                                                                  Sats




                                                                                       ty
                                                                                  if

                                                                                            aE
                                                                                            Se
                                                                             Hi
                                                                                 Se




                                         a     a
                                                ei
                                         IPOD Whatley                                                                       ny
                                                                                                                            eon

                                                                                                                            Lie
                                                                                                 Hees rik           teed
                                                                                            i 1s        Hats:




                                                                                                                       Ki




                                                                     fF,
                                                                           a
                                                                           eal( Ron
                                                                                            i                   y

                                                                   HUNeast       hh
                                                                        HEHE bh gt:
                                                                  aii Panag
                                                                    ih fevit           Raa                      y

                                                                     }                      au         ‘




                  Heath
     .
         als:
           i

    Lae
     bi
    pone                       iN
                                   gis




                Mitra
2
     ett
       .                  )
                              Hy
    ey
     Nie                           ty
                 ta
     i          H




                                                          F
                                                        ; ie ee
                                                        Bele,
                                                         WANs
                                                         i)
           Digitized by the Internet Archive
               in 2022 with funding from
                Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/methodtheoryinam0000unse
Method and Theory in American Archaeology
Method and Theory
         BY GORDON      R. WILLEY

                    AND      PHILIP PHILLIPS




in American Archaeology




          THE   UNIVERSITY   OF
                                  «
                                  CHICAGO   PRESS
           Library of Congress Catalog Number: 57-11215

      Tue University oF Cuicaco Press, CHIcaco 37
Cambridge University Press, London, N.W. 1, England
   The University of Toronto Press, Toronto 5, Canada

     © 1958 by The University of Chicago. Published 1958
                                Composed and printed by
                   Tue University oF Cuicaco Press,
                                 Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A.
To JAMES ALFRED FORD
                                                 Preface
 In the summer of 1952, as a result of numerous discussions, we de-
cided to set down our thoughts on certain methodological and the-
oretical questions in American archaeology. The original plan was
an article in two parts: the first, a statement of what we believed
to be the minimal aims of archaeology and the basic operations di-
rected toward the achievement of these aims, and the second, some
theoretical formulations about New World prehistory. The first
part was subsequently published under the title “Method and
Theory in American Archaeology: An Operational Basis for Cul-
ture-Historical Integration.”! The second part followed a year and
a half later as “Method and Theory in American Archaeology II:
Historical-Developmental Interpretation.”® The comments and
criticism which these papers drew from colleagues and students
have kept us interested in the subject, and, as a result, we have re-
written both original papers and combined them, along with an
introduction, originally published as a brief journal article,’ in the
present volume.
   A good many of the revisions and additions we have made to the
original papers are the result of second thoughts, which we trust
are better than the first ones. Others, by no means the least sub-
stantial, are the direct result of critical comments and suggestions
on the part of colleagues in archaeology and anthropology. To list
them all would provide a roster of impressive proportions. We
would, however, like to single out Albert C. Spaulding and Irving
Rouse for the time, interest, and advice they have expended in our
behalf.
   1. Phillips and Willey, 1953.
   2. Willey and Phillips, 1955.
   3. Phillips, 1955.



                                                        Vil
   Finally, a word about the restrictive connotation of the qualify-
ing term ‘‘American’”’ as used in our title and throughout the book.
Obviously, the methods, theories, and ideas in general which are
propounded and discussed in this work are not limited to the Ameri-
cas any more than archaeology is so limited. Many, or most, of
them have originated in the Old World with Americanists as ‘late
borrowers. We have used the qualification inasmuch as our own
experience is in the American field and all the examples and subject
matter are so confined. There is another reason for using the term.
In no other large part of the world does archaeology stand so com-
pletely on its own feet as in the New World. The historic con-
tinuities and documentation binding past to present are infinitely
weaker here than in the European, Middle Eastern, and Asiatic
areas where archaeology has been carried forward. American
archaeology complements, but is in no sense an adjunct of, history;
hence its methodology stands in somewhat sharper relief than the
methodology in many parts of the Old World. This is not a denial
of the vital importance of historical and ethnological data in inter-
preting the American past, but such considerations lie outside the
scope of this book.
                                             Gorpon R. WitLey
                                               Puitre PHILiips




                                             PREFACE   Vil 1 1
                                         Contents

   Introduction: American Archaeology and General
                           Anthropological Theory


        PART   I. AN   OPERATIONAL   BASIS    FOR   CULTURE-
                               HISTORICAL      INTEGRATION


                       1. Archaeological Unit Concepts           II

                          2. Archaeological Integration         BF

                                                    Summary      57


'PART II. HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL       INTERPRETATION


         3. The Historical-Developmental Approach
                          in American Archaeology                61

                                             4. Lithic Stage     79

                                        5. Archaic Stage       104

                                     6. Formative Stage        144

                                         7. Classic Stage      182

                                     8. Postclassic Stage      H[SD5)
                                                    Summary    200


                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY


                                               Bibliography    209




                                                               259
                                                Introduction




        American Archaeology and
   General Anthropological Theory
It has been said that archaeology, while providing data and general-
izations in such fields as history and general anthropology, lacks a
systematic body of concepts and premises constituting archaeological
theory. According to this view, the archaeologist must borrow his
theoretical underpinning from the field of study his work happens
to serve, or do without. Whether the latter alternative be an admis-
sible one does not seem to be an arguable point. Acceptable field
work can perhaps be done in a theoretical vacuum, but integration
and interpretation without theory are inconceivable.
   The above remarks apply to archaeology in general, but the sole
concern of this study is American archaeology. It seems to us that
American archaeology stands in a particularly close and, so far as
theory is concerned, dependent relationship to anthropology. Its
service to history in the narrower sense, i.e., as the record of events
in the past with the interest centered on those events, is extremely
limited, because for pre-Columbian America there is in effect no
such history. The use of traditions derived from native informants
and other documentary sources ‘of the contact period as starting
points for pushing back into the unrecorded past—the “direct his-
torical approach” —is not archaeology serving history, but the re-
verse. As a technique of investigation, American archaeology, like
archaeology generally, provides useful data for geology, paleon-
tology, climatology, etc., and it recovers valuable material for art
museums and the study of aesthetics, but it is not involved theo-


                                              INTRODUCTION     ]
retically with any of these subjects. To paraphrase Maitland’s
famous dictum: American archaeology is anthropology or it is
nothing. The American archaeologist, unless he thinks he can dis-
pense with theory altogether, is therefore obliged to take a stand
on some of the basic questions of general anthropological theory.
This we shall do briefly in the following pages.
   The methods outlined in this study, and our arguments in their
behalf, are predicated on two general theoretical assumptions: (1)
that anthropology is more science than history, and (2) that the
subject matter of anthropology is both society and culture. The
first part of this statement appears to settle out of hand the position
of anthropology in respect to the dichotomy science-history, a
question that has vexed philosophers ever since the emergence of
anthropology as a field of study. It seems to us that the force of
this antithesis is largely spent. There is now considerable agree-
ment among theorists that the world of anthropology is a mixture
of recurrent and unique events acting and reacting upon each other
in a tremendously complex fashion. The only serious disagreements
are in respect to the role and importance of the two components of
the mixture. Our view is that the part played by recurrent events,
though it may be the smaller, is the more significant; and that this
is just as true for an archaeology devoted to the service of anthro-
pology as it is for anthropology itself. Archaeology, in the service
of anthropology, concerns itself necessarily with the nature and
position of unique events in space and time but has for its ultimate
purpose the discovery of regularities that are in a sense spaceless
and timeless.' And, since it appears that a comparative method will
be most likely to disclose such regularities, it follows that the
archaeologist is faced with the responsibility of finding, in the
seemingly endless flow of cultural and social events, forms and
   1. This we hope will not be taken to mean that the events referred to take
place outside space and time. In this and all subsequent references to space and
time in this study, it is of course geographical space and chronological time
that are denoted.



                                           METHOD AND THEORY
                                     IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
systems of forms that are not only comparable to each other but
also comparable to, or at least compatible with, the forms and sys-
tems of forms of cultural or social anthropology.? We shall return
to this point later.
   The second article of belief referred to above is that the subject
matter of anthropology is both society and culture, another polarity
that is not standing up under analysis. The interpenetration of social
and cultural facts now seems to be taken as axiomatic. Following
Kroeber and others, we have chosen to regard them here as aspects
of the same basic reality. Definition of this basic reality is fortu-
nately outside the scope of the present inquiry. It is sufficient for
our purposes to characterize it loosely as patterned human be-
havior. Archaeology, of necessity, deals very largely with pat-
terned human behavior in its cultural aspect. In American archaeol-
ogy especially, we have tended to suppress the social aspect alto-
gether. Some Americanists have been drawn into the extreme posi-
tion that sees in culture an independent order of phenomena, in-
telligible in terms of itself alone—the “cultural superorganic.”
Most of us, without subscribing to the superorganic view of cul-
ture, have nevertheless operated “as if” it were a fact. In our opin-
ion even this moderate position, though operationally expedient
and to a certain extent inevitable, is ultimately detrimental to the
main task of archaeology, which is to organize its data in terms of a
real world, a world in which cultural and social phenomena (to
name only these) are inextricably mingled.
   The reader will have noted by this time that we are driving
toward an accommodation between the seemingly opposed methods
and outlook of archaeology and ‘cultural anthropology. Compari-
   2. “Social anthropology” in England, “cultural anthropology” in the United
States—these are not precise equivalents but are closer, it seems to us, than
practitioners in the two countries appear to believe. From the detached point
of view of the archaeologist, at any rate, they are practically synonymous
terms. In this study we follow the American usage but without any convic-
tions regarding the predominance of the cultural over the social aspect of our
subject matter.


                                                 INTRODUCTION      3
son may be facilitated by considering the operations of the two
disciplines on three levels of organization that are generally appli-
cable to all scientific analysis: observation, description, and explana-
tion. The accompanying diagram is a crude attempt to show how the
operations of archaeology and cultural anthropology can be con-
sidered as converging toward a synthesis from one level to the
next.

Explanation               Processual         Ethnology
                          interpretation

Description          Culture-historical         Ethnography
                     integration

Observation      Field work                              Field work
                        ARCHAEOLOGY           CuLTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY


   On the observational level, archaeological and cultural anthro-
pological field work are placed far apart on the diagram because of
wide differences in the phenomena observed. These differences,
however, can be too easily overemphasized. Cultural anthropology
observes group behavior and the products of group behavior in
their twofold aspects, social and cultural. Its primary concern is
with the social aspect, but certain categories of behavior, notably
those which are symbolized in language, art, myth, etc., may be
studied very largely in their cultural aspect. Archaeology observes
primarily the materialized products of group behavior but has con-
siderable opportunity to observe symbolized behavior in the forms
of art, iconography, and (rarely) written language, and occasional-
ly touches social behavior through inferences, as in the interpreta-
tion of burial practices, house plans, settlement patterns, roads, ir-
rigation systems, and the like. Thus it appears that the raw mate-
rials of the two disciplines are not so different after all; what is dif-
ferent is that archaeology is obliged to view its material almost en-
tirely in the cultural aspect. It has sometimes attempted to turn
this limitation into an asset by embracing the cultural superorganic,
as already noted.


                                         METHOD AND THEORY
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   The term “culture-historical integration,” as used here, covers
almost everything the archaeologist does in the way of organizing
his primary data: typology, taxonomy, formulation of archaeologi-
cal “units,” investigation of their relationships in the contexts of
function and natural environment, and determination of their inter-
nal dimensions and external relationships in space and time. How-
ever high-sounding these terms, it appears that the activities repre-
sented by them remain essentially on the descriptive level. Explana-
tory concepts, such as acculturation, diffusion, and stimulus diffu-
sion, are utilized, but the aim is primarily to describe what hap-
pened to specific cultural units at specific times and places; no at-
tempt is made (on this level) to draw generalizations from these
observations and descriptions. Culture-historical integration is thus
comparable to ethnography with the time dimension added, but we
dare not push this analogy too far, because the archaeologist’s de-
scriptive formulations, like his observations, lie mainly in the cul-
tural aspect of his subject matter. Later in this book we make a plea
for unit concepts that are intelligible in the social aspect as well,
but we are under no illusion that any except the very smallest of
them can be precisely equated with correspondent units of social
structure. Nevertheless, we have placed culture-historical integra-
tion and ethnography closer together on the diagram than their re-
spective field operations, in the belief that archaeological unit con-
cepts can and should make more sense in terms of the social aspect
than is generally supposed.
   So little work has been done in American archaeology on the
explanatory level that it is difficult to find a name for it. It might
have been left blank on the diagram to emphasize this lack. The
term “functional interpretation,” which has gained a certain amount
of currency in American studies, was used in the original version
of this diagram but is not entirely satisfactory, since it implies that
the functional is the only explanatory principle involved. We have
substituted here the broader “processual interpretation,” which
might conceivably cover any explanatory principle that might be
invoked. In the context of archaeology, processual interpretation


                                             INTRODUCTION    5
is the study of the nature of what is vaguely referred to as the cul-
ture-historical process. Practically speaking, it implies an attempt
to discover regularities in the relationships given by the methods
of culture-historical integration. Whatever we choose to call it,
the important consideration is that, on this explanatory level of
organization where we are no longer asking merely what but also
how and even why, our formulations must be viewed in both their
cultural and their social aspects.* It is not possible to go about in-
vestigating culture-historical processes and causality without ref-
erence to the efficient causes of cultural change, which are people or
groups of people, and therefore lie in the social aspect of reality.
Perhaps it is fair to say that there has been a lack of progress in
processual interpretation in American archaeology to date precisely
because unit formulations have been put together with so little
reference to their social aspect. In the same vein of optimism al-
ready displayed, we have put processual interpretation and ethnol-
ogy (which includes among its many meanings the operations of
cultural anthropology on the explanatory level) side by side on the
diagram to suggest a further convergence of aims, if not of prac-
tice. At this point, the archaeologist is in effect a cultural anthropol-
ogist,* but it is well to remember that his activities on this level are
conditioned by his formulations on the descriptive level and that
   3. To name only two of the important factors in a complex equation. Geo-
graphical and ecological factors, already present on the descriptive level, carry
over with increased importance onto the explanatory level. These have been
deliberately ignored in our diagram, which is focused on the special rela-
tionships between the cultural and social aspects of anthropology. The same
neglect of physiological and psychological factors should be noted.
    4. This point has been very well put by Walter Taylor, who also rational-
izes the operations of archaeology on a series of levels that differ in detail from
ours but can be reconciled with them, as in the following passage: ‘“When the
archaeologist collects his data [observational level], constructs his cultural con-
texts [descriptive level] and on the basis of these contexts proceeds to make a
comparative study of the nature and workings of culture in its formal, func-
tional, and/or developmental aspects [explanatory level], then he is ‘doing’
cultural anthropology and can be considered an anthropologist who works
in archaeological materials” (1948, p. 43).



                                            METHOD AND THEORY
                                      IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
these in turn have special characteristics which it is our purpose to
describe.
   Diagrams and models have the happy faculty of proving what-
ever they are designed to prove, and ours is no exception. Never-
theless, we think that this model, in spite of the crude simplification
inherent in any system of “levels,” represents a pattern that is not
wholly fictitious. As archaeology, in the service of anthropology,
moves from one operational level to the next, it is compelled to pay
more attention to the social aspect of its subject matter, until there
takes place on the explanatory level an actual convergence with
cultural anthropology and the possibility of an eventual synthesis in
a common search for sociocultural causality and law.




                                             INTRODUCTION    7
                          Part |




     An Operational Basis for
Culture-Historical Integration
                                                           Chapter 1



           Archaeological Unit Concepts
“Culture-historical integration” is the term we have chosen to
designate what we regard as the primary task of archaeology on the
descriptive level of organization. The procedural objectives of cul-
ture-historical integration have tended to be divided, in theoretical
writings on American archaeology, between the reconstruction of
spatial-temporal relationships, on the one hand, and what may be
called contextual relationships, on the other.} Operationally, neither
is attainable without the other. The reconstruction of meaningful
human history needs both structure and content.
   Cultural forms may be plotted to demonstrate geographical con-
tinuity and contemporaneity, but, when we move to establish his-
torical relationships between them, we immediately invoke proc-
esses like diffusion, trade, conquest, or migration and in so doing
shift the problem from the bare frame of space and time into the
realm of context and function. Conversely, the processes named
have no historical applicability without control of the spatial and
temporal media in which they operate. Taylor was undoubtedly
correct in stating that American archaeologists have placed heavy
    1. Taylor, in the work already cited (1948), puts these procedures on two
distinct levels of interpretation, which he calls “chronicle” and “‘historiogra-
phy.” See also Willey’s (1953a) use of the terms “historical” and ‘‘proces-
sual.”’ The latter term was used by Willey in reference to the description of
the way in which specific cultures function in specific times and places, not as
we are using it in the present study in reference to the attempt to draw general-
izations from culture-historical data. All four terms, “chronicle,” “‘historiogra-
phy,” “historical,” and “processual,” in the writings cited, refer to operations
on the descriptive level of organization as defined in the present study.


                                ARCHAEOLOGICAL UNIT CONCEPTS         11
emphasis on the skeletal chronicle at the expense of the recovery
of what he calls ‘‘cultural context,’’ but a review of the recent lit-
erature indicates a strong trend in the contrary direction. We sub-
mit that this is now an area of agreement for American archaeol-
ogy: culture-historical integration is both the spatial and temporal scales
and the content and relationships which they measure. The essence of
this study’s departure, if it may be called a departure, is that these
objectives are not regarded as being on different and unequally
significant levels of interpretation or as even being capable of
effective separation operationally. It seems to us that the apprehen-
sion and formulation of archaeological unit concepts involve the
simultaneous investigation of contextual and spatial-temporal rela-
tionships.
   A method basic to archaeology on the descriptive level is taxon-
omy. Under this general heading, the archaeologist deals with two
sorts of concepts: types, and cultures or, as we prefer to say,
archaeological units.2 The former usually pertain to artifacts or
other products of technology but may be used in connection with
other categories of cultural behavior such as burial types. Some
archaeologists also apply the type concept to full archaeological
assemblages, or units as we would call them, using the designation
“culture type.” While this usage has the apparent virtue of econo-
my through elimination of the conceptual difference between type
and unit, we prefer to keep them distinct, because we think that
unit concepts have certain characteristics not shared by artifact
types and that these in turn have important methodological bear-
ings. Our interest here is centered on unit concepts, but a few re-
   2. There is a good deal to be said for and against the prevailing use of
                                                                          ‘“cul-
ture” to denote every conceivable kind of archaeological unit. It is very con-
venient in many cases where we do not really know what kind of unit we are
dealing with, but it is conducive to sloppy thinking. We shall be trying here to
confine its use to units of a certain magnitude, maximum units in fact, but are
not enthusiastic about the cumbersome “archaeological unit’’ as an alternative.
ae the context is clearly archaeological, perhaps the term “unit” will
suffice.



                                          METHOD AND THEORY        12
                                    IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
marks on the concept of type as applied to artifacts will serve to
get us into the subject.®
   There is, happily, a general working agreement among American
archaeologists about what constitutes an artifact type, though
there is still some dispute about what it signifies in terms of the
basic reality that we have postulated as the subject matter of archae-
ology. The principal difference of opinion may be crudely stated
as opposition between those who believe that types are arbitrarily
“designed” by the classifier and those who think that types exist
in nature and that the classifier “discovers” them. According to the
first view, types are simply analytical tools that are to be judged
solely on the basis of their usefulness; the second maintains that
they have, or should have, behavioral reality in the sense that they
would be recognized as norms, the “right way,” in the societies
that produced the objects being typed. Our attitude is that these
opposing views are not completely antagonistic. We maintain
that all types are likely to possess some degree of correspondence
to this kind of reality and that increase of such correspondence must
be the constant aim of typology.‘ The actual procedure of segregat-
ing types is therefore a more complex operation than is suggested
simply by such words as “design” or “discovery,” and is in effect
a painstaking combination of both.
   No less laborious than artifact typology are the procedures in-
volved in the formation of archaeological units, in which we have
to consider not only the relationship of forms as such but their
spatial and temporal relationships as well. Disregarding the latter
for the moment, we may begin our consideration of the nature of
   3. Another valid objection to the use of “culture type”’ as a synonym for
“archaeological unit” is that we need such a generalizing term when we want to
talk about a type of culture without reference to any specific time or place.
A “theocratic irrigation state’”’ (Steward et al., 1955, p. 65), for example, is
a culture type that may in theory occur wherever the necessary cultural and
natural preconditions are present.
    4. Cf. Phillips, Ford, and Griffin, 1951, pp. 63-64, for a discussion of the
problem of the “empirical” versus the “cultural” type as applied to ceramics.
Those inclined to take sides on this question are advised to see Evans, 1954;
Ford, 1954a, 19546, 1954c; and Spaulding, 19534, 19536, 1954a, 19546.



                              ARCHAEOLOGICAL UNIT CONCEPTS        13
unit concepts by examining their strictly formal characteristics.
We are seeking a broad definition that will cover all sorts of units,
from those whose content may consist of a very small number of
highly specialized forms to units represented by the fullest com-
pendium of cultural data that can be recovered by the most refined
techniques of investigation and the most imaginative interpretation.
It is plain, therefore, that the size or comprehensiveness of the as-
semblage is no criterion. What is required rather is that the con-
stituent forms be physiognomic, recurrent, and internally consistent.
To borrow a phrase from V. Gordon Childe, they must relate to
one another in a way that permits us to assume them to be “‘the
concrete expressions of the common social traditions that bind to-
gether a people.’”®
   So much for the formal content of an archaeological unit of
whatever magnitude. Now the particular interests of archaeology
also require that this content be placed in the contexts of geo-
graphical space and time. It is often maintained that this is some-
thing the archaeologist does after the unit has been defined. How-
ever sensible in theory this may appear, in practice it does not
work that way. The working procedure, as every archaeologist
knows, is initial formulation, investigation of spatial and temporal
dimensions, reformulation, reinvestigation of spatial and temporal
dimensions, and so on indefinitely. The operation is immensely
complicated by the fact that the fixing of these internal dimensions
is, more often than not, dependent on external relationships. We
have only to recall certain essential conditions of our unit’s exist-
ence. In the same place, but before or after it in time, were similar
units whose contents intergrade with its content in so-called transi-
tional periods that are almost impossible to establish with precision;
beside it in space were other contemporaneous units with similar
intergrading at frontiers equally difficult to draw. Yet we maintain
that the fixing of these spatial and temporal boundaries, however
difficult, is an essential part of the definition of the unit. Small
wonder that the unavoidably arbitrary nature of such operations
  5. Childe, 1950, p. 2.

                                     METHOD AND THEORY    1
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY     +
has led many archaeologists to believe that an archaeological unit
is nothing more than a fragment excised from a spatial-temporal
continuum, a fragment that could not be said to have existed as a
unit before it was named and defined.
   The same problem confronts us here that we have already dis-
cussed in connection with artifact typology. An archaeological unit,
as described above, may appear to be a rational construct in terms
of the observed facts of cultural continuity and cultural relation-
ships, but what are the chances that it corresponds in any real sense
to an intelligible unit of culture-history? In our original paper we
took the position that such correspondences may eventually be
possible but that “the archaeologist is on firmer footing at present
with the conception of an archaeological culture as an arbitrarily
defined segment of the total continuum.” In a long and exceedingly
astringent letter to the authors, Albert C. Spaulding attacked this
position with such force that we have obtained his permission to
quote a portion of it here.
   It is true that any assemblage represents a segment of a continuous
stream of cultural tradition extending back into time, but once you grant
the purpose of a scientific exposition of culture history, the process of
classifying the time stream with respect to its cultural characteristics is
anything but arbitrary. It should be classified in terms of events which are
themselves associated with a cluster of other new events so as to yield a
succession of distinct culture types. A possible exception to this generali-
zation would be a segment of a continuum in which culture change did not
occur, or in which change occurred at a uniform rate so that it could be
represented as a straight line on a graph. In the hypothetical case of no
change, classificatory subdivision would serve no useful purpose that I can
think of and would be arbitrary; in the case of a slanting straight line, sub-
division would in a sense also be arbitrary, since a complete description
would require no more than a statement of the point of origin, slope, and
point of termination (if any) of the line. In fact, the two cases are basically
the same case. However, widely accepted cultural theory indicates that
the normal pattern is one of relative stability, then rapid growth through
the introduction of a critical new element followed very quickly by a num-
ber of other new elements, then a period of relative stability, and so on.
Plotted on a time against culture change graph, this results in an ogival
growth curve, and the recognition of the sharp curves is a scientific obliga-


                              ARCHAEOLOGICAL    UNIT   CONCEPTS   15
tion of the archaeologist. The segments so recognized are certainly not the
result of arbitrary classification, the changes in slope of the line are just
as characteristic of it as is its continuous nature. So time itself is con-
tinuous and proceeds at an unvarying rate, but culture change in relation
to time probably never proceeds at an unvarying rate, and useful archaeo-
logical classifications of chronology are those which have sharp rate
changes as their limiting points. A good chronological classification yields
a number of periods, each of which is characterized by a distinctive “cul-
ture” (“culture type” in my terminology), and the proper job is to pin-
point the critical element so that the time of its invention can be made to
serve as the starting point of the new period.
    To consider a second implication of “‘space-time-cultural” continuum,
space itself is a continuum, but culture is not uniformly distributed in that
continuum. To get off a lofty crusher first, there are no archaeological sites
in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, either on the surface or on the bottom.
On a more sensible plane, archaeological materials characteristically occur
in discrete clusters [we call them “sites” in space, and the task of describ-
ing them includes discovery of their boundaries—there isn’t any arbitrary
slicing up of a uniform continuum involved in the problem. To turn now to
what I think you actually have in mind, it is quite conceivable that the
cultural characteristics of components might vary uniformly or continu-
ously (i.e. in infinitely small steps, or at a uniform slope, so that the spatial
position against cultural content graph, time controlled, shows a curve or
straight line instead of a noticeably jagged line), but I am uncertain as to
how important this is in fact. I think that ethnographic evidence strongly
indicates that if any considerable number of components over any sub-
stantial area were considered, a classification of culture type with respect
to space would reveal fairly neat clustering, not simple polarity or radia-
tion. Certainly you would concede this if sharp ecological boundaries were
involved. Discovery of clustering at the multicomponent level would elimi-
nate the claims of arbitrariness effectively. In summary, then, your vague
and sweeping talk about arbitrary slicing up of a continuum results in the
confounding of several important cultural problems and leads to methodo-
logical obfuscation, not clarification.

   Without yielding entirely before Spaulding’s assault, we are
prepared to admit that the assumption of a more or less unvarying
rate of cultural change in a spatial-temporal continuum has been
overdone, by us as well as by others. We now prefer to say that
the archaeologist is on a firmer footing with the concept of an ar-
chaeological unit as a provisionally defined segment of the total


                                          METHOD   AND THEORY      |6
                                    IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
continuum, whose ultimate validation will depend on the degree to
which its internal spatial and temporal dimensions can be shown to
coincide with significant variations in the nature and rate of cul-
tural change in that continuum. In simpler terms, it is the archaeolo-
gist’s job to be aware of the arbitrary nature of his unit concepts
and, at the same time, alert to the possibility of making them less
arbitrary.
   Absorbing as this question of cultural continuity and change
must be to all archaeologists, it is really not an issue in the present
discussion. Our object here is to show that a fundamental, unvary-
ing characteristic of all archaeological unit formulations of what-
ever magnitude is that they are arrived at by combining three sorts
of data: formal content, distribution in geographical space, and
duration in time. These three ingredients are present, though not
always explicit, in all unit concepts but may differ significantly in
the part they play in the formulation. Variations in content, general-
ly but not always a function of the limits of available information
and the archaeologist’s ability to draw inferences therefrom, need
not concern us here. Our interest centers rather on variations in
spatial and temporal dimensions and particularly on the fact that
there is no regular (or constant) relationship between variations in
these two dimensions. Probably a large share of our classificatory
difficulties and the ensuing arguments could be avoided by the gen-
eral recognition of this fact. It becomes essential, therefore, in the
definition and use of archaeological unit concepts of whatever na-
ture to understand precisely what quantities of space and time are
involved in the formulation.
   In the search for practicable units of study, American archaeolo-
gists have invented a large number of unit concepts and designated
them by an even larger number of names. Our initial requirement,
therefore, is a comprehensive nomenclature by means            of which
existing schemes and their working parts can be roughly equated.
We have committed ourselves to the proposition that all unit con-
cepts, whatever the outlook and intentions of their originators,
have implicit spatial and temporal dimensions. Therefore, they can


                           ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   17)
be differentiated by reference to the amounts of space and time
they are thought to involve. If these premises be granted, it
seems a reasonable approach to bring one of these two variables
under control before considering it in combination with the other.
The spatial factor is easier to deal with; so we may begin by setting
forth a series of geographical categories that we have found useful
in this connection.

                                           SPATIAL   DIVISIONS

   A site is the smallest unit of space dealt with by the archaeologist
and the most difficult to define. Its physical limits, which may vary
from a few square yards to as many square miles, are often impos-
sible to fix. About the only requirement ordinarily demanded of
the site is that it be fairly continuously covered by remains of for-
mer occupation, and the general idea is that these pertain to a single
unit of settlement, which may be anything from a small camp to a
large city. Upon excavation, of course, it rarely turns out to be
that simple. The site is the basic unit for stratigraphic studies; it is
an almost certain assumption that cultural changes here can only be
the result of the passage of time. It is in effect the minimum opera-
tional unit of geographical space.
   A locality is a slightly larger spatial unit, varying in size from a
single site to a district of uncertain dimensions; it is generally not
larger than the space that might be occupied by a single community
or local group. It is hardly necessary to add that such limits as are
implied in this qualification have the variability found in the size
and settlement patterns of local groups from one sort of society
to another. In strictly archaeological terms, the locality is a geo-
graphical space small enough to permit the working assumption of
complete cultural homogeneity at any given time. This is not to
say that two or more discrete archaeological units might not, under
special conditions, simultaneously occupy the same locality, or
even the same site. For example, it has long been thought that
people carrying an intrusive Salado culture occupied certain sites
of the Gila-Salt region of south-central Arizona and coexisted


                                      METHOD AND THEORY     18
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
peacefully with the indigenous Hohokam populations.® If this is
the correct interpretation of the archaeology of the sites in ques-
tion, it reflects a rather uncommon situation.
   Examples of localities well known in the literature of American
archaeology are given below in connection with the discussion of
local sequences.
   A region is a considerably larger unit of geographical space usual-
ly determined by the vagaries of archaeological history. Quite
often it is simply the result of concentrated research by an individu-
al or group. Rightly or wrongly, such a region comes to be thought
of as having problems of its own that set it apart from other regions.
Regional terms are those most often found in the titles of archaeo-
logical papers of wider scope than site reports. Through constant
reiteration they become fixed in the literature and achieve a kind
of independent existence. Regions are not altogether without refer-
ence to the facts of geography, however. In stressing the accidental
factor in their formation, we must not overlook the tendency for
environmental considerations to assert themselves. In portions of
the New World where physical conditions of sharp diversity pre-
vail, archaeological regions are likely to coincide with minor
physiographic subdivisions. An excellent example is furnished by
the Glades region comprising the southernmost portion of the
Florida peninsula. Here the relationship between culture and a
highly characterized environment has been particularly close
throughout the entire span of the archaeological record.” Many
other similar examples could be cited, and the effect would be to
show that, of the various spatial units considered here, the region
offers the most favorable field for the detailed study of the rela-
tionships between culture and environment.
   In terms of the social aspect of culture—and here we must tread
warily—the region is roughly equivalent to the space that might
be occupied by a social unit larger than the community, a unit to
which we may with extreme trepidation apply the term “tribe” or
   6. Gladwin et al., 1937, p. 13.
   7. Goggin, 1949, pp. 28-32.



                              ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   19
“society.” This rough equation is based on what we know of Amer-
ican tribal distributions in early historic times and must be accorded
the same flexibility that we see in the size of those distributions.
The same caution is required in attempting to characterize the re-
gion in terms of the cultural aspect. Generally speaking, it is a
geographical space in which, at a given time, a high degree of cul-
tural homogeneity may be expected but not counted on. As we
shall see later, it is quite possible for more than one archaeological
phase to occupy a region at the same time.
   An area is a geographical unit very considerably larger than a
region; it corresponds roughly to the culture area of the ethnogra-
pher. Archaeological areas, like regions, have come into existence
by common consent, but the element of historical accident is re-
duced somewhat by the fact that many individuals and institutions
are likely to have been involved in their investigation. They tend
to coincide with major physiographic divisions. That the North
American Southwest, for example, has maintained its identity as
an archaeological area through more than a half-century of intensive
investigation is certainly due in large part to culture-environment
correlations of a positive nature. It is hardly necessary to add that,
although the area as defined here may have general physiographic
integrity, its limits are not so easy to draw on a map as those of
the smaller region. The southeastern United States is a case in
point; it has to be defined afresh every time anyone writes about it.
The problem is a familiar one in culture-area studies.
    It often happens that there are territories of geographical extent
intermediate between the region and the area which possess quali-
ties and degrees of cultural unity that give them a definite useful-
ness in archaeological or ethnographical studies. We refer to such
spatial units as subareas. A case in point might be taken with refer-
ence to Middle America (or Mesoamerica), which has been defined
quite specifically as a culture area.’ Embracing southern Mexico
and upper Central America, Mesoamerica has a distinctive culture
content and patterning; yet within this sphere of common cultural
   8. Kirchhoff, 1943.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY    2O
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
likenesses there are differences of traditionally recognized signifi-
cance. As but one example, the cultures of the lowland Maya coun-
try stand in sharp contrast to those that are adjacent to them. Their
art, architecture, ceramics, calendrics, and writing bind the Maya
lowland territory into an obvious unit of history. At the same time,
these Maya lowlands are too complex and diversified to be or-
ganized as a region, as that cultural-geographical term is defined
here. Workable Maya regions might be the Petén, the Usumacinta,
the Motagua-Chamelecon, or the several divisions of Yucatan, etc.
In consequence, the useful term “Maya lowlands” signifies a sub-
area.
                                   BASIC ARCHAEOLOGICAL UNITS
   The concepts about to be discussed under this heading were re-
ferred to in our original paper as “formal or content units’’ to ex-
press the fact that the element of content is more important in their
formulation than the spatial and temporal dimensions. Use of such
a term, however, suggests that they are different in kind from what
we later describe as “integrative” and “maximum” units, which is
not strictly true. It seems preferable, therefore, to call them simply
“basic units,’ which indeed they are.
   The component, a useful term which has achieved nearly univer-
sal currency in eastern North American archaeology, has been de-
fined by W. C. McKern as the manifestation of a given archaeologi-
cal “focus” at a specific site.® Strictly speaking, in the McKern
system, the component is not a taxonomic unit. In theory the basic
unit of classification is the focus, comprising a number of com-
ponents, and the same may be said of what we designate as a
“phase.” It is a working assumption that no phase worthy of the
   9. “The manifestation of any given focus at a specific site is termed a com-
ponent of that focus. This is in no sense an additional type of culture manifes-
tation, one of the five class types; rather, it is the focus as represented at a
site, and serves to distinguish between a site, which may bear evidence of sev-
eral cultural occupations, each foreign to the other, and a single specified
manifestation at a site. In many instances several components, each at cultural
variance with the other, may be found to occur at a single site’ (McKern,
1939, p. 308).


                               ARCHAEOLOGICAL UNIT CONCEPTS        »|
name will fail to manifest itself in more than one component. In
practice, of course, it often happens that a phase is initially defined
on the strength of a single component, i.e., a site or a level within
a site, but the expectation is implicit that other components will be
found and the original definition modified accordingly. It will be
noted later, however, in the discussion of the social implications of
the phase, that it is theoretically and actually possible for a phase
to consist of a single component.
   The phase is, in our opinion, the practicable and intelligible unit
of archaeological study. Choice of the term accords with prevailing
usage in a preponderance of New World areas, including the South-
west, most of South America, and all of Middle America. Kidder
has defined the phase in the following terms: “‘A cultural complex
possessing traits sufficiently characteristic to distinguish it for pur-
poses of preliminary archaeological classification, from earlier and
later manifestations of the cultural development of which it formed
a part, and from other contemporaneous complexes.’’!°
   Like Kidder, we prefer “phase” to the approximately equiva-
lent “focus”? because of its stronger temporal implication. The
emphasis cannot be placed entirely on time, however. Modifying
Kidder’s definition slightly, we would prefer to describe the con-
cept as an archaeological unit possessing traits sufficiently characteristic
to distinguish it from all other units similarly conceived, whether of the
same or other cultures or civilizations, spatially limited to the order of
magnitude of a locality or region and chronologically limited to a rela-
tively brief interval of time. It must be acknowledged that this defini-
tion gives a specious impression of uniformity. It would be fine if
phases could be standardized as to the amount of space and time
they occupy. Unfortunately, there are so many variable conditions
entering into the formulation that it is neither possible nor desirable
to define the scope except within rather broad limits. A phase may
be anything from a thin level in a site reflecting no more than a brief
encampment to a prolonged occupation of a large number of sites
distributed over a region of very elastic proportions.
   10. Kidder, Jennings, and Shook, 1946, p. 9.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY     2?
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   It will be noted that Kidder’s definition of phase lays more em-
phasis on cultural continuity than ours, since it implies necessary
relations to what goes before and what comes after. We have freed
it of this requirement to provide for the many instances in which
we simply do not know what goes before or comes after, or for
those less frequent occasions when a new phase appears as an in-
trusion without apparent relationship to any precedent continuity.
In any case, whether as an instance of continuity or of discontinuity,
the phase most often appears as one member of a series that will be
referred to hereinafter as a “local” or “regional sequence.” These
terms will be defined presently, but let us first examine a little more
closely the spatial and temporal implications of this basic archaeo-
logical unit.
   We have already alluded briefly to the impossibility of close de-
limitation of the phase in respect to the dimensions of time and
space. It may help to clarify the problem to consider it in relation
to various levels of cultural development. In Part II of this book we
will describe a developmental scheme for New World archaeology
with five hypothetical stages: Lithic, Archaic, Formative, Classic,
and Postclassic. It is not necessary to anticipate the definitions of
these stages to point out here that the spatial and temporal dimen-
sions of phases are not likely to be the same on all stages. For ex-
ample, in the Lithic stage, in which a migratory, hunting-gathering
economy is postulated, phases can be expected to occupy more
geographical space than in the sedentary Formative stage. There 1s
no regular reduction from stage to stage, however, in the Classic
and Postclassic stages the spatial dimensions of phases may also be
larger than in the Formative but. for a different reason: the socio-
political groups are larger. Temporal dimensions, on the other
hand, may actually exhibit a regular diminution from stage to stage,
if the commonly held assumption is correct that the rate of cultural
change accelerates with increased advancement and complexity.
Without elaborating this point or further refining the definition,
we wish simply to emphasize that the concept of phase has no ap-
propriate scale independent of the cultural situation in which it is


                         ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   Ms 3
applied. This is not so great a deficiency as might appear. Looked
at internally, so to speak, phases may have very considerable and
highly variable spatial and temporal dimensions; looked at from
the total range of New World culture-history, they are very small
quantities indeed, and it is from this point of view that they assume
a sort of rough equivalence, enabling us to use the concept of phase
as an operational tool regardless of the developmental stage in-
volved.
  As typological and stratigraphic analyses become more refined,
it often becomes desirable to subdivide phases into smaller (primari-
ly temporal) units, and it seems best to regard these as subphases
and to give them numbers instead of names. It also sometimes hap-
pens that two or more phases in the same locality or region, origi-
nally set up as independent units, subsequently appear to be more
intelligible as subphases of a single unit, though they continue to be
operationally useful in sequences and area correlations. It is clearly
impossible to lay down any precise rules governing the formation
of subphases. In general, their use seems appropriate in cases where
differences apply only to a few specific items of content or where
such differences are expressible only in variations in frequency. In
other words, if it is impossible to present a sensible account of the
culture of a unit except in terms of what went before or came after,
it is probably better regarded as a subphase. It is hardly necessary
to add that subphases and components are entirely different kinds
of subdivisions of the phase.

                                            TEMPORAL     SERIES

   A local sequence in its purest form is a series of components found
in vertical stratigraphic succession in a single site. It may also, how-
ever, be a composite series made by combining shorter stratigraphic
“runs” from various portions of a site or from several sites within
a locality, or it may be derived from seriating components by vari-
ous means without benefit of stratigraphy at all. However ob-
tained, the local sequence has this important feature: it is local.
The spatial dimension, by definition, is small enough to permit the


                                     METHOD AND THEORY     24
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
working assumption that differences between components reflect
differences in time.
   We have already referred to the fact that members of a local se-
quence, though technically regarded as components, are often re-
ferred to as phases on the ground that they are local manifestations
of the larger units and, also, that it is theoretically possible for a
phase to be represented by a single component. The local sequence
may, therefore, be defined as a chronological series of components,
phases, or subphases, within the geographical limits of a locality as de-
fined in this study.
   Local sequences, which are the very stuff of archaeology,
abound. A famous example of the kind of sequence based upon a
single site is at the ceremonial Maya center of Uaxactun, in the
Guatemalan Petén. The Uaxacttin sequence was determined by
combinations of “dirt” and architectural stratigraphy revealed in
long and intensive excavations." The sequence runs the gamut of
the Middle American Formative and Classic stages and probably
represents some two thousand years of more or less continuous
human occupation. Continuity throughout all phases of the sequence
is provided by ceramics which, in spite of several marked innova-
tions, show a recognizable local evolution. The earliest Formative
stage phases are the Mamom and Chicanel, in that order, and these
are followed by Matzanel, generally considered Proto-Classic.
The Classic phases, well represented in temple and palace construc-
tion, are the Izakol and Tepeu. R. E. Smith, who defined and
named these phases, has recently subdivided the latter two into
subphases: Tzakol 1, 2, 3, and Tepeu 1, 2, 3.% A comparable, but
slightly more complex, local sequence is the one at Kaminaljuyu in
the Guatemalan highlands, near Guatemala City. This is an exten-
sive ceremonial and dwelling center, and a long Formative-through-
Classic sequence of Maya occupation and building was worked out
  11. Ricketson and Ricketson, 1937; A. L. Smith, 1950.
  12. R. E. Smith, 1955, pp. 21-25.


                           ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   25
here by the cross-matching of numerous mound, tomb, and refuse
excavations over a very large site zone.’
   Kroeber’s pioneer seriation of seventeen Zufii ruins by means of
surface pottery alone was limited to sites that could be reached in
an hour’s walk from the modern pueblo. This classic study thus
affords a striking illustration of the local sequence and the advan-
tages of keeping it local. “Particularly does the necessity of con-
centration apply geographically. A promising site here and another
a hundred miles away may show striking differences in innumer-
able respects. But in the present chaos of knowledge who can say
which of these differences are due to age and which to locality
and environment?’’!4
   We have spoken of local sequences built up by comparing stra-
tigraphies and seriations from a number of sites within a relatively
small, circumscribed territory. The Vira Valley, on the north
coast of Peru, is an example. The valley is about fifteen miles
long and three miles wide at its widest point. In prehistoric times
it was densely occupied. Although the valley is not a single site, or
site zone, there are no contemporaneous cultural differences from
one part of Viru to another. Its ceramic and architectural series
are, indeed, local. Quite likely, when more sequential information
is available from neighboring north coast valleys, it will be seen
that Vird joins conveniently with several others to form a regional
sequence. Such a regional sequence is suggested by the frequent ref-
erences to the “North Coast” on Peruvian culture sequence charts,!®
though it must be pointed out that the regional integrity of the
Peruvian “‘North Coast” is still to be demonstrated.

    A regional sequence is not merely a local sequence with larger spa-
tial dimensions. The difference can best be approached from the
   13. Kidder, Jennings, and Shook, 1946; Shook, 1951; Shook and Kidder,
1952.
   14. Kroeber, 1916, p. 21.
   15. Ford and Willey, 1949; W. C. Bennett, 1950; Strong and Evans, 1952;
Willey, 1953c; Collier, 1955.
   16. Bennett and Bird, 1949, p. 112.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY     26
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
operational standpoint. In the normal extension of archaeological
information, components, subphases, phases, and local sequences
multiply, and questions of wider relationships come to the fore.
Ideally, the archaeologists of a region come together in a harmoni-
ous session where a careful matching of local sequences produces a
new sequence of larger scope. Actually this happy event occurs but
rarely. What more often happens is that phases and local sequences
gain in scope by a sort of osmosis. They flow outward, so to speak,
often propelled by their originators, uniting to themselves their
weaker correlates over a widening circle. The process is necessarily
accompanied by a progressive generalization of definition until
much of their original usefulness to research is impaired.
   Nevertheless, we will assume for the sake of argument that local
sequences remain local and that regional sequences are the result of
correlating them—not combining them, be it noted, because in the
process the original formulations are retailored to fit the wider spa-
tial and (sometimes) deeper temporal dimensions. The phase now
appears in its widest practicable extension and at its farthest remove
from the primary data; at any rate, it is our contention that the con-
cept of phase cannot safely be extended beyond the limits here de-
scribed. With these operational conditions in mind, we may define
the regional sequence as a chronological series of phases or subphases
within the geographical limits of a region as defined in this study.
   One of the firmest sequences in North American archaeology is
that established by James A. Ford and his associates in the south-
ern portion of the Mississippi alluvial valley, centering approxi-
mately about the mouth of the Red River in Louisiana.!’ This is an
instructive example in which stratigraphy in a small number of
closely related sites at the center (Marksville locality) and seriation
of a large number of sites extending out from the center have been
skilfully combined in a regional sequence of great strength but
sufficient flexibility to permit the incorporation of new formula-
tions from time to time. The unusual vigor of the “Lower Valley”
  17. Ford, 1936; Ford and Willey, 1940, 1941; Ford and Quimby,     1945;
Quimby,   1942, 1951; Ford, 1951, 1952.




                            ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   p7
sequence is manifested by a tendency to dominate in correlations
with other sequences in neighboring regions, but it is important to
point out that its strength derives from the hard core of stratigraphy
at the center. If there is any valid criticism of this sequence, it is
that it tends to take in too much territory. Workers in the delta of
the Mississippi and adjacent coastal regions, for example, have
tried to fit their data into it, not without considerable strain, which
is scarcely to be wondered at, considering the sharp environmental
differences involved in such an extension.!® This is a case of the
“osmotic” tendency noted above. It also exemplifies another
source of difficulty, to wit, the confusion that inheres in practically
all archaeological sequence formulations between culture and
chronology. As soon as we begin to rank cultural phases in order of
time, they tend to become “periods.” As periods, of course, they
are theoretically not spatially limited; they may be extended in-
definitely. If the Marksville phase of the Lower Valley sequence is
merely the interval between points E and F on a continuous time
band (as in Ford’s recent writings), then anything that can be es-
tablished as lying within that interval, in the delta, or anywhere
else for that matter, can also be called Marksville. The catch is
that Marksville is and will remain more than a mere chronological
period. The interval marked off by points E and F is determined
by cultural criteria in the first instance; the identification of other
material as belonging to that interval (in the absence of independent
calendrical dating) is determined by those same cultural criteria.
When the latter are not sufficiently in conformity with the cultural
criteria for comfortable identification, it is a sure sign that the
limits of the particular phase in question, either spatial or tem-
poral or both, have been exceeded. We shall have considerably
more to say about this ever present problem in the sections devoted
to area syntheses.
   Another strong regional sequence, though expressed largely in
ceramics, is exemplified by the Petén region of the central part of
the lowland Maya subarea. The key local sequence is that at
  18. McIntire, 1954.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY     28
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Uaxactun, already referred to, but stratigraphies at Benque Viejo
and San José can be correlated with ease.!® There are also indica-
tions from other sites in the same general vicinity, in both Guatema-
la and British Honduras, that ceramic types and their sequences
are in close harmony. In sum, an archaeological region of at least
fifty miles in diameter, and probably considerably larger, can be
established around Uaxactin, and the local sequence at that center
can be expanded into an equally valid sequence for the region.
   Before we leave the subject, it may be well to emphasize the
artificiality of the relationship between phase and region in a re-
gional sequence. We have said that the maximum practicable spa-
tial dimension of the phase is comparable to that of the region, but
no actual geographical coextension is implied. Such a one-to-one
relationship may occur fortuitously, because it often happens that a
region comes into existence on the heels of a phase, so to speak;
but there is no reason to expect that earlier or later phases will also
coincide with that region. In fact, the chances are that they will not
do so. As an example, there is a neat coincidence of region and
phase on the Florida Gulf Coast at the time of the Weeden Island
phase. The latter is relatively uniform in its entire extent from the
vicinity of Pensacola (if not farther west) south and east to
Charlotte Harbor below Tampa Bay.”® This correlation breaks
down, however, if we move either backward or forward in time.
On an earlier level, the Santa Rosa-Swift Creek phase seems much
more restricted in its distribution, and at a later time the old Wee-
den Island region is divided between the Fort Walton phase in the
north and the Safety Harbor phase in the south.
                                          INTEGRATIVE UNITS
   In our first paper we designated the large-scale unit concepts
horizon and tradition as “integrative devices,” but we now prefer
to call them “units” in tardy realization of the fact that they are not
radically different in kind from other unit concepts described in
   19. Thompson, 1939, 1940.
  20. Willey, 1949, chap. vi.



                           ARCHAEOLOGICAL UNIT CONCEPTS   29
this study but, rather, different in the uses to which they are put.
We call them “‘integrative” because, in our opinion, they constitute
the most practicable means for effecting culture-historical inte-
gration on a geographical scale larger than that of the region. They
are not the only means, however, and, before we describe them
further, it will be necessary to consider the problem of large-scale
integration in more general terms.
   One good result of our first presentation of the nomenclature
advocated here was a paper by Irving Rouse* in which, and in
subsequent correspondence with the writers, he looks with favor
on our basic units (component and phase) and their use in local
and regional sequences but expresses some misgivings in regard to
these larger integrative units (horizon and tradition) and the
way we proposed to use them. Rouse maintains that it is necessary
to distinguish three “levels of interpretation” and three correspond-
ing methods of correlating phases in large-scale area comparisons:
“descriptive,” “distributional,” and “genetic.” The first has to do
with formal comparisons of the sort employed in the McKern
taxonomic system and does not apply to the problem of culture-
historical integration as we understand it. His “distributional cor-
relation”’ is a strictly spatial-temporal ordering of phases in which
the unifying criteria are theoretically independent and extracultur-
al—nothing more or less than position in geographical space and
time—in contrast to his “genetic correlation,’ which does not
scruple to use culturally determined criteria. We agree that our in-
tegrative units operate mainly, if not entirely, on Rouse’s genetic
level of interpretation. He defines “genetic” very broadly, apply-
ing it, if we understand him correctly, to any relationship between
discrete units resulting from some form of historical contact. We
prefer “integrative,” which we have been using in practically the
same sense, because it carries no implications of phylogeny. This
is a minor verbal difference, but, when it comes to a general evalua-
tion of the role of genetic or integrative concepts in archaeology,
  21. Rouse, 1955.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY    30
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
we find ourselves in disagreement. Rouse takes what seems to us
an overcautious view:
   For these reasons, I would suggest that the genetic approach is not in
itself an efficient method of ordering the phases, i.e. of making broad-scale
syntheses of cultural relationships, although it may be useful as a check
upon syntheses established by other means. It would seem prudent to make
one’s basic synthesis by means of descriptive or distributional correlation
and then to point out the genetic relationships only in the instances where
sufficient data are available and they indicate that this type of relationship
has occurred.”
   In our view, the only synthesis worthy of the name is a culture-
historical synthesis. We have Rouse’s own word for it that descrip-
tive and distributional correlations tell us nothing about cultural or
historical relationships; the first tells us whether cultures are like
or unlike, the second places them in space and time. How are we to
achieve by either or both of these means a “broad-scale synthesis
of cultural relationships”? It would seem axiomatic that cultural
relationships can be revealed and expressed only by means of inte-
grative concepts that are culturally determined. This may be un-
fortunate and is certainly productive of circular reasoning, as Rouse
points out, but we do not see how it can be helped. The culturally
determined integrative units that we are about to consider are ad-
mittedly inefficient and hard to handle, but they constitute, in our
opinion, the principal means for the realization of what we have
repeatedly defined as archaeology’s primary task—culture-historical
integration.

   Failure in our original paper to distinguish between the terms
horizon and horizon style, which we used interchangeably, drew
some well-merited criticism, thanks to which we here make that
distinction and offer what we hope is a more sensible discussion of
the whole subject.
   The horizon-style concept, introduced into Andean archaeology
by Max Uhle** and later formalized by A. L. Kroeber,”* has amply
   22. Rouse, 1955, pp. 719-20.
   23. Uhle, 1913.                       24. Kroeber, 1944, pp. 108-11.


                              ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   31
proved its utility in that area. It differs from other unit concepts
described in this study in that the content is of a limited and special-
ized nature and the spatial and temporal dimensions are combined
in very unequal proportions. In theory, a horizon style, as the
name implies, occupies a great deal of space but very little time.
It may be roughly defined as a specialized cultural continuum
represented by the wide distribution of a recognizable art style. On
the assumption of historical uniqueness of stylistic pattern, coupled
with the further assumption that styles normally change with con-
siderable rapidity, the temporal dimension is theoretically reduced
to a point where the horizon style becomes useful in equating
phases or larger units of culture in time that are widely separated
in space. As one of the present authors has already observed: “The
horizon styles are the horizontal stringers by which the upright
columns of specialized regional development are tied together in
the time chart.”
   Thus the horizon style is one culturally determined means of
establishing a horizon, but the latter must be defined in broader
terms. This is the step we neglected to take in our first paper. The
horizon-style concept has a limited application, since it presupposes
a level of aesthetic development that many archaeological cultures
in the New World failed to reach. It is conceivable, however, that
other kinds of cultural data might serve equally well to mark
horizons, although this is a proposition that has not been sufficiently
investigated. We have in mind such items as highly specialized
artifact types, widely traded objects, new      technologies, unusual
modes of burial, or peculiar ritual assemblages—in other words,
any kind of archaeological evidence that indicates a rapid spread
of new ideas over a wide geographic space.
  Rouse recommends a stricter definition of the horizon. In a letter
to the authors, written subsequently to his paper from which we
have just quoted, he makes it clear that his conception of the hori-
zon is on his distributional level and operates ideally with inde-
pendent extracultural dating criteria, whereas ours, he points out,
  25. Willey, 1945a, p. 55.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY     3>
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
is on the genetic level and is therefore unsuitable for use in distribu-
tional correlations and should be called by another name. If we
could be convinced that it is possible at all times to maintain a clear
cut distinction between distributional and genetic methods of corre-
lation, we would be inclined to accept this suggestion. However, it
seems to us that certain horizon styles—or horizons, to use the
 more inclusive term—can be looked upon as both distributional
 and genetic in Rouse’s terminology. For example, the presence of
 Southern Cult horizon-style elements in various far-flung cultures
 of the southeastern United States links those cultures genetically,
 in the very broad sense that they reflect some kind of contact, but
 the cultures so linked are quite different from one another and,
 so far as we can see, have very different genetic relationships in
 all other respects. Though the genetic implications cannot be
 ignored, the primary concern of the archaeologist with the South-
 ern Cult style is often purely distributional: he thinks of it as a
 horizon marker whose appearance in various regional sequences is
 useful in cross-dating. However, we are prepared to waive this
 point and agree that it is best to use only independent, extracultural
 dating in distributional correlations or, as we call them here, area
 chronologies. We adhere, therefore, to our original notion of the
 horizon, not quite agreeing that it cannot be used for purely tem-
 poral correlations, but freely admitting its kinship with the concept
_of tradition on the genetic level of interpretation. The horizon,
 then, may be defined as a primarily spatial continuity represented by
 cultural traits and assemblages whose nature and mode of occurrence
 permit the assumption of a broad and rapid spread. Vhe archaeological
 units linked by a horizon are thus assumed to be approximately
 contemporaneous. The word is italicized because it is recognized
 that horizons based on cultural criteria unsupported by independent
 dating may have considerable temporal depth and that the assumed

    26. We trust that the reference to Rouse’s “levels of interpretation’’ is not
 producing confusion in respect to our “‘levels of organization” as described in
 the introductory section of this study. All his levels fall within the definition
 of our descriptive level.



                               ARCHAEOLOGICAL    UNIT   CONCEPTS    33
correlation is not necessarily horizontal but may, and probably
does, have a “‘slope’”’ depending on the amount of time required for
the spread of the elements used as horizon markers. Notwithstand-
ing these limitations, the horizon is an invaluable integrative unit
for the investigation and expression of external relationships over
wide geographical areas. If we have agreed that it is of dubious
value in establishing purely temporal equations, it is merely to
avoid blurring the useful distinction between Rouse’s distributional
and genetic methods of correlation in the formation of area chronol-
ogies, a point we shall return to later.
   Tradition is another integrative concept that seems to have origi-
nated in South American archaeology. A familiar, not to say indis-
pensable, word in any historical context, “tradition” has of late
acquired a special meaning in archaeology, or rather a number of
meanings, for it is still in an early stage of formulation and does not
mean the same thing to all who use it. Owing to the fact that the
concept is designated by a term that has long been used in archaeo-
logical writings, it is difficult to say just when it began to be a
methodological tool. In the Andean area it came into use as a
counterpoise to the horizon style and was at first applied only to
pottery. Once it became apparent that the utility of the horizon
style depended upon the combination of broad spatial and short
temporal dimensions, it was clear that some other formulation was
needed to express a different kind of ceramic unity in which these
proportions were reversed. This gave rise to the term “pottery
tradition,” certainly not a verbal innovation, but perhaps the first
use of the term “‘tradition” with a definite methodological sense.
   The relationship of the two concepts, horizon style and pottery
tradition, proved to be so important in Peruvian archaeology that
one of us may be permitted to repeat himself, as follows:
   These speculations concerning the relationships of the later White-on-
red styles to the earlier component styles of the White-on-red horizon lead
us to wonder if there are not other widely inclusive historical units of an
order different from that of the horizon style. It appears certain that the
Peruvian Andes and coast were a unified culture area in that the important



                                      METHOD AND THEORY      34
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
culture developments were essentially local and basically inter-related for
at least a thousand years. This fundamental cultural unity justifies seeing
ceramic developments in terms of long-time traditions as well as coeval
phenomena. The concept of a pottery tradition, as used here, includes
broad descriptive categories of ceramic decoration which undoubtedly
have value in expressing historical relationships when the relationships are
confined to the geographical boundaries of Peruvian-Andean cultures. The
pottery tradition lacks the specific quality of the localized pottery style,
and it differs from the horizon style in that it is not an integration of artistic
elements which has been widely diffused at a given time period. A pottery
tradition comprises a line, or a number of lines, of pottery development
through time within the confines of a certain technique or decorative con-
stant. In successive time periods through which the history of ceramic de-
velopment can be traced, certain styles arose within the tradition. Trans-
mission of some of these styles during particular periods resulted in the
formation of a horizon style, other styles in the continuum of the tradition
remained strictly localized. The distinction between a horizon style and a
pottery tradition should be kept in mind as the two are opposable concepts
in archaeological reconstruction.?’

   Shortly after this idea of tradition had first been injected into
Peruvian studies, Wendell Bennett enlarged the concept very con-
siderably under the name “‘area co-tradition.” This formulation he
defined as ‘‘the over-all unit of cultural history of an area within
which the component cultures have been inter-related over a period
of time.’’”? The emphasis implied in the ‘“‘co-” is on the linkage of
whole cultures, each with its own history and persistent traditions,
and on the area in which this linkage takes place. Thus the area
co-tradition is a vast enlargement over the simple tradition in terms
of content, since it is no longer confined to a single technological
development but becomes a broad coalescent cultural continuum.
At the same time, it introduces a restriction in that stable geo-
graphical boundaries are implied.
   The subsequent history of the area co-tradition and the contro-
versies that grew out of attempts to apply it in other areas”® need

    27. Willey, 1945a, p. 53.             28. W.C. Bennett, 1948, p. 1.
   29. Martin and Rinaldo, 1951; Willey, 19534, pp. 373-74; Rouse, 1954;
Cotter, 1954.



                                ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS    35
not detain us, since we are not proposing to incorporate the con-
cept in the nomenclature described here.
   About the same time that the Peruvianists were beginning to talk
about pottery traditions, McGregor introduced the term into the
archaeology of the Southwest with somewhat different connota-
tions. He defined tradition very broadly as “more or less deeply
rooted human characteristics—persistent attitudes or ways of do-
ing things—which are passed on from one generation to another,’’*
thus emphasizing the non-material and configurational aspects of
traditions and the social and behavioral continuities reflected in
their persistence. He maintained that characteristic attitudes can
be inferred from material traits and that the determination of tra-
ditions (as defined by him) is not only possible but essential in
making broad archaeological comparisons. McGregor’s traditions
are for the most part technologically oriented: house types, pottery,
ground stone, etc.; he merely advocates that they be formulated in
terms of the preferences and attitudes they reflect. There is nothing
revolutionary in this, but it is a point of view that cannot be too
often stated.
   The first significant use of the tradition concept in eastern North
American studies, so far as the authors are aware, was by John
Goggin, whose definition follows:
    My concept of Florida cultural traditions is similar in theory but more
inclusive in content than a ceramic tradition. A cultural tradition is a dis-
tinctive way of life, reflected in various aspects of the culture; perhaps ex-
tending through some period of time and exhibiting normal internal cultural
changes, but nevertheless throughout this period showing a basic consistent
unity. In the whole history of a tradition certain persistent themes domi-
nate the life of the people. These give distinctiveness to the configura-
tions.

   Goggin recognizes ten cultural traditions in Florida archaeology,
allowing to them a great deal of latitude in spatial and temporal di-
mensions. It seems to us that here he has discovered the outstand-
   30. McGregor,   1950. (Paper submitted in 1946.)
   31. Goggin, 1949, p. 17.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY        36
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
ing merit of the tradition as a methodological tool, namely, its
flexibility. Goggin also, rather more than others who have used the
concept, emphasizes the importance of environmental factors in
the shaping and conserving of traditions. Here again he has put his
finger on another virtue of the concept. It offers a most effective
means for giving expression to culture-environment correlations.
   From the examples just given, it may be seen that the concept
of tradition has been expanded considerably since its first use in
Peruvian archaeology. In our original paper we expressed satisfac-
tion with this growth and gave a definition of our own that was as
broad as, if not broader than, any previous ones. It may be asked,
however, whether by such radical expansion the tradition is not
deprived of some of its utility as an integrative unit. In the blunt-
ing that is inseparable from increased generalization it tends to lose
its primary significance of long temporal continuity as a counter-
poise to the broad spatial continuity represented by the horizon.
Furthermore,   since the publication of our first paper, we have
come to realize that, for expressing the maximum segmentation of
culture-history, the old standbys “culture” and “‘civilization” will
not be easily supplanted by such cumbersome expressions as “full
cultural tradition.’”’ We are therefore now proposing a return to
something like the original meaning of tradition in Peruvian ar-
chaeology, with emphasis put back on single technologies or other
unified systems of forms rather than on whole cultures. ‘The tradi-
tion thereby takes its former place as a means to integration, with
the culture or civilization standing as the product of integration.
Our first definition is accordingly amended to read: an archaeological
tradition is a (primarily) temporal continuity represented by persistent
configurations in single technologies or other systems of related forms.
The lack of specification in respect to the spatial dimension may be
supplied by the use of qualifying terms, as in “regional tradition,”
“areal tradition,” and so on.
   This definition of tradition takes us not quite all the way back to
the original pottery tradition of Peruvian archaeology. Some expan-
sion is left, in that traditions may be based on more complex sys-


                          ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   37
tems of forms than that represented by a single technology. We
have in mind something like the functionally interrelated trait com-
plexes of the ethnographer. About the same amount of expansion
is involved in substituting the concept of horizon for the horizon
style. The working relationship between horizon and tradition,
therefore, remains the same as between horizon style and pottery
tradition in the passage quoted above (pp. 34-35).
   After making the decision to cut back the tradition, as outlined
above, we received a manuscript copy of the report on the Society
for American Archaeology’s seminar on “Cultural Stability” held
at Ann Arbor in August, 1955. At this meeting the concept of
tradition was thoroughly anatomized. In defining it as “a socially
transmitted form unit (or series of systematically related units)
which persists in time,” the conferees were careful to avoid any
qualifications as to size, either in terms of content or in spatial and
temporal dimensions, beyond the obvious implication of long dura-
tion in the clause “which persists in time.’’ They were evidently
prepared to think of “whole cultural traditions,”’ but most of the
discussion, and nearly all the examples, applied to traditions of less
than whole cultural scope. Our impression is that such limitation
made the tradition a more useful tool in their investigation of cul-
tural stability. ‘““Thus, although it is logically necessary to entertain
the possibility of traditions ranging from the smallest to the largest,
it is also important to recognize that the cultural and historical
significance of a tradition diminishes toward either size extreme.”’”
   The reference in the Ann Arbor definition to social transmittal
serves to emphasize the fact that traditions operate on Rouse’s
genetic level of interpretation, perhaps even more surely than hori-
zons. Thus, if we may express the reciprocating relationship be-
tween them without too flagrant a confusion of categories, the
tradition gives depth, while the horizon gives breadth, to the genetic
structure of culture-historical relationships on a broad geographic
scale.
  In seeking to polarize such essentially fluid concepts as horizon
  32. Haury et al., 1956, p. 39.



                                         METHOD AND THEORY   38
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
and tradition, we have unavoidably overstressed their salient fea-
tures and produced an impression of profound difference between
them that may be misleading. Looked at from the broader view of
total archaeological method, horizon and tradition are not really
very different. Both are unit concepts in the sense that their formu-
lation involves the combination of cultural data and spatial-tem-
poral dimensions. They differ considerably in the nature of the
cultural data and, theoretically, in the quantities and proportions of
the spatial and temporal dimensions; we have stated with tiresome
repetition what those differences are supposed to be, but in practice
such standards are difficult to apply. Our first apprehension of a
major archaeological continuity, as of the proverbial elephant in the
dark, is usually so‘tenuous that we do not know what it is or what
to call it. The same continuity may be viewed by one investigator
as a tradition, by another as a horizon. Even when the outlines are
fairly clear, it may still be thought of either way, depending on the
problem under consideration.      For   example,     Hopewellian   zoned
rocker-stamped pottery, when looked at from the standpoint of its
geographic extension in the eastern United States, may be quite
legitimately thought of as a horizon phenomenon; on the other
hand, when the interest is centered on the course of its develop-
ment through successive phases in a particular region, it may
equally well be regarded as a tradition. This is perhaps an extreme
example of the fluidity we have praised in describing these integra-
tive concepts.
   There remains but to mention briefly the useful but largely neg-
lected concept climax. In reference to the integrative units just de-
scribed, the climax may be defined as the type or types of maximum
intensity and individuality of an archaeological horizon or tradition.
This is necessarily a value judgment, but only in relation to the
horizon or tradition involved. In whole cultural terms the climax
becomes the phase or phases of maximum intensity and individuality
of a culture or civilization. So far as possible, in this wider context,
the emphasis should be multilinear, not confined to exquisite de-
velopments in aesthetics. Such developments may conceivably take


                          ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   39
place in periods of low cultural intensity. Theoretically, there
should be a climax in every horizon, tradition, culture, or civiliza-
tion, on all stages of development. Our choice of the term “classic”
—which means about the same thing—to denote the climactic stage
of New World culture is by no means intended to preclude its use
in more humble contexts. Any horizon or tradition may have its
classic type, as any culture or civilization may have its classic
phase. The word makes equal sense whether we are talking about
the classic black stirrup-mouth jar of the Chavin horizon, the
classic Folsom point of the fluted-point tradition, the classic Pueblo
III phase of the San Juan Anasazi culture, or the classic stage of
New World culture as a whole.

                     OPERATIONAL    RELATIONSHIPS   OF BASIC

                                    AND   INTEGRATIVE    UNITS

   Before we go on to a consideration of large-scale area schemes
and maximum archaeological units, it may be well to summarize
briefly the working relationships between the unit concepts so far
described, because these constitute, in our opinion, the most effec-
tive apparatus for the integration of the primary archaeological
data. These relationships are crudely diagramed in Figure 1, which
is designed to show the difference between the basic units, com-
ponent and phase, and the integrative units, horizon and tradition,
not in their nature as archaeological units but in the way they oper-
ate in large-scale integration. The relationships in the component-
phase system are predominantly formal and static; those in the
horizon-tradition system are fluid and historical or, as Rouse would
say, genetic. In the first pair, the spatial and temporal dimensions
that inhere in all archaeological unit concepts are, in this larger
context, reduced to negligibility. This is what permits us to refer
to the phase as the “manageable” unit of archaeological study. It
can be manipulated in large-scale area schemes as though its internal
dimensions were non-existent.
   Up to this point most archaeologists would probably go along,
though many, depending on the areas in which they have worked,


                                     METHOD AND THEORY     40
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
would prefer to use other terms in place of “phase.” Where our
point of view differs is in the conviction that the phase, as defined
in these pages, is the largest archaeological unit that can be so
manipulated. Our later discussion of some of the characteristics
of the maximum units, culture and civilization, we need anticipate

                                    iT
                                     '
                                     '
                                     '
                                     !
                                     \
                                     \
                                     '
                                     '
                                     '
                                     \




                                    !
                                    '
                                    \
                                    '
                                    1
                                    |
                                    '
                                    '
                                    \
                                    |
                                    T
                                                C= Component
                                                P= Phase
                                              TT=  Tradition
                                              HH = Horizon
    Fic. 1.—Diagrammatic   integration of components,    phase,   horizon,   and
tradition.


here only to the extent of pointing out that these are in a very real
sense the ends, not the means, of culture-historical integration.
Their vastly greater internal spatial and temporal dimensions, par-
ticularly the latter, render them completely unmanageable as units
of study in both formal and spatial-temporal comparisons. Forms
are fluid, changing constantly through space and time; with ex-
pansion of these dimensions, the changes in forms within the unit


                            ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS      4]
are such that the unit can only be described in progressively more
general terms—the familiar phenomenon of shorter trait lists for
larger taxonomic subdivisions. For example, at the Woodland Con-
ference   in 1941,%* eastern   North   American   archaeologists   laid
down a formal definition of the Woodland cultural pattern couched
in such general terms that, as later discovered, but for the inclusion
of pottery, it fitted the Archaic pattern just as well.** In a similar
manner, temporal relationships between large units become im-
possible to describe through excess of internal time dimensions and
the consequent possibilities of overlap. Failure to recognize this
is responsible for many fictitious problems. The Adena-Hopewell
problem, a long-standing subject of debate, might be cited as an
example. The sequential arrangement of these two cultures in the
Ohio Valley and their correlation with other units of comparable
dimensions in eastern North America became faintly ridiculous
when radiocarbon dates indicated a probable overlap of several
centuries in their time spans. This is not to maintain that spatial
and temporal relationships of cultures and civilizations are not
legitimate problems for the archaeologist, but to point out simply
that in this wider arena the variables of space and time are more
difficult to control. Such questions certainly cannot be investigated
and expressed by the crude diagrammatic methods ordinarily em-
ployed in large-scale area schemes.
    To return to the cabalistic diagram in Figure 1: if it be granted
that the component-phase system operates mainly with relation-
ships of a formal nature, it will certainly be allowed that horizons
and traditions belong to a different system—a system in which the
element of formal content is reduced in importance, while the vari-
ables of space and time have the dominant roles. The real point,
however, is not how like or unlike these two pairs of units may be,
conceptually or operationally, but that there is no built-in taxonom-
ic relationship between them. Components and phases enter into
horizons and traditions; their external relationships are expressed
   33. Woodland Conference, 1943.
   34. Sears, 1948.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY   4)
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
by these units, but they are not combined to form them. In fact, the
opposite is more nearly the case. A single phase may conceivably
enter into more than one horizon. For example, the Esperanza phase
in the highland Maya sequence at Kaminaljuyu, Guatemala, par-
ticipates in both the basal-flanged bowl horizon and the Teotihua-
can tripod-jar horizon.** The basal-flanged bowl, of presumably
lowland Maya inspiration, is a widespread horizon marker for the
period of the Early Classic cultures in southern Middle America.
The tripod cylinder jar, deriving from Teotihuacan about the same
time, has an even more extensive distribution and imitation. As for
traditions, there is certainly no question that a number of these may,
and usually do, converge in a single phase. This is clearly seen, for
example, in the Mochica phase of the north coast of Peru. Mochica
red-and-white modeled pottery represents a convergence of the old
Cupisnique, or north Peruvian Plastic and Incised, traditions, with
the north Peruvian White-on-red tradition that first made its ap-
pearance in the Salinar phase.* In sum, the effectiveness of this
apparatus, as we see it, depends on the free interplay of basic and
integrative units without rigid limitations of a systematic nature.
   35. Kidder, Jennings, and Shook, 1946, p. 250.
   36. Willey, 19454.




                            ARCHAEOLOGICAL UNIT CONCEPTS   43
                                                         Chapter 2




                Archaeological Integration
                                                  AREA   SYNTHESIS

The integrative units described in the preceding section are well
adapted to express the extraordinarily complex and fluid relation-
ships of archaeological phases over wide geographical areas, but
they cannot furnish the rigid spatial-temporal frames that archaeolo-
gists seem to find so reassuring. For these we generally turn to
some system of matching phases from region to region, expressing
the results by means of a diagram in which the regional sequences
are arranged in parallel columns with their phases stacked up like
boxes, scaled against a real or imaginary vertical time band at one
side. Illustrations are available in current archaeological literature
in great profusion and variety. The appearance of an archaeological
report without such a diagram would in fact be something of a curi-
osity today. This is what Rouse, in the paper already cited, has
called “distributional correlation of phases,” and the resulting dia-
gram, of which he presents an excellent model,! is often referred to
as an “‘area chronology.”
  We have expressed agreement with Rouse that so far as possible
such a scheme should be effected by means of independent, extra-
cultural cross-dating, e.g., radiocarbon dating, dendrochronology,
river-channel and river-terrace sequences, discrete geological and
meteorological     events    (volcanic     eruptions,    droughts,   etc.)—in
short, any available techniques of dating that do not involve as-
sumptions about culture. Unfortunately, in the present stage of

   1. Rouse, 1955, Fig. 2, p. 716.


                                           METHOD AND THEORY    44
                                     IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
archaeological development in the Americas we rarely, if ever, have
sufficient dates of this kind; consequently it is difficult to find in the
literature examples conforming to Rouse’s model. Even in the
Southwest, where tree-ring dating has made such remarkable prog-
ress, it appears that dates are still insufficient for interregional cor-
relation.? Therefore, present area chronologies in the New World
do not scruple to employ any sort of correlation data that comes to
hand—descriptive, distributional, or genetic. They are often
dressed out to look like real chronologies by the addition of a few
calendrical dates, usually guesses, marking off the “periods” on
one side of the chart. These seldom date more than one of the
phases that are correlated to form the “period,” the correlation
being really based‘on cultural similarity, horizon phenomena, trade
objects, etc., and the well-worn assumption that these reflect con-
temporaneity. In other words, the correlations are not based on in-
dependent dating so much as the dating is based on the correla-
tions. A casual glance through the literature of American archaeol-
ogy of the past twenty-five years will reveal numerous examples of
such charts. The Peru-Bolivian, or central Andean, area is especial-
ly well represented.’ For Middle America it is also easy to cite
similar chart presentations.‘
   Outstanding examples of area schemes that are virtually without
benefit of dating are to be found in the southeastern United States.
Here, owing to the failure of independent dating techniques to de-
velop as rapidly as in some other areas, it has become a habit to
equate widely separated archaeological units on strictly formal
principles, and, whether as cause or effect, there prevails a sweep-
ing assumption of synchrony of culture change throughout the
area. Does culture A have plain fiber-tempered pottery? If so, it
equates in time with culture B, which has plain fiber-tempered pot-

   a, \WVinentey WOE Toe Sze
   3. Kroeber, 1944, p. 112; Willey, 19482, p. 9; Bennett and Bird, 1949, p.
112. These are but a few samples.
  4. Armillas, in Kroeber, 1948, p. 116; Kroeber,   1940, pp. 484-85;   Mac-
Neish, 19545, p. 623; Wauchope, 1950; Sorenson, 1955, pp. 54-56.



                               ARCHAEOLOGICAL   INTEGRATION   45
tery. The possibility that the relationship may be genetic, and there-
fore not necessarily synchronous, is not entertained. We are so fond
of this method of reasoning in the Southeast that we tend to ignore
the few independent (radiocarbon) dates that we have. As a recent
example, William H. Sears’s excellent final report on excavations
at the Kolomoki site in southwestern Georgia contains an elabo-
rate correlation of southeastern sequences against a calendrical
scale, but no radiocarbon dates appear on the chart, nor are they
mentioned in the text.®
   There is an unfortunate tendency in area chronologies of this
culturally correlated variety for the periods to take on some of the
characteristics of developmental stages. The larger the area, the
more likely is this to happen. The best example in recent literature
is the scheme for ‘Eastern United States”’ as set forth in the monu-
mental Cole Anniversary Volume under the editorship of James B.
Griffin.’ The area, which takes in everything from the Plains to the
Atlantic, is too large, in our opinion, for any practical archaeologi-
cal purposes. Nevertheless, Griffin addresses himself to the heroic
task of correlating hundreds of phases and cultures in this vast area
into a succession of “culture periods,”’ defined, as the term implies,
both chronologically and culturally but necessarily in such broad
terms as to be little more than general stages in the development of
American culture. In some of the contributions to the volume, the
terms “period,” “‘culture,” and “‘stage”’ are used interchangeably,
depending on the exigencies of the moment. Deliverance from this
kind of semantic ambiguity will come when current techniques of
absolute dating have reached a point of such dependability that we
can place a given unit within a temporal frame, on the one hand,
and in a developmental sequence, on the other, without confusing
the two operations.
   We are forced to conclude that the pure area chronology based
on distributional criteria alone is, in the New     World at least, a

   5. Sears, 1956, p. 80.
   6. Griffin, 1952a.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY    46
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
presently unattainable ideal. But, with the rapid accumulation of
radiocarbon and other types of independent dating now taking place,
it 1s a certain possibility in the future. In the meantime we must be
content with the sort of hybrid area schemes now in vogue. There
is no harm in them so long as we are clear about how they are made
and what they mean, but, when they lead us to think that we have
discovered something about the way culture “‘works,”’ it is time to
be on guard. In any case, it will be entertaining to compare them
with true area chronologies when these are available.

                                  MAXIMUM     UNITS:   CULTURE
                                              AND   CIVILIZATION

   We have tried to show that area chronologies express the spatial-
temporal relationships between archaeological phases, while hori-
zons and traditions express their culture-historical relationships.
These are unquestionably their primary functions, but, on a more
abstract level of interpretation, all these units and devices may be
considered means by which the archaeologist gropes for the major
segmentations of culture-history. There is clearly an irresistible
urge to relate cultural forms to their largest possible contexts, ex-
pressed in the terms “‘culture”’ or “‘civilization’”’ as used by students
of culture-history when they are referring to events on a world-
wide scale. We did not sufficiently take account of this urge in our
first paper, which was conceived in terms of practicable archaeologi-
cal methods and was not particularly concerned with ultimate ends.
We found in the phase an operationally manageable unit, 1.e., a
unit small enough in spatial and temporal dimensions to be manipu-
lated in area correlations and sequential schemes. Phases were to be
related in larger culture-historical organizations by means of con-
cepts such as the horizon and the tradition, but it was ruled that
these were strictly integrative units and that the phases were not
to lose their identity in these larger formulations. But the urge for
totality was at work, with the result that the definition of one of
these concepts, the tradition, was so broadly stated as to include
the “full cultural tradition,’’ which is, in effect, a self-sufficient


                             ARCHAEOLOGICAL   INTEGRATION   a7.
archaeological unit more like the phase, with greatly amplified
spatial and temporal dimensions, than like a mere device for ex-
pressing relationships, as advertised. In short, here was a serious
contradiction, which we now find it necessary to remove.
   The solution we have chosen has already been described: to cut
back the concept of tradition to something like its original scope,
taking from it the expanded connotation of “‘full cultural tradition”
and returning that connotation to the unit concept of “culture” or
“civilization,” where it has always lodged. Thus, the phase re-
mains the manageable unit; horizon and tradition remain the inte-
grative units for expressing relationships between phases; culture
and civilization, the maximum units reflecting the major segmenta-
tions of culture-history. In a strictly methodological context, and
subject to the developmental relativism which applies to all unit
concepts, culture and civilization can be treated as equivalents. As
a somewhat arbitrary specification, however, applicable to the New
World only, we suggest that “culture” be used to denote maximum
units on all stages up to and including the Formative, reserving the
term “civilization” for such units on the Classic and Postclassic
stages.

                           THE   SOCIAL   ASPECTS   OF ARCHAE-

                                              OLOGICAL   UNITS

   We have described a number of archaeological unit concepts and
discussed their working relationships, but we have allowed ques-
tions of their social meaning to accumulate in the belief that these
can be more sensibly dealt with under a single heading. The task
of finding social equivalents for archaeological units is beset by the
most formidable difficulties, most of which stem from the fact that
the kinds of data archaeology depends on are precisely those ele-
ments of culture that diffuse most readily across social and political
boundaries. Consequently, we seldom experience the satisfaction of
feeling that our units are coextensive, either spatially or temporally,
with corresponding social units, even in the simplest and most ex-
plicit of archaeological situations. However, we must remind the


                                    METHOD AND THEORY      48
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
reader that, according to our theoretical position, archaeological
units are formulated on the descriptive level of organization with a
view to their use on the explanatory level and, to qualify for the
latter, must be intelligible in both the cultural and the social aspects
of the behavior that is our subject matter. So we are obliged to keep
in mind the possibility of social equivalents to our unit formulations,
even when we cannot say with any degree of assurance what they
are?
    In the case of archaeological units of the smallest magnitude,
however, we are on fairly solid ground. The social equivalent of the
component is the “community,” as defined by Murdock and others:
“the maximal group of persons who normally reside together in a
face-to-face association.”” Murdock’s three types of community—
band, neighborhood, and village—manifest themselves archaeologi-
cally in the component, and it is even possible sometimes to tell
which type is represented. So far, so good. The equivalent of
phase, then, ought to be “society,” and in a good many cases it
probably is. The fact that, in practice, phases often consist of a
single component need not disturb us; on the lower levels of cul-
tural development the society likewise may consist of a single com-
munity. At the other end of the developmental scale, however, so-
ciety becomes a larger concept, spatially at least, than phase. We
shall return to this point presently in discussing the social aspect of
our maximum units, culture and civilization. For the purposes of
the immediate discussion, let us think of society in its minimal
sense, as “‘a group of people acknowledging a single political au-
thority, obedient to a single system of law, and in some degree or-
ganized to resist attack from other such societies.”® How does this
relate to the concept of phase? Logically the correspondence 1s
reasonable. Such a society comprises a number of communities; the
phase comprises a number of components; component equals com-
munity; therefore, phase equals society. Unfortunately, in practice
it does not work. We have no means of knowing whether the com-
  7. Murdock, 1949, p. 79.
  8. M. A. Smith, 1955, p. 4.


                             ARCHAEOLOGICAL INTEGRATION   49
ponents we group together into a phase are the same communities
an ethnographer (supposing such a person happened to be on hand)
would group into a society. We cannot be sure that the individual
members of these communities would recognize themselves as be-
longing to the same “people.” They might not even speak the same
language. Ethnography offers abundant examples of different so-
cieties sharing a material culture that would be impossible to differ-
entiate archaeologically. It would be only slightly more difficult to
find examples in which the material culture of individual communi-
ties within a society diverged sufficiently to cause them to be classi-
fied archaeologically in separate phases. A frontier garrison com-
munity, organized specially for defense, might be a case in point.
   More vexing, perhaps, are questions having to do with the stabili-
ty of material and social culture through time, a dimension happily
ignored by the ethnographer. We have laid down the rule that the
temporal dimension of the phase must be kept within manageable
limits, but this is admittedly in terms of the somewhat prodigal view
of time held by the archaeologist. We are not forgetting that the
life-span of our phases 1s ordinarily determined by the persistence
of material traits which can be remarkably stable. Within such a
span it is conceivable that social changes might be sufficient to en-
able our hypothetical ethnographer to speak of several societies.
Conversely, under special conditions, even a primitive population
may exhibit revolutionary changes in material culture without
losing its identity as a society. We have abundant examples of this
in recent colonial history.
   In sum, it looks as though the present chances are against
archaeological phases having much, if any, social reality, but this
does not prevent us from maintaining that they can have and that in
the meantime we may act as if they did have. We have already ex-
pressed a similar attitude in connection with artifact typology.
Just as, with the inevitable refinement of archaeological techniques,
it will become increasingly possible to define types in terms of so-
cial behavior, it will become likewise increasingly possible to de-
fine phases in terms of social structure. This possibility must be


                                     METHOD AND THEORY    50
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
reckoned with, but it is not really the point of the present discus-
sion. We do not maintain that every, or even any, specific phase
is the archaeological expression of an extinct society. We simply
call attention to the fact that there is a certain conceptual agree-
ment between phase and society. Both are intelligible units of their
respective fields of study. They have similar roles and similar
scales, and in this crucial matter of scale both exhibit the same rela-
tivism with respect to the level of cultural development. This con-
gruence, we contend, qualifies the phase as the intelligible unit of
comparative study and, thus, offers the best hope of incorporating
archaeology into general anthropological science.
   The integrative units, horizon and tradition, because of their
incomplete cultural content, cannot be regarded as self-sufficient in
the cultural aspect; so there is an a priori case against their intelli-
gibility in the social aspect. This is not equivalent to denying that
they are socially transmitted. These units are the archaeological
expressions of the processes of diffusion. They have come into exist-
ence in response to an awareness that particular forms and systems
of forms—as distinct from whole, functioning, cultural units—flow
through geographical space and time in a manner seemingly inde-
pendent of the cultural matrices in which they are found. It is be-
side our purpose to investigate the mechanics of diffusion, or the
question of how they may be detected in archaeology—a subject for
a lengthy treatise in itself—but we suppose that in the main they
operate through the agency of individuals or organized groups, such
as trading companies, religious bodies, armies, and migrating popu-
lations, which, with the exception of the last, are not complete and
self-sufficient social units. In general, therefore, horizons and tra-
ditions fail to meet the test of intelligibility in the social aspect, and
no more need be said about them here.
   When it comes to the social aspect of the maximum units, cul-
ture and civilization, we are on more difficult terrain. Here the
problem of stage-relativism becomes acute. We have arbitrarily de-
fined the culture as the maximum unit on all developmental stages
up to and including the Formative. Even with this specification,


                              ARCHAEOLOGICAL   INTEGRATION    51
there is still a tremendous variability in its connotations, both cul-
tural and social. On the lowest stage, the Lithic, the term “culture”
usually refers to single technologies or “assemblages” reflecting a
similar economic adjustment shared by a large number of social
groups. The content of such a “culture” is seldom sufficiently com-
plete or physiognomic to suggest that a single homogeneous society
is responsible. Put the other way around: on this level we are un-
able to infer the existence of social units large enough to be coex-
tensive with these “‘cultures.’”’ It would perhaps be preferable to
organize these incomplete data—all archaeological data are in-
complete, but Lithic data are more so—in terms of phases and tra-
ditions, eschewing the term ‘‘culture” altogether. We do not really
expect this wholesome suggestion to be followed, but, if we could
at least eliminate “cultures” represented by a single type of pro-
jectile point, it would be progress in the right direction.
  On the Archaic stages of development, the situation is a little
different. Archaic phases are generally richer in cultural content;
spatial and temporal dimensions tend to be smaller. It seems to be
possible in some cases to organize the data into larger units than
phases, for which the term culture stands without benefit of quota-
tion marks. It is difficult to say, however, what the social equiva-
lents of such cultures might have been. We have inferred elsewhere
that social organization in the Archaic stage had not generally pro-
ceeded beyond the level of complexity represented by the tribe, but
this is a gratuitous assumption that might not stand up under investi-
gation. In short, it remains to be shown whether or not the unit,
culture, is intelligible in the social aspect on the Archaic stage of
development.
  The Formative is by definition the stage of the appearance of new
economic patterns, and these we assume to have been accompanied
by the formation of societies of greater scale and complexity than
existed theretofore. Ethnohistory furnishes examples in the numer-
ous confederacies, and we have abundant evidence of the existence
on this stage of religious and ceremonial organizations far exceed-
ing in scope anything that could be represented by a phase in ar-


                                     METHOD AND THEORY    5D
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
chaeology. This would seem to be the stage on which the unit, cul-
ture, becomes intelligible in the social aspect. However, it is diffi-
cult, even in an ethnohistoric context, to make satisfactory equa-
tions between archaeological and social units on this level of cul-
tural development. In the case of the Iroquois Confederacy, for ex-
ample, we can equate specific archaeological phases with the indi-
vidual member tribes, but the unit “Iroquois culture” seems to have
been shared by tribes that were not only outside the famous con-
federacy but in some cases not even afhiliated linguistically. In a
context that is largely prehistoric the difficulties are even greater.
As a trial example we may consider the Coles Creek—Plaquemine
culture, a Formative continuity in the lower Mississippi Valley
lasting from about a.p. 900 to a.p. 1731 (date of the final dispersal
of the Natchez tribe). We regard this as a unit because the elements
of continuity from phase to phase seem to be stronger than the ele-
ments of change. Now what would be the social equivalent of such
a continuity? Projecting back from ethnohistoric data, we know
that there were several phases of this culture in the seventeenth cen-
tury and that these phases pertain to discrete tribal groups, such as
the Natchez, Taensa, Houma, Tunica, or Yazoo. There is no evi-
dence that these tribes were united into a political federation. In
fully prehistoric times it is possible that some sort of hegemony may
have been imposed on these groups, but, if the pattern of oppor-
tunist warfare and ephemeral alliances that we see in historic times
is any index to what happened earlier, it is inconceivable that any
such hegemony could have embraced the full geographical range, or
time span, of the Coles Creek—Plaquemine culture.
   So far, in the discussion of possible equations between archaeo-
logical cultures and larger social units, our implicit definition of a
social unit has been essentially a political one. We have also seen
that it is extremely difficult to identify the correlates of political
structure in an archaeological record. Leaving aside for the mo-
ment, then, the question of political forms, let us simply ask what
kind of archaeological evidence might be indicative of larger social
units. This, we feel, is the most fruitful starting point in the search


                            ARCHAEOLOGICAL   INTEGRATION   5 3
for archaeological and social equations; and, in seeking evidence of
this order, it is also our opinion that the Classic and Postclassic cul-
tures of the New World offer more potentialities than the Forma-
tive.
   One of the characteristics of Classic cultures in both Middle
America and Peru is the possession of great art styles. These styles
are symbolic systems. Their content and the contexts in which they
are presented assure us that they permeated much of their cultural
setting and that they were a part of the conscious awareness of the
peoples of these cultures. For example, the recognition and appre-
ciation of an art style like that of the lowland Maya imply a realiza-
tion upon the part of the beholders that they are affiliated with other
peoples who also recognize and believe in the symbolism of this
same style. Such a sense of affiliation must necessarily have had so-
cial significance. It is difficult, perhaps impossible, to define the
exact nature of the bonds giving coherence to such a social order or
society in the large. They may, or may not, have been political.
We have no definite knowledge about the ancient Maya political
structure. Maya ceremonial centers from the Usumacinta to the
Motagua may have been held together under a single authority, or
each may have maintained a completely independent sovereignty.
Religious ideology was undoubtedly one of the ties that held Maya
society together. Not only does the art style suggest this, but wide-
spread diffusion of uniform calendrical and hieroglyphic lore sup-
ports the interpretation. Yet the Maya bonds appear to have been
more than the interchange of religious and astronomical ideas among
a few priestly elite from the great centers or cities. Such may have
been the mechanism of their original dissemination, but there are
numerous signs that the ordinary Maya villagers who sustained the
centers and the theocratic leadership also participated in, and had
at least a peasant’s understanding of, the ideas of the upper classes.
These ideas, in so far as they were generally accepted, probably
became much more than purely religious dogma. It is likely that
they were assimilated into the values and beliefs of Maya peasant
culture and that these values and beliefs were shared by Maya


                                     METHOD AND THEORY     54
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
society in the same way that the art expressing these values was
also shared by that society.
   If we argue that stylistic unity may demonstrate social as well
as cultural cohesion, for what other prehistoric American art styles
can we build a case similar to that for the Maya? Teotihuacdn?
Zapotec (Monte Alban)? Mochica? Nazca? These four have the
requisite qualities of greatness and pervasiveness. For each the im-
print of the style is unmistakable, whether rendered in stone, pot-
tery, wall painting, or textiles. Also, all four have the relatively
tight territorial integrity which suggests a unity of a social kind.
All four lack, however, those continuities into the ethnohistoric pe-
riod that the Maya case possesses in some degree, and this makes
it more difficult to be assured of common language, custom, and
belief. What of the still older styles, Olmec and Chavin? For these
the circumstances of remote antiquity and great geographic range
lessen the possibility that the social dimension can ever be approxi-
mated. It may be, as has often been surmised, that Olmec and Cha-
vin style occurrences, in their respective Middle American and
Peruvian spheres, signify only religious, ideological, or cultist
diffusions and that the ideas behind these styles never penetrated
the receiving cultures to the extent that general values and beliefs
were substantially modified. If so, there would be less reason to be-
lieve in the coherence and homogeneity of an Olmec or Chavin so-
ciety. Perhaps these two styles represent an earlier stage in the
civilizing process of social enlargement and homogenization that
we have inferred for lowland Maya culture and society. To con-
tinue this same line of speculation, it is possible that such a horizon
style as the Southern Cult of the southeastern United States is de-
velopmentally prototypical to Middle and South American great
styles in the same way that southeastern Formative cultures are
prototypical to the Mexican and Peruvian Classic civilizations.
  Civilization has been characterized, both qualitatively and quan-
titatively, by Childe, Redfield, and others.° The chief requisites
are city life with its concomitants of large population size and
  9. Childe, 1946, pp. 82-105; Redfield, 1953; Braidwood, 1952.



                             ARCHAEOLOGICAL   INTEGRATION   55
density, formalized religions, class systems, craft specializations,
the beginnings of codified learning and science, and great artistic
traditions. Inferentially, it is our opinion that a consciousness of a
larger social order is also a feature of civilization. In other words,
the societal basis of a civilization differs from that of a culture, both
quantitatively and qualitatively. In quantity, it is larger, it en-
compasses more people, it overrides community and tribal barriers.
In quality, it demands beliefs in, and allegiances to, ideas and
values that are abstract and remote from the individual and his
tribal hearth.
   The foregoing review of the various archaeological unit con-
cepts in their social aspect has brought out several interesting but
highly tentative possibilities. First, it appears that the basic units,
component and phase, are theoretically capable of intelligibility in
the social aspect on all the lower stages of development up through
the Formative, but the difficulties of close equations are not to be
minimized. Though the question of just what the social equivalents
of these smaller units might be in the more highly organized Classic
and Postclassic societies has not been investigated, it is nevertheless
easy to foresee that the difficulties of doing so would be formidable.
Second, while the integrative units, horizon and tradition, have been
rather summarily dismissed because of apparent lack of complete-
ness and self-sufficiency in both the cultural and the social aspects,
this is a rather arbitrary exclusion which, needless to add, requires
further investigation. Third, in testing rather more thoroughly the
maximum units, culture and civilization, we seem to have stumbled
upon a valuable insight which is at the same time a useful criterion
for distinguishing between these units. For, while it has proved to
be difficult to envisage any social equivalent for the culture, it ap-
pears that the really definitive characteristic of the civilization is
that such a possible equivalent does exist.




                                     METHOD AND THEORY     56
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
                                            Summary
In so far as the foregoing definitions and stated relationships can be
formalized as a program for the integration of New World archaeo-
logical data on the descriptive level of organization, they may be
summarized as follows:
  1. The primary emphasis should continue to be placed on the for-
mulation of basic units, component and phase, in local and regional
sequences under stratigraphic control.
   2. Phases should be studied intensively in their cultural and natu-
ral contexts.
   3. Their external spatial and temporal dimensions should be kept
within manageable limits of magnitude.
  4. Their external relationships should be studied and expressed
by means of the integrative units, horizon and tradition.
   5. Large-scale integrating syntheses should be kept within the
limits of the ‘‘area,”’ as defined herein, and horizontal correlation
of phases in such schemes should be effected so far as possible by
means of independent extracultural data.
   6. On the basis of these integrative studies, phases should be
combined when possible to form the maximum units, culture and
civilization.
   7. Constant effort should be made to invest all units of what-
ever magnitude with the greatest possible intelligibility in both the
cultural and the social aspects.




                                              SUMMARY    57
                       Part II




FAlistorical-Developmental
             Interpretation
               —
                   ~




   baiyea
cec pean ng beieee     (1
rind FULT
                                                      Chapter 3




       The Historical-Developmental
              Approach in American
                        Archaeology
                              TOWARD A SYNTHESIS OF NEW
                                       WORLD PREHISTORY
Culture-historical integration, as we have seen, is the descriptive
process concerned with cultural forms, with plotting these forms
in space and time, and with defining their relationships and inferred
functions. There is, we think, common agreement that these are
archaeology’s primary tasks, on the descriptive level of organiza-
tion. It is with these tasks in mind that we have attempted to formu-
late intelligible archaeological “units” for study. The questions of
how such units may be named and defined and how they may be
related one to another are, we maintain, the foundation of theoreti-
cal formulations on the explanatory level of organization, i.e., in
the fields of culture-continuity and culture-change. Of the various
trial examinations and hypotheses that might be built upon this
foundation, a synthesis of New World archaeology as a whole is
one that falls short of the higher level of organization, occupying a
sort of gray borderland between description and explanation. The
historical-developmental interpretation presented in the following
pages is an attempt at such a synthesis.
   We have already spoken of the tendency for large-scale area
chronologies   to   take   on   the characteristics    of developmental
schemes. It might then be supposed that the difference between the


                THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH     6l
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
synthesis of an area and the synthesis of a continent, or a hemi-
sphere, is just a matter of scale, but this does not seem to be the
case. Judging by the record, there seems to be a tacit agreement
among Americanists that, whereas archaeological reconstructions
of localities, regions, and areas may be treated in unified systems,
we are unable to extend these systems to continental or hemispheric
dimensions. This fact, in itself, is a highly interesting aspect of
New World culture-history. That the great American art styles
rarely, if ever, pass beyond the geographical limits of the areas of
their characterization is surely a key to cultural understanding.
Similarly, the relative scarcity of specific objects, “trade items,”
native to one area hearth and transmitted to another is a clue to the
areal isolation of New World cultures. What, then, is the nature
of the historical evidence that links the various American areas?
   Let us narrow the question somewhat by asking which, if any,
of the large-scale unit concepts defined in the first part of this
study may be used to integrate archaeological data on an interareal
basis. Our so-called maximum units, cu/ture and civilization, fail to
qualify, for the reason stated in the paragraph above. Archaeologi-
cal areas in most cases owe their existence to previous formulations
of those maximum units with which their boundaries are, initially
at least, thought to be coterminous. Often, room has subsequently
to be made for other cultures and civilizations, and thus the areas
tend to be subdivided. Only rarely are they combined into larger
areas owing to a discovery of cultural distributions wider than first
supposed, and this again is a significant commentary on the isolable
nature of American cultures.
   But what of the integrative units, horizon and tradition? The
horizon is characterized by its relatively limited time dimension and
its significant geographic spread. It is usually expressed by an art
style or a very specific complex of features of unmistakable histori-
cal uniqueness. As we have just noted, such phenomena do not fre-
quently pass outside the major areas in which they originated. The
horizon clearly has little utility in multiple-area syntheses. What


                                    METHOD AND THEORY
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY   62
then of the tradition? We have defined the tradition as “a (primari-
ly) temporal continuity represented by persistent configurations in
single technologies or other systems of related forms.” Attention
is called to the fact that, apart from the temporal factor—the essen-
tial characteristic of all traditions is persistence in time—this defi-
nition is extremely flexible. We were purposely vague about the
behavior of traditions in the spatial dimension—and still are.
Transmission of traditions through generations of people living in
the same place is so obvious as to require no further comment, but
how are they transmitted to other people living in other places?
This is a question that is surely in need of further investigation.
Does a tradition become diffused widely enough and rapidly
enough to be usable as an integrating device in culture-historical
schemes of larger than areal scope? American maize agriculture
may be taken as an example of the sort of tradition we are talking
about. It has distinctive content (Zea mays and its hybrids) as well
as technical skills and utensils associated with its cultivation and
preparation. Its tremendous spatial and temporal range in the New
World makes it unsuitable for tracing out detailed interareal rela-
tionships; nevertheless it has an important historical unity. It is an
American tradition whose diffusion has overridden areal boundaries
and whose presence establishes common ties. Pressure flint-chipping
and pottery-making are traditions of even broader scope, so broad
as to be almost without historical significance. There are other tra-
ditions, however, whose range is more restricted and whose ap-
pearance might, therefore, be taken to indicate a higher degree of
historical intimacy. The metallurgical techniques which extend
from the south Andes northward to the southwestern United States
furnish an example. They cross at least five major archaeological
areas but are almost certainly a historical unit. The resist-dye
painting of pottery (negative painting), the ceramic mold, curious
and complex vessel forms such as the stirrup-mouth jar—all these
are multiple-area phenomena, each presumably of single historical
origin.


               THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH   63
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   But can traditions, of whatever kind, be integrated into an effec-
tive historical system for the Americas as a whole? Horizons, as
we have shown, enable us to equate local and regional phases in a
reasonably precise spatial-temporal scheme for a particular area.
Horizontal equivalence on the space-time chart means approximate
contemporaneity. It might be supposed that traditions of the wide-
spread sort referred to above would have a similar usefulness on a
scale larger than that of the area, would operate in effect as super-
horizons, but such does not appear to be the case. Maize agriculture,
for example, did not commence at the same time, or even at approxi-
mately the same time, throughout its range of distribution; nor can
the Peruvian and Mexican cire-perdue casting be established as
contemporaneous. There is, in short, no device (except calendrical
dating) by which cultures can be temporally equated on a continen-
tal or hemispheric scale. Iraditions and horizons are, we repeat,
the most effective units for the presentation and interpretation of
intra-areal relationships, but this is the limit of successful spatial-
temporal integration.
   For larger syntheses, another type of formulation must be re-
sorted to, one that is free from strict limitations of space and time
yet has a general historical validity in the widest sense. The only
possible kind of scheme that meets these requirements, so far as
we can see, is a series of cultural stages in what we have chosen to
call a historical-developmental sequence. These stages will of
course be founded on common participation in important historical-
ly derived traditions, but their formulation is a procedure distinct
from the methods of systematic historical (spatial-temporal) inte-
gration as laid down in the first part of this book. The historical-
developmental sequence remains, however, as we shall attempt to
demonstrate, essentially on the descriptive level of organization.
   Possibly because of the strong reaction in this country against
what is disdainfully referred to as “nineteenth-century evolution-
ism,” overt developmental classifications are comparatively new in
American archaeology. There were, however, perspicacious stu-
dents who saw what was the true nature of area “chronologies”


                                    METHOD AND THEORY     64
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
then current.! Such recognition is reflected in the increasing use of
nomenclature emphasizing development, e.g., Frank Roberts’
modification of the Pecos classification, using terms like ‘“‘Develop-
mental,’’ “Great,” and “Recessive Pueblo” in place of Roman nu-
merals,’ but these were still conceived as chronological periods,
and archaeologists felt obliged to define them in strict calendrical
terms. The Ford and Willey scheme for the eastern United States,
published in 1941, was a succession of “‘stages” rather than peri-
ods, but these were based on “chronological profiles,” and the
style of the paper is narrative and historical.? James B. Griffin’s
slightly later synthesis of the same area showed no concern to
differentiate between cultural development and chronology. “Suc-
cessive cultural stages throughout the eastern United States can be
erected on the basis of local stratigraphy, the interchange of specific
cultural items and the common possession of definite cultural con-
cepts at specific chronological periods.”*The scheme put forward in
the gigantic Cole Anniversary Volume, Archeology of Eastern
United States, under Griffin’s editorship, shows the same disinclina-
tion to differentiate between “‘stage’”’ and “‘period.”’ The terms are
in fact interchangeable, as in this passage: “The description of
these periods will emphasize a generalized cultural picture of the
major features which characterize each of these stages by and large
throughout the entire area.”> About the same time, the authors of
the first comprehensive textbook of North American archaeology
organized the eastern          data into four “chronological            stages,’
   1. See Kluckhohn and Reiter, 1939, p. 159: “Probably the single fact of
greatest general import which has emerged thus far from the Bc 50-51 excava-
tions is that the various stages recognized by the Pecos Classification (and very
commonly referred to as ‘periods’) do not, necessarily, represent separate and
clear-cut time periods, even in the same geographical locality.”
   2. Roberts, 1936, 1937.
   3. Ford and Willey, 1941.
   4. Griffin, 1946, p. 39. (Italics ours.)
   5. Griffin’s own contribution, “‘Culture Periods in Eastern United States
Archeology,” in Griffin, 1952a, p. 352. (Italics ours.)
   6. Martin, Quimby, and Collier, 1947, p. 232.



                  THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH         6 5
                                  IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
thereby having it both ways. More developmental in terminology,
and to a certain extent in implication, are a number of Middle
American and Peruvian syntheses of more recent appearance.’
With one exception, to which we             shall presently return, these
schemes are all on an areal scale and adhere to their supporting
chronology more closely perhaps than the North American schemes
just mentioned. Nevertheless, they show a new awareness of the
possibility, not to say necessity, of distinguishing between stages
in the development of cultures and archaeological periods. In his
summary of the 1947 Conference on Peruvian Archaeology, at
which a number of these syntheses were presented, Kroeber was
impelled to say: “Another query that began to strike me as Bennett
read his paper, and that kept recurring during our two days, was
how far schemes of development like these also exemplify or imply
general schemes of historic evolution of civilizations—the most
famous and complete example, of course, being that of Toynbee.”®
   From the developmental standpoint, nearly all area schemes that
have so far appeared are subject to the same difficulties. They have
followed in the wake of archaeological chronologies and have found
it impossible to break free of them. Their strength has derived
largely from the supporting chronology, and this very fact has led
to misunderstanding. Cultural development has a time dimension,
but this dimension is not necessarily uniform for all localities or re-
gions of an area. When stage and horizon (or period) lines are
represented on a chart as straight and horizontal, confusion is in-
evitable. A similar difficulty arises when we attempt to extend de-
velopmental stages from one major area to another, except that
within the area the time discrepancies probably will not be so great.
Students of Andean and Middle American archaeology have ra-
tionalized the problem by insisting upon the homogeneity of the
“area co-tradition” and by believing that developmental change
will be more or less uniform         throughout   the area, with no re-
   7. Armillas, 1948; W. C. Bennett, 1948; Larco Hoyle, 1948; Steward, 1948;
Strong, 19484; Willey, 19484; Caso, 1953.
   8. Kroeber, 1948, pp. 115-16.


                                         METHOD AND THEORY
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY    66
gional retardations. This is an unlikely possibility, certainly not a
demonstrated fact.®
   The scheme for eastern North America, referred to above (Ford
and Willey, 1941), employed stage lines rising obliquely from
south to north, and, apart from the circumstance that some of these
lines now appear to have been sloped the wrong way, it is likely
that this conception better fits the facts of chronology and develop-
ment. However, when all chronology is relative, as in this particu-
lar scheme, there are no firm landmarks for establishing relative
rates of cultural change from region to region. This will be one of
the important roles of true area chronologies based on independent
dating.
   When we shift from an areal to an interareal consideration of the
New World data, we note that only two comprehensive develop-
mental schemes have been formulated with recent archaeological
evidence.!° Julian Steward’s “functional-developmental” classifica-
tion of American high cultures is a scheme for equating the major
developmental stages of Middle American and Andean civiliza-
tions. These equations are made on the basis of technology for the
earlier stages and upon what might be called general configuration
in development for the later. Although Steward’s primary interest
in this particular paper was the areas of American high cultures (or
civilizations, as we have chosen to call them), his classification has
much wider applicability. He defines six “periods” which are in
effect developmental stages:        (1) “Pre-agricultural”;      (2) “Basic
Agricultural Beginnings”’; (3) “Basic or Inter-areal Developmental
or Formative’; (4) “Regional Developmental or Formative’’; (5)
“Regional Florescent”’; and (6) “Empire and Conquest.” In a later
article Steward proposes a similar classification of world-wide
   9. Extension of the concept of area co-tradition to the North American
Southwest by Martin and Rinaldo (1951) ran into immediate difficulties on this
account. See critiques in Rouse, 1954; Willey, 1954.
   10. Steward, 1948, and Krieger, 1953. Pedro Armillas has recently prepared
a synthesis of New World culture-history for the “Program of History of the
Americas” of the Pan-American Institute of Geography and History (MS of
September, 1954).



                 THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH        67
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
scope. With some changes in terminology, and with a considerable
expansion of later “eras,” this revised scheme is basically the same
as the first.!! Steward, in effect, sees the following major stages
(which he terms “eras’’) in the development of native American
civilizations: first, a pre-agricultural hunting and gathering stage;
second, the beginnings of agricultural experimentation; third, the
establishment of agriculture and permanent village life with spe-
cial ceremonial and political institutions, fourth, a climax of the
agricultural pattern with resultant artistic and technical elaborations
and the maximum development of “religious states’’; and, fifth, the
rise of urbanism, the secular state, and the formation of empires.
   Alex Krieger has recently proposed a somewhat similar classifi-
cation. At the International Symposium on Anthropology held by
the Wenner-Gren Foundation in New York in 1952, he read an in-
ventory paper on the archaeology of “Anglo-America,” in which
an immense amount of recent data was presented but without any
formal chronological or developmental structure. The latter he
supplied in the discussion period in a statement, subsequently re-
vised for publication, which not only presents the first adequate
developmental scheme for North America as a whole but also con-
tains the clearest discrimination between the concepts of stage and
period that we have yet seen in print:
    For present purposes, I will consider a “stage” to be a segment of a his-
torical   seat Wek   in a given area,   ehacaciericad: by a dominating       pattern   of

economic existence, The general economic life and outlines of social struc-
ture of past peoples can often be inferred from archaeological remains and
can be related to similar phenomena, whether the dates are known or not.

    11. Steward, 19492. In this study the eras are listed as: (1) “Hunting and
Gathering”;    (2) “Incipient Agriculture’;       (3) ‘‘Formative’”’;   (4) “Regional
Florescence”’; (5) “Initial Conquest’; (6) ‘Dark Ages’’; (7) “Cyclical Con-
quests”; (8) “Iron Age Culture’; and (9) “Industrial Revolution.’ Era 3 com-
bines Periods 3 and 4 from the first classification. Era 4 is the same as Period 5
in the first classification. Eras 5, 6, and 7 parallel Period 6 of the first classifica-
tion. Eras 8 and 9 are beyond the developmental range of New World civiliza-
tions,
    12. Krieger, 1953.



                                              METHOD AND THEORY         68
                                        IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
The term “period,” on the other hand, might be considered to depend upon
chronology. Thus a stage may be recognized by content alone, and, in the
event that accurate dates can be obtained for it inagiven area, it could be
said that the stage here existed during such-and-such a period. Further, the
same stage may be said to appear at different times or periods in different
areas and also to end at different times. A stage may also include several
locally distinctive culture complexes and minor time divisions. A great
deal of discussion is needed on these points.}*
Krieger’s scheme employs four major stage divisions: ‘“Paleo-In-
dian’’;4“Food-gathering”’; ““Food-producing”’; and “Urban Life.”
Tt will be noted that, although his main concern is still with “Anglo-
America,” i.e., North America north of Mexico, the classification
is one that would accommodate Middle and South American data
as well. His definitions parallel those of Steward rather closely.
“Paleo-Indian” does not have any real counterpart in Steward’s
scheme, evidence of this order of antiquity in the high-culture
areas being so slight at the time of Steward’s formulation. Krieger’s
“Food-gathering” is approximately equal to Steward’s ‘‘Pre-agri-
cultural,” with an overlap into “Basic Agricultural Beginnings”
perhaps, depending on where one prefers to put the emphasis in
cultures of mixed gathering—food-producing economy. Krieger’s
“Food-producing”’ would then take the rest of Steward’s “Basic
Agricultural Beginnings” and both his “Formative” stages, and
Krieger himself has made it explicit that he would bracket Stew-
ard’s “Regional Florescent”’ and “Empire and Conquest’’ together
in the stage he has designated as “Urban Life.”
   A comparison of the two classifications brings out the somewhat
different interests of the two classifiers. Steward was focusing his
attention on the areas of “high civilization” in the New World.
Krieger, while allowing for data of this type, was thinking in terms
of the simpler cultures of North America. The discrepancy be-
tween his “Food-gathering” and Steward’s “Basic Agricultural Be-
ginnings”’ reflects this. Steward, with the Peruvian sequence data
   13. Krieger, in Tax et al., 1953, p. 247.
   14. Krieger has recently proposed the term “‘Paleo-American” in place of
“Paleo-Indian” (Suhm and Krieger, 1954, p. 15).



                 THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH     69
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
on the Huaca Prieta premaize agriculturists in mind, conceived
of this stage as a slow transition from hunting and gathering to
agriculture. Krieger, to judge from his examples, was considering
the California cultures and the Archaic cultures of the eastern
United States as representative of the “Food-gathering”’ stage.
Actually, either concept might accommodate both the South and
the North American data. The Huaca Prieta culture of the Peruvian
coast depended for food on gathering as well as on agriculture; and
there is a reasonable possibility that some of the Archaic cultures of
the eastern United States were experimenting with plant domestica-
tion.
   To date, neither the Steward nor the Krieger scheme has been
applied to New World data in complete detail. These authors may
eventually do so. We make no claim that our effort here is a substi-
tute for the particular interpretations of either. The ideas they have
proposed, however, are of such wide and general interest to Ameri-
canists that additional points of view are desirable. In our previous
paper we put forward our particular scheme and subjected it to a
trial run by projecting a considerable amount of data against it.
This we propose to repeat here with certain modifications that we
will describe presently.
  Before doing so, however, we think it necessary to enter the
controversial domain of culture-evolutionary theory far enough at
least to demonstrate our contention that ours is not an evolutionary
scheme. In a paper written after the ones quoted above, Steward
defined with considerable precision three evolutionary approaches
in anthropology: unilinear, universal, and multilinear.2* It does not
seem necessary to support with long-winded arguments the state-
ment that the developmental classification proposed in these pages
conforms to neither of the two first-named approaches. The skepti-
cal reader is advised to read Steward’s paper, and if he still thinks
that what we are describing is unilinear or universal evolution (as
therein defined), then we have completely failed to explain what we
   15. Bird, 19482, 19485.
   16. Steward, 1953.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY    "
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY        O
are about. Whether it be multilinear evolution is a more difficult
question. In the general sense that we are concerned with a line of
cultural development in one part of the world, while recognizing
that there are other quite unrelated lines of development in other
parts of the world, this might be called multilinear evolution.
   But, if we understand Steward correctly, particularly his applica-
tion of the theory in recent publications,!” he is concerned with
tracing multiple lines of evolutionary development leading to
specific kinds of cultural features or whole cultures (his “culture
types”) wherever these may be found. His formulations are limited
in scope, more so than ours perhaps, but they are universals in the
sense that they are unrestricted geographically or chronologically.
A “theocratic irrigation state’’ can be designated as such whether
found in Peru or Mesopotamia, and the stages leading up to such
a culture type—if truly parallel—are reflections of inherent cul-
tural causality. Historical causality is important only in that it has
to be eliminated from the equation. Thus, in terms of basic theory,
as expounded in the introductory section of this book, Steward’s
multilinear evolution is on our explanatory level. We, on the other
hand, as already hinted, are classifying cultures in a sort of theoreti-
cal twilight. Cultures A and B are classified as Archaic because
they possess certain common denominators that we have chosen as
criteria for that stage. Their common possession of these features
may be the result of historical contact, environmental determina-
tion, homotaxis in a truly evolutionary sense, or any two or all
three of these. In other words, the system, if it can be called a sys-
tem, is not rigged to exclude any particular kind of explanation.
This is why we have stated that, although it seems to lie outside
the domain of culture-historical integration, above the descriptive
level of organization, it cannot claim to operate on the explanatory
level. This is also why we have chosen to call it “historical-develop-
mental” interpretation, which sounds like a contradiction in terms
but which expresses the fact that our stage concepts are not wholly
abstracted from the historical matrix. Within the geographical
   17. Steward et al., 1955.



                    HE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH   71
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
frame, large as it is, contact and diffusion may have played a larger
role than set deterministic relationships within the province of cul-
ture alone. Man’s biological and subcultural psychological and emo-
tional reactions cannot be omitted from the equation, nor can the
reality of the social groups in which he exists be denied its forma-
tive role. Environment and increases or decreases in size and dis-
tribution of population, reflected in cultural-ecological adaptations,
are also significant factors exerting strong influences on the nature
and direction of cultural change.

                         STAGE   DEFINITIONS   AND   FORMULATIONS

   In selecting criteria with which to define the stages of New
World culture-history, it is obvious, from the foregoing review of
the Steward and Krieger schemes, that there are but two broad
divisions of a fundamental          technological and economic nature:
hunters-gatherers and agriculturists. This is analogous to the broad
division in the Old World between the Paleolithic-Mesolithic
stages, on the one hand, and the Neolithic and later stages, on the
other. As in the Old World, these two general patterns of life have
a sequence relationship, with the hunters-gatherers preceding the
farmers. And, as is also the case in the Old World, there is a con-
siderable chronological overlap, with hunting-gathering cultures
persisting in some regions into periods of contemporaneity with
farming cultures. It should be recognized that no other differentia-
tion between stages with which we will deal has the same pro-
fundity and significance as this one. In this we are in agreement with
Robert Braidwood!® and Robert Redfield!’ who see the Old
World “urban revolution,” or “dawn of civilization,” as something
that was made possible by the establishment of agriculture several
millenniums earlier, but not as marking a technological and econom-
ic shift as profound as the one from food-gathering to food produc-
tion. This point of view is reflected in our stage criteria and termi-
nology. The criteria for dividing pre-agricultural stages are essen-
   18. Braidwood, 1952.
   19. Redfield, 1953.



                                         METHOD AND THEORY
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY      2
tially technological. They refer to artifact types and traditions in
technology. The criteria for dividing stages above the threshold of
agriculture take reference in much more complex data. They per-
tain to social and political organization, religion, aesthetics—to the
whole of what Redfield has termed the “moral order.”
   Our method of formulating stages was to review archaeological
sequences from all parts of the New World in local and regional de-
tail, on an area basis and with reference to cross-areal comparisons.
Our first concern was to set up a series of trial stages by seeking
for clues to generalization between areas. We drew generalizations,
tested them by going back to primary sources on the regional and
local levels, and thus came to recognize certain ‘common denomi-
nator” criteria for each of the stages. Needless to add, with a pro-
cedure of this kind, our trial stages and the criteria of definition
changed constantly. This was true during preparation of the first
published article,?° and there is testimony to the fact that changes
have continued in this present version. In 1955 we proposed six
historical-developmental stages. We are now proposing five stages,
with some changes in terminology and in criteria of definition. A
quick comparison of the two schemes may be set down as follows:
                      1955                       1957
            Postclassic stage              Postclassic stage
            Classic stage                  Classic stage
            Formative stage                Formative stage
            Preformative stage
            Archaic stage                  Archaic stage
            Early Lithic stage             Lithic stage

The present ‘“‘Lithic” corresponds almost exactly to the former
“arly Lithic”; reasons for dropping the “early” will be given in
the next chapter. The “Archaic” stage remains about the same,
except for some modifications resulting from the elimination of
the “‘Preformative.”” Phases and cultures formerly assigned to the
“Preformative” have been divided between the “Archaic” and the
  20. Willey and Phillips, 1955.


                THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH        7 3
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
“Formative.” Otherwise the ‘“‘Formative,”’ “‘Classic,’”’ and ‘‘Post-
classic”’ are essentially unchanged in so far as archaeological con-
tent is concerned;   in definition and emphasis upon criteria, there
have been some changes.
   Before we set forth our definitions of these stages, it may be well
to consider briefly a difficulty that inheres in all developmental in-
terpretation, to wit, the familiar problem of cultural lag. We have
found it useful to differentiate between two kinds of lag situations:
belated and marginal. The first is one in which a culture shows the
essential characteristics of a given stage long after the time general-
ly considered to be appropriate to that stage. This is in effect a
temporal marginality, often referred to as a “late marginal situa-
tion.” The second kind of situation, to which the term “marginal”
applies primarily in a cultural sense, is one in which a culture shows
significant characteristics of a given developmental stage in a con-
figuration which, as a whole, fails to measure up to the definition
of that stage. In the first, it is primarily a matter of persistence
without change; in the second, it is a matter of change that, from
the standpoint of the developmental criteria employed, is one-sided
or incomplete. This second type of cultural, as opposed to merely
temporal, marginality can also under certain conditions be the re-
sult of developmental regression, as we shall have many occasions
to point out.
  Marginal cultures are usually belated as well; so, in effect, the
distinction we are trying to make is between cultures that are sim-
ply belated and those that are both belated and marginal, in the sense
in which we are using these terms. Figure 2 is a very crude expres-
sion of the relationship, which may be clarified by the use of ex-
amples. Culture 4 in this figure is a belated Lithic culture, some-
what theoretical, it must be confessed, because our definition of
Lithic is not so unrestricted temporally as some of the other stages.
This would be a culture late enough to have received influences
from Archaic (or later) stage cultures but sufficiently immune to
such influences to permit us to classify it as Lithic without any
qualifications beyond those implied in the term “belated.” is


                                    METHOD AND THEORY
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY    74
simpler language, some Archaic elements may be present, but these
are not sufficient to raise any classificatory difficulties. Certain
late Lithic cultures in the North American Great Plains might be
used as examples. Culture B, on the other hand, is marginal Archaic
in the sense that it has incorporated sufficient Archaic elements to
take it out of the Lithic category but not enough to qualify fully
as an Archaic stage culture. Many, if not all, Plains Archaic cul-




                                           or

             (=)

    Lithic

 Fic. 2.—Belated and marginal cultures in relation to developmental stages

tures appear to be of this character. Culture C is a belated Archaic
culture, and here we are on firm ground, for there are many ex-
amples available, some coming right down to very recent times.
Most of the ethnographic cultures of the peripheral areas of North
and South America could be classified as belated Archaic. Culture
D, marginal Formative, is well illustrated by many of the Middle
Woodland cultures of eastern North America, which received sig-
nificant elements of the Formative Adena-Hopewell culture with-
out profound modification of their essentially Archaic pattern.
There are many marginal Formative cultures of the regressive type.
Since Formative culture presupposes a stable economic base, usually


                THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH       7 5
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
agricultural, movement of cultures into areas unfavorable to that
base or an unfavorable change of climate will often result in re-
gression to an Archaic stage of development. Culture E on the dia-
gram is belated Formative. This is the situation of many New
World Formative cultures. Classic and Postclassic stage cultures
are all so late that it does not add anything meaningful to distinguish
some of them as belated, and so these are not shown on the dia-
gram. Marginal Classic, F in the diagram, is well represented in
lower Central America, in cultures such as Nicoya, Costa Rica,
etc. Culture G is a rather special case intended to show that develop-
mental marginality may, under certain conditions, “skip” a stage.
An example is to be seen in the Quebrada de Humahuaca region of
northwestern Argentina, where Inca influence operating on an es-
sentially Formative level has produced a culture of marginal Post-
classic type.
    The point of this apparent hair-splitting is that a vast number of
New World cultures are belated or marginal in the sense here given
these terms, and in many cases their classification hinges on our
ability to say which. There is probably no such thing as a pure be-
lated culture, i.e., one that fails to show any elements of higher de-
velopmental stages whatever, and there is probably no such thing
as a marginal culture that is not belated to some degree. So it usual-
ly comes down to the question of the number of developmentally
significant elements and their relationships to the total configura-
tion, which will in fact determine whether we classify a culture as
a belated culture of a given stage or a marginal culture of a higher
one. These qualifiers are designed to enable us to hedge on difficult
classificatory decisions, and they will be used pretty freely in the
pages to follow. This will perhaps contribute little in the way of
culture-developmental understanding but will at least point up some
of the difficulties of large-scale developmental interpretation.
   The remaining pages of this book will be devoted to comprehen-
sive definitions of the five stages enumerated above, to their identi-
fication, examination, and evaluation in terms of archaeological se-
quences and syntheses. Before we start this trial run, let us make it


                                     METHOD AND THEORY
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY      6
very clear that we are under no illusion that this is anything re-
motely resembling a natural system. There is nothing inevitable
about five stages; there might as well be four, or even eight. Nor
is there any law, evolutionary or otherwise, that says that all New
World cultures must pass through these stages one after the other in
their proper order. We cannot even say, for example, that an
Archaic stage culture will “in the natural course of events’’ pass
on to the Formative stage. Whether or not it will do so depends ona
multiplicity of factors, not all of which are in the domain of culture.
As we have previously stated, our basic theoretical position is that
culture is not an independent order of phenomena intelligible in
terms of itself alone (the “‘cultural superorganic’’), and from this it
follows that there are no universal, irreversible processes of cultural
development. We are not, in short, attempting to impose an evolu-
tionary or any other kind of determinism on the data of New World
archaeology. Nor can we accept the criticism that ours are not the
“right” stages, if such criticism carries the implication that “right”
stages are to be found. This attitude involves an important method-
ological distinction between what we have called culture-historical
integration and developmental interpretation, our present concern.
The aim of the first was the organization of archaeological data in
terms of a real world. However far short of attainment it falls, our
object was the formulation of archaeological units that have (or
rather had) a correspondent historical reality. It therefore seems
possible that such units may be judged as to their “rightness.” In
developmental interpretation, on the other hand, we abstract, not
only from the primary data but from the above-mentioned inte-
grated units as well, certain characteristics that seem to have sig-
nificance from the point of view of the general development of New
World culture. In a general sense the sequence is historical as well
as developmental, but the individual stages can have no correspond-
ent historical unity or reality. Therefore the test of “rightness” is
irrelevant. This also disposes of the idea that developmental stage
formulations must not be “set”’ until we know all the archaeology—
which will be never.


                THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH   f,7
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   Finally, it is clearly impossible in the space available to survey
the entire field of American archaeology. The most we can do is to
sample liberally from all areas and periods in the hope that no sig-
nificant block of data is overlooked altogether. It is not to be ex-
pected that the specialist in any area will be satisfied. We may plead
in extenuation, however, that the purpose of our inquiry is not to
effect a tight classification of New World cultures but to explore
the possibilities of this kind of approach.




                                   METHOD AND THEORY    7}
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY      8
                                                         Chapter 4




                                              Lithic Stage
                                                        DEFINITIONS

In our previous paper we designated and defined the earliest stage
of American culture as “Early Lithic.””! This stage was conceived
of as embracing two major categories of stone technology: (1) un-
specialized and largely unformulated core and flake industries,
with percussion the dominant and perhaps only technique employed,
and (2) industries exhibiting more advanced “‘blade”’ techniques of
stoneworking, with specialized fluted or unfluted lanceolate points
the most characteristic artifact types. At that time we hesitated to
use this division as a basis for setting up two separate stages in our
classification, because there seemed to be insufficient evidence of a
time differential between them. The evidence is still inconclusive,
although the case for a distinct and earlier core and flake stage is
somewhat stronger than it was. We still adhere to our original de-
cision to consider all these early evidences of man in America as
a single stage, but we recognize the good possibility of an eventual
division along the lines suggested above. In view of this possibility,
we have modified our terminology and will refer hereinafter to this
earliest New World stage simply as “‘Lithic,” allowing for future
separation into “upper” and “lower” Lithic stages, if such a course
seems advisable.
   “Lithic” is not entirely satisfactory as a name, but we have so
far been unable to come up with anything better. Its sole merit is
that the evidence on this stage is predominantly in the category of
  1. Willey and Phillips, 1955, pp. 730-39.



                                               LITHIC   STAGE   i,9
stone technology (although there is an increasing number of early
bone finds). The terms most commonly applied to this stage,
‘‘Paleo-Indian” or “Paleo-American,” are open to a serious objec-
tion, in our view, in that they imply a grand twofold division of
New World prehistory, with a “Neo-Indian” or ““Neo-American”
stage as a counterpoise. There is a grand twofold division, as we
have shown, but the hinge comes later in the sequence, viz., between
the Archaic and the Formative.
   The Lithic stage cannot be defined without reference to geo-
chronological considerations. Illogical as it may appear in a de-
velopmental scheme, we have to start with the flat assertion that
the Lithic is the stage of adaptation by immigrant societies to the
late glacial and early postglacial climatic and physiographic condi-
tions in the New World. The effective working criteria are, there-
fore, associations of artifacts and other evidences of man’s activity
in geological deposits, or with plant and animal remains, reflecting
these times and conditions. When types so established are found
without such associations, which is more often the case, the rela-
tionships are inferred in the normal archaeological manner, with
the result that an immense corpus of Lithic stage data is available
in the literature but has not so far been subjected to effective inte-
gration and synthesis.
    The nature of these finds has led to the assumption that the pre-
dominant economic activity in this stage was hunting, with major
emphasis on large herbivores, including extinct Pleistocene forms,
and that the general pattern of life, like that of the animals on which
it depended, was migratory in the full sense of the word. The possi-
bility of a measure of circularity entering into this assumption can-
not be investigated here but certainly should not be ignored. In any
case, upon this basis many American students have erected a simple
historical and typological dichotomy: an early hunting stage fol-
lowed by a gathering stage, each with its own characteristic tech-
nological traditions. In the present classification, although we have
not been able to avoid this attractive simplification altogether, we
will try to maintain a critical attitude toward it. An early non-agri-


                                    METHOD AND THEORY     SO
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
cultural society would presumably make the best possible use—
within the limits of its culture—of whatever animal and vegetal
resources were available; consequently, the relative importance of
hunting and gathering would be a function of the ecological and
technological balance in a particular place and time. Quite pos-
sibly, however, the natural conditions in the late glacial and early
postglacial times postulated for the Lithic stage may actually have
been more favorable generally to hunting than to gathering, and
technological limitations (lack of milling techniques and imple-
ments?) may have contributed to tip the balance further. We would
say, then, for purposes of definition, that the Lithic is pre-emi-
nently a hunting stage, though other economic patterns were cer-
tainly present whose local dominance, under certain conditions,
is not precluded.
   Known details of culture in the Lithic stage are few. Lithic
stone technology covers an immense range of rough- and chipped-
stone traditions? but does not include the practice of grinding and
polishing. Work in bone and horn is assumed to have been impor-
tant, but the evidence has largely disappeared.* Settlement and habi-
tation patterns were such as to leave few traces in the ground. Cor-
related with the absence of house remains is the scarcity of deep
refuse deposits. Sociopolitical inferences for this stage are hazard-
ous in the extreme. A small-scale kinship type of organization is
postulated, but, within this generalization, great variability and a
high degree of specialization must be allowed for. The data do not
support the view that because Lithic cultures are relatively simple
they are also uniform. Let us not forget that the major portions of
both American continents were “pioneered” on this stage.
    2. “Rough” refers to artifacts shaped by use rather than design; “chipped,”
to artifacts shaped by techniques ranging from crude percussion to controlled
pressure flaking and fine-edge retouching.
   3. Sufficient evidence of early bone finds has been summarized        by Krieger
(19514; 1953, p. 242) and by Cotter (1954, p. 65) to suggest that, if condi-
tions were   more   favorable   for preservation,   traditions   of bone technology
might rank with stone in the definition of Lithic stage culture.



                                                      LITHIC STAGE     81
                         A POSSIBLE   EARLY    PERCUSSION    STAGE
                                         OF STONE    TECHNOLOGY

   Before considering the better-known Lithic cultures of the New
World, we may as well first get the problem of the putative “lower”
Lithic stage out of the way. There is considerable documentation
for such a stage, but its evaluation is extremely difficult for the
present writers, in whose fields of specialization stone technology
plays a distinctly minor role. It seems to us that, if this is ever to
be more than a theoretical stage in the development of American
culture as a whole, certain questions have to be answered in the
affirmative: (1) Have stone complexes of this nature been found
unmixed in specific sites under controlled conditions? (2) Do they
constitute true assemblages, i.e., can the possibility be ruled out
that they represent only partial inventories of the total tool com-
plex owing to special conditions? Tools from a quarry site or a
butchering station, where only a segment of the total economic ac-
tivity is represented, might be cases in point. (3) Finally, and most
importantly, can it be shown that there is a time differential be-
tween these percussion industries and the more specialized indus-
tries that would be classed as “upper’’ Lithic if such a division
were made? This does not mean, of course, that al] percussion as-
semblages must be early but that some of them are is a minimum
requirement.
   The outstanding proponent among Americanists for this early
percussion stage is Alex Krieger, who referred to some of the evi-
dence in its favor in his paper at the International Symposium on
Anthropology in 1952. More recently he summarized the evidence
in greater detail at an informal meeting of American archaeologists
held at Andover, Massachusetts,          in April, 1956.4 The finds re-
garded as significant by Krieger are briefly as follows: (1) Heavy
percussion-flaked tools and sharpened bone splinters found at Te-
quisquiac in the Valley of Mexico in 1870, deep down in the Up-

    4. We are grateful to Alex D. Krieger for allowing us to use this informa-
tion and to Frederick Johnson, of the R. S. Peabody Foundation, who supplied
us with a transcript of the meeting.


                                        METHOD AND THEORY       82
                                  IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
per Becerra formation only two feet above the caliche layer that
separates it from the Lower Becerra—caliche estimated by geolo-
gists to be of mid-Wisconsin date.' (2) An obsidian flake, crude
choppers and scrapers, and a split and pointed bone implement, from
Tule Springs, Nevada.® Charcoal thought to be of human origin from
this site was dated as older than 23,800 years.” Faunal associations
included mammoth, horse, and (mostly) camel. (3) Worked bones
including a bone tube from the famous Potter Creek Cave in north-
ern California, excavated by paleontologists in 1870. The deposit
contained an abundant middle to late Pleistocene fauna. After con-
siderable controversy,® the finds were rejected as “water-worn
bones,” but they have been seen recently by Krieger, who declares
them to be artifacts.* (4) Very crude chipped stones of possible hu-
man workmanship and a bone tube found with a rich late Pleisto-
cene fauna in Friesenhahn Cave in south-central Texas.!° The bone
tube, found beneath the skeleton of a saber-toothed cat, is similar
to the one from Potter Creek Cave and may, in Krieger’s opinion,
help to authenticate the otherwise dubious human origin of the
stone objects. (5) Three rude sandstone heads found underneath
twenty-six feet of gravel near Malakoff, Henderson                       County,
Texas," not generally accepted by archaeologists but believed by
Krieger to be “probably” of human workmanship. If so, there is
not much to be said for the skill of the workman. (6) Basin-shaped
hearths on Santa Rosa Island, off the southern California coast,
containing masses of split bones of dwarf mammoth but no un-

    5. The artifacts are mentioned and illustrated in de Terra, 1949, pp. 46, 66,
Pls. 9f, 105. Radiocarbon dates earlier than 6000 B.c. have been obtained from
the top few inches of the Upper Becerra formation; according to Krieger, the
artifacts must be considerably older than this date.
   6. Harrington, 1955.
   7. Sample No. C-914 (Libby, 19542).
   8. For a selected bibliography of the dispute over the Potter Creek finds see
Sellards, 1952, p. 123.
   9. Krieger, 1953, p. 240.             10. Sellards, 1952, p. 94, Fig. 43.
   11. Sellards, 1941; 1952, pp. 99-105, Fig. 47.



                                                  LITHIC   STAGE   8 3
mistakable artifacts, which yielded a very early radiocarbon age
of about 30,000 years (not yet published). A number of other
finds of this putative pre-projectile-point category were rejected
by Krieger because of uncertainty of their status as artifacts, lack
of dating, or both. These include: G. F. Carter’s La Jolla and San
Diego finds;!? the Imlay Channel finds in eastern Michigan;'* the
Black’s Fork culture of southwestern Wyoming;'* the Malpais
industry of the Mohave Desert in southern California;* and the
Death Valley finds in the same region.’ This list might be extended
to include the Albuquerque, Comanche Springs, and Rio Puerco
finds in central New Mexico;"7 the Tolchaco complex of the Little
Colorado River in Arizona;!8 and the Farmington complex in the
foothills of the Sierra Nevada of central California. It is manifest-
ly unfair to list all these finds together without comment, as though
they were all of equal standing. Some of them, especially the two
last named, appear to be valid assemblages that are typologically
“lower” Lithic, but confirmative evidence of early date is lacking.
   Our timid conclusion is that none of the finds cited by Krieger,
or those added by us, fully answers the requirements of the classifi-
catory problem. Some of them indicate a strong probability of the
presence of man on the North American continent at a considerably
more remote period than the “end of the Pleistocene’ usually at-
tributed to the better-known “upper” Lithic cultures. But there is
a possibility that these cultures, too, have to be pushed farther back
into the past. Radiocarbon ages for the Sandia culture in excess of
20,000 years have been recently published though not generally
credited.?° Clovis, the earliest known culture sharing the fluted-
point tradition, has not yet been satisfactorily dated, so far as the

  12. Carter, 1949, 1950, 1952, 1954.

  13. Baggerly, 1954.

  14. Renaud,   1938, 1940.             17. Hibben, 1951.

  15. M. J. Rogers, 1939.               18. Bartlett, 1942, 1943.
  16. Clements and Clements, 1951.      19, Treganza, 1952.
  20. Sample Nos. M-247, M-349 (Crane, 1956). Cf. p. 91, n. 47.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY      84
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
present writers are aware. A partial overlapping contemporaneity
with Sandia is not an unreasonable hypothesis.2 Even when this
possibility is disregarded, however, and the temporal priority of
the finds that Krieger has assembled is accepted, it nevertheless re-
mains a fact that the evidence in the form of artifacts associated
with these remote cultures is insufficient to support the assumption
of a prior state of percussion technology. To be sure, there are no
points or other artifacts that suggest a “higher” stage, but in no
single instance among the datable occurrences is the artifact sample
large enough to be conclusive.
   One of the complications of this problem of dividing the Lithic
into two stages is that, in the Greater Southwest and contiguous
areas, where most of the early finds have been made, the percussive
techniques and characteristic tool types seem to have persisted
with little change (to our unpracticed eyes) and with continued
dominance into cultures that we have classified on other grounds
as Archaic. Thus, the precise classificatory difficulty is to distin-
guish between Archaic cultures and Lithic cultures that would
be “lower” rather than “upper,” if such a division were to be
made. It is this, perhaps as much as the uncertainties of dating,
that has kept us from making such a division.
   We conclude, then, about as in our 1955 paper: The possibility
of a “lower” Lithic stage of technology in the Americas remains
an intriguing hypothesis. The case for temporal priority has grown
stronger but remains to be proved, whereas persistence of such a
percussion technology into post-Lithic times is more certain than
ever. The general impression, from a world-wide standpoint, is one
of marginal survival rather than technological regression, and we
still feel that Linton’s suggestion that the industries in question
represent a belated survival of very early technological traditions
distantly related to the lower Paleolithic cultures of Southeast
Asia is an exciting possibility. Nevertheless, we are both unwilling
    21. Compare the finds at the Lucy site, in central New Mexico, where San-
dia points, including fluted examples, were found in the same “blowouts” with
typical Clovis points (Roosa, 1956).



                                                LITHIC STAGE   85
and unable to set up the “lower” Lithic as an independent stage in
the present classification.
                                                  NORTH AMERICA
   We move onto surer ground with the cultures that would be
“upper” if a division of the Lithic were made. The best-known
areas for finds on this stage are the central and southern North
American High Plains and adjacent eastern foothills of the Rocky
Mountains, home of a series of early cultures sometimes collec-
tively referred to as Folsom-Yuma, on account of the highly spe-
cialized projectile points that bear those names. Available data
consist of a few thin habitation sites, a larger number of game
“kills” and butchering stations, and innumerable surface finds in
“blowouts,” where they are associated with other objects of all
ages, and in isolated spots, without associations of any kind. The
nature of the finds is such as to yield a fragmentary and incomplete .
view of the total archaeological culture and, except in one or two
lucky instances, even of the total stone assemblage. The conse-
quent emphasis on projectile points—the various types of which
are used for identifying the “cultures” —and on knives, scrapers,
and other tools supposedly used in butchering, skinning, and pre-
paring skins, has undoubtedly resulted in a one-sided view expressed
in the frequent designation “early hunting cultures.”
   The earliest cultures of this category are Clovis and Folsom,
with their celebrated fluted projectile points and extinct faunal as-
sociations.” Clovis is not only stratigraphically older than Folsom??
but is consistently associated with remains of mammoth and other
Pleistocene fauna,?4 whereas Folsom is usually found with an ex-
    22. The Folsom site in northeastern New Mexico will long be famous as the
scene of the first association of human artifacts with remains of extinct fauna
in an incontestable early postglacial geological context, probably the most im-
portant “breakthrough” in the history of American archaeology. See Cook,
1927; Figgins, 1927; Roberts, 1935, 1936a.
   23. At Blackwater No. 1 site near Clovis in eastern New Mexico (Sellards,
1952, pp. 29-31).
   24. Figgins, 1933; E. B. Howard et al., 1935; Sellards, 1952; Haury, 1953a;
Roosa, 1956.



                                        METHOD AND THEORY
                                  IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY        86
tinct bison that differs only slightly from modern forms. Clovis
points are more generalized in form and distribution; Folsom seems
to represent a late climax of the fluted-point tradition that is con-
fined to the Plains. The Folsom culture has been dated around
8000 B.c., a date which appears to be consistent with the geological
and climatic conditions.* Since there is a rather complete shift in
faunal associations between the two cultures, Clovis must be very
considerably older. Thus we have to reckon with the possibility of
a very early beginning and an immensely long time span for the
fluted-point tradition in North America.”
   Considerably more recent, but still on the Lithic stage, is the
tradition of fine parallel flaking on points that used to be called
Yuma but now are more often referred to as Eden-Scottsbluff. This
culture, or cultures—it is difficult to apply consistent terminology
to assemblages of which only the projectile points have been ade-
quately described—is stratigraphically younger than Folsom,?’ and
this relationship is to a certain extent confirmed by radiocarbon
dates of 4000-5000 B.c.?8
   The older dichotomy between fluted and parallel-flaked tradi-
tions, expressed in the terms “Folsom” and (now largely super-
   25. 7932 + 350 B.c. at the Lubbock site in northwestern Texas (sample
No. C-558 [Libby, 1951]).
   26. An unexpectedly early radiocarbon date of 35000 B.c. plus for Clovis
has been recently published (Time magazine, August 6, 1956, p. 42). This re-
markable date was obtained by the Humble Oil Company laboratory on char-
coal from a hearth at the Lewisville site, near Dallas, Texas. A typical Clovis
point was found in close proximity to the hearth. Qualified archaeologists who
have investigated the finds accept the association, but the date is altogether out
of line with previous estimates, a consensus of which would give to Clovis an
age of about 12,000 years.                ;
   27. At the Finley site in southwestern Wyoming (Moss et al., 1951) and
the MacHaffie site near Helena, Montana (Forbis and Sperry, 1952).
   28. At the Horner site in northwestern Wyoming. Actual dates are 4925 +
250 B.c. (sample No. C-302 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]) and 4966 + 500 B.c.
(sample No. C-795 [Libby, 1954a]). Scottsbluff-like points at the Ft. 41 and Ft.
50 sites in the Medicine Creek locality of Nebraska are dated considerably ear-
lier, but the final report on the stratigraphy and association has not yet ap-
peared (Schultz and Frankforter, 1948; Davis and Schultz, 1952; Davis, 1953).



                                                   LITHIC   STAGE   8i
seded) “Yuma,” has given way before an increasing accumulation
of typologically intermediate forms, which may have been inter-
mediate in time also. We refer to various point types which at
first were called “unfluted Folsom” because of their general re-
semblance to Clovis and Folsom in shape but which exhibit a
flaking technique more like a crude approach to the fine parallel
flaking of Eden-Scottsbluff. The best-documented points and “‘cul-
tures’’ of this general intermediate category are: San Jon,”* Plain-
view,?0 Long (or Angostura),*! Portales, and Mailnesand.3* A
general continuity of these cultures with Clovis-Folsom, on the one
hand, and Eden-Scottsbluff, on the other, is indicated by the other,
less characteristic implements associated with these point types,
which further suggests an intermediate temporal position, and the
faunal associations and few available radiocarbon dates are in agree-
ment.4
   Thus we appear to have in the Great Plains an immensely long
continuity of culture based primarily on the hunting of large mam-
mals—from wholly extinct Pleistocene forms down to the modern
bison—marked off into archaeological units mainly by changes in
projectile-point forms. This obviously oversimplified picture masks
an actual situation of great complexity that is in need of further or-
ganization.
   Many of the point types referred to above, particularly those
of the fluted-point tradition, have a near-continental distribution.
The Clovis-like points have such general distribution that it is un-
safe to specify any major unglaciated areas in North America
where they are not found. They seem to be relatively scarce, how-
ever, on the Pacific Coast and in the nearby intermontane plateau
and desert areas, and only doubtful specimens have been reported
from Mexico and farther south. They also tend to diminish north-
   29. Roberts, 1942.
   30. Sellards, Evans, and Meade, 1947.   32. Sellards, 1952, pp. 72-74.
   31. Hughes, 1949.                        33. Sellards, 1955.
   34, 5122 + 300 B.c. for Plainview and Long (Angostura) points at the
Allen site in southwestern South Dakota (sample No. C-604 [Libby, 1951]).



                                       METHOD AND THEORY      88
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
ward, a circumstance unfavorable to any theory of specific Asiatic
origin. Perhaps the greatest total of fluted points have come from
the Mississippi Valley and the East, but until fairly recently very
little could be said about associated complexes, Now sites are being
reported, and we can begin to speak of phases and cultures. In the
Enterline culture of the Middle Atlantic subarea, we have Clovis-
like fluted points and a complete stone assemblage with some char-
acteristics that are not found in western fluted-point cultures.3° The
recently reported Bull Brook        site near Ipswich, Massachusetts,
shows relationships to both Enterline and Clovis along with indi-
vidual features of its own.**. Some of the fluted points from Bull
Brook are said to be practically indistinguishable from the points
found inside the carcass of the Naco mammoth in faraway Ari-
zona.’7 Fluted points from another New England site, the Reagan
site in northwestern Vermont,        show considerable variance from
western norms, however.*§ An important center for surface finds,
the lower Ohio Valley and Tennessee-Cumberland regions pro-
duced the first eastern fluted-point site, the Parrish site in western
Kentucky,*? and it seems possible that the well-known “Ohio” or
“Cumberland” fluted point may be the marker type for another, as
yet unformulated, culture which may also include recently dis-
covered sites in northern Alabama.*? It is commonly held by west-
ern archaeologists that the eastern distribution of the fluted-point
tradition represents a belated extension of early western hunting
societies forced out of the High Plains by the advent of arid condi-
tions in the altithermal period. Since there are no extinct faunal as-
sociations and practically no dating of any kind for eastern fluted-
point cultures, this theory is not directly refutable. However, the
present trend of dating in the East is pushing the later Archaic stage
   35. McCary, 1951; Witthoft, 1952.
   36. Eldridge and Vacaro, 1952; Byers, 1954, 1955.
  37. Byers, 1956, p. 9, citing personal communication from Emil Haury.
  38. Ritchie, 1953.               39. Webb, 1951a.
   40. Lewis and Kneberg, 1951; Lewis, 1953; Kleine, 1953; Soday, 1954;
Mahan, 1954-55.



                                              LITHIC STAGE   89
cultures back to a point that leaves little if any time for such a move-
ment to have taken place.
  Some of the point types that we have tentatively placed in an
“intermediate” category, especially Plainview, also have been re-
ported widely in the East, but, since the forms are more generalized,
the nature of the relationship to their western counterparts con-
tinues to be questionable. Complaints of uncritical use of western
point typology by eastern archaeologists usually have to do with
this category of types. “Plainview” points, for example, have been
reported from many sites and complexes in the East, often on the
basis of superficial resemblances that may have no culture-historical
significance whatever. The contexts are usually Archaic, which al-
lows us to sidestep the problem momentarily.
  Parallel-flaked points of Eden-Scottsbluff types are less often
reported in the East. Their general distribution in, North America
seems to be more northerly than that of the earlier fluted-point
types, which possibly reflects a northward drift of the early Plains
hunting cultures and their quarry with the slow retreat of the late
Wisconsin ice.
  In the areas considered so far, most if not all of the early finds
pertain to hunting cultures, and the relationship between hunters
and gatherers is not a problem. On the other hand, when we turn
to the Southwest and the contiguous Basin and California desert
areas, we find an environment which, for a period that extends very
far back into the past, fostered a gathering—small-game-hunting
way of life, for which “Desert culture” is a commonly accepted
term. For reasons that will appear later, we have relegated the
Desert cultures en bloc to the Archaic stage, even though some of
them show evidences, including radiocarbon dates, of comparable
antiquity to Folsom and other Lithic cultures of the Plains. In the
Southwest proper, the best-known Desert culture is the Cochise.
In our first paper we classified the earliest phase of Cochise,
the Sulphur Spring “‘stage,”’ as Early Lithic because of its extinct
faunal associations and what at that time we regarded as early radio-
  41. Sayles and Antevs, 1941.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY   90
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
carbon dates.*” These dates are no longer too early for Archaic,
and there is even some question about the association of the ex-
tinct fauna.*? Furthermore, projectile points, formerly thought to
be non-existent in Sulphur Spring, have since turned up in subse-
quent excavations, and these are the same Pinto-like points that oc-
cur in the later Chiricahua phase.‘ It appears that, notwithstand-
ing the time gap indicated by carbon 14 dating between Sulphur
Spring and Chiricahua—which is certainly Archaic—the con-
tinuity in artifact types is more pronounced than the differences.
   That there is an indisputable Lithic stage in the Southwest, how-
ever, and that it is chronologically early is evidenced by the re-
mains of hunting cultures similar to, and in some cases specifically
related to, the “upper” Lithic cultures of the Plains and the East.
Perhaps the earliest is the Sandia culture, first encountered in a cave
in the Sandia Mountains near Albuquerque, New Mexico. This
culture, with its characteristic asymmetrically stemmed (Solutrian-
like) points, was associated in the lower levels of the cave with a
rich Pleistocene fauna in a geological context estimated by an emi-
nently qualified geologist to be of Wisconsin interstadial age,* and
was stratigraphically overlain by younger deposits containing a late
Folsom or an “intermediate” stone complex that also had extinct
faunal associations. Radiocarbon ages of over 20,000 years for
mammoth ivory from the Sandia level have been recently pub-
lished,*? but, notwithstanding these combined evidences of high
antiquity, the temporal position of Sandia is still in question.*®

   42. Dates for Sulphur Spring Cochise are: 5805 + 370 B.c. and 4259 +
450 B.c. (sample Nos. C-216 and C-511    [Arnold and Libby, 1951]).
   43. Information by J. Charles Kelley given at the Radiocarbon Conference»
Andover, October, 1956.
   44. E. B. Sayles (verbal communication,   1955).
   45. Hibben, 1937, 1941.              46. Bryan, in Hibben, 1941.
   47. Sample Nos. M-247, M-349     (Crane, 1956). For an impression of the
uncertainty surrounding these important dates see Hibben, 1955, and Crane,
1955.
   48. Johnson, n.d.



                                                 LITHIC   STAGE   9]
   Recent evidence from the Lucy site in central New Mexico sug-
gests Sandia’s possible overlapping contemporaneity with Clovis,
Sandia’s principal rival for the distinction of being the oldest pro-
jectile-point-bearing culture in the Americas.*? From the stand-
point of continental distribution, however, Sandia has proved a
disappointment. Unlike Clovis and Folsom points (particularly the
former), which, once properly recognized and defined, turned up
in great numbers all over the country, Sandia points are still ex-
tremely rare, and occurrences outside the type locality are typologi-
cally dubious.°°
   Other evidences that the Southwest was not lacking in early
hunting cultures classifiable as Lithic were found in the lower level
of Ventana Cave in south-central Arizona—a somewhat impover-
ished Folsom-like culture with abundant extinct faunal associa-
tions, in a “humid” deposit referable to one of the later substages
of the Wisconsin glaciation®*\—and in a large number of surface
finds more specificially related to the Lithic cultures of the Plains.
More spectacular was the discovery of typical Clovis points in-
side the carcass of a mammoth at Naco in southwestern Arizona.
It has been suggested that such finds may reflect a seasonal hunting
aspect of cultures which in their entirety would conform to the
prevailing Desert pattern.** If true, this would be very embarrass-
ing, because we would be found to have classified two activities of
the same culture in separate developmental stages. As a hypothesis
   49. Roosa, 1956.
   50. Hibben, 1946; Wormington, 1949, p. 75. The difficulty of identifica-
tion is that asymmetrically stemmed points or “‘knives’” are found in many
North American stone assemblages of various ages. Within the range of vari-
ability of this class of artifacts, individual specimens might easily approximate
the Sandia type without any culture-historical significance. See M. W. Hill,
1953, Ritchie, 1953, Kleine, 1953, and Lewis, 19544, for examples that come
close to Sandia forms. There is also an early(?) Archaic lozenge-shaped point
that tends to look like Sandia.
   51. Haury et al., 1950.
   52. Hurt, 1942; Haynes, 1955.
   53. Haury, 1953a.         54. Cressman, 1951, p. 294; Haury, 19534, Paleo



                                         METHOD AND THEORY        9 2.
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
it cannot be ignored; in a transitional phase like Sulphur Spring
Cochise it might be a reasonable expectation. However, the present
trend of dating appears to support the contrary view—that the
finds really do pertain to an earlier, predominantly hunting stage of
culture in the Southwest.
   In a brief summary of our discussion of the Lithic stage thus far,
the following points may be emphasized: (1) The principal stage
criteria are rough- and chipped-stone artifacts. (2) The natural
context is that of the late glacial and early postglacial environments
of the New World. (3) The areas where these evidences are most
complete are western North America, particularly the High Plains
and the Southwest. (4) Iwo major technological traditions, or
groups of traditions, are postulated: one characterized by pressure
flaking and lanceolate blades, the other by percussion chipping and
crude choppers and scrapers. (5) There are indications that the per-
cussion chopper-scraper traditions may have earlier beginnings than
the pressure-flaked-blade traditions, but this remains to be demon-
strated as a fact. There is certainly good evidence that the two
existed contemporaneously for a long time. (6) The pressure-
flaked-blade traditions are clearly best adapted to the ancient grass-
land environment of the Plains and the East and to the hunting of
large mammals     now   extinct,   whereas   the percussion      chopper-
scraper traditions seem more at home in the semiarid environments
of the Greater Southwest, where they are associated with gather-
ing economies. This is not an iron-clad separation, however, and in
some instances both may be exemplified in the archaeological as-
semblage of a single culture. (7) It should be understood that both
groups of traditions, the early forms of which are markers for the
Lithic stage, show continuity into later cultures of the succeeding
Archaic stage. This is particularly true of the percussion chopper-
scraper traditions, which carry on into the Archaic Desert cultures
of the Greater Southwest.
   So far we have drawn examples from Lithic stage cultures in the
Southwest and the Plains, with a brief side glance at the East.
There are in the rest of North America, so far as we can see, no


                                             LITHIC STAGE   93
other Lithic cultures of comparable ponderability to Clovis, Fol-
som, Enterline, and Eden-Scottsbluff. A long catalogue of widely
scattered finds of artifact types related to these better-known cul-
tures could be compiled, but it would not add anything but dis-
tribution to the picture already given. The balance of our survey
of the North American Lithic can be taken at a swifter pace.
   The Great Basin area, comprising western Utah, all of Nevada,
south-central Oregon, and large portions of southern California,
has produced as many chronologically early finds as any other area
of comparable size in the New World, but, for reasons which we
hope will appear to be sound, we are putting most of them into the
Archaic. The precise difficulty is that many sites with early radio-
carbon dates show a dependence on gathering from the lowest
levels on, with hunting in a secondary role and no remains of ex-
tinct Pleistocene fauna. If the dates are correct, the shift to modern
conditions must have taken place earlier in the Great Basin than
in other areas so far considered.®® Extinct faunal remains have been
found, however, in sites on the peripheries of the area. On the
northern periphery, in south-central Oregon, at Paisley Five Mile
Point, food bones in the lowest level of a cave included horse and
camel, but there were no diagnostic artifacts in association.® At
Lower Klamath Lake, in the same region but just over the Califor-
nia line, horse, camel, and probably mammoth were found, the last
in direct association with fragmentary obsidian tools of indetermi-
nate type. Not iz situ, but believed to have come from the same
geological deposit, were several beveled-bone foreshafts similar to
the one found at Clovis, New Mexico, possibly a marker type of
the Clovis culture. Unfortunately, manos and post—Lithic-type
projectile points were also in this deposit.*7 No fluted or other
Lithic stone types were found in either of these sites. On the
southern periphery of the Great Basin, at Gypsum Cave in south-
eastern Nevada, ground sloth and possibly horse and camel were
found in association with an artifact complex whose characteristic
   55. Jennings and Norbeck, 1955, p. 4.
   56. Cressman et al., 1942, p. 93.        57. Ibid., pp. 99-100.



                                         METHOD AND THEORY      94
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
“Gypsum point” is one of the marker types for the Archaic.*8 The
problem of Gypsum Cave is aggravated by early radiocarbon dates
well within the range of time assumed for the Lithic,®® but we can-
not regard the culture as anything but Archaic in terms of the defi-
nitions used here.
   Other finds in the extreme southern part of the Great Basin and
contiguous lower Colorado River and southern California desert
and coastal regions confront the would-be classifier with even more
vexing problems, but some of the cultures involved appear to be
Lithic and cannot be overlooked. The San Dieguito—Playa (or
San Dieguito I) culture seems to reflect a hunting pattern, not-
withstanding its lack of characteristic point types,°? and its close
relationship with the Ventana culture indicates a date that would
satisfy the chronological requirements of the Lithic stage.®! In the
Lake Mohave complex (which includes too many types for com-
fort) the San Dieguito—Playa percussion choppers, planes, scrapers,
etc., are associated with points vaguely reminiscent of Sandia,
Clovis, San Jon, and Plainview.*? The Mohave and Silver Lake
points have wide distribution but are not consistent or stable in
their association.® An almost complete lack of milling stones in the
Lake Mohave sites indicates a primarily hunting culture, and there
is a good possibility that some, but certainly not all, of the material
is early enough to qualify as Lithic.** A site subsequently reported
by the same investigators, the location of which was not specified
but was presumably in the same region, revealed a “pure’’ Folsom-
like complex with rather striking similarities to Lindenmeier in
   58. Harrington, 1933, 1934.
   59. Dung of giant sloth from Gypsum Cave was dated at 8504 + 340 B.c.
and 6576 + 250 B.c. (sample Nos. C-221, C-222 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]),
but the association of dung and artifacts is not beyond question (Heizer, 1951a,
p. 24; Cressman, 1951, p. 306).
   60. M. J. Rogers, 1939.
   61. Haury et al., 1950, p. 531.
   62. E. W. C. Campbell et al., 1937.
   63. Wormington, 1949, p. 85.                   64. Brainerd, 1953.



                                                  LITHIC STAGE   95
artifacts other than points.® This, on typological grounds alone, we
would classify as Lithic.
  The relative infrequency of remains attributable to the Lithic
stage on the Pacific Coast of North America appears to confirm
the widely held assumption that early migration southward from
Alaska was mainly in the intermontane and High Plains “corri-
dors” on either side of the Rocky Mountains. Estimates of con-
siderable antiquity have been made for the earlier manifestations
of the La Jolla culture® and the Topanga culture,*’ of the San Diego
and Los Angeles regions, respectively. The lowest level in the se-
quence at Malaga Cove, also in the Los Angeles region,** has been
compared to Rogers’ Dieguito and is thought to be early, but it
includes a microlithic “flake drill” type that is remarkably similar
to the characteristic “‘perforators”’ of the Poverty Point culture of
the lower Mississippi Valley on a late Archaic or even Formative
level.69 The enigmatic Oak Grove culture of the Santa Barbara re-
gion”? is also difficult to fit into our definition of Lithic. The four
last-named cultures have been recently gathered together, along
with material from the Little Sycamore site in Ventura County,
under the designation “Early Milling Stone Cultures of Southern
California” and have been assigned a guess date of 3000-2500 B.c.7!
This convenient generalization has encouraged us to put them all
into the Archaic stage.
  Farther north, in central California, well-developed sequences in
the San Francisco Bay and Sacrainento Delta regions have no Lithic
phases; the earliest cultures are clearly Archaic in terms of the
definitions used here. The Farmington complex has already been
mentioned as a possible “lower” Lithic stage culture, but there is
no dating to support the assumption. North of San Francisco Bay,
  65. Campbell and Campbell, 1940.
   66. M. J. Rogers, 1929, 1945; Harding, 1951; information given by
Clement Meighan at the Andover Radiocarbon Conference of April, 1956.
  67. Heizer and Lemert, 1947; Treganza and Malamud,    1950.
  68. E. F. Walker, 1951.                  70. D. B. Rogers, 1929.
  69. Ford, Phillips, and Haag, 1955.      71. Wallace, 1954.


                                      METHOD AND THEORY     906
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
at the controversial Borax Lake site,” there seems to have been an
early component that included rather dubious fluted points and
Lindenmeier-like scrapers and gravers, but, if this existed as a
complex, it was not clearly differentiated stratigraphically from a
culture more like the milling-stone cultures referred to above. In
view of this uncertainty, it would seem preferable to classify all of
Borax Lake as Archaic.
   From here on up the Pacific Coast, our sources of information on
the Lithic diminish rapidly. In the northern California, Northwest
Coast, and Plateau areas, finds attributable to the Lithic are very
scarce, partly because of ignorance no doubt, partly because we
are getting farther away from the bases of our criteria and are un-
able to recognize Lithic materials when we see them. A few pos-
sibly early sites have been reported but in no case fully published.”
North Pacific archaeology is clearly not well enough known to per-
mit generalization, nevertheless, it may be suggested that this is
an area quite unsuited in nature to the migratory hunting-and-col-
lecting way of life characteristic of Lithic cultures elsewhere.
   This brings us to the Arctic. We can hardly expect to fit Arctic
data into our scheme of classification without difficulty. As one of
the outstanding Arctic specialists has recently said: “The pattern
and development of Eskimo culture are the result of a combination
of geographical, ecological and cultural factors that are truly
unique.”’4 This would apply equally to any cultural pattern in the
Arctic, since the unique geographical conditions can be projected
indefinitely into the past, and with them the special cultural adjust-

   72. Harrington, 1948.
   73. The Lind Coulee site in eastern Washington may have a Lithic phase
(“Notes and News,” American Antiquity, 16, 290; 17, 281; 18, 189, 297). A
date of 6746 + 400 B.c. (sample No. C-827 [Libby, 19544]) certainly indi-
cates that kind of occupation. Three fluted points found some time ago in Ore-
gon and Washington have recently been identified as Clovis in type (American
Antiquity, 21, 451). In British Columbia a very good Eden-Scottsbluff point
was recently received by the Provincial Museum, purportedly from the vicinity
of Lake Windermere (Duff and Borden, 1954).
   74. Collins, 19536, p. 201.



                                                LITHIC   STAGE   9 i
ments required to make life endurable in such an environment.
Apart from marginal phases of Indian cultures whose centers lie
farther south, no major cultural configuration other than Eskimo
has been conclusively shown to have occupied the area. The only
culture that might represent a pre-Eskimo configuration is the well-
known Denbigh “flint complex’’ first encountered at the Iyatayet
site on the north Bering Sea coast of Alaska.” Denbigh shows con-
nections of a tenuous nature with late Lithic stage cultures of the
Plains, but its more significant affiliations appear to be with eastern
Siberian cultures that are variously regarded as Mesolithic or Neo-
lithic. The latter are assumed to be the source of the burin and
microcore-and-blade (“polyhedral core and lamellar flake’’) tradi-
tions so characteristic of the Denbigh complex. These Mesolithic
traditions,   particularly     the microcore-and-blade      technique,    are
widely but erratically distributed in northern and eastern North
America on a time level that is by no means early. The single
fluted point from the Iyatayet site is a poor example that cannot
be classified with any established type, but the fine parallel-flaked
points would seem to be typologically related to the Eden-Scotts-
bluff culture of the Plains. Radiocarbon dates for the Denbigh level
at Iyatayet, however, are considerably later than those for Eden-
Scottsbluff.”* This lends support to Henry Collins’ belief that fur-
ther information about the non-lithic aspects will bring out the es-
sential Eskimo character of the Denbigh culture.
   No other complex that might be considered Lithic has yet been
   75. Giddings, 1951, 1952.
   76. Radiocarbon dates for the Denbigh level at Iyatayet are:       1546 +
230 B.c. and 2705 + 220 B.c. (sample No. C-792 and C-793 [Libby, 1954a]).
Giddings, who collected the samples, declined to accept the dates and adhered
to his original estimate of 8,500 years ago (1955, p. 376). A good deal has
been made of the date of 4042 + 280 B.c. (sample No. C-560 [Libby, 1951])
obtained from a sample of twigs from the lower level of the Trail Creek Cave
on Seward Peninsula which also contained Denbigh type material. According to
Helge Larsen, who excavated the cave, these twigs could not be positively as-
sociated with the Denbigh artifacts and might even have been brought into the
cave by hibernating bears (statement made at the Andover Radiocarbon Con-
ference, October, 1956).



                                        METHOD AND THEORY      9 8
                                  IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
reported in the Arctic area. A few scattered fluted points have bee
reported from various localities in Alaska, but most are without
associations and reliable dating criteria.77 The general impression
is that they are relatively late and marginal to the main centers of
the fluted-point tradition farther south. In the Canadian subarctic,
an area of extreme difficulty for archaeology, the Yukon and
Mackenzie valleys are crucial because they are the most likely
diffusion routes in the Lithic stage. A few significant finds have
been made,”® but, in so far as they can be related to Lithic traditions
elsewhere, they seem to be relatively late in the scheme of things.
We have to conclude that remains pertaining to the earliest immi-
grants from Asia either have not been found or, if found, have not
yet been recognized. The origins of Lithic cultures in North Ameri-
ca are still completely obscure.

                                  MIDDLE   AND    SOUTH     AMERICA

   We can, therefore, hardly expect clarification of the problem of
Lithic origins in Middle and South America. Any theory of popu-
lation-spread into these areas must assume north-to-south move-
ments of peoples and cultures in a Lithic stage of development. In
Middle America there is now ample confirmation of the presence of
man with extinct fauna, including mammoth, in upper Pleistocene
formations in the Valley of Mexico, but the associated artifact as-
semblages are incomplete and the relationships with North Ameri-
can Lithic cultures remain to be worked out. The San Juan “‘in-
dustry”? of Helmut de Terra, consisting of ten artifacts from three
sites,”? has received some slight reinforcement from finds asso-
ciated with the two Iztapan mammoths, among them three classifi-
able points, of the Eden-Scottsbluff, Angostura, and Lerma types,
respectively.®° The fact that these types are relatively late and
heretofore not associated with mammoth              may indicate that the
   77. Hibben, 1943; Solecki, 1951; Collins, 19535.
   78. Johnson, 1946; MacNeish,   1951, 1953, 1954a.
   79. De Terra, 1949.
   80. Aveleyra and Maldonado-Koerdell,    1953; Aveleyra, 1956.



                                                 LITHIC   STAGE   99
mammoth survived in central Mexico long after its extinction in
the United States. It may also give slight additional meaning to the
fact that good fluted points have not so far been found south of
Durango. The poor example from Costa Rica is of doubtful sig-
nificance.®! Another important evidence of Lithic stage culture in
Mexico is to be seen in the Canyon del Diablo sequence of southern
Tamaulipas,®? of which the first two phases, Diablo and Lerma, are
said to represent hunting cultures; but the material has not yet been
thoroughly described, and comparisons with Lithic material north
of the border cannot be made. The occurrence of a Lerma point
with the second Iztapan mammoth, referred to above, is a strong
indication that both Diablo and Lerma belong in the Lithic stage.
From Mexico on south through the Maya area and lower Central
America, scattered and isolated evidences of man’s presence in late
glacial or early postglacial times could be cited, but they do not
add up to anything of cultural significance and may be omitted here.
   Identification of Lithic remains in South America is beset with
difficulties. Technological similarities between North American
Lithic traditions and those presumed to be of comparable date in
South America are, for the most part, of a very general kind. An
even greater source of trouble is the limited geological and paleon-
tological criteria for temporal equation with North American Lithic
cultures. Nevertheless, there are a number of finds in South America
that may be considered relevant. One of the best-substantiated
claims for a South American Lithic stage is to be found in the
Magellanic sequence.** The lowest level, Period 1, in the Palli
Aike and Fell’s caves on the north side of the Straits, contained,
along with remains of horse and sloth, pressure-flaked points of
ovate triangular shape with broad tapering stems, a single un-
stemmed Plainview-like point, crude chopping tools, bone flakers
and awls, and some rude disk-shaped pieces of lava. Bird’s original

  81. Swanger and Mayer-Oakes, 1952.
  82. MacNeish,     1950.
  83. Bird, 1938.



                                  METHOD AND THEORY   100
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
modest estimate of 1000-3400 B.c. for this culture has been con-
siderably extended by a radiocarbon date of 6688 + 450 B.c.*4
   Other researches into the problem of early man in the southern
part of the South American continent may be compared and con-
trasted with the Palli Aike and Fell’s caves Period 1 discoveries.
In some instances there are indications of even earlier materials.
M. A. Vignati’s stratigraphy on the Argentine coast of Tierra del
Fuego® reveals a three-part sequence in which the earliest phase
has only retouched cores and flakes or bifacial percussion-flaked
blades and choppers. In the second level, he recovered a “‘knife”’ or
point similar to those of Bird’s Period 3, and in the third, or top,
cultural layer there was a point similar to those of Bird’s Period 4.°
It is to be noted, however, that crude bolas stones are found even in
the first period of the Vignati sequence.®” Along the Atlantic coast
of Patagonia, Menghin has correlated site occupations with a series
of rising coast lines and has defined an earlier Oliviense complex,
characterized by retouched flakes and scrapers, and a later Sola-
nense complex, featuring single-notched-base projectile points.
Geological dating here suggests that both these complexes ante-
date Bird’s Period 1. Menghin has also described Patagonian cave
stratigraphies the lowest levels of which (Toldense complex) ap-
pear to correlate with Palli Aike-Fell Period 1, on the basis of
lanceolate Plainview-like points, though they include also crude
bolas stones.8® The upper levels in these same caves (Casapadrense
complex) resemble Bird’s Period 2 at Palli Aike in the absence
of stone points and the presence of numerous bone implements along
with crudely retouched scrapers and blades. This order, of course,
tends to reverse the percussion chopper to pressure-flaked point
    84. Sample No. C-485 (Libby, 1952).        85. Vignati, 1927.
    86. This last identification was made by Bird (personal communication,
 1956).
    87. It is interesting to note that the rude percussion industries of southern
and Baja California have “charmstones” which may also have been bolas
stones, although the similarities to South American types are not close.
    88. Menghin, 19525.                         89. Menghin, 1952a, 19525.



                                                  LITHIC STAGE    101
 (“lower’”’ to “upper” Lithic) sequence. This Casapadrense phase is
dated, in relation to volcanic activity in the region, as subsequent
to 6000 B.c. It appears to relate to a somewhat similar phase (Tan-
dilense) in Buenos Aires Province.*°
    Possibly within the range of our Lithic definition is the Ayampi-
tin phase of the Cérdoba and San Luis hills in northwestern Argen-
tina. Here A. R. Gonzalez has obtained a stratigraphy at the Gruta
de Intihuasi in which the Ayampitin assemblage, with its lanceo-
late points and crude grinding utensils, underlies the later, Archaic-
like Ongamira phase. The Ayampitin projectile points are closest
to Bird’s Period 3, but the radiocarbon dating supports a Lithic
assignment.°
   We cannot leave Argentina without commenting on Ameghino’s
claims for the antiquity of man in Buenos Aires Province.% The
geological basis for these claims of what seems an excessive age is
still in dispute,    and   the characteristic   artifacts,    battered   and
splintered pebbles suggestive of crude hand-ax or chopper forms,
have uncertain associations. In some of Ameghino’s sites they
seem to have been found with pressure-flaked points, grinding
stones, and even pottery. Bird has reported similar implements
from northern Chile in contexts that are relatively late.%
   In Brazil the artifacts associated with the longheaded Lagoa
Santa skeletal type,*4 also found in some of the sambaquis of the
southern coast,® have been considered relevant to the problem of
early man’s presence in South America, but we have relegated
them to the Archaic stage for reasons given in the next chapter.
   From the great corpus of archaeological data pertaining to Peru
and Bolivia, few finds could conceivably be on the Lithic stage.
The only possibilities that might be mentioned are: (1) the long
   90. Menghin and Bormida, 1950.
   91. Gonzalez, 1952. A recent radiocarbon date on the Ayampitin phase is
in the neighborhood of 6000 B.c. (A. R. Gonzalez [personal communication,
1956].
   92. Ameghino, 1911.                 94. Walter, 1948; Evans, 1950.
   93. Bird, 1943.                     95. Serrano,   1946.




                                     METHOD AND THEORY        102
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
tapered-stem points and other implements from the Chicama Valley,
which seem to have no connection with later preceramic and ceram-
ic phases in the region;* (2) the seemingly unrelated complex
featuring stemless and diamond-shaped points found in the non-
ceramic refuse of certain inland rock shelters near Huancayo;%
(3) the chipped-stone complex which Strong has reported from the
south coast;*8 and (4) recent discoveries from Viscachani in the
Bolivian highlands.°® From the northern Andes there is even less.
Discoveries have been claimed as evidences of man in geologically
early periods, such as the Punin skull,!°° or the Alangasi mastodon!®!
(this claim recently demolished by Gross) ,!° but no artifact com-
plexes that can be measured against our criteria for the Lithic stage.
In Venezuela, J. M. Cruxent and Irving Rouse have recently re-
ported a quartzite assemblage from sites in the locality of El Jobo
in the northwestern part of the country. This has not yet been
formally described, but specimens from it have been examined by
a number of North American authorities; the consensus is that
the assemblage definitely represents an early culture—the speci-
mens are closely related to artifacts found with the second Iztapan
mammoth—with more distant but probably significant relation-
ships to some of the later Lithic cultures of North America.1%
    In this résumé of South American data two things stand out:
first, the tendency for Lithic finds to be concentrated in the tem-
perate (southern) and arid portions of the continent, perhaps the
only favorable areas for cultures primarily based on hunting;1%
second, the fact that there are few specific resemblances to early
cultures in North America, and those that do appear are with pro-
jectile-point forms of the later post-fluted-point cultures of the
Lithic stage.

  96. Larco Hoyle, 1948, pp. 11-12, Pl. 1.
  97. Tschopik, 1946.                   101.    Uhle, 1930.

  98. Strong, 1954.                     102. Gross, 1951, p. 104.

  99. Menghin, 1953-54.                 103. Cruxent and Rouse, 1956.
   100. Sullivan and Hellman, 1925.     104. Bennett and Bird, 1949.



                                               LITHIC   STAGE   103
                                                      Chapter 5




                                        Archaic Stage
                                                     DEFINITIONS

Our previous use of the concept ‘“‘Archaic” for the second stage of
New World historical-developmental interpretation is here re-
tained in its essentials. The term was introduced into the archaeol-
ogy of eastern North America by William A. Ritchie, who applied
it to his Lamoka phase in central New York.! Soon after, the rich
preceramic culture of the northern Alabama and Kentucky shell
middens was revealed by the extensive excavations of W. S. Webb
and his associates. Relationships to Lamoka were noted, and the
term “Archaic” was extended accordingly, with a “‘pattern”’ sig-
nificance in the Midwest taxonomy.” About the same time, re-
examination of earlier shell-midden investigations in the far South-
east? and excavations on the Georgia coast‘ expanded the Archaic
still further geographically and also slanted it toward the concept
of a “Shellmound” culture. Similar extension was going on all over
eastern North Ainerica, and there were suggestions that cultures
as far away as California were somehow related.> However, it was
also becoming clear that the concept had outgrown its specific
historical implications, and Griffin in his first synthesis of eastern
   1. Ritchie, 1932. Alanson Skinner had previously designated certain pro-
jectile points from shell middens in the vicinity of Manhattan as ‘“‘archaic’’
(1919, 1920), but Ritchie was apparently first to use the term in a full cul-
tural sense.
   2. Webb and DeJarnette, 1942.       3. Wyman,    1868, 1875; Claflin, 1931.
   4. Unpublished work by Preston Holder and A. J. Waring, Jr.
   5. Haag, 1942; Beardsley, 1948.



                                      METHOD AND THEORY       104
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
archaeology made an attempt to jettison it.6 Failing in this, he and
his co-workers reinstated it as a “period” in what might be re-
ferred to as the new midwestern chronology.’ As it was our con-
tention—and still is—that periods in area chronologies of wide
geographical scope lose their temporal significance and become, in
effect, developmental stages, we have chosen to use “‘Archaic’”’ as a
stage designation, making use of its broad typological implications
and expanding the concept to its ultimate hemispherical limits.$
   For some time North American archaeologists have found it
convenient to speak of “early” and “late” Archaic, but there is a
remarkable lack of agreement about what these terms mean. In
preparing our first classification, we considered making a similar
division into “upper” and “lower” Archaic stages but abandoned
the idea for two reasons: (1) the difficulty of finding criteria that
would hold for all major areas of New World archaeology and (2)
the belief that the concept of a Preformative stage following the
Archaic would take care of many of the cultures generally regarded
as “late” Archaic. This did not work out quite as expected—the
precise difficulties will be discussed later on—and, with the elimi-
nation of Preformative in the present scheme, the need for sub-
division of Archaic seemed more pressing than before. There had
also taken place in the interval the conference of North American
archaeologists at Andover in April, 1956, at which a twofold sub-
division of the Archaic was generally agreed upon. We tried very
hard, therefore, in preparing the present version of our classifica-
tion, to follow this lead—and failed again.
   6. Griffin, 1946.             7. Griffin, 1952a.
    8. ‘‘Archaic’”’ was used much earlier in American studies by Boas (1913),
Spinden (1928), and others to refer to the beginnings of settled agricultural vil-
lage life in Mexico and Central America. This connotation is, of course, en-
tirely different from the use and meaning here. Our ‘‘Formative”’ is the ap-
proximate equivalent of the Boas and Spinden “Archaic.” Our decision on this
terminology was influenced by the current and firmly intrenched North Ameri-
can usage of “‘Archaic’’ and by the fact that such names as “Formative’’ and
“Preclassic” have now replaced “Archaic” as the designation for early New
World village agriculture.



                                               ARCHAIC STAGE     105
   The Andover classification, if we may call it such, is of narrower
scope than ours. The problem was limited culturally to stone
technology and geographically to North America. Within this
frame of reference it seemed possible to a majority of the conferees
to distinguish two broad stages of Archaic technology, with the
presence or absence of ground- and polished-stone artifacts as the
governing criterion. We made a serious effort to expand these
technological stages culturally and geographically but finally con-
cluded that expansion was neither possible nor desirable. In the
perspective of New World archaeology as a whole, polished-stone
technology does not seem to have any consistent developmental or
even temporal significance. One must conclude that polished-stone
artifacts were desirable things to have, perhaps even essential in
certain environments, but that many groups got on very well with-
out them. For example, the first successful efforts toward agricul-
tural food production seem to have been made in cultures lacking
polished stone. To have to call such cultures “lower” Archaic
would be disconcerting. On this point we were better off with our
Preformative.
  Even in the restricted frame of reference of North American
stone technology, it may be questioned whether subdivision of the
Archaic along the lines suggested at Andover is entirely feasible.
It is, of course,   a methodological   principle   that developmental
classifications and chronological classifications do not of necessity
march together, but, when we compare concepts of “early” and
“Jate’’ Archaic in the literature with concepts of “lower”        and
“upper” Archaic proposed at Andover,          we find scarcely any
agreement at all. It seems best, therefore, to leave Archaic as a
single stage allowing for the use of qualifiers, “lower” and “upper”
(or “early” and “‘late’”’), by area specialists according to whatever
criteria seem best to fit the case.
    To define Archaic as a single stage, however, is not without its
difficulties. So far as we can tell from the meager remains charac-
teristic of most early Archaic cultures, there is no important shift
in economic and social patterns from the previous Lithic stages. It


                                   METHOD AND THEORY    106
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
would be convenient if, following the lead of some Americanists,
we could simply designate the Lithic as the stage of early hunting
and the Archaic as the stage of early gathering cultures. We have
already inveighed against this simple division. For purposes of
large-scale integration, concepts of hunting versus gathering cul-
tures are useful only as convenient rubrics. We found that we had
to accommodate both in our definition of Lithic, and we are obliged
to do the same for the Archaic. Nevertheless, it does seem possible
to see a shift in emphasis between hunting and gathering, in favor
of the latter, and there certainly were differences in the plants col-
lected and the animals hunted.
   With these points in mind, we may briefly define the Archaic
as the stage of migratory hunting and gathering cultures continuing
into environmental conditions approximating those of the present.
With the extinction of the large Pleistocene mammals hunted by
Lithic stage peoples—and this extinction is assumed to have been
virtually complete by the beginning of the altithermal period—there
is now a dependence on smaller and perhaps more varied fauna.
There is also an apparent increase in gathering; it is in this stage
that sites begin to yield large numbers of stone implements and
utensils that are assumed to be connected with the preparation of
wild vegetable foods. In most Archaic cultures these are shaped by
use rather than design and do not, therefore, fit into the category
of ground and polished stone, which is one of the often-referred-to
criteria of the Archaic stage. The specialized techniques of gather-
ing and preparation of wild foods, especially in areas where these
consisted mainly of hard-shelled seeded forms, suggest a medium in
which early experimentation in plant domestication could take
place. As a result, it is in some rather primitive, and surprisingly
early, Archaic cultures that the first evidences of New World
agriculture are to be found. These we designated as Preformative
in our first classification. We have since come to the reluctant con-
clusion that the mere presence of agriculture, though of enormous
importance historically in terms of the growth of particular Ameri-
can patterns of culture, is not of primary significance from a more


                                        ARCHAIC   STAGE   107
abstract, developmental point of view. It becomes so only when it
can be seen as dominant in the economy and integrated socially to
produce the stable settlement patterns that we have postulated as
the sine qua non of the Formative stage. Furthermore, certain cul-
tures that we classified as Archaic in our first paper because they
had no agriculture appear to have achieved stable settlement pat-
terns and other prerequisites of the Formative without that stimu-
lus. Lack of agriculture, therefore, is no longer a negative criterion
in our formulation of the Archaic stage.
   The point of departure for the description of Archaic stage cul-
ture in North America is commonly a level of stone technology
marked by the addition of grinding and polishing to the earlier
techniques of percussion and pressure flaking. This is no longer an
adequate approach, for archaeologists tend increasingly to consider
the possibility of an “early”’ Archaic prior to the adoption of ground
and polished stone. Although we are not attempting to set up such
a stage, for reasons already given, we shall refer to many cultures
in the following pages that lack ground and polished stone alto-
gether. Nevertheless, it is appropriate to begin our description with
this category, which certainly represents a technological innovation
of immense significance.
   Of primary interest as stage criteria are the heavy ground-stone
woodworking tools generally regarded as prerequisite to the suc-
cessful occupation of forest environments—axes,        adzes, wedges,
gouges, etc. Highly characteristic, but less useful as criteria, are
implements and utensils used in the preparation of vegetable foods—
milling stones, metates,   mortars,   manos,   pestles, pounders,   etc.
Some of these have already appeared in the Lithic but usually in
the guise of rough-stone artifacts, i.e., objects fashioned principally
by use rather than design. These carry over into the Archaic, but
there is an increasing tendency toward more specialized forms and
careful workmanship. Particularly characteristic of the Archaic in
some areas are stone vessels, precursors of pottery. Their presence
reflects the greater stability of occupation postulated for some of the
later cultures of this stage. Migratory peoples are not partial to


                                   METHOD AND THEORY    108
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
stone vessels for obvious reasons. Other Archaic elements of sig-
nificance in particular areas are ground slate points and knives;
polished atlatl weights of various forms; plummet-like objects
 (variously referred to as “plummets,”     ‘“‘charmstones,”   ‘‘fusos’’) ;
stone tubes, which may in some cases have been smoking pipes;
stone beads; and an array of other objects of purely ornamental or
problematical function. Thus, the addition of a new way of handling
stone resulted in an immense increase in variety and complexity of
the archaeological inventory.
   In the chipped-stone category it is noteworthy that the high
standards characteristic of many Lithic cultures are not generally
maintained in the Archaic. Many of the older forms, however, per-
sisted with little modification, particularly in the chopper and scrap-
er categories. A new tool that seems to have had little if any sig-
nificance in the Lithic is the drill. Drills are found in some Archaic
 cultures in great profusion and variety, a matter doubtless related
 to the fact that many of the ground and polished forms mentioned
above are perforated and to the emphasis on beads and pendants of
stone, bone, shell, and other materials that is a common feature in
this stage. In some areas the older lanceolate projectile forms of
 the Lithic are carried over into the Archaic, but in general there
 is a greater variety of points, with emphasis on stemmed, corner-
 notched, and side-notched forms, roughly in that order. In areas
 where ground- and polished-stone artifacts are rare or absent, such
 points are of crucial importance in classification. Certain specific
_types, such as Pinto and Gypsum, have been used, perhaps too
 freely, as markers for the Archaic in many parts of North America.
The increased variety of forms is matched by an increase in the
variety of materials used. In some areas, notably eastern North
America, Archaic cultures tended to specialize in the use of stones
other than flint.
   We would be able to record a number of Archaic determinants in
the rough-stone category if we had this class of objects under bet-
ter control. Plain, pitted, and faceted hammerstones, anvil stones,
notched pebbles (usually called “sinkers”), saws, abraders, whet-


                                         ARCHAIC   STAGE   109
stones, polishing stones, etc., are consistently reported from Archa-
ic sites. We know little about the history of these forms—some of
them probably go back to the Lithic—but the association of a num-
ber of forms together, and in quantity, is a fairly reliable general
criterion of the Archaic stage. Finally, of doubtful status as arti-
facts but extremely characteristic of Archaic sites in the Americas
are masses of fire-cracked stones used in pit roasting and stone
boiling. In areas where stones were unobtainable, objects of baked
clay were used for the same purpose.
   Artifacts of bone, horn, and ivory, present but not abundant in
the Lithic stage—a fact partly due, no doubt, to unfavorable fac-
tors of preservation—assume a major importance in assemblages of
the Archaic. These materials, for the first time, vie with stone as
materials for many implements and ornaments, such as points,
knives, scrapers, tubes, beads, and pendants, but in the main they
were used for objects that have no counterparts in stone. Most im-
portant numerically are awls, perforators, and needles, generally
regarded as adjuncts to the technologies of basketry and work in
skins. An equally large number of forms—gorges, leisters, har-
poons, fishhooks—testify to the importance of fishing and marine
hunting activities for which there is little evidence in the previous
stage. Shell makes its first significant appearance as a material,
largely in articles of personal adornment, especially beads and
pendants, except in certain coastal and island areas where it was
used for implements normally made of stone. Other materials that
seem to have made their first appearance in the Archaic, but only in
regions near the sources of supply, are copper and asphaltum. Final-
ly, although the word “Archaic” is often used interchangeably with
“preceramic,”’ many of the cultures classified as Archaic in this
study have a well-developed pottery technology.
   The above-named artifacts are found in village-site refuse and
with burials, and in a very important sense these conditions are
themselves criteria of the Archaic. In suggesting that burials first
appear on this level, we do not mean to imply that Lithic peoples
had no formalized modes of disposing of their dead but simply that


                                   METHOD AND THEORY    110
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
it is only in the Archaic and later stages that we can say what they
were. There is, as might be expected, too much variety to permit
generalization on a hemispherical scale, but certain modes and fea-
tures, such as flexed inhumation in round graves, partial cremation,
and the use of red ocher in burial rites, have wide distribution on
this level.
   Habitations do not appear to have been any more permanent than
in the Lithic, though, possibly, greater use was made of caves and
rock shelters, where accumulations of refuse from (probably) brief
and intermittent occupations suggest a degree of stability and con-
tinuity that may be illusory. Houses of sufficient durability to leave
traces in the ground are still generally lacking, as are storage pits
and other appurtenances of settled existence. Settlements are char-
acteristically small in extent, but the depth of deposit often indi-
cates considerable temporal continuity, from which a sedentary or
at least seasonal type of occupance may be inferred—quite different
from the nomadic way of life assumed for the Lithic stage. This, of
course, could be made possible only by the development of special-
ized subsistence economies in favored localities. As an example, it
seems to be in the Archaic that fishing, and especially shellfish-
collecting, became important in the economic picture, an adapta-
tion to coastal and interior waterside environments clearly evi-
denced by the distribution of Archaic cultures. Another sharply
contrasting example is the widespread seed-gathering or “Desert”
economy of the North American Great Basin and Southwest, which
also, to a lesser extent perhaps, tended to anchor populations in
favored localities and, by conditioning them to greater dependence
on vegetal foods, prepared the way for the adoption of agriculture
at a later time.

                                            NORTH     AMERICA

  It seems appropriate to begin our survey of Archaic cultures in
eastern North America, where the concept originated, but it must
be confessed that the task of organizing the masses of available data
is entirely beyond our competence. Use of the concept in a broad


                                         ARCHAIC   STAGE   ll1
developmental sense is going to oblige us to call many cultures
Archaic that have not been so designated before, but we will leave
these aside for the moment in order to concentrate on those about
whose status there can be no serious disagreement. Of these, we
will start with the cultures that would be “early,” or “lower,”
Archaic if we had chosen to make such a division. Even here there
is an embarrassment of riches, so far as raw data are concerned, but
a remarkable paucity of organization.
   An initial difficulty, which will surprise no one who has tried to
classify cultures in this way, is the separation of Archaic from Lith-
ic, or ‘‘Paleo-Indian” as this stage is most frequently called in the
East. ‘‘Paleo-Indian” has been indiscriminately applied to all sorts
of cultures that are (1) reasonably early and (2) not “Archaic” in
the older and narrower sense of ‘‘Eastern Archaic.” The trouble is
not all semantic, however. Lithic stage artifact types, including
fluted and parallel-flaked points practically indistinguishable from
their western counterparts and with characteristic basal grinding,
have a disconcerting tendency to turn up in Archaic complexes in
the East, and it is usually not clear whether they originated there
or not. The explanation that they were “picked up” from earlier
Lithic stage sites by thrifty or curious Archaic hunters does not
seem to cover the situation. The fact that some of the marker types
for early Archaic cultures in the East—such as Nebo Hill, Dalton
(Meserve), Starved Rock, or Guilford—continue the lanceolate-
point tradition of Lithic cultures on the Plains is a further indication
that the criteria for the separation of Lithic and Archaic stages have
to be sought outside specific point typology. For this we are obliged
to fall back on more tenuous criteria, such as (1) increased variety
in point types and the inclusion of stemmed and corner-notched
forms that are not in the lanceolate tradition and (2) increased evi-
dence of gathering activities in the form of milling stones, mortars,
cupstones, etc.? Geochronological criteria are almost entirely lack-
   9. The presence of heavy chipped ax- or adz-like tools that could be re-
garded as forerunners of the ground and polished axes and adzes of the “later”
Archaic has been suggested as a criterion for the Archaic beginnings, but the
proposition requires further investigation.


                                      METHOD AND THEORY        112
                                 IN AMERICANJARCHAEOLOGY
ing; faunal associations, when known, are invariably confined to
modern forms; and radiocarbon dating is not extensive enough to
be helpful but has in fact increased our classificatory difficulties, as
we shall see.
   The above remarks apply particularly to cultures in the eastern
Plains and the prairie borderlands of the Middle West,!° sometimes
referred to as “Late Paleo-Indian.”” Pending better stratigraphic
separation of these mixed Lithic-Archaic cultures than we now
possess, it seems advisable to classify them all as Archaic. The
lower levels of the Starved Rock site on the Illinois River," the
Modoc Rock Shelter in southern Illinois on the Mississippi,!? the
Hidden Valley Shelter on the Missouri side of the river below St.
Louis,!° and Graham Cave in central Missouri'* are by no means
identical in content, but they are examples of the transitional or
mixed Lithic-Archaic cultures and are in all cases overlain by de-
posits containing what we shall have less difficulty in identifying
as typical “Eastern Archaic.”
   Although dating is not supposed to be of crucial importance in a
developmental scheme, we cannot refrain from mentioning the
problem raised by the early radiocarbon dates from some of these
middle western sites. The Modoc site yielded dates ranging from
about 7000 B.c. to over 9000 B.c. for the middle and lower levels—
with the earliest dates actually in the middle.!® Dates from Graham
Cave are only slightly later.!* These dates fall well within the time
   10. Evidence that the prairies formerly extended farther east and that this
was significant in the spread of late “‘Paleo-Indian”’ cultures is given by Lewis,
1953, 1954a.
   11. Mayer-Oakes, 1951.                _12. Fowler and Winters, 1956.
   13. R. M. Adams, 1941; Chapman, 1948, pp. 140-42.
   14. Logan, 1952; Chapman, 1952.
   15. Dates in question are: 8993   + 900 B.c. for Level B2; 9246       + 800 B.c.
for Level B3; 8697    + 650 B.c. for Level C1; 7147       + 440 z.c. for Level C2
(sample Nos. C-904, C-905, C-907, C-908 [Libby, 1954]).
   16. Dates in question are: 7744 + 500 B.c. and 6874 + 500 B.c. for Level 6
(6-7 ft.) and 5944 + 500 B.c. for Level 4 (4-5 ft.) (sample Nos. M-130,
M-131, M-132 [Crane, 1956]).



                                                ARCHAIC    STAGE   113
range of Lithic stage cultures in the Plains. Nevertheless, on the
basis of the preliminary reports available, a considerable portion of
the materials associated with these dates is typical of fully de-
veloped Archaic cultures elsewhere in the East. In short, all these
dates seem excessively early. It will not do to discount them entire-
ly, however, because we are going to run into the same problem in
other areas, notably in the Great Basin, where comparable dates
have been obtained for cultures that we are also cheerfully classify-
ing as Archaic.”
   The early Archaic picture in the East is further complicated by
the fact that, east of the Appalachians, such dubious late or transi-
tional Lithic cultures are scarcely in evidence, and instead there is
a series of cultures showing a preference for non-flint materials,'®
with a ruder aspect in consequence, not unlike the Desert cultures
of the Great Basin and the Southwest, and a bewildering array of
projectile-point types. Prominent among the latter as possible
stage markers are lozenge-shaped points vaguely reminiscent of
Gypsum and single-shouldered, Sandia-like points (or knives).
Testimony to the complexity and long duration of the Archaic in
this part of the East is provided by the well-known but as yet un-
documented Badin site on the Yadkin River in the North Carolina
piedmont.!° Here in a deep (eighteen feet) stratigraphic column, a
deposit containing the long, narrow Guilford point was underlain
by a succession of levels, each with its own characteristic point
type and all within the Archaic stage as defined in this study.
    17. Since the above was written, a popular account of excavations in Rus-
sell Cave in northeastern Alabama has appeared (Miller, 1956). Projectile
points from the bottom level, dated as 6204 + 300 B.c. (laboratory not given),
are clearly Archaic in type, not unlike material from Graham Cave and the
Modoc Shelter.
    18. An example is the Old Quartz “industry” of the South Carolina pied-
mont (Caldwell, 1954).
    19. Excavations at the Badin site have been briefly reported by Joffre Coe
at meetings of the Southeastern Archaelogical Conference, and the final re-
port is awaited with great interest.
   20. There was no “‘Paleo-Indian”’ level in the Badin site, but fluted points
were found in the St4 site directly across the river.


                                        METHOD AND THEORY       114
                                  IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
    Turning now to the later and more typical Archaic cultures of
the East, we are still plagued by a plethora of unorganized informa-
tion. Everyone will agree that the cultures we are about to consider
are Archaic, but probably no two easternists would organize them
in the same way. One possibility would be to set up the old ‘“East-
ern Archaic’! as a major cultural continuum, but our feeling is that
too much time and space have been built into this unit and that
ultimately a considerable number of separate cultures will have to
be formulated within it. A “Southeastern Archaic,” preferably
with another name, could be organized around the well-documented
shell middens of the Tennessee River in northern Alabama” and
the Green River in Kentucky.” Temporal phases of this continuum
will have to be worked out, however, for there is a good possibility
that more than one major cultural unit is represented even here.
“Southeastern Archaic” is generally understood to include also the
fiber-tempered pottery traditions on the Savannah River,”4 Georgia
coast,”> and St. Johns and Indian rivers in Florida,”® but it might
prove to be more sensible to make fiber-tempered pottery the basis
for a separate far Southeastern Archaic culture. The St. Johns and
Indian River phases also show the influence of the very distinctive
Glades culture of lower peninsular Florida, which remained on an
essentially Archaic level throughout most of the span of its exist-
ence.”’ The spread of Southeastern Archaic culture from the nuclear
Kentucky-Tennessee        region eastward      up the Tennessee       River
seems to have been slight.?8 To the north and west it includes the
   21. Ford and Willey, 1941.
   22. W.S. Webb, 1939; Webb and DeJarnette, 1942, 1948a, 1948, 1948c,
1948d; Webb and Wilder, 1951.
   23. W.S. Webb, 1946, 1950a, 1950b, 1951a; Webb and Haag, 1939, 1940,
1947.
   24. Claflin, 1931; Fairbanks, 1942; Miller, 1950.
   25. A. J. Waring, Jr. (personal communication).
   26. Goggin, 1952; Rouse, 19510.           27. Goggin, 1949.
   28. Kneberg, 1952. A thorough survey of the Norris Basin of the Tennessee
River in eastern Tennessee failed to reveal any Southeastern Archaic sites
(W. S. Webb, 1938).



                                             ARCHAIC   STAGE   l 15
early Eva phase on the lower Tennessee River,”® perhaps the Faulk-
ner phase,*? and the phase represented by prepottery sites near
Carbondale*! in southern Illinois. So far, no Southeastern Archaic
sites have been reported from the lower Mississippi. The ‘Iche-
functe phase*? has often been mentioned in this connection and is
certainly Archaic in terms of our definition, but it would be better
to leave the cultural affiliation of this phase in suspension until its
relationships with other early cultures in the lower Mississippi have
been clarified. How far up the Ohio River the concept of a South-
eastern Archaic culture can be carried is hard to say—probably as
far as the extensive but poorly documented shell middens about
the falls of the Ohio at Louisville.*?
   Chronological estimates for Southeastern Archaic, formerly held
within modest limits, have been very considerably extended by ra-
diocarbon dating. It now appears that the culture was well estab-
lished by 3000 B.c. and may have begun a good deal earlier.** Its
terminal date is less easy to fix, some authorities maintaining that
the culture persisted locally down to a late prehistoric period.
   The idea of a “‘Northeastern Archaic’’ culture is sometimes re-
ferred to in the literature but does not seem to have found favor with
the archaeologists of that area. The pioneer Archaic phase, the
Lamoka of central New York,*® is still rather isolated as far as
direct relationships are concerned. It also remains the earliest
   29. Lewis and Kneberg, 1947; Kneberg, 1954.
   30. MacNeish, 1948; Cole et a/., 1951.            32. Ford and Quimby, 1945.
   31. Maxwell, 1951.                                33. E. Y. Guernsey, 1939, 1942.
   34. Radiocarbon dates from two sites of the Green River phase of South-
eastern   Archaic   are   as   follows:    5423   + 500   B.c.,   3198 + 300    B.c., and
2949 + 250 s.c. from the Annis site (sample Nos. C-180, C-116, and C-251
[Arnold   and Libby,      1951]);   3351   + 300 B.c.     from    the Indian   Knoll   site
(sample No. C-254 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]). The sample dated 5423 +
500 B.c. from Annis was from a higher level in the midden than the other two
samples dated from that site, and the date is therefore considered to be in error
(Webb, 19514, p. 30). However, a recently published date (5194 + 500 B.c.)
from the Eva phase on the lower Tennessee River is comparable (sample No.
M-357 [Crane, 1956]).
   35. Ritchie, 1932.



                                            METHOD AND THEORY            116
                                      IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
manifestation of the Archaic in the Northeast, with radiocarbon
dates somewhat later than those for Southeastern Archaic referred
to above.*® A broader, if somewhat insubstantial, formulation is
the later Laurentian, which, as the name implies, is thought to have
been intrusive into New York from the St. Lawrence Valley?’ and
also into New England, where it incorporates the famous Red Paint
phase of coastal Maine.38 To the west, Laurentian has relationships
of an uncertain character with the Old Copper culture of the upper
Great Lakes region.*® Until recently regarded as little more than
a technological tradition, the Old Copper culture has now become
one of the most intriguing Archaic cultures in eastern North Ameri-
ca, as a result of radiocarbon dates of surprising antiquity, which if
substantiated would make this the earliest metal-using culture in the
Americas and one of the earliest in the world.‘° Laurentian is also
of interest because of a special flavor contributed by ground- and
polished-stone gouges, rubbed slate points, and semilunar knives,
formerly attributed to Eskimoan influence but now thought of as
relating to an ancient circumpolar distribution.”
   A coastal “‘substratum’’ extending from southern New England
down through the Middle Atlantic states has been suggested as a
possible point of departure for another Archaic continuum.” There
may be another “Boreal Archaic” culture, or series of cultures, in
the Northeast (which would include the Red Paint phase already

   36. Radiocarbon    dates    from   the Lamoka     site are   as follows:   2418   +
200 B.c. and 3432 + 250 B.c. (sample Nos. C-288 and C-367 [Arnold and
Libby, 1951]); 2484 + 400 B.c. and 2574 + 400 B.c. (sample Nos. M-26
and M-195 [Crane, 1956]).
   37. Ritchie, 1944, 1951a.
   38. Willoughby, 1898, 1935, pp. 16o3 Ls Moorehead,            19224; B. L. Smith,
1948.
    39. Ritzenthaler and Scholz, 1946; Miles, 1951; Wittry,            1951; Ritzen-
thaler and Wittry, 1952; Wittry and Ritzenthaler, 1956.
   40. 3646 + 600 B.c. and 5556 + 600 B.c. (sample Nos. C-836 and C-837,
C-839 [averaged] [Libby, 19544]).
   41. Gjessing, 1944; Spaulding, 1946, Ritchie, 19510.
   42. MacNeish,     1952; Sears, 1954.



                                                   ARCHAIC STAGE     Ly
mentioned), based on the taiga of northern New England, the Mari-
time Provinces, Newfoundland,        and southern Labrador, but the
idea is still in an unformulated state.
   This by no means exhausts the material that has been called
“Archaic” in the eastern United States, but it is enough to serve as
a basis for the concept of an Archaic stage. There are other cultures
in the area, however, that we are compelled by the logic of our
definitions to relegate to this stage. About these there may be some
disagreement. Lack of space forces us to hypothesize in a rather
sweeping fashion. As a vehicle for generalization we will use the
current Griffin chronology.** This scheme, in brief, classifies east-
ern cultures into a series of “periods,” which are at the same time
large-scale cultural units, as follows: Paleo-Indian, Archaic, Early
Woodland, Middle Woodland, and Mississippi (which includes
Late Woodland).
   Our hypothesis starts with the assumption that the basic adapta-
tion to the modern forest and waterside environments is represented
by the various Archaic cultures already considered and that their
ultimate sources lie in the boreal cultures of the Eurasiatic Meso-
lithic and Neolithic stages. Upon this substratum, we further hy-
pothesize, was grafted one or several pottery traditions, also of
northern Eurasiatic origin, resulting in the Early Woodland cul-
tures of the Griffin scheme. Whether the same northern influences
were responsible for the introduction of the earliest burial mounds
is not yet clear. Certainly, at this time we can see evidence of the
gathering together of mortuary ceremonialism that climaxed later
in the mound-building (Middle Woodland) cultures of the Ohio
Valley.44 The incorporation of pottery (and possibly burial
mounds) did not bring about any changes of significance from a
developmental point of view. For the most part these Early Wood-
land cultures must be regarded as Archaic in terms of the defini-
tions used here.*® We also have to reckon with the possibility that
  43. Griffin, 1952a.                 44. Ritchie, 1955.
  45. This is by no means a new idea (cf. Griffin, 19524, p. 356). The sug-
gestion made by William H. Sears (1948) that Archaic is merely Woodland



                                     METHOD AND THEORY      118
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOT OGY
agriculture, already present in northeastern Mexico and the South-
west for a long time, was beginning to percolate into the East in
the Early Woodland period, but, if so, its effect on the general cul-
tural pattern was plainly insufficient to shift the cultures into the
Formative stage. Examples of middle western Woodland cultures
that we would be inclined to classify as Archaic may be seen in the
Black Sand and Red Ocher phases of the Illinois Valley,*® the Crab
Orchard and Baumer phases of southern Illinois,” and the Glacial
Kame “culture” of Ohio.48 On the other hand, the Adena culture,
often designated as Early Woodland in the literature, we are going
to designate as Formative for reasons that will be developed later.
Examples from the Southeast might include the Watts Bar and
Candy     Creek    phases    in eastern      Tennessee,#?     Mossy     Oak    in
Georgia,®° and Deptford in Georgia and northwestern Florida. In
a strictly taxonomic sense these Early Woodland cultures are transi-
tional from Archaic to Middle Woodland, but in the developmental
terms used here they lack all the essential characteristics of the
Formative.
   The Middle Woodland period of the Griffin scheme is marked
by the rise of a number of traditions, mainly from local sources but
with outside contributions, the origins and extent of which are still
obscure. We assume that diffusion from the Eurasiatic north is still
going on, but there are now influences from the south to be reck-
oned with. These are of overriding importance for us, because now

without pottery arose from the same observation that we have made above, to
wit, that the addition of pottery had little if any effect on the configuration of
the culture as a whole. We are simply turning his statement around to read:
Early Woodland is merely Archaic with pottery. Fairbanks was expressing
the same idea in pointing out that Early Woodland cultures in the Southeast
are in effect merely transitional from Archaic to Middle Woodland and that
no change in basic economy was involved (1949, p. 59).
   46. Cole and Deuel, 1937; Cole, 1943; Wray, 1952.
   47. Maxwell,   1951; Cole et al., 1951.
   48. Cunningham, 1948; Morgan, 1952.              50. Fairbanks, 1952.
   49. Lewis and Kneberg, 1941, 1946.               51. Willey, 1949.



                                                ARCHAIC STAGE     119
certainly they are involved with the spread of agriculture and as-
sociated elements, and they do involve significant changes in the
older cultural and economic        patterns.   Middle    Woodland,     then,
marks the shift to the Formative stage in eastern North America,
but, since it is primarily a temporal period, it does not necessarily
follow that all cultures classified as Middle Woodland in the Griffin
scheme are Formative in ours. Wherever Middle Woodland cul-
tures came into contact with pre-existing Archaic or Early Wood-
land cultures, they tended to dominate in the resulting accultura-
tion, except on the peripheries where this dominance was incom-
plete, resulting in cultures that would be classified here as mar-
ginal Formative. Excellent examples of this kind of developmental
situation are to be seen in the Middle Woodland cultures of the up-
per Ohio Valley® and New York State.5? Such acculturation was not
only incomplete but decidedly impermanent, it seems, and there fol-
lowed a re-emergence of simpler Woodland patterns, the Late
Woodland of the Griffin scheme. This late regressive marginality
is, of course, complicated by influences from the Mississippi cul-
tures of the Formative stage, which by this time were flourishing
to the south; it is to be noted that Mississippi and Late Woodland
are essentially the same period. How to classify these Late Wood-
land cultures developmentally is a rather tricky question. Are they
belated Archaic or marginal Formative? Beyond this uncertain and
probably fluctuating dividing line, which is in effect an expression
of the northern and eastern limits of successful maize agriculture,
are the vast forest areas in which the culture remained on an Archaic
level down to the ethnographic present.
   Classification of Archaic stage cultures is even more difficult in
the Plains than in the East, owing to a conservatism that probably
reflects a long persistence of ancient hunting traditions and a reluc-
tance or inability to take up the features, especially ground- and
polished-stone technology, that characterize the Archaic stage in
   52. Mayer-Oakes, 1955.
    53. Ritchie, 1938, 1944, 19514. Specific reference to the New York Hope-
wellian or Geneseo phase.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY      120
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
other areas.54 Practically all Plains Archaic cultures show a mixed
Lithic-Archaic typology, and in some cases the specific Archaic
relationships are with the later “typical” Archaic cultures in the
East. Nevertheless, owing to the conservatism postulated here, the
general configuration of these cultures, so far as it can be discerned
in the meager remains, is closer to our concept of Lithic. For ex-
ample, Signal Butte I and II in western Nebraska show a persist-
ence of lanceolate-point types of generalized Lithic stage character
in a context that includes Archaic stemmed and notched forms,
drills, and a few ground-stone implements.                   A     bison-hunting
economy is indicated, and there can be little doubt that the culture
reflects a strong continuity from the ancient Lithic stage cultures
of the area. At the same time there are definite affiliations with
Eastern Archaic, and the only available radiocarbon date is well
within the time range of such cultures.
   The same general observations apply to the Frontier complex
found at the Medicine Creek             (Allen) site in south-central Ne-
braska, with interesting affiliations, on the one hand, to certain
Desert cultures in the Great Basin and, on the other, to the Clear
Fork culture in Texas, both of which will be classified as Archaic
when we get to them.*” The deeply buried Lime Creek sites in the
same locality, not yet adequately reported, may be in the same
Archaic category, although some of the points are said to be more
    54. In emphasizing cultural continuity in the Plains, we are in effect reject-
ing a very attractive theory proposed by Krieger (1953), to wit, that the
altithermal was a period unfavorable to hunting in most of the Great Plains.
The Pleistocene mammals were gone. Only with the return of favorable condi-
tions in the medithermal period was man able to occupy the Plains again, living
off the great herds of bison that now roamed the area, but with a different cul-
ture, a much larger range of implements, many of them comparable to Eastern
Archaic forms. It seems to us that the evidence suggests rather a gradual re-
placement of the older fauna by modern forms and that the life of the later
hunters differed little from that of the earlier.
   55. Strong, 1935; Bliss, 1950.
   56. The Signal Butte I phase is dated at 1494 + 120 B.c. (sample No.
L-104A [Kulp, Feely, and Tryon, 1951]).
   57. Holder and Wike, 1949.



                                                ARCHAIC STAGE     121
specifically related to Lithic stage types (Plainview and Eden-
Scottsbluff).58 Radiocarbon dates from both Medicine Creek and
Lime Creek sites are of the same order of magnitude as those for
Archaic sites in the Middle West, i.e., well within the range of
Lithic cultures in the Plains.** If they are correct, and if they date
the material described—which is uncertain in the case of the Medi-
cine Creek site—we have here a significant instance of temporal
overlap of Lithic and Archaic stages in the same area.
   The diffusion of Woodland pottery into the central Plains,
though assumed to have taken place later than in the East, does not
seem to have marked any significant advance in cultural develop-
ment. The very large number of sites in the Valley phase, for ex-
ample, indicate an intense and widespread occupation of the stream
valleys at this time, but their small size and meager refuse deposits
suggest a continuation of the migratory hunting-gathering econo-
my of the area.S° The distinctive Sterns Creek phase of eastern
Nebraska is also designated as Woodland of this same ‘“‘Middle”
period; it furnished evidence at the Walker-Gilmore site of squash
and gourds (no corn), but otherwise failed to present a configura-
tion that we could classify as Formative.® This is the first of many
examples we shall consider in which limited agriculture is present
in cultures that otherwise remain essentially on an Archaic level.
Not until the later emergence of the Plains Village type of culture
beginning about a.p. 1200 can we begin to speak of a Formative
stage in the central Plains.
  The sequence for the northwestern Great Plains, recently pro-
posed by William Mulloy,® fits our classification very neatly. In
   58. Schultz and Frankforter, 1948; Davis, 1953.
   59. Site Ft-50 (Medicine Creek) has a date of 8542 + 1500 B.c. (sample
No. C-470 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]), but the sample came from below the
occupation zone (Roberts, 1951, p. 21). Average of two runs on a sample from
Site Ft-41, one of the Lime Creek sites, was 7573 + 450 B.c. (sample No.
C-471 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]).
   60. Hill and Kivett, 1940; C. S. Smith, 1949, pp. 298-99; Kivett, 1952;
Wedel, 1953, p. 506.
  61. Sterns, 1915; Strong, 1935; Champe, 1946.       62. Mulloy, 1954.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY      12
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY           2
his “Early Prehistoric” period the area was occupied by small, mi-
gratory, hunting groups with a Folsom or Yuma-type culture, 1.€.,
our Lithic stage of development. Following an interval of uncertain
length for which evidence is lacking, the ‘“‘Middle Prehistoric”
shows an economy more strongly oriented toward plant-gathering
and small-animal-hunting. The big bison have disappeared, but the
modern American buffalo (Bison bison) is not yet in evidence. The
two levels at the McKean site in northeastern Wyoming reflecting
early and late phases of this Middle Prehistoric culture are related
to Signal Butte I and II, respectively, and are plainly Archaic in
general configuration and typology.®* Mulloy’s ‘““Late Prehistoric”
seems to reflect, in part at least, a culture rooted in the ceramic-
agricultural traditions of the East, whose bearers, on moving out
into the High Plains, abandoned agriculture and took to a nomadic
hunting way of life, the modern buffalo having now appeared.
Here seems to be an example of the regressive type of marginality
described in chapter 3. Whether such cultures should be regarded
as Archaic or marginal Formative is a question of emphasis, and its
determination is a matter for the area specialist.
   On the eastern border of the central Plains, lanceolate points
continue to predominate in “Plains Archaic” cultures, but there
is a greater admixture of Eastern Archaic forms. For example, the
Nebo Hill assemblage, known from surface sites in the vicinity of
Kansas City, has points that are very closely related typologically
to some of the unfluted, Lithic stage types (Plainview, Angostura,
etc.) but includes grooved axes.* If the association is valid, this
would be a very difficult culture to classify. Farther east, in central
Missouri, the distinctive trianguloid Dalton point is associated with
lanceolate forms of the same general character.®
   The archaeology of the Ozark Plateau, a region with a highly
    63. The single radiocarbon date of 1333 + 600 B.c. (sample No. C-715
[Libby, 1954a]) from the upper level compares closely with the date for Signal
Butte I, cited above. Both would be late in the time range of Eastern Archaic
cultures.

   64. Shippee, 1948.               65. Chapman, 1948.



                                             ARCHAIC STAGE    iv 3
characteristic environment, has important bearings on the concept
of an Archaic stage, but is a little difficult to generalize upon. Ex-
cellent survey reports by Carl Chapman and others afford an abun-
dance of data, but they are organized in terms of the midwest
(Griffin) sequence, a classification which is imposed on the material
instead of deriving out of it. Better for our purposes is the formu-
lation of David Baerreis, in which the evidence, largely drawn from
open sites in northeastern Oklahoma (the Grove focus), has been
interpreted as reflecting a long continuity of basic stone artifact
types, notwithstanding an apparent shift in the economic base from
hunting and gathering to horticulture.*’ The later phases of this
Grove continuum are thought to pertain to the famous Ozark Bluff-
dweller culture, which, thanks to conditions unusually favorable
for the preservation of perishable materials, is known in great but
insufficiently documented detail.** This has led to spurious com-
parisons with the Basket Maker culture of the San Juan Anasazi
region of the Southwest, another instance of fortunate preserva-
tion. Baerreis believes. that the more significant relationships are
with the Archaic cultures of the East. The preceramic Bluff-dweller
culture is overlain by a later ceramic phase, not covered in Baerreis’
summary, in which can be seen faint emanations of influence from
the late Formative stage in the Mississippi Valley. This ceramic
phase corresponds to Harrington’s “Top-Layer’’®® and Robert
Bray’s “Marginal Mississippi.’’7° For our purposes it is sufficient
that the entire Ozark Bluff-dweller culture, notwithstanding the
abundant remains of domesticated plants in the later phases, re-
mains essentially on the Archaic stage of development as defined
in this study. It is a remarkable fact that the culture of a region so
close geographically to the centers of maximum intensity of Forma-
   66. Chapman, 1948, 1954, 1956; Chapman, Maxwell, and Kozlovich, 1951.
   67. Baerreis, 1951.
   68. Harrington,   1924;   Gilmore,   1930;   Dellinger,   1936;    Dellinger   and
Dickinson, 1942.
   69. Harrington, 1924.
   70. Bray, 1956.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY             124
tive development in the Mississippi Valley has been so impervious
to cultural influences from those centers. This would provide an
extremely nice frame for a study of culture-environmental inter-
action.
   Identification of an Archaic stage in Texas is easy enough—
where would Texas archaeology be without it?—but we are con-
fronted with the same difficulty, reference to which is beginning to
sound repetitious, of separating it from Lithic. Conditions favoring
a predominantly hunting type of economy persist in much of the
area, and there is the same disconcerting tendency for Lithic point
types, specifically Plainview and Angostura, to turn up in Archaic
contexts. Further, there is an almost complete lack of ground and
polished stone in Texas Archaic cultures; so we are deprived of
this handy criterion. An outstanding example is the Edwards Pla-
teau culture of central Texas, known from open camp sites and
“burned-rock middens’ (accumulations of fire-cracked hearth
stones) containing refuse indicating a hunting-gathering economy
with more dependence on deer than on bison. Plainview and Angos-
tura points are found too consistently in these sites to be regarded as
accidental intrusions.”: Otherwise the chipped-stone assemblage
is typically Archaic, with a wide variety of stemmed points, knives,
axes, choppers, picks, and large drills (mostly made-over projectile
points). Ground milling stones and manos are common, and there
are a few minor artifacts of polished stone, including crude boat-
stone atlatl weights. It is evident that this culture persisted for a
long period of time. Of the three documented foci of this culture,
the Clear Fork, featuring a specialized end-scraper (the “Clear
Fork gouge”), has long been the center of a dating controversy,
with estimates running as early as 8000 B.c., but general typological
considerations favor the more conservative figures of 4000 or
2000 B.c. (depending on certain alternative geological correlations)
to about A.p. 1500.72 The Round Rock focus is thought to have
   71. Suhm and Krieger, 1954, pp. 104-5; Suhm, 1955.
   72. Kelley, 19474. More recently Suhm and Krieger have extended the be-
ginning date of Clear Fork to “not later than 4000 to 5000 B.c.”’ (1954, p. 106).



                                               ARCHAIC STAGE     12 5
been approximately coeval with Clear Fork,” but the Uvalde focus
occupied only the last two or three centuries of this long interval
of time.”4 The important point for us here is that this continuum
comes down to a very late period—late enough to receive intrusive
types from east Texas cultures on the Formative level—without
departing significantly from the original Archaic pattern. The
Trinity culture of north-central Texas, nearer to the source of east
Texas intrusives, is nevertheless equally Archaic in its general con-
figuration.”
   The belated character of Texas Archaic is perhaps even more
conspicuous on the coast, where, in the Tonkawa, Karankawa, and
Coahuiltecan tribes comprising the so-called ethnological sink, we
have an opportunity of viewing a low-grade Archaic way of life in
ethnohistorical detail.7®
   The Big Bend aspect of the trans-Pecos region, in the extreme
western part of Texas, is known from rock shelters as well as open
sites and has in consequence a larger cultural inventory, including
many perishable items, and a more southwestern flavor.”’ The early
Maravillas focus of this culture has been compared with Ventana-
Amargosa I of south-central Arizona; the intermediate Pecos River
focus has Gypsum-type points; and the later Chisos focus has
Pinto and San Pedro types.’$ In other respects the stone assemblages
compare closely with that of Edwards Plateau, and the time range
is thought to be similar, except that the terminus of the Big Bend
culture may be slightly earlier. This is a culture extremely impor-
tant, from our point of view, as a bridge between the Archaic cul-
tures of the East and the Desert cultures in the Southwest, which
we are about to designate as Archaic.
  Before doing so, however, it might be well to pause at this point
to consider at greater length a general classificatory question al-
ready touched upon in connection with the Plains and the Ozark
  73. T. N. Campbell, 1948.                   74. Kelley, 19476.
  75. Suhm and Krieger, 1954, pp. 76-80.
  76. Swanton, 1924; Newcomb,    1956.
  77. Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940.     78. Kelley, 19476.



                                   METHOD AND THEORY
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY   12 6
Plateau. With regard to the Big Bend culture, which we have con-
sidered as essentially Archaic, it should be noted that two of the
later foci, the Chisos and the Livermore, have furnished evidence
of agriculture. In our previous paper we classed these two later
foci as ‘“Preformative.” Our concept of a Preformative stage had
been developed to take care of the many cultures that possessed
domesticated maize but do not yield substantial evidence that this
possession was of primary, or even significant, economic impor-
tance. In the present classification we have dropped the Preforma-
tive, admitting the presence of domesticated food plants on Archaic
levels where it is reasonably obvious that such agriculture was not
of importance in the development of stable, sedentary village life.
In this connection ‘it is of interest to note that these early occur-
rences of plant domesticates in North America are mostly from the
arid or semiarid areas of the continent. The fortuitous factor of
favorable conditions for preservation may be involved here, but it is
also likely that the seed-gathering and seed-grinding cultures of
these areas assimilated a trait like maize as they would numerous
wild plants and with little more immediate cultural effect. Hence we
classify these Texas cultures possessing corn as Archaic, because
in all other respects they seem to have that kind of conformation.
This is a preview of a situation that will be encountered again in dis-
cussing the cultures of the Southwest and northern Mexico.
   Generalization about the Archaic in the Great Basin and the
Southwest involves a continuation of the difficulties foreshadowed
in the Lithic section. These have to do with that great continuum
of basin and range Desert cultures,’® which, because of the preva-
lence of grinding stones in the archaeology, are so often contrasted
with the early hunting cultures in the literature. In our first attempt
at classification we chose to play down this division between hunters
and gatherers and, without really committing ourselves, suggested
that the earliest phase of this Desert continuum in the Southwest,
the Sulphur Spring phase of the Cochise culture of southeastern
Arizona and southwestern New Mexico, might be regarded as
  79. Jennings and Norbeck, 1955.



                                         ARCHAIC STAGE   127
Early Lithic—or Lithic, as we would now call it. We have al-
ready given reasons        for abandoning       this position*® and now
prefer to call all three phases of the Cochise               culture Archaic.
Chiricahua is involved in another division, that between gatherers
and farmers,®! and this antithesis too has probably been overdone.
The early corn in Bat Cave, on the St. Augustin Plains of west-
central New Mexico, was associated with a stone assemblage that
differs little from Chiricahua Cochise.’ Radiocarbon dates from
corn-bearing levels in the cave run as early as about 4000 B.c.,%*
but data on the association of the corn and the charcoal samples
dated have not yet been published. The earliest Bat Cave corn is
exceedingly primitive—it cannot be said with certainty that it 1s
not a wild variety—but reliable evidence of domestication comes
early in the sequence, and we can infer that it was well advanced
by 2000-3000 B.c. The same story of evolving corn in a retarded
Chiricahua-like culture is seen in the Tularosa Cave in the same
region of New Mexico.* There are said to be evidences of a re-
newed importance of hunting in the late San Pedro phase of Co-
chise,®* which might be taken as further evidence that agriculture
was not decisive in the patterning of Cochise culture. Cochise ap-
pears to have been the basis for both the Mogollon continuum of
the mountain region of southeastern Arizona and southwestern New
Mexico and the Hohokam of the southern Arizona desert, which we
shall classify later as Formative.
   To the west, in the lower Colorado River and California desert
regions, the Amargosa continuum parallels Cochise with some dif-
ferences, but these are not significant from a developmental stand-
   80. See p. 91.                           81. Kirchhoff, 1954.
   82. Mangelsdorf
                 and Smith, 1949; Dick, 1952.
    83. Earliest ofa long series of dates are: 3654 + 290 B.c. and 3980 + 310
B.c. (sample Nos. C-571, C-573 [Libby, 1951]).
   84. Martin et al., 1952. Radiocarbon dates on Tularosa corn are: 272 +
200 B.c., 194 + 160 B.c., 349 + 200 B.c. (sample Nos. C-584, C-585, C-612
(Libby, 1951]).
   85. Campbell and Ellis, 1952.



                                         METHOD AND THEORY     1? 8
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
point. Amargosa II, or Pinto-Gypsum as it was formerly called,*
correlates roughly with Chiricahua Cochise in time®” but shows
no signs of agriculture and not much of collecting; hunting is still
(or again) the dominant mode. Stone types are what we have come
to regard as Archaic in character. Whether or not it is correct to
equate Gypsum and Pinto temporally is a question we do not have
to go into. Both types seem to be widespread horizon markers on
the Archaic level for large portions of the Southwest and Texas and
on into the eastern United States. How this is to be reconciled with
the extinct faunal associations at Gypsum Cave and the early radio-
carbon dates of sloth dung in the cave deposits is difficult to see.*8
Amargosa III, equating roughly with San Pedro Cochise, is also
classified here as Archaic.
   At Ventana Cave, in south-central Arizona, Amargosa and Co-
chise traditions mingled in an excellent stratigraphic sequence that
has provided most of the evidence for the correlations referred to
above.8® Above the deposit containing the Lithic stage Ventana
complex and the discontinuity that is believed to mark a long period
of erosion and abandonment of the cave was a thin, red-sand deposit
containing artifacts of the Amargosa I phase, previously postu-
lated but not isolated in the lower Colorado River region. The
characteristic broad, stemmed points, somewhat similar to Borax
Lake points,®° are well within the typological range of Eastern
Archaic forms. This was followed by thick midden deposits, the
lower portion containing both Amargosa and Cochise types, called
Chiricahua-Amargosa II, the upper portion containing San Pedro
Cochise. The upper terminus of this midden was marked by an-
other disconformity, followed by. deposits containing Hohokam of
the Colonial and Sedentary periods. Amargosa              I, Chiricahua-
Amargosa II, and San Pedro are Desert cultures on an Archaic
stage, and the Hohokam phases are Formative. In this cave we have
   86. M. J. Rogers, 1939.                87. Haury et al., 1950, p. 534.
   88. Harrington, 1933. The sloth dung has been dated at 8504 + 340 B.c.
and 6576 + 250 B.c. (sample Nos. C-221, C-222 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]).
   89. Haury et al., 1950.               90. Harrington, 1948d.



                                          ARCHAIC STAGE    129
in vertical stratigraphy the full range of our developmental se-
quence from Lithic through Formative.
   A number of other cultures would have to be considered in any
complete description of the Archaic stage in the Southwest, a few
of which may be briefly mentioned. The San José culture, found in
fossil sand dunes in the Grants region in northwestern New Mexi-
co, has points in the Pinto tradition.*t The dunes are associated
with the altithermal period, a date which agrees with the general
time position of other early Archaic cultures in the Southwest.
Closely related to San José is the Concho complex from undated
surface sites about one hundred miles away in east-central Arizo-
na.* The general character of the artifacts and many of the spe-
cific forms are also Archaic as defined in this study.
    Pinto-type points have been recently reported from the San Juan
Anasazi region.* It may be assumed that when the elusive Basket
Maker I is finally run to earth it will be a culture of Archaic type.
Basket Maker II, formerly classified as Preformative, we are now
obliged to demote to the Archaic. Although agriculture was well
developed—there is nothing comparable here to the primitive corn
of Bat Cave—it does not seem to have become the central theme
of the culture, perhaps was not even the principal food resource.
Hunting and collecting are still much in evidence. Characteristic
settlements are small, unorganized groups of very crude, unstand-
ardized-surface, or shallow pit-houses of “brush and timber ma-
sonry’’ and stone-slab-lined storage cists. There are as yet no spe-
cialized religious structures (kivas) and in general only the faintest
indications of developing ceremonialism. Thanks to favorable con-
ditions for preservation in those regions where dry caves and
shelters were utilized as storage, burial, and camp sites, there is an
unusually large body of information about basketry, cordage,
finger-woven bags, sandals, wooden implements, and weapons, in-
   91. Bryan and Toulouse, 1943; Bryan and McCann, 1943.
   92. Wendorf and Thomas, 1951.
   93. Reported by J. Charles Kelley at the Andover Radiocarbon Confer-
ence, April, 1956.



                                   METHOD AND THEORY       |
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY           30
cluding the atlatl but not the bow. Pottery, however, has not yet
appeared, though presumably already in use in the Mogollon and
Hohokam     regions. In sum, as a cultural phase that has adopted
agriculture without profound modifications of settlement patterns
or other branches of technology, Basket Maker II remains essen-
tially on the Archaic level.** Basket Maker III, on the other hand,
also classified as Preformative in our first effort, is now promoted
to Formative; so we can again face our southwestern colleagues
without fear of personal violence.
   In sum, the general southwestern picture in the Archaic stage
is one of basic uniformity, reflecting an over-all environmental
homogeneity, with collecting as the most characteristic economic
pattern. There are marked local and temporal variations in the role
of hunting and, in the southeastern portion of the area, an early ap-
pearance of maize agriculture unaccompanied by any recognizable
changes in the technological inventory.
   An impressive accumulation of finds in the central and northern
Great Basin relates to another, perhaps even more fundamental,
Desert continuum, for which the name “‘Bonneville’’ has been sug-
gested. The cultures involved appear to be on an Archaic level.
These include Deadman,%* Promontory and Black Rock,®” and
Danger’ caves in the Great Salt Lake region; Lovelock Cave®? and
Leonard Rock Shelter! in the Humboldt Sink region of western
Nevada; and Catlow, Roaring Springs, Paisley Five Mile Point,
and Fort Rock caves in south-central Oregon.! General typologi-
cal affiliations are with the Amargosa and Cochise cultures already
discussed, but the remarkably early radiocarbon dates for some of
these sites, running as early as 9500 B.c. at Danger Cave, raise
   94. Kidder and Guernsey, 1919; S. J. Guernsey, 1931; Amsden, 1949;
Morris and Burgh, 1954.
  95. Jennings, 1953, p. 208; Jennings and Norbeck, 1955.
  96. E. R. Smith, 1941, 1952.
  97. Steward, 1937, 1940.               99. Loud and Harrington, 1929.
  98. Jennings, 1953.                    100. Heizer, 1951.
  101. Cressman et al., 1942; Cressman, 1951.



                                           ARCHAIC   STAGE    i3l
some very serious classificatory problems. Until the discrepancies
between some of these dates and the local geological correlations
are resolved, and until the temporal phases of this “long and placid”
continuum have been worked out and described, our relegation of
practically all these Basin cultures! to the Archaic stage must be
regarded as tentative. If the dates are correct, it would follow that
the Desert pattern was already in existence in the Great Basin in
a period occupied by Lithic cultures elsewhere and, if so, was prob-
ably basic to all the Desert cultures in the Greater Southwest.
Whether this would negate the assumption of temporal priority of
Lithic over Archaic stage cultures in western North America is a
question that can be neither settled nor ignored. We have already
referred to certain eastern “lower”? Archaic dates that pose the
same problem.
   Archaic cultures in the southern part of the Great Basin have
already been touched upon. The assemblage at Gypsum Cave in
southeastern Nevada,!° notwithstanding the possible extinct faunal
associations and early radiocarbon dates, seems to represent a
typical Desert culture and provides in the Gypsum point a useful
marker type for wide areas in North America. The Pinto point,
which takes its name from a series of surface finds in the Pinto Basin
of southwestern California,!°* has an even wider distribution on
the same level. The temporal relationship of Gypsum and Pinto has
been hotly debated; for our purposes it is sufficient that both are
in the Archaic stage. Farther north, the Little Lake (Stahl) site in
Inyo County, California, with Pinto, Lake Mohave,                      and Silver
   102. The first radiocarbon dates from the lowest culture-bearing levels at
Danger Cave were: 9502 + 600 B.c. and 9200 + 570 B.c. (sample Nos. C-609
and C-610 [Libby, 1951]). These were subsequently confirmed by dates of
9044 + 700   s.c.   and   8444 + 700   B.c.   (sample   Nos.   M-118   and   M-119
[Crane, 1956]). Sandals from the Fork Rock Cave gave a date of 7102 +
350 B.c. (sample No. C-428 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]).
    103. A few possible exceptions have been mentioned above in the Lithic
section.
   104. Harrington, 1933.
   105... burt, 1953p. 215.             106. Campbell and Campbell, 1935.


                                       METHOD AND THEORY
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY          13 a
Lake points, has provided one of the rare evidences of house con-
struction on the Archaic level in North America.!°7 The association
of Pinto with Lake Mohave and Silver Lake points on this site
throws a little extra doubt upon our tentative classification of the
Lake Mohave complex as Lithic. Possibly Lake Mohave ought to
be called Archaic as well.
  Turning to the southern California coast, we have already dis-
cussed a number of finds, thought to be early, and dismissed their
claims to be considered Lithic. These are the “Early Milling
Stone” cultures,!°% a “culture type” which includes the Little
Sycamore site in Ventura County,!°? Oak Grove in the Santa
Barbara region,!° the Topanga culture from the Tank site just
north of Los Angeles,!" Level 2 at the Malaga Cove site near
Redondo Beach in Los Angeles County," and the La Jolla complex
localized near San Diego and extending for an uncertain distance
into Baja California." Somewhat more distantly related are
Buena Vista Lake near the south end of the San Joaquin Valley"
and the controversial Borax Lake site north of San Francisco Bay.™
Relationships outside the California area are said to be with Pinto
Basin, Chiricahua-Amargosa II, and Chiricahua Cochise, which we
have already defined as Archaic. These coastal California milling-
stone cultures have some polished-stone artifacts, specifically con-
sisting of simple and rather crude charmstones and discoidals; there
are said to be remains of houses in at least one of them, the Oak
Grove; and in several of them burials assume a considerable im-
portance in the archaeological record. It is not unlikely that early
gathering communities on the California coast were somewhat
more stable than those of corresponding development in the in-
terior. This was certainly the case in later times.
   107. Harrington, 19482, 1948c, 1951.
   108. Wallace, 1954.
   109. Ibid.                             111. Treganza and Malamud, 1950.
   110. D. B. Rogers, 1929.               112. E. F. Walker, 1951.
   113. M. J. Rogers, 1929, 1945; Harding, 1951.
   114. Wedel, 1941.                      115. Harrington, 1948¢.



                                              ARCHAIC STAGE    13 3
   Among the best-documented archaeological cultures of North
America are those of the Sacramento—San Joaquin Delta and San
Francisco Bay regions of central California.“® It is mainly in
reference to these that comparisons with Eastern Archaic have
been made,!!7 but such discussions have usually had to do with
the possibility of historical connections, which is not germane to
our present purpose. The relationships from the culture-develop-
mental point of view are indubitable, whatever the causes may
have been.!8 According to Beardsley, the elements that support
the theory of an actual historical connection are for the most part in
the early and middle “horizons”’ of the three-part central California
sequence.
   The California late horizon, particularly in its climax Cosumnes
phase,"° shows a density of population and relatively advanced
level of cultural development made possible by a stabilized food
supply in the form of a highly specialized acorn complex. In our first
paper we took note of this economy in the following terms: ‘““This
might be regarded as an alternative to agriculture in its capacity to
produce conditions for a Preformative or even Formative stage,”
but we were bound by the logic of our classification and consigned
the late horizon, along with the early and middle, to the Archaic
stage. Now, with the shift of emphasis consequent upon the elimi-
nation of the Preformative, amounting to a downgrading of agri-
culture as the indispensable economic basis for Formative stage
culture, we are inclined to think that some at least of the late cen-
tral California cultures should be ranked as Formative. The same
   116. Schenck,   1926; Gifford and Schenck,   1926; Schenck and Dawson,
1929; Heizer and Fenenga, 1939; Lillard, Heizer, and Fenenga, 1939; Heizer,
1941, 1949; Belous, 1953.
   117. Haag, 1942; Beardsley, 1948.
    118. “Although basing their description of an Archaic stage primarily on
eastern data, Willey and Phillips (1955) have presented a summary which con-
forms in nearly every detail to the California picture as well’? (Clement
Meighan, in “A Review ofthe California Archaic,”’ read at the Andover Radio-
carbon Conference, April, 1956).
   119. Lillard and Purves, 1936.



                                      METHOD AND THEORY      l
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY          34
possibility must be extended to the final phase of the parallel three-
part Canalino sequence in the Santa Barbara region of southern
California.!2° This late phase has been identified with the historic
Chumash occupation of the region. Village populations, according
to estimates of the early discoverers, were as high as one thousand
people living in eighty houses, which suggests a degree of concentra-
tion a good deal more intensive than we think of as characteristic of
the Archaic. It must be noted, however, that both this and the Co-
sumnes phase mentioned above are climax phases; it by no means
follows that all late California cultures had advanced beyond the
Archaic level. The significant thing about these climactic food-
gathering cultures is that they seem to have been the end products
of extremely long and gradual internal development, without ob-
servable stimuli from outside. They have become Formative the
hard way, so to speak. This situation offers an interesting compari-
son to what seems to have happened farther up the Pacific Coast.
   Revision of our scheme of 1955 also gives us an opportunity to
renege on our classification of all Northwest Coast cultures as
Archaic, a position which elicited some not entirely unanticipated
criticism. W. C. McKern put the case in the clearest possible man-
ner, and it must be acknowledged that his intervention had some-
thing to do with our change of outlook:
    The authors’ difficulty would seem to be that of selecting agriculture as
the most significant culture criterion everywhere; selecting a measuring
device for Middle America and attempting to apply it universally. The real
contributions of agriculture, a sedentary life and security, can be provided,
within certain developmental limitations, by patterns of life other than
the agricultural. I submit that the Northwest Coast fishing-gathering
pattern produced for its peoples a richer, more complex social and eco-
nomic manner of existence than that enjoyed by the importantly agricul-
tural [roquois.'"
   Ome     ee Orral943, alo 2.
   121. McKern, 1956, p. 361. McKern’s further suggestion that an ecological
variant must be taken into account in developmental taxonomy has undeniable
merit but would involve an operation entirely different in scope and level of
abstraction from what we are attempting here. The object of the present in-
quiry is to see whether a gross classification of all New World archaeological



                                              ARCHAIC STAGE    13 5
   On taking a second look at some of the Northwest Coast
archaeology for the purpose of this revision, however, we have the
same impression of its essentially Archaic flavor. Unlike the
archaeology of California, it does not seem to provide a deep and
adequate basis for the climax development that we know ethno-
graphically as Northwest Coast culture. The latter we are now pre-
pared to call Formative, but it remains an interesting problem to
locate in the rather meager archaeological record the shift from
Archaic to Formative configurations. The best available data seem
to be in the Gulf of Georgia region, where a number of sequences!”
have revealed substantially the same general pattern of cultural
change: an early chipped-stone culture (lacking ground and
polished stone) with evidence in some localities of a land-hunting
economy,     followed in at least one locality by a maritime                   sea-
mammal-hunting “Eskimoid” culture with emphasis on ground
slate, followed again by an “Intermediate” period featuring the
reintroduction of land hunting and the use of ground-stone tools
testifying    to a well-developed         woodworking        industry of pre-
sumed interior origin, and finally the amalgamation of this with
the earlier maritime culture to produce a culmination. According
to Bryan, it was in the “Intermediate” period that the culture be-
came adapted to a// the natural resources of the area, both land and
sea, and it is here that he would place the first evidences of cul-
ture configurations classifiable as Formative.!? Substantiation of
this hypothetical sequence must await further investigation.
    In the meantime, while agreeing perfectly with McKern in
theory, we continue to feel uneasy about the classificatory situa-
tion. We cannot escape a feeling of unreality about the discussion, a
sense of factors missing from the equation. All developmental inter-
pretation is subject to this malaise, but it is especially apparent

data into a small number of broad developmental stages is possible and, if pos-
sible, useful. Introduction of the ecological variant would result in a classifica-
tion of entirely different nature which would answer neither of these questions.
   122. King, 1950; Borden, 1951, 1954; Carlson, 1954; A. L. Bryan, 1955.
   123. A. L. Bryan (personal communication, October, 1956).


                                         METHOD AND THEORY        13 6
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
when we move out to, and possibly beyond, the limits of what
might be called the nuclear American “diffusion sphere.’”24 The
sad fact is that our definition of the Formative stage has only
nominal value in peripheral situations. Whatever we think of the
importance, or lack of importance, of agriculture as a criterion, the
concept is nonetheless based very largely on configurations near the
center. This is particularly true in the case of Northwest Coast cul-
tures, the sources of which, wherever they ultimately turn out to
be, were almost certainly not to the south. The present tendency
seems to be to discount the role of Asiatic and Oceanic elements,
emphasizing rather the possibility of old Eskimo-Aleut connec-
tions.’ It seems to us, from the vantage ground of more or less
complete ignorance, that Kroeber’s views on this question have
not been superseded. “From both the northward centering and re-
cent northward trend of the climax of the whole Northwest Coast,
it is expected that more refined analysis will confirm the conjecture
that Asiatic influences perhaps were more potent than Nuclear
(Middle) American ones in the specific shaping of Northwest Coast
culture. If direct Oceanic influences have ever to be reckoned with,
they may complicate the picture.”° Archaeology, it appears, has
not yet been able to provide the “more refined analysis” mentioned
by Kroeber, perhaps never will, because the presumed Asiatic ele-
ments are such as to leave few traces in the ground.’ In any case,
whatever may be the true explanation, one senses here the presence
of forces more stimulating than mere abundance of food—forces
definitely outside the range of the more familiar (to us) patterns of
New World cultural development. It is something like the explosive °
climax of Plains culture after the introduction of the horse, a de-
velopment which would be equally hard to classify.

   124. This term was suggested by Christopher Hawkes (personal communi-
cation, 1953).
   125. Borden, 1954; Drucker, 1955; M. W. Smith, 1956. Borden has a date
of 476 + 163 B.c. for his “Eskimoid” phase in the lower Fraser River region
(University of Saskatchewan, sample No. 5-3).
   126. Kroeber, 1939, p. 31:           127. De Laguna, 1947, p. 12.



                                           ARCHAIC   STAGE   13 7
   In line with what has just been said, it might be better not to
mention the Archaic stage in the Arctic. Here we are dealing with
cultural traditions and configurations so unique as to make com-
parisons appear faintly ridiculous. There is a rapidly accumulating
corpus of finds in the Arctic that are earlier than, and possibly
distinct from, the Eskimo cultures, but the only adequately formu-
lated unit in this category is Denbigh, which, on the basis of ex-
traordinarily fine chipping techniques and specific point types, we
have already considered as a possible Lithic culture. However, we
have found similar late Lithic point types (Plainview, Angostura,
Eden-Scottsbluff, etc.) turning up repeatedly in contexts that we
have classified without hesitation as Archaic, with radiocarbon dates
considerably older than those obtained for Denbigh. Since the
original discovery at Iyatayet, burins and the associated microcore-
and-blade tradition that seem to us to be more characteristic of
Denbigh than the Lithic traits mentioned above have turned up in
many new sites and old collections in Alaska,”? the Aleutians,!%° the
Mackenzie Valley,!*! and the eastern Arctic and Canada,!* as well
as Greenland,!* in contexts that are variously labeled “Early
Man” and “Paleo-Eskimo.” The geographical and temporal di-
mensions of this tradition are not yet sufficiently understood to
make it useful as a criterion in developmental classification, but we
have a strong impression that its first appearance in New World
archaeology and subsequent associations are with cultures of the
Archaic stage, although something rather like it is found farther
south in the Formative stage.134
   With these exceptions out of the way it is surprising how many
   128. Cf. chap. 4, n. 76.
   129. See Daugherty, 1956, for summary of recent Alaska finds, and Irving,
1955, for reappraisal of Alaska Campus material.
   130. Laughlin,   1951; Laughlin,   Marsh,   and Leach,   1952; Laughlin and
Marsh, 1954.
   131. MacNeish, 1954a.
   132. Harp, 1951, 1952; Collins, 19535.          133. Melgaard, 1952.
   134. In Hopewellian cultures of Ohio and Illinois and the Poverty Point
culture of the lower Mississippi Valley. Cf. pp. 156-59.


                                       METHOD AND THEORY
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY       108 8
of the criteria of our definition of Archaic are applicable to Eskimo
and Paleo-Eskimo cultures. This is particularly noticeable in the
Dorset culture of the eastern Arctic,!*° whose relationship with
northeastern Archaic cultures is a perpetual subject of discussion.1°
But even such climactic phases as Old Bering Sea and Ipiutak'?
would, if the specifically Asiatic elements were subtracted and if
the finds were subjected to the same unfavorable conditions for
preservation, appear to be on the same level of development as
many of the well-known Archaic cultures farther south. Not only
is there a basic conformity in stone and bone technologies but there
are a great many shared artifact types of a specific nature. Until
fairly recently the tendency was to attribute the presence of such
traits in Archaic contexts to Eskimoan influence. Now, with the far
greater time depth allowed to North American Archaic, this inter-
pretation is no longer tenable.
                                    MIDDLE   AND   SOUTH   AMERICA

   The case for an Archaic stage in Mexico and Middle America is
similar to that outlined for the southwestern and Great Basin areas
of the United States. In Tamaulipas, the Nogales phase, which fol-
lows the probable Lithic stage Diablo and Lerma phases, is char-
acterized by teardrop- and triangular-shaped points, large oval
blades, chipped-stone hoes or celts, and frequent crude hammer-
stones, manos, and metates.!88 The subsequent La Perra phase is
characterized by the appearance of a primitive maize, but, other-
wise, the Archaic culture continuum is essentially unchanged.'*° By
   135. Jenness, 1925; Rowley, 1940; Leechman, 1943; Collins, 19534.
   136. Strong, 1930; De Laguna, 1946; Ritchie, 19514; Hoffman, 1952.
   137. Collins, 1937; Larsen and Rainey, 1948. The settlement of Ipiutak is
altogether exceptional from the point of view of village plan and size (575 lo-
cated house pits!). The excavators themselves were able to account for this
only by supposing that the village was occupied seasonally, with new houses
being built each year in preference to reoccupation of those previously used
(ibid., p. 47).
   138. MacNeish,    1950, p. 92.
   139. MacNeish,    1947; MacNeish,    1950, p. 87. The radiocarbon date for
La Perra is 2490 + 280 B.c. (sample No. C-687 [Libby, 1952]).


                                              ARCHAIC   STAGE   l3 9
 extension, the preceramic Chalco complex of the Valley of Mexico
is assigned to the Archaic upon the basis of its artifact similarities
to Nogales. Quite probably, the Abasolo and Repelo complexes of
the Tamaulipas coast fit into this bracket. In Coahuila the Cienegas
complex and the later Coahuila complex, both defined by Taylor,
are Archaic cultures in the Desert tradition.14°
   On the Chiapas coast, at Islona de Chantuto, the preceramic
levels of the shell middens have yielded little in the way of distinc-
tive artifacts"! and may, possibly, pertain to anything from Lithic
to Archaic; however, the nature of the site deposit suggests the
Archaic.
   In Panama, a non-ceramic and probably preceramic complex, the
Cerro Mangote, has been discovered on an old shoreline of the
Bay of Parita on the Pacific coast. Artifacts include crude pebble
choppers and grinders, rubbing stones, and scrapers. The subse-
quent Monagrillo phase of the same region sees the addition of
rather simple plain, incised, and red-painted pottery to this Cerro
Mangote complex. A third phase, the Sarigua, which may be later
than Monagrillo, lacks the stone chopping and grinding tools but
possesses pottery of a simple kind, though in a style quite different
from Monagrillo. The location of all these sites on abandoned
shorelines and lagoons and the nature of their refuse argue against
the presence of agriculture; and their general configuration is that of
the Archaic.!4%
   In South America there are several possibilities for an Archaic
stage. Among these 1s the culture, or culture continuum, represented
by the deep preceramic levels at Huaca Prieta, in the Chicama
Valley on the north coast of Peru.'# Formerly, we discussed this
Huaca Prieta phase as Preformative, basing our judgments on the
abundant remains of domesticated squash, peppers, gourds, and

   140. Kelley, MS presented at Andover, October, 1956. Radiocarbon dates
on Cienegas range from 6920 to 5450 B.c. The Coahuila radiocarbon date is
1670 B.c. See also Martinez del Rio, 1953.
  141. Drucker, 1948.              143. Willey and McGimsey, 1954.
  142. McGimsey, 1956.             144. Bird, 19482, 19485.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY     140
cotton, and seeing in this early agriculture something of a parallel
with Chiricahua Cochise or La Perra. The Huaca Prieta stone com-
plex, which consists only of crude flakes and choppers, offers few
clues for comparisons with North America or anywhere else.
Tentatively, we may consider Huaca Prieta as being on the Archaic
level, an assignment which is fairly consistent with its radiocarbon
dates of 2500-1250 B.c.14
    In northern Chile, at Arica and Pichalo, the Archaic is well rep-
resented by two sequent periods or phases. Shell fishhooks, cigar-
shaped stone sinkers, composite stone fishhooks of stone and bone,
stone mortars, and stone bowls are among the distinctive artifact
types. Rough percussion-flaked artifacts are found all along the
Chilean coast, but these are clearly associated and contemporaneous
with pressure-flaked and ground- and polished-stone implements.
In brief, there is no evidence of Lithic stage cultures antedating
those of the Archaic along the Chilean littoral.4¢ At both Arica and
Pichalo, maize agriculture and ceramics follow the Archaic periods.
In the Arica sequence there 1s some slight indication that maize may
have preceded pottery, but this is not certain.
   In southern South America, in the Straits of Magellan sequence,
Archaic stage cultures follow the Lithic stage Periods 1 and 2.147
In the Archaic artifact assemblages some of the stemmed projectile
points are not unlike Archaic points of North America. Bolas
stones, showing up in Periods 3, 4, and 5, mark the use of ground-
stone implements in this Magellanic sequence. Subsequent to this,
pottery appears as a part of the historic Tehuelche artifact complex
in this far southern region. There is little doubt that the pottery
trait spread southward into the Pampas and Patagonia in prehis-
toric times, probably diffusing from foci on the lower Parana
River. Arroyo Sarandi and El Cerrillo, near the delta of the Plate,
are representative of these pottery-making Archaic cultures of the
northern Pampas.'§ Bone implements and objects, chipped and
ground stone, and incised and punctated pottery of simple vessel
   145. Bird, 1951.                147. Bird, 1938.
   146. Bird, 1943.                148. Lothrop, 1932.


                                          ARCHAIC STAGE   141
forms make up the artifact assemblages.               As yet, preceramic
Archaic phases have not been stratigraphically demonstrated for
the Pampean or Parana regions, although certain site collections
suggest them. In general, aboriginal life on the Pampas and in sur-
rounding regions is revealed by both archaeology and ethnohistory
as varying between nomadism on the open flat country and rela-
tively stable small sites along the rivers. Land game and riverine
foods were the staples.!4° Only in very late times, with the occupa-
tion of sites like Arroyo Malo in the Plate Delta by Guarani
Indians, was an agricultural village pattern tentatively established
in the area.¥5°
   In eastern Brazil, in some of the Lagoa Santa caves, chipped- and
ground-stone celts, handstones, pitted anvils, and bone projectile
points are found in levels preceding pottery and pottery pipes.
Serrano defines an early coastal shellmound, or sambaqui, culture
as having an artifact complex very similar to that of the Lagoa
Santa caves.!! Later sambaqui phases (the ‘Middle’? and the
“Southern’”’) ¥ are characterized by numerous ground- and polished-
stone artifacts, including plummet-like stones (“fwsos’’), bolas,
mortars, axes, celts, and elaborate fish-shaped dishes. As such, they
are reminiscent of the Archaic stage in North America.
   Preceramic cultures of Archaic appearance are reported from
Manicuare,!®* in Venezuela, and from the various islands of the
West Indies.°4 The Venezuelan Archaic resembles that of the
Antilles in the possession of conch-shell tools, and resemblances of
this nature are also noted northward into Florida. West Indian pre-
ceramic levels are rather unique in their specific artifact forms, and
   149. Howard and Willey, 1948.
   150. Lothrop, 1932.
   151. Serrano, 1940a, 1946. The Araujo II sambaqui, in Parana, has an early
phase (Culture A) in which stone-grinding and stone-polishing are less well
developed than in later phases (B and C) (Orssich and Orssich, 1956).
   152. Serrano, 19405.
    153. Manicuare radiocarbon dates: 1615 + 130 B.c. and 1095 + 80 z.c.
Yale Natural Radiocarbon Measurements III, 1956, Nos. ¥-295 and 296g.
   154. Rouse, 1941, 1948, 1949, 19514; Osgood, 1942.



                                      METHOD AND THEORY
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY       142
there is considerable variation from island to island. The preceramic
levels of Puerto Rico and the Guayabo Blanco phase of Cuba, along
with the Manicuare of Venezuela, lack polished-stone forms. On
the other hand, in such phases as the Couri and the Bay of Conch
in Haiti and the Cayo Redondo in Cuba, peg-shaped ceremonial
stones, stone dishes, and axes all reveal stone-grinding and stone-
polishing techniques.
   To summarize briefly, the Middle and South American cultures
classed as Archaic in this discussion represent numerous historical
lines whose origins and connections have not been, or cannot be,
traced. In Mexico there appear to be connections with early cul-
tures in the southwestern United States and in Texas. The Chilean
coast, another principal center           of Archaic-type developments,
shows an amazing number of parallels to the Archaic units of the
southern   California   coast.%@   In the far south, what            we   have
designated as Archaic seems to have deep roots in the old Pata-
gonian and Fuegian hunting cultures of the Lithic stage, although in
its later periods it undoubtedly assimilated various traits, including
pottery, from the Archaic cultures in the areas to the north. In
eastern Brazil, as well as in the northern Pampas and Parana River
section, there are a number of parallels to the Archaic of the
eastern United States.487 Archaic cultures in the Antilles, which
could have formed a convenient link between those of the eastern
United States and those of Brazil, are rather distinctive and highly
localized, although there are some similarities both with Venezuela
and with Florida.
   155. Rouse, 1952; Alegria, Nicholson, and Willey, 1955; Rouse, 1948.
   156. Bennyhoff, 1950; Lathrap, n.d.
   157. Baerreis, 1950; Willey, 195 1a.




                                             ARCHAIC   STAGE   143
                                                  Chapter 6




                                  Formative Stage
                                            DEFINITIONS
In discussing the Archaic, we have already indicated the kind of
changes we have to make in our original concept of the Formative.
The latter was defined “‘by the presence of maize and/or manioc
agriculture and by the successful socioeconomic integration of such
an agriculture into well-established sedentary village life.’ As
we pointed out at the time, this definition introduced specific dif-
fused, i.e., historically derived, agricultural traditions as criteria
in a developmental classification. We were not unmindful of the
ambiguity of this procedure, but were constrained to follow along
the lines of conventional thinking in both New and Old World
archaeology.
   We were well aware of the possibility of sociocultural pat-
terns of comparable complexity being sustained by economies
other than agricultural. We thought of cultures such as those al-
ready discussed in the California and Northwest Coast areas as
marking a sort of florescence within the limits imposed by their
hunting-fishing-gathering economies; we were quite prepared to
admit that they might have attained the essential demographic
characteristics of the Formative stage, but we preferred to call
them Archaic, for two reasons: (1) they might be said to represent
the “older” (developmentally speaking) pattern and (2) it could
be argued that they lacked the potentialities for demographic in-
crease that agricultural food production normally provides. That
is to say, they were not Formative in the sense that they might go
  1. Willey and Phillips, 1955, p. 765.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY   14.
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY      +
on to a Classic stage. This is a perfectly defensible position. It is
substantially that taken by a majority of Old World archaeologists
at a similar juncture. It is well known that certain Mesolithic
sites in northern Europe exceed in size and material richness sites
of the later Neolithic cultures in the same area.2 On the other
hand, in making a survey of “Preformative” cultures in our first
paper, we found that agriculture per se was not the explosive stim-
ulus to cultural development we had supposed it to be. The early
evidences of plant domestication seem to be associated with cul-
tures that we would be inclined to think of as “lower” Archaic
if we had such a division, and in the one area where we have fairly
reliable chronological control, the North American Southwest,
there was plant domestication for a remarkably long time before
any spectacular development followed.
   This “slow-footed agricultural revolution” was actually the
principal theoretical basis for our “Preformative” stage. It was
the stage of emerging agriculture prior to its “successful integra-
tion into well-established sedentary village life.” This also is a
perfectly defensible formulation, but in practice it did not work
very well. At the lower border of ‘“‘Preformative,” i.e., when one
is trying to distinguish ‘“‘Preformative” from Archaic, the mere
presence of agriculture is detectable archaeologically only under
unusually favorable conditions; at the upper border, the termina-
tion of emerging and beginning of “successful integration’’ can be
established only by inference from settlement patterns and other
indirect evidence. Practically speaking, then, the settlement pat-
terns, etc.—not the agriculture—are the effective criteria for clas-
sification. Such being the case, it seems unreasonable to ignore the
evidence of stable sedentary organization in those instances in
which an agricultural basis cannot be inferred, either because there
is no evidence or because the environment was unsuited to agri-
culture. Thus, the elimination of “Preformative”’ may be seen as
largely a practical consideration, but a change of outlook is in-
volved, not in regard to the importance of agriculture in New
  2. Clarke, 1936, 1952.



                                     FORMATIVE STAGE   14 5
World archaeology, but in regard to its place in developmental
interpretation. We are not retreating from the position that agri-
culture was the principal formative agent in the development of
Formative cultures, but only from a rigidity that makes it the
indispensable agent. In so doing, we have shifted the emphasis
somewhat away from the historical toward the developmental side
of our hybrid “‘historical-developmental”     scheme. If, as we be-
lieve, it is thus more consistent and workable, the change may be
an improvement.
  Therefore, we now define the New         World Formative by the
presence of agriculture, or any other subsistence economy of com-
parable effectiveness, and by the successful integration of such an
economy into well-established, sedentary village life. We are deal-
ing with societies of a certain minimal complexity and stability
whose population sizes and gross groupings have been made pos-
sible by specific food economies, but, since these are preponderant-
ly agricultural, we are also dealing with a historical phenomenon—
the diffusion, or diffusions, of native American agriculture. Pot-
tery-making, weaving, stone-carving, and a specialized ceremonial
architecture are usually associated with these American Formative
cultures. These elements are not linked to American agriculture
through any inner causality, and some of them are often found in
contexts that are non-agricultural. Seldom, however, are Ameri-
can agricultural societies lacking in all of them. There are insuffi-
cient data as yet to establish the relative chronological appearances
of these trait complexes in the various New World areas, but it is
unlikely that they exploded concurrently in one locality to effect
a sudden and sweeping cultural revolution. Their significance is
less one of origins than of function. It is a practical certainty that
the origins of Formative stage cultures will be found to be extreme-
ly complex and diverse—the gradual assemblage of elements over
considerable periods of time and over wide areas to produce cumu-
lative and patterned results.
   Cultures of the Formative stage occupy a geographically central
position in the Western Hemisphere. They are found throughout


                                   METHOD AND THEORY    146
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
much of Middle America and most of Andean South America.
From these areas they extend northward, with some lacunae, into
the southwestern and eastern United States, and in South America
they run down the Cordillera to central Chile and eastward along
the Amazon and Orinocan drainages of the lowlands. Their chron-
ological span would appear to go back to the second millennium
B.c. in Middle America? and almost that far back in Peru.t As
noted above, there are early occurrences of maize in New Mexico
and ‘Iamaulipas, but there is no indication that agriculture was the
primary basis of life in these cultures or that populations were
organized into sizable, stable villages.
    Not until the first centuries A.p. were Formative-type cultures
established in the Southwest. Most authorities would agree on this
same approximate date for the Southeast. In lower Central Ameri-
ca, Colombia, and Ecuador, it is possible that agricultural village
life is of an age with that of Middle America and Peru, but there
is still little in the way of proof. In the South Andes the Formative
threshold may be as late as a.p. 1000.5 Caribbean and Amazonian
archaeological     sequences   suggest considerable         time depth for
Formative-type cultures in some regions, but, as yet, there are
few means by which to correlate these with Mexican or Peruvi-
an chronologies.
                                                MIDDLE   AMERICA

   In Middle America® the earliest known pottery-and-agriculture
phases of several different archaeological regions are representa-
   3. The date of 1359 +250 B.c. for Early Zacatenco in the Valley of Mexico
is consistent with the Valley of Mexico stratigraphy and with the majority of
the other carbon 14 dates (sample No..C-196 [Libby, 1952]).
   4. Radiocarbon date of 714 +200 s.c. for Coastal Chavin culture in north-
ern Peru (sample No. 75 [Libby, 1952]).
    5. This would be true if agriculture and ceramics were introduced into
northern Chile and northwestern Argentina on a Derived Tiahuanaco level. It
is more likely, however, that these events antedate Tiahuanacoid diffusions
from Peru (see Bird, 1943).
  6. An area to be defined approximately       as Kirchhoff    (1943)   defines
‘Mesoamerica.”



                                          FORMATIVE STAGE     147
tive of Formative stage culture. A definition of all the regional
culture sequences of Middle America is beyond the scope of this
book, but any one of several will serve to demonstrate the rise
and growth of Middle American civilization in the Formative
stage. In the Valley of Mexico and its environs the El Arbolillo 7
and the Early Zacatenco® phases are the earliest Formative mani-
festations. These phases are represented by large village sites of
deep and extensive refuse. Handmade figurines, incised or white-
on-red decorated ceramics, and metate and mano stones are char-
acteristic artifacts. There follow the successive Middle Zacatenco,
Tlaltilco, Ticoman, and Cuicuilco phases.? Although there is con-
tinuity from one phase to the next, this should not be misconstrued
as a wholly local development. Outside influences came into the
Valley of Mexico during these phases. One of the most striking of
these “foreign” waves is reflected in the Tlaltilco pottery and the
associated Olmec-style figurines. Toward the close of the Forma-
tive stage in the Valley of Mexico, the trait of platform-mound
construction appears—Cuicuilco is the outstanding example!’—as
does monumental stone sculpture. The end of the Formative in the
Valley of Mexico is marked by the beginning of the Teotihuacan
II, or Miccaotli, phase of the Classic Teotihuacdn civilization.
This Mexican highland Formative sequence is, apparently, paral-
leled by the Mamom-through-Chicanel sequence of the lowland
Maya," the series of Formative stage phases at Kaminaljuyu in
the Guatemalan highlands,” those of the Huasteca,!* and various
other sequences of southern Mexico.
   In all these Middle American regions there are general techno-
logical and aesthetic similarities which link the Formative cultures.
Ceramics show a competence of manufacture. They tend to be
plain or monochrome, or, if decorated, the decorative techniques
are frequently incision, scoring, punctation, rocker-stamping, or
  7. Vaillant, 1935.
  8. Vaillant, 1930.           11. R. E. Smith, 1955.
  9. Porter, 1953.             12. Shook and Kidder, 1952.
  10. Cummings, 1933.          13. Ekholm, 1944; MacNeish, 19548.



                                  METHOD AND THEORY     148
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
a rather uncomplicated use of painting. Handmade figurines are a
hallmark, and there are stylistic details which serve to establish
cross-regional ties. A village community, probably consisting of
from a duzen to several hundred households, was the basic living
situation of the Middle American Formative cultures. In some
regions there is evidence that this kind of settlement, alone, pre-
ceded the appearance of sites marked by public or religious archi-
tecture in the form of pyramid platforms. Wauchope has termed
such a subdivision of the stage as the “Village Formative.’”4 This
was followed by an “Urban Formative’ in which ceremonial cen-
ters, consisting of pyramid-mounds, were constructed in addition
to the ordinary villages.
   This distinction, between        a purely village life and a village
life plus ceremonial-center participation, poses a problem in stage
classification. In so far as the archaeologist is able to read a pre-
historic record, there can be little argument but that the ceremonial
center, with its public works, stands for multivillage co-operation
and for the beginnings of relatively large-scale politico-religious
organization. These, presumably, were patterns which had not
existed before. Should we not, then, fix upon this change as a stage
division by lowering the upper limits of the Formative? We admit
the validity of this reasoning but hesitate to follow it up. For one
thing, the concept of the ‘‘Formative,” the “Developmental,” the
“Preclassic,”’ or the ‘““Archaic”’—all terms which have been applied
to more or less the same span of culture development in Middle
America—is rather deeply established in the existing literature.’
This, in itself, is not cause to perpetuate the terminology and
classification; but we feel there are other arguments. The name
“Formative,” as we use it, implies the formation of the New World
agricultural village pattern. At the same time, it carries with it the
connotation that this pattern was basic to and formational toward
later and more advanced developments. The era that we think of
   14. Wauchope, 1950.
   15. Caso (1953) makes the distinction referred to by calling the earlier, or
“Village Formative,” the ‘“Archaic”’ and the later division the ‘‘Formative.”’



                                           FORMATIVE   STAGE   149
as the late Formative in Middle America was a time of rapid
growth, of new ideas and their material implementation in the form
of community construction projects. It was, in this sense, part of
the stage still formational to what we will define as the Classic.
   The extent to which the similarities between the regional cul-
ture sequences of Middle America can be attributed to inter-
regional diffusion or to developmental parallelism is not always
clear. Some cases, such as the presence of the Olmec figurine style
at Tlaltilco, in the Valley of Mexico, and Tres Zapotes, in Vera-
cruz,!® or the resemblances between Formative stage pottery of
the lowland Maya Mamom and Chicanel phases and that of Vera-
cruz and of the Huasteca, are undeniably the results of diffusion.
But such a phenomenon as the apparent increase of populations
during the Formative cannot be explained by historical forces
alone. The idea of the platform- or pyramid-mound was undoubt-
edly widely diffused in Middle America during the late Forma-
tive, but the conditions for its acceptance from region to region
were locally developed. This suggests the hypothesis that Middle
American Formative stage culture, as it developed in its various
foci, proceeded steadily but somewhat unevenly.
   Most of the great achievements of the subsequent Classic stage
are presaged by the Formative, but there is no significant regional
clustering of these elements. Ambitious stone sculpture is featured
in one region, elaborately decorated ceramics in another, and what
appear to be the beginnings of a glyphic system elsewhere.17 Cer-
tain regions may have evolved particular features because of
peculiar natural environmental circumstances or advantages. Other
cultures lacking settings with these specific potentialities may have
turned to different courses. Geographical proximities and dis-
tances or physiographic barriers undoubtedly influenced the work-
ings of diffusion, allowing an innovation or an acceleration of a
trend here, delaying it there. With such cultural growth, which
we cannot yet follow and may never be able to follow in all its
complexity of detail, the Formative cultures of Middle America
  16. Drucker, 1943.             17. Caso, 1947.



                                  METHOD AND THEORY    15
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY         0
gradually assumed what archaeologists have come to call a ‘“Clas-
sic’ status.
   Surely, one of the reasons that Classic cultures could be devel-
oped in Middle America was that there was a multiplicity of re-
gional traditional antecedents. The intertwining of the many
varied strands of the Formative produced the Classic. Individually,
these strands would have supported nothing of greater moment
than a culture like the Mississippian of the eastern United States,
with its temple mounds, or the Coclé culture of Panama, with its
fine pottery and metal craft. Together, they emerge as Middle
American civilization. This does not mean that the Middle Ameri-
can Classic stage was characterized by a single, homogeneous
culture or civilization. Regionalism persisted, but it was a region-
alism in which the various Classic cultures had assimilated enough
from each other so that all drew upon a common fund of great
depth and richness.

                                            NORTH   AMERICA

   Northwest of Middle America the distinctive patterns which
characterize that area become attenuated and eventually dis-
appear. A well-developed Formative stage, however, was attained
in all three principal subareas of the North American Southwest.
Middle American Formative elements are abundantly present in
the later phases, but even before this the general configurations
are distinct and characteristic Formative entities in their own
right. It is in the southwestern setting, in fact, that archaeology
can offer the most detailed view of continuous cultural develop-
ment from Archaic into Formative, and it was because of this that
our previous exposition of a Preformative stage relied heavily
upon data from this area.
   We are inclined to agree with J. O. Brew!® that Anasazi, Hoho-
kam, and Mogollon can no longer be considered self-contained
cultural continuities; instead, as sequence formulations of a scope
somewhere between what we have designated as regional se-
  18. Brew and Smith, 1954, p. 588.



                                      FORMATIVE STAGE   l5 l
quences and area syntheses, they offer the best opportunity for
testing our developmental hypotheses without losing us in the
superabundance of detail that southwestern archaeology offers.
Let us begin with the Mogollon subarea. We have already spoken
of the early corn in Bat and Tularosa caves of southwestern New
Mexico and their story of a protracted Archaic-with-corn stage
of development. The point at which this ends and Formative be-
gins is more than usually difficult to establish. Five separate
“branches” (regional sequences in our terminology) of the Mogol-
lon subarea have been correlated by Joe Ben Wheat, in two recent
publications, into a sequence of five numbered periods covering a
span from about 300 B.c. to a.p. 1500.!° He gives excellent sum-
maries of developments in various technological categories but not
much idea of changes in total configuration. This kind of informa-
tion is also rather hard to get from the primary sources.?° All
writers emphasize the continuity from Cochise into Mogollon,
and, apart from the incorporation of elements derived from Hoho-
kam and, later, Anasazi sources, the subsequent history seems to
have been one of slow and uneventful change. On the other hand,
it appears that, in the Pine Lawn, Hilltop, and possibly other early
phases of the Mogollon sequence, there were already small villages
of pit-houses clustered around a larger, presumably ceremonial,
structure.” It would seem that we have to accord Mogollon I a
qualified Formative status, but it is not until considerably farther
along in the sequence that the settlement patterns and general con-
figurations are comparable to Formative developments in other
parts of the Southwest,      and by this time it is a moot question
whether the culture is still Mogollon.
   In the Anasazi subarea, Basket Maker III of the Pecos Classifi-

   19. Wheat, 1954, Fig. 1; 1955, Fig. 12.

   20. Haury, 1936; Martin and Rinaldo, 1947, 1950a,      19504;   Martin,
Rinaldo, and Antevs, 1949; Martin et al., 1952, 1956. .
  21. Wheat, 1954, p. 580.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY    15 2
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
cation (or Modified Basket Maker, as it is alternatively called)?
is essentially a continuation of Basket Maker II with new features,
such as additional varieties of corn, beans, domesticated turkey,
pottery, the bow, the grooved ax and maul—none of decisive sig-
nificance perhaps from a developmental point of view, but the
general configuration is suggestive of the Formative. There is now
widespread use of substantial slab-lined pit-houses of standardized
types, with antechambers, ventilators, and other special features
that became embalmed in the small kivas of later periods. There
are also, in some localities, ranges of contiguous one-story surface
rooms of crude masonry and jacal construction that foreshadow
the agglutinated unit-type house structures of the Pueblo II and
III periods. More important, perhaps, from our point of view, is
the fact that the villages attain considerable size in Basket Maker
III, up to one hundred and fifty rooms or more, and that in some
cases large circular structures are associated with them, presuma-
bly of religious or ceremonial import and possibly prototypical of
the Great Kivas of Pueblo III.
   In the succeeding Pueblo I period, although there is progressive
development of masonry architecture, there is a tendency for vil-
lages to be smaller.28 Without knowing whether these seemingly
small settlements were organized into larger communities, we can-
not readily evaluate this kind of change. At any rate, in Pueblo
Il’* the trend toward larger villages, which started in Basket
Maker IIJ, is resumed and is accompanied by pronounced archi-
tectural improvement, both in planning and in construction. All
the specialized features of the kiva attained their characteristic
forms in this period and began to be incorporated into the village
plan in a manner that indicates foresight and design. The Anasazi
phases of the great Pueblo III and IV periods represent a climax
of Formative stage culture in the Southwest as a whole. Athabascan
incursions and Spanish conquest had serious effects upon Anasazi
culture, and the towns decreased in size and number; nevertheless,
  22. Roberts, 1929; Martin, 1939; Amsden, 1949; Lancaster et al., 1954.
  23. Roberts,   1931, 1939, 1940        24. Morris, 1939; Brew, 1946.




                                        FORMATIVE   STAGE   15 3
the culture remained viable, and a Formative type of life persisted
—and still persists—in the modern pueblos.
  Like the Mogollon, the Hohokam of the Gila Basin and Tucson
regions of Arizona appears to have grown out of the earlier
Cochise, but with the difference that the later phases of Cochise
in this subarea have not yet furnished evidences of agriculture.
As in the Mogullon sequence, the earliest phases of the Hohokam
are a sort of incipient Formative in that it is as yet difficult to judge
the significance of agriculture as a means of promoting sedentary
village life. We     are inclined, however,    to place the Formative
threshold in the Vahki phase of the Pioneer period” at an estimated
date of 300 B.c. Population increase and such features as ball
courts, canal irrigation, and a presumed        step-up of agricultural
production in the succeeding Colonial period phases** mark the
crystallization of full-fledged Formative stage culture. Undoubt-
edly the ball-game idea, along with many other elements, passed
into the Southwest from Middle America, but its adoption and the
construction of large community works in connection with it indi-
cate that Hohokam societies were developing sufficient size and
co-ordination to exploit such an idea. In the Hohokam Sedentary
period” irrigation systems were enlarged and improved; ball courts
were still in use but were reduced in size; villages became com-
pactly planned settlements of adobe houses, in some cases inclosed
by walls to form compounds. In the Classic period, beginning about
A.D. 1000, the innovations were largely architectural, culminating
in the massive, multistoried adobe structures of Casa Grande?’ and
Los Muertos.”® To some extent these architectural and settlement
changes of the Sedentary and Classic periods may be attributed to
diffusion, and even actual migration, from the Anasazi regions to
the north, yet the continued expansion of the irrigation systems
would seem to suggest steadily increasing populations. Thus, al-
though the form and style of the new settlements may have been
   25. Gladwin et al., 1937.
   26. Woodward,    1931; Haury, 1932.        28. Gladwin, 1928.
  27. Gladwin et al., 1937.                   29. Haury, 1945.


                                      METHOD AND THEORY    154
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Anasazi (or “Salado,” whatever that term may mean), the social
and cultural conditions which they reflect were, at least in part, en-
gendered within the Hohokam culture. The causes of the breakup
of Hohokam culture after a.p. 1400 are not fully understood. Soil
depletion and irrigation difficulties, internal warfare and external
pressures, are cited as possibilities. Whatever the course of events,
the prosperous agricultural villages could no longer be maintained,
and Hohokam culture slipped back from its Formative level to a
condition reminiscent of an earlier and simpler stage.*°
   In summary, the Formative stage cultures of the Southwest,
in contrast to those of Middle America, are seen in their earliest
beginnings and show the gradual steps by which marginal agricul-
tural societies may achieve full agricultural status. In an internal
sense, southwestern culture could be said to have reached a Classic
stage in such manifestations as Pueblo Bonito of the Chaco Can-
yon*! or Casa Grande of the desert region of southern Arizona.”
But from an external point of view, in the perspective of New
World culture-history, these achievements         are meager in their
over-all architectural, artistic, and intellectual attainments when
compared to Classic Middle American or Peruvian civilizations.
It has been a commonly held opinion that southwestern native cul-
tures lagged behind Middle American cultures because they were
geographically remote from the sources of American agriculture
and therefore started their climb toward a higher culture much
later. But the early dates for Bat Cave corn in the Southwest force
us to re-examine this rationalization. We have argued that a varied
natural environment and multiple regional-cultural centers in
Middle America were        significant stimuli for cultural growth in
that area. It is likely that the limitations of the Southwest in this
regard were the most important deterrents to the rise of a native
American Classic stage in that area.
  In our discussion of the Archaic in eastern North America, we
placed the Formative threshold roughly on the division between
  BOM DIResOmlo>1h 1953.
  31. Kidder, 1924; Judd, 1954.          32. Gladwin, 1928.



                                      FORMATIVE   STAGE   15 5
Farly and Middle Woodland in the Griffin chronology. It re-
mains only to give examples and the reasons for calling them Form-
ative. First, however, we must dispose of some exceptions to the
corollary generalization that all “Archaic” (in the Griffin ter-
minology) and Early Woodland cultures are below that threshold.
The Poverty Point culture of the lower Mississippi is generally
designated as “late Archaic,” because it has stone technology of
that level, baked clay objects highly reminiscent of the central
California Archaic, soapstone vessels, and no pottery. On the
other hand, there are mounds of unascertained function up to
seventy feet high, and the type site in northeastern Louisiana
has a great sixfold system of concentric octagonal earth embank-
ments three-quarters of a mile in diameter. The function of this
remarkable earthwork is likewise problematical. The only inves-
tigators who have seen something of these embankments from the
inside have found them to be composed largely of refuse, and argue
therefrom that they represent a planned village of these extraordi-
nary proportions.®* The temporal position of Poverty Point, now
fairly well established by no less than ten radiocarbon dates rang-
ing from about 1300 to 200 B.c. with the majority clustering
around 800 B.c., would be more appropriate to an Early Woodland
culture, but, from our point of view, the possibility of Formative
status must be allowed for. On the basis of the sheer size of the
mounds and earthworks, we have to infer a concentration of
population, or at least a concentration of control over a large popu-
lation, backed up by a stable food supply. So far there has been no
evidence of agriculture, but it is quite impossible to imagine any
other adequate economic basis in the geographic setting.
   The second exception to the generalization that Formative in
the East begins with Middle Woodland is the Adena culture of the
   33. Griffin, 1952a. For those who prefer the Ford and Willey scheme
(1941) the line would be between the Burial Mound I and II periods.
   34. C. H. Webb, 1944, 1948b; Haag and Webb, 1953; Ford, 1954d; Ford,
Phillips, and Haag, 1955; Ford and Webb, 1956.
   35. Ford and Webb, 1956.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY      156
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Ohio Valley.** Adena has been designated as “Early Woodland”
in the Griffin classification, and is so regarded by most easternists,
on the basis of an assumed priority over Hopewell, the main
anchor of the Middle Woodland concept in eastern archaeology.
This assumption, based largely on typological and distributional
grounds without stratigraphic confirmation, was badly shaken by
the first published radiocarbon dates, which appeared to invert the
relationship.?”. More recent dates have substantially restored the
original chronology,*® however, and it has received additional sup-
port from recent stratigraphic studies in the upper Ohio Valley.*
Thus, if we set aside Poverty Point as a developmental enigma
clearly in need of further explanation, Adena probably represents
the earliest reorientation of eastern Archaic culture along lines
that we can designate as Formative. All available information
comes from the excavation of burial mounds and small sections of
village sites beneath them, and thus very little can be said about the
settlement patterns. However, the great size of mounds,*° the na-
ture and complexity of mortuary practices (suggestive of social
   36. Mills, 1902; Greenman, 1932; Webb and Snow, 1945; Spaulding, 1952.
   37. Griffin, 1951.
    38. There are now too many Hopewell and Adena dates available to be
listed here, and they are too erratic for summary generalization. The sig-
nificant dates from the point of view of this discussion are 696+170 B.c.
 (sample No. C-759 [Libby, 1954a]) and 8264410 B.c. (sample No. C-942
 [Libby, 19544]) from Adena sites in Kentucky and Ohio, respectively, both of
which are substantially earlier than 545 +300 B.c. (sample No. M-15 [Crane,
 1956]) and 385 +250 B.c. (sample No. C-152 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]),
two of a fairly neat cluster of Illinois Hopewell dates. The Ohio Hopewell
dates so far obtained run slightly later than those from Illinois.
    39. Information given by John Witthoft at the Andover Radiocarbon Con-
ference, October, 1956.
   40. The Grave Creek Mound, near Wheeling, West Virginia (Squier and
Davis, 1848, Fig. 56), and the Miamisburg Mound near Dayton, Ohio (Shet-
rone, 1931, Fig. 100), each approximately seventy feet high, and the Great
Serpent Mound of Adams County, Ohio, though they have not been satisfac-
torily excavated, are all considered on fairly good evidence to be Adena. They
may, therefore, date as early as 500 B.c. From the standpoint of mass, these
monuments will stand comparison with any other New World structures of
comparable date.



                                          FORMATIVE   STAGE   15 7
stratification), the large and substantial houses, and the high artistic
quality of some of the artifacts permit us to infer stable settlements
and an effective economic base.‘
   When we turn to cultures that have been classified as Middle
Woodland, it is impossible to avoid beginning with Hopewell.
Adena is a reasonably well-defined archaeological unit; not so with
Hopewell. The name has been much abused in the literature. There
are at least two primary centers of concentration, one in southern
Ohio, the other in the Illinois River and Mississippi River valleys
in Illinois and adjacent states, and there are a great many so-called
Hopewellian phases or cultures farther afield that we shall speak
of presently. Dates for Illinois and Ohio Hopewell range from
about 500 B.c. to A.D. 1, the Illinois sites being slightly older at
the present time. The nature of the relationship between them is
a problem about which there might be considerable diversity of
opinion, but all would agree that the climax of the culture is repre-
sented by the “big four’? Ohio sites: Hopewell, Mound City,
Seip‘4—all three in the Scioto Valley in the vicinity of Chillicothe
—and the Turner Mounds,* on the Little Miami River near Cin-
cinnati. This climax development cannot be placed accurately
within the time span indicated above, but we may assume it was
toward the end, say, in the last one or two centuries B.c. The
technological skill and artistic sensitivity attested by some of the
objects in stone, obsidian, tortoise shell, bone, copper, silver, and
meteoric iron were unapproached anywhere else in North Ameri-
ca at this time and hardly surpassed in Middle and South America.
The same may be said of the energy expended in the complicated
construction of huge burial mounds, ceremonial earth inclosures,
and fortifications.“ In our first paper we reluctantly assigned this
   41. Spaulding, 1955, pp. 19-21.
   42. Moorehead, 1922a; Shetrone, 1926.
   43. Mills, 1922.        44. Mills, 1909; Shetrone and Greenman, 1931.
   45. Willoughby, 1922.
   46. The great Fort Ancient, its name given erroneously to a later culture,
is now recognized as a hilltop sanctuary of the Hopewell period (Morgan,
1952, p. 93).

                                      METHOD AND THEORY       15 8
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
classic Hopewell phase to a “Preformative’”’ status on the grounds
of insufficient evidence of large, stable villages—excavations in
Ohio Hopewell sites have been almost entirely confined to burial
mounds for understandable but not altogether praiseworthy rea-
sons—and only very occasional direct indications of maize agri-
culture. Under our present less rigorous standards we can redress
that injustice. As in the case of Poverty Point and Adena, it seems
unlikely that the large populations we are obliged to infer could
have been supported and organized for public works of such mag-
nitude without a stable and efficient economic base. The Ohio
Valley lies well within the known historic orbit of maize agricul-
ture; in later aboriginal periods maize was of primary economic
significance. We find it difficult to conceive of an alternative wild
food supply of sufficient dependability in this region. In any case,
maize or no, the configuration of the culture is fully Formative,
as we now define the stage.
   Whether the many Hopewellian manifestations scattered widely
throughout the East should be regarded as units of a major Hope-
well continuity or as phases of other unformulated cultures linked
by a Hopewellian horizon is a complicated question that we do not
have to go into here. Our casual impression is that the various
phases in Illinois,” Indiana,** Wisconsin,*® Michigan,*° and per-
haps New York®! might be drawn in with Ohio Hopewell into a
Hopewell “culture” without stretching the formulation unduly,
but whether these also, in all cases, could be regarded as Forma-
tive is another question. Hopewellian manifestations farther away
from the nuclear centers, particularly in the South, while possess-
ing individual elements (horizon markers?), show markedly differ-

  47. Cole and Deuel, 1937; Griffin and Morgan, 1941; Deuel et al., 1952.

  48. Lilly, 1937; Quimby, 1941a.
  49. McKern,      19314; L. R. Cooper, 1933.

   50. Greenman,    1927; Quimby,   1941a, 19414, 1952.

  51. Ritchie, 1938.


                                           FORMATIVE   STAGE   159
ent configurations. Marksville,** Troyville,°* and Issaquena,* for
example, are more intelligible as phases in a lower Mississippi con-
tinuum that has yet to find a name. It does not contribute any
cultural understanding to call them Hopewellian. The kind of
excavations required to permit judgment as to whether this
Marksville-Troyville culture is classifiable as Formative have not
been made or at least have not yet been published. It would, how-
ever, be very surprising if such were not the case.
   Similarly, on the Florida Gulf Coast, Hopewellian traditions,
chiefly ceramic, entering perhaps by way of the lower Mississippi,
have combined with resident traditions to form a regional develop-
ment of great vitality and individual flavor. In its early Santa
Rosa-Swift Creek phase® this regional development lacks sufficient
site documentation for developmental interpretation, but, in the
later Weeden Island®* and Kolomoki®’ phases, particularly the
latter, it would qualify as Formative.
    Many other instances of Hopewellian intrusion into the South-
east could be mentioned. The elements that reveal such a connection
are often striking, as in the famous Crystal River mound in Flori-
da,5* but there is always the question whether they reflect a serious
orientation of pre-existing Early Woodland patterns or merely some
sort of trade relations. The same developmental uncertainty at-
taches to Middle Woodland cultures in the Southeast which seem
to have been more resistant to Hopewellian influences. An ex-
ample is the Copena             (copper-galena)      of the Tennessee River
   52. Fowke, 1928; Ford, 1936; Ford and Willey, 1940.
   53. W. Walker,        1936; Ford,    1951. The Troyville and Greenhouse   sites
covered by these reports are multicomponent sites. The ideal type site for the
Troyville phase (Baptiste, or Av-25, on the Marksville Prairie, Louisiana) has
been dug but not reported.
   54. Greengo, 1957.
   55. Willey and Woodbury,        1942; Willey, 1949.
   56. Moore, 1901, 1902, 1903, 1918; Fewkes, 1924; Willey, 19455, 1949.
   57. Sears, 195la, 1951b, 1953, 1956.
   58. Moore,    1903,    1907a; Greenman,      1938; Willey and Phillips, 1944;
Willey, 19480.



                                             METHOD AND THEORY   160
                                       IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Valley in northern Alabama.*? Here again, our information is con-
fined to burial mounds of modest proportions and their contents,
which show a level of sophistication comparable to Adena and
Hopewell, but little can be said about the kind of settlements or
the economic base.
   Middle Woodland period cultures in Georgia and contiguous
portions of adjoining states are likewise difficult to classify. These
are unified by common participation in the southern Appalachian
or Complicated Stamp pottery tradition, a ceramic development
grounded in the simple and checked stamp styles of the Early
Woodland phases such as Mossy Oak and Deptford (already clas-
sified as Archaic), which attained a sudden climax from the aes-
thetic point of view in the beautiful curvilinear style of the early
Swift Creek phase of south-central Georgia.® A parallel develop-
ment, possibly derived out of the Mossy Oak simple stamped type,
resulted in a complicated rectilinear style the best-known example
of which is called “Early Napier.’ Both curvilinear and recti-
linear styles went through a number of phases and reacted upon
each other in a very complex fashion, their influence spreading
far beyond the borders of Georgia, but the associated cultures,
so far as we can see, remained on a relatively low level of develop-
ment, until the Etowah and Lamar phases, which will be referred
to later.
   Cultural development in peninsular Florida tended to pursue a
course of its own which renders terms like ‘Early Woodland”
and ‘‘Middle Woodland” somewhat meaningless. Cultures of the
St. Johns River, Indian River, and Glades regions, where we have
excellent sequences, seem to have remained on an Archaic level
throughout most of the long spans of their existence. Elements de-
rived from Formative culture to the north appear in considerable
strength in some of the later phases, but there are few signs of
accompanying socioeconomic changes. This is almost certainly
  59. W.S. Webb, 1939; Webb and DeJarnette, 1942.
  60. Kelly, 1938; Fairbanks, 1952.
  Ole ocarss 1952.



                                       FORMATIVE STAGE   1 6l
due to the conservative influence of a highly characterized envi-
ronment which offers an abundance of fresh- and salt-water foods
but is not, generally speaking, favorable to agriculture. We are
frankly at a loss to say where Formative begins in these Florida
sequences. St. Johns II, as represented in sites like Mount Royal
and the Grant Mound,” would probably qualify, as would, possibly,
the corresponding Malabar II phase of the Indian River region.**
The climax of the Glades III phase, as exemplified in the famous
Key Marco site, is perhaps another instance of attainment of at
least a marginal Formative status on an economic base that almost
certainly did not include agriculture.®4
   Middle Woodland cultures in the upper Mississippi Valley, the
Great Lakes region, and the Northeast generally failed to reach
an unquestionable Formative level. Exception to this facile gener-
alization might perhaps be taken in favor of the Efhgy Mound cul-
ture of Wisconsin and portions of adjacent states, in which a
remarkable amount of energy was expended in raising monuments
to the distinguished dead. Excavations have disclosed that in some
cases an effigy or linear mound several hundred feet long contains
no more than the body of a single individual. Unfortunately, arti-
facts seldom accompany the burials, and we know next to nothing
of the more prosaic aspects of the culture. It has been suggested
that this unique florescence of mound-building in what otherwise
appears to be an essentially Archaic context may have been made
possible by a subsistence economy based on the abundant supplies
of wild rice in the region. If so, perhaps Effigy Mound should be
added to the short list of debatable instances of Formative cultures
based on economies other than agriculture.
   To generalize briefly on the Middle Woodland cultures of the
   62. Goggin, 1952.                  63. Rouse, 19510.
   64. Cushing, 1897; Goggin, 1949.
    65. Barrett and Hawkes, 1919; McKern,    1928, 1930, 19314; Nash, 1933;
J. W. Bennett, 1952.
   66. Cf. discussion of late phases of central California, the Northwest
Coast, and the Florida Glades.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY    162
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
East, we are conscious of the marginal nature of most of them
with respect to our concept of a Formative stage and of the inade-
quacy of the data upon which we are basing our opinions. Actual
settlement data are extremely scanty. For certain phases, such as
Ohio Hopewell and other closely related manifestations, the
earthworks and burial mounds attest to population densities and
sociopolitical organization of a sort consistent with sedentary life
based upon established agriculture, but even here the direct evi-
dences of such a life and such an economy are very weak. In other
regions, as we have acknowledged on numerous occasions, it is dif-
ficult even to infer settled economies and village life. Evidently
our statement that Middle Woodland marks the beginning of Form-
ative in the East requires a great deal of qualification. The fact
is that some of the inferred splendor of the climax Ohio Hopewell
phase has rubbed off on related and even unrelated (but contempo-
raneous) cultures, which, examined coolly on strictly developmen-
tal criteria, fail to come up to Formative standards. We are seman-
tically embarrassed at this juncture, because, if such cultures are
not Formative, or at least marginal Formative, we have to call
them “‘Archaic,” and the term has a more restricted meaning in
eastern archaeology.
   The situation, fortunately, is rather different in the succeeding
Mississippi period. The features of this period that seem reliably
reflective of an intensive agricultural village life, i.e., a full-blown
Formative stage, are the rectangular “temple” or “town-house”
mounds, the arrangement of these mounds around a central plaza,
compact villages of substantial pole-and-thatch or wattle-and-daub
houses with deep and extensive refuse (other than shell middens),
and the frequent and abundant finds of maize itself. Such features,
along with certain characteristic pottery styles and artifact types,
are known to be associated with, though not confined to, the Mis-
sissippi (or “Middle Mississippi”) culture. Many of these ele-
ments appear to have derived from Middle American sources.
They are clearly post-Hopewellian arrivals in the eastern United
States. The mechanisms and routes of their presumed diffusion


                                       FORMATIVE STAGE   l6 3
from Middle America are still completely unknown, although there
has been no lack of speculation on the subject.*”
   Mississippi is probably the best-known culture in the East, yet
one looks in vain for an integration of its manifold phases and a
description of the whole. The chief difficulty, perhaps, has been our
inability to nucleate the culture geographically. This in turn is
partly, if not wholly, due to the belief expressed above that the
source of most of its diagnostic elements is Middle America and
that we might therefore expect to find its nucleus in the Gulf
coastal, lower Mississippi Valley, or Caddoan regions. Such expec-
tations have not, in our opinion, been fulfilled.** Certain elements
that have been identified closely with Mississippi culture, notably
the above-mentioned rectangular temple mounds, do enter into
certain Gulf, lower Mississippi, and Caddoan area cultures, but,
whenever the really diagnostic Mississippi features appear in these
regions, they seem to have intruded from the north. This has led
to the hypothesis that the nuclear area for the Mississippi culture
is somewhere in the central Mississippi Valley (from the mouth
of the Missouri to the Ohio) and lower Ohio Valley or Tennessee-
Cumberland regions.® It is only in this general area that the culture
   67. Swanton, 1924; Spinden, 1931; Beals, 1932; Vaillant, 1932; Mason,
1937; Phillips, 1939, 1940; Griffin, 1944; J. W. Bennett, 1944; Krieger, 1945,
1948.

   68. This is admittedly a matter of opinion. Alex Krieger, for one, is con-
fident that such a nuclear center has been found, in the Alto phase of the Cad-
doan area (Newell and Krieger, 1949; Krieger, 19515, 1952). His arguments
in favor of the proposition have considerable appeal, and he has one radio-
carbon date of a.p. 398+175 on corncobs from the Davis site (sample No.
C-153 [Libby, 1951]), but this would require drastic revision of dating in other
areas that archaeologists working in those areas have so far been unwilling to
make (Griffin, 1950; Phillips, Ford, and Griffin, 1951; Ford, 1951, 1952).
   69. This statement appears to be at variance with opinions previously ex-
pressed by one of the present authors (Phillips, Ford, and Griffin, 1951, p.
451) because we are now attempting to take a more precise view of the
Mississippi culture. We now prefer to think of some of the “‘centers’’ of
Mississippi development, referred to in the publication cited, in terms of
Mississippi influence upon units that in the main belong to other cultures,
e.g., Etowah-Lamar, Fort Walton, Coles Creek—Plaquemine, etc.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY       164
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
seems to have any appreciable time depth. A number of “Early
Mississippi” phases have been identified, but the stratigraphic
evidence is rather tenuous.”? Examples are: the Old Village phase
at the great Cahokia site in East St. Louis,” the Obion phase in
western Tennessee,’? and the Hiwassee Island phase in the Chicka-
mauga Basin of eastern Tennessee.’ The Macon Plateau phase of
central Georgia’* is early Mississippi in type but is clearly an intru-
sion into a region dominated by cultures of the Complicated Stamp
pottery tradition.”* Following closely upon these scattered early
phases, the climax period of the Mississippi culture is seen in such
phases as Monks Mound,” named after the big mound at Cahokia,
Illinois, largest rectangular platform-mound north of Mexico;
Kincaid and Angel, on the lower Ohio;77 Cairo Lowland, in south-
eastern Missouri;78 Nodena and Parkin, or “St. Francis,” in north-
eastern Arkansas;7? Cumberland, in the Nashville Basin of central
Tennessee;®? Dallas and Mouse Creek, in eastern Tennessee;®
and Moundville, on the Black Warrior River in north-central
Alabama,* including the closely related Bessemer site near Bir-
mingham.® Many more phases could be cited, but these are the
most intensively Mississippian and seem to define the nuclear area
as outlined above. Here is more than sufficient material for a com-
    70. One of the puzzling anomalies of eastern archaeology is the fact that
dating estimates are as incongruent and unreliable in the later periods as in the
earlier, if not more so, a condition which is only beginning to be remedied by
radiocarbon dating.
   71. Kelly, 1933; Griffin, 1949. The recently published Cahokia        date of
A.p. 1156+200 (sample No. M-33 [Crane, 1956]) refers, we assume, to the
Old Village component in the site.
   72. Kneberg, 1952, p. 193.          _    74. Kelly, 1938.
   73. Lewis and Kneberg, 1946.             75. Fairbanks, 1952; Willey, 19530.
   76. Moorehead and Leighton, 1923; Moorehead et a/., 1929; Titterington,
1938.
   77. Cole et al., 1951; Lilly, 1937; Black, 1944.
   78. Williams, 1954.
   79. Phillips, Ford, and Griffin, 1951; Griffin, 1952c.
   80. Phillips, 1939.                     82. Moore,   1905, 19075.
   81. Lewis and Kneberg, 1946.            83. DeJarnette and Wimberly, 1941.



                                             FORMATIVE STAGE      16 5
prehensive definition of Mississippi culture, but it is sufficient for
our purposes to note that all these phases, both early and late, are
on the full-blown Formative level as defined in this study.
   During or perhaps slightly after the climax period of the Mis-
sissippi development, an outstanding horizon style, the “Southern
Cult,” spread throughout the Southeast far beyond the boundaries
of the Mississippi culture as understood here.** This style is exem-
plified in certain designs and motifs on embossed copper plates, on
engraved shell, and on modeled,                engraved, and negative-painted
pottery, as well as in a number of highly specialized artifact types
commonly associated with these designs. The style is almost cer-
tainly of Mississippi origin and serves to measure the extent of
Mississippi influence in the late pre-contact period. It poses some
very interesting questions in culture dynamics, in that some of the
strongest centers for Cult material are not, strictly speaking, in
the Mississippi tradition. At Etowah, in northern Georgia,® the
Cult material seems to be intrusive in a culture that is dominated
by the Complicated Stamp pottery tradition of that region and is
doubtless a thrust from the nearby Tennessee-Cumberland region;
and Spiro, on the Arkansas River in eastern Oklahoma,** which
yielded the gaudiest Cult material of all, is entirely outside the Mis-
sissipp1 orbit in all other respects, as are Mount Royal (St. Johns
IIb) and other Cult centers in Florida.*’ The horizon-style concept
appears to fit the situation admirably but of course is not an expla-
nation.
   Getting back to the problem in hand, most of the remaining late
Formative stage cultures in the East can be interpreted on the
basis of some sort of relationship with the Mississippi culture.
This usually takes the form of a blend with earlier, or at least
resident, cultures, as in the mixed (Woodland-Mississippi)                      Fort
   84. Phillips,   1940;   Krieger,    1945;   Waring and   Holder,   1945;   Griffin,
19525.
   85. Moorehead et al., 1932.
   86. Burnett, 1945; K. G. Orr, 1946, 1952; Griffin, 1952.
   87. Goggin, 1952.



                                            METHOD AND THEORY         166
                                      IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Ancient, in the Ohio Valley,** and Owasco-Iroquois of central
New York,®® though it may take the form of an attenuated Missis-
sippi-like (“Upper Mississippi”) culture, of which the Oneota
furnishes a most interesting example. This protohistoric culture,
which has a very wide distribution extending from central Wiscon-
sin through Iowa and Minnesota to Missouri and even Kansas and
Nebraska,     has been identified with the Chiwere                    Sioux     in the
period of their migration from east of the Mississippi River out
onto the Plains.°° From our point of view, it is of interest that
throughout this very extensive movement the culture retained its
homogeneity and remained on a Formative level.
   In Georgia, as already indicated, Mississippi blended with the
Complicated Stamp tradition to produce a culture which, in the late
Etowah and Lamar phases in northern and central Georgia, and
in the Savannah and Irene phases on the coast,* was on its way
to becoming one of the strongest and most pervasive Formative
cultures in North America. On the Florida Gulf Coast, Mississippi
combined with Weeden Island to produce the Fort Walton phase,°*
which may certainly be classified as Formative; in the lower Mis-
sissippi Valley, it blended with the Coles Creek—Plaquemine cul-
ture in the late Deer Creek®4 and Natchez phases to an extent
that makes it difficult to say which predominates. The native cul-
tures of the Caddoan area of eastern Texas and northwestern

    88. Griffin, 1943. Fort Ancient is perhaps not a good example. The earlier
phases, such as Baum, show a mixture of Woodland and Mississippi elements,
but the later Madisonville phase is practically all Mississippi. Nevertheless,
it differs in essential respects from the nuclear Mississippi culture as defined
here.
   89. Ritchie, 1934,     1944,   1949,   1952;   Ritchie   and     MacNeish,    1949;
Ritchie et al., 1953.
   90. Hill and Wedel,    1936; Griffin, 1937; Keyes, 1942;          Berry and Chap-
man, 1942; H. G. Smith, 1951.
   91. Fairbanks, 1952.
   92. Caldwell and McCann, 1941.
   93. Willey, 1949.
   94. Phillips, n.d. (MS in preparation).           95. Quimby, 1942.



                                              FORMATIVE     STAGE    | 67
Louisiana were strong enough to resist effectively the inroads of
Mississippi culture. Whether this is because the Alto® and other
phases that make up the Gibson aspect were too early to receive
Mississippi influences, and in fact passed on to the Mississippi
some of its physiognomic elements—specifically those of pre-
sumed Middle American origin—depends on the outcome of the
dating controversy to which allusion has already been made. From
the developmental point of view, it is interesting that these earlier
phases are more explicitly Formative than the later (Fulton aspect)
phases of Caddoan culture.*” A similar change may be seen in some
of the later phases of the Coles Creek—Plaquemine culture of the
lower Mississippi Valley, particularly the Natchez.°* In both
cases we can infer, from ethnographic sources, not a developmen-
tal regression but an apparent change from a village type to some-
thing more like a neighborhood type of community organization.®®
This may in fact have been consequent on greater political stability
and internal security.
   We have already referred to the possibility of regarding the
early ‘Plains Village’ cultures as marginal Formative. The most
extensive and characteristic of these, the Upper Republican,!° is
represented by innumerable small pit-house villages strung out
along the stream terraces from South Dakota across Nebraska,
Kansas, and eastern Colorado. The culture seems to reflect the
initial adjustment of a sedentary farming economy to an environ-
ment that offered the additional resource of buffalo-hunting. The
result was a mixed seasonal way of life favorable to the growth
and persistence of sedentary communities.          Owing perhaps to
limitations of transport, the communities appear to have remained
on a rather elementary Formative level until the introduction of
the horse in early post—Spanish-contact times, when villages be-
   96. Newell and Krieger, 1949.
   97. Krieger, 1946; C. H. Webb, 19484; Suhm and Krieger, 1954.
   98. Quimby, 1942.
   99. Murdock, 1949, p. 80.
   100. Strong, 1935; Wedel, 1947; Kivett, 1949.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY    168
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
came a good deal larger. The Lower Loup phase of east-central
Nebraska,'"   for example, thought to be protohistoric Pawnee,
manifests a mature Formative stage of development as defined in
this study.
   When we look at the eastern North American Formative stage
data from a broader point of view, we see two developmental
peaks, one in the Hopewell culture and the other in the Mississippi
culture. Hopewell developed to a remarkable intensity in a rela-
tively restricted area (Illinois and Ohio) and radiated influences
far and wide, but these in the main were not of such a nature as to
lift the cultures acted upon much above the pre-existing Archaic
level. Possibly this is due to Hopewell itself being a kind of
florescent northern Archaic culture, or possibly to its strong orien-
tation about a cult of the dead. Mississippi, on the other hand, has
a typical Middle American configuration, most clearly expressed
in the temple mound and plaza assemblages entirely lacking in
Hopewell] and, indeed, in the rest of North America, including the
Southwest. There seems to be little doubt that this temple mound—
plaza complex and the idea system behind it were diffused from
Middle America, though we cannot say much about the route of
that diffusion. This complex seems to have entered, in a rather
small way, into the Gulf Coast, lower Mississippi Valley, and
Caddoan areas some time before the Mississippi climax, but not
until that climax did it develop to a point which invites comparison
with late Formative and early Classic mound assemblages in
Middle America. It is almost impossible not to regard this nexus
of traits as closely related to, perhaps dependent on, new proce-
dures in agriculture hitherto unknown in eastern North America.
We can only assume, lacking proof, that these traits found their
optimum conditions for development, not in the regions nearest
their point of entry, but somewhere farther north, in the general
vicinity of the confluence of the Missouri, Illinois, Ohio, and
Mississippi rivers, and that the culture brought about by these
innovations spread fanwise from that nuclear area, even back to-
  101. Dunlevy, 1936.



                                     FORMATIVE STAGE   169
ward the south, in the direction of the ultimate source of its
power. Whereas Formative cultures in the Southwest are limited
and confined by the small natural localities and regions that were
suitable for their growth, the Formative cultures of the Mississippi
Valley and the Southeast knew no such bounds. The widespread
horizon style, the Southern Cult, and the attempts at large-scale
geographic-political units seen in some of the protohistoric con-
federacies are phenomena comparable to Middle American devel-
opments on the threshold of the Classic stage.
   In discussing and appraising the cultures of the southwestern
and southeastern United States in accordance with the definitions
of the Formative concept, we have focused our attention on the
threshold or lower margins of the Formative. In turning to the
regions which    lie south of Middle      America,   to lower      Central
America and parts of the northern Andes, we will be more con-
cerned with the upper limits of the Formative concept. In these
regions there has been revealed, as yet, little evidence of cultures
which show the beginnings of a Formative way of life.

                                     LOWER CENTRAL AMERICA
                                         AND SOUTH AMERICA
   On a Formative level the archaeological sequences of Honduras
and Salvador reveal a number         of close relationships with both
Mexico and the Maya regions. The Playa de los Muertos, Ulua
Bichrome,'°? and Cerro Zapote!®? phases are linked closely in their
ceramics to the Formative phases of the Petén and Copan. Follow-
ing these, the Honduran        Las Flores and Santa Rita phases!
feature a Maya-like polychrome pottery, apparently deriving its
inspiration from the Tepeu! phase of the Classic stage of lowland
Maya. A still later Naco phase in Honduras has ceramic affilia-
tions with the Postclassic cultures of the Mexican highlands. In
spite of these specific historical connections and parallels, it is
questionable whether the Honduran and Salvadoran developments

   102. Strong, Kidder, and Paul, 1938.        103. Lothrop, 1927.
   104. Strong, Kidder, and Paul, 1938.        105. R. E. Smith, 1955.



                                      METHOD AND THEORY   A   @)
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
ever go beyond what we are defining as a Formative stage. Mound-
building was known in these regions as early as Yarumela III in
Honduras—an archaeological phase apparently equatable in time
with the Ulua Bichrome!*’—and mounds, or mounds and _ bal]
courts, were constructed at Tazumal,!°’ Los Llanitos,!°8 and
Naco,!°® indicating the persistence or presence of these ideas in
Salvador and Honduras in the late pre-Columbian periods. But
aside from these architectural features (which in size and elabora-
tion do not compare with the great mound sites of the Middle
American Classic), there is little to indicate that Honduras-Salva-
dor ever achieved the full-blown Classic stage. The Middle Ameri-
can contacts in themselves do not seem to have been sufficient to
produce social and cultural phenomena of Classic or Postclassic
rank.
  Archaeological regions and phases have been suggested for
Nicaragua and Costa Rica,!"° but culture sequences are lacking. In
general, mound sites here are of less impressive size and layout
than those of Middle America proper. Some mounds appear to have
been used as bases for buildings, but, apparently, the superstruc-
tures were of perishable materials. Other tumuli may have been
built solely for burials. Several types of stone statues occur, fre-
quently in association with the mounds. Ceramics are well devel-
oped, and the Nicoya Polychrome style is linked to both Classic
Maya and later Mexican styles by certain decorative motives.
Such contacts would date from perhaps a.p. 800 to a.p. 1500.
Nothing has yet been discovered in Costa Rica or Nicaragua that
would relate, specifically, to the Formative stage phases of either
Middle America or Salvador-Honduras. Yet, in spite of the fact
that the chronological equations between Nicaraguan—Costa Rican
archaeology and Middle America are with late Classic or Post-
classic phases, the archaeological remains in this part of lower
Central America suggest a level of cultural development no greater
  106. Canby, 1951.
  107. Boggs, 1944.            109. Strong, Kidder, and Paul, 1938.
  108. Longyear, 1944.         110. Strong, 19486.



                                      FORMATIVE STAGE    1y|l
than that of the Formative. In some traits, such as pottery and
metallurgy, they reveal excellent craftsmanship, undoubtedly at-
tributable to diffusions from both the north and the south. In
other aspects, particularly architecture, site size, and site layout,
they are not markedly different from southeastern North American
Formative cultures.
   Archaeological regions have been defined for Panama," and,
recently, sequence work has begun in one region."” Large villages
and extensive cemeteries      are reported.   Mounds,     apparently for
both dwellings and burials, occur, but the constructions are very
small." There is also some evidence for ceremonial precincts
formed by crude stone columns,'4 but non-perishable architecture
is minimal. There is a fine metallurgical tradition in ornamental
gold, tumbaga, and gilded copper, which clearly relates to Colom-
bian regions such as the Quimbaya. Except for the Archaic stage
Monagrillo culture of the coastal shell heaps to which we have al-
ready referred,” all indications are that Panamanian prehistoric
cultures such as the Coclé, Veraguas, Chiriqui, and the various
ceramic complexes of Darien are relatively late. The level of de-
velopment, however, appears to correlate with that of the Form-
tive cultures in Middle America and elsewhere.
   For the most part, the prehistoric remains of Colombia ‘and
Ecuador appear to be upon about the same level as those of lower
Central America. That is, everywhere we have evidences, direct
or inferred, of sedentary, agricultural village life with a compe-
tent, or even high, development of pottery.What are probably the
earliest, and the simplest, archaeological remains in Colombia per-
tain to those phases of the northeastern and north-central part of
the country such as Isla de los Indios,!° Barlovento,"? and Momil.!8
  111. Lothrop, 1948.
  112. Willey and McGimsey, 1954; Willey and Stoddard, 1954.
  113. Stirling, 1949.
  114. Lothrop, 1937-42.                  116. Reichel-Dolmatoff, 1954.
  115. Willey and McGimsey,    1954.      117. Reichel-Dolmatoff, 1955.
  118. Reichel-Dolmatoff, personal communication, 1956.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY     17 2
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
The Isla de los Indios culture has a swampland habitat along the
lower Magdalena River. It is distinguished by a ceramic complex
featuring incised and rocker-stamped decoration. Rocker-stamped
ceramic decoration, it will be recalled, is a trait of Hopewellian
cultures in eastern North America, of the middle Formative levels
in Mexico and Honduras, and of the early Formative in Peru."®
Its presence in the early Isla de los Indios complex tends, thus, to
imply an approximate contemporaneity with these cultures. That
a comparable stage of development can be argued from this con-
temporaneity is, of course, less certain. The terrain of the Isla de
los Indios sites would seem to be unfavorable for agriculture; how-
ever, we call this culture phase to attention at this time as a pos-
sible early Formative manifestation in Colombia. The Barlovento
ceramic complex features incision, punctation, and simple vessel
forms. The context is a coastal shellmound. Here, again, Forma-
tive status is questionable. For Momil, the considerably richer
ceramic inventory, including rocker-stamped pottery, suggests a
stronger case for Formative status. The two phases, or subphases,
of Momil possess several ceramic traits that are reminiscent of
Formative cultures in Middle America and Peru, and a full exposi-
tion of this site is awaited with interest.
   The presumably later and better-known archaeological cultures
in Colombia include the Quimbaya, in the Magdalena River Valley
of northwestern Colombia, which is an important metallurgical
center for the north Andes and for the New World.!”° Both tech-
niques and styles of artifacts probably diffused from this region
northward into Panama and other Central American countries.
San Agustin, in southern Colombia,         is a ceremonial and burial
site of considerable size,!”" and there are vague relationships be-
tween the stone sculptures here and stone statuary in both lower
Central America and the northern highlands of Peru. However,
nowhere in Colombia do we find ceremonial centers with the large,
   119. Willey, 1955a.
  120. W. C. Bennett, 1944a, 1946a; Banco de la Republica, 1948.
   121. Preuss, 1931.



                                       FORMATIVE STAGE    17 3
impressive architecture of either Middle America or Peru, nor are
there evidences of real urban development. The prehistoric Santa
Marta or Jairona towns in the northeast!” offer the nearest ap-
proach to urban centers and to large-scale public works (roads,
bridges, etc.); however, the total region is rather small, and the
over-all effort falls below the Middle American or Peruvian mark.
Although the Chibchans, of the Bogota Savanna, loom large in
some ethnohistoric accounts!** for their politico-military prowess,
their domain was geographically small, and their population was
probably not of great size.!?4
   A lack of well-worked-out regional sequences in Colombian
archaeology makes it difficult or impossible to appraise most of
these cultures in a sequential context. It is probable, however, that
there is substantial time depth to the pattern of relatively small,
sedentary, agricultural villages. In northeastern Colombia, appar-
ently later than the early and possibly Formative stage phases of
Isla de los Indios, Barlovento, and Momil, there are three sequent
phases in the Rio Rancheria region (La Loma, El Horno, and Por-
tacelli) that are characterized by agricultural communities and
polychrome ceramics.’ This series was, in part, ancestral to the
still later and protohistoric Santa Marta or Tairona cultures.
   The archaeological sequences for the Ecuadorian highlands show
a long continuity of Formative-type scattered farm or small village
units.!° In the central and southern highlands there is nothing in
the way of large-scale public works or monuments until the period
of the Inca invasion.
   In the Ecuadorian Guayas Basin some recently reported work of
Evans and Meggers!”” documents a ceramic sequence in which the
earlier phases show close affinities with Middle American and
   122. Mason, 1931-39; W. C. Bennett, 1946a.
   123. See Restrepo, 1895.          124. Kroeber, 1946; Haury, 19535.
   125. Reichel-Dolmatoff and Reichel-Dolmatoff, 1951.
   126. Collier, 1946; Collier and Murra, 1943; W.C. Bennett, 19465.
   127. Paper presented to the annual meeting of the American Anthropo-
logical Association, Boston, 1955.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY    ee
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Peruvian Formative cultures in such technical features as rocker-
stamping, negative painting, and white-on-red painting.
   On the Ecuadorian coast the settlement size and architectural
achievements may imply Classic stage developments following
earlier and clearly Formative cultures like the Pre-Guangala of
Guayas.!”8 At the site of Cerro Jaboncillo, just back of the Manabi
coast, hilltop platform-mounds are associated with the remains of
stone buildings which contained U-shaped zodmorphic stone
chairs, bas-reliefs, and stone statues. This Cerro Jaboncillo cul-
ture, probably contemporaneous with the Guangala phase of the
Guayas sequence, may be coeval with the middle periods at the
large Manabi coastal site of Manta. The Manta middle periods
are associated with large, stone-faced, pyramidal mounds. This
same Manta site, in its late pre-Columbian or Mantefio period,
shows extensive dwelling refuse and house-foundation remains
covering several square kilometers.!8° The early ethnographic ac-
counts of the Manabi coast support these late-period archaeological
data in describing large towns whose wealth and importance were
said to have been based upon maritime trade.
   To sum up, no prehistoric cultural phase in lower Central Ameri-
ca, Colombia, or highland Ecuador is outstanding for a coincidence
of great ceremonial construction, monumental art, craft excellence,
or urban concentrations of population. For the Ecuadorian coast
the data are poorly ordered; yet we know that the Cerro Jaboncillo
and Guangala phases and the presumed middle periods at Manta are
characterized by specialized temple mounds, monumental stone
sculpture, technically competent ceramics, a pottery figurine art of
high quality, and a metallurgical industry which produced tools as
well as ornaments. In the later Mantefio phase, at the Manta site,
there seems to have been a true urban center with extensive dwell-
ing areas surrounding temple structures. The concurrence of all
these traits argues for Classic status, but the information on these
  128. Bushnell, 1951.
  129. Saville, 1907-10.
  130. See Jijon y Caamafio, 1930; Sanders, n.d.



                                        FORMATIVE   STAGE   li]5
coastal Ecuadorian phases is, as yet, too scant for such a classi-
fication.
   In Peru a number of regional-cultural continuities are first per-
ceived on a Formative stage of development. In each of these con-
tinuities certain themes are emphasized, such as the modeled ceram-
ics of the north coast,!*" the multicolored pottery and textiles of the
south coast,!82 or the subterranean and multistoried stone architec-
ture of the Callején de Huaylas.** Yet this regionalism is interpene-
trated by common bonds of technological traits, by developmental
changes within these traits, and, also, by the diffusions of specific
styles. This kind of unity manifests itself during the early phases
of the Formative stage and is still characteristic of native Peruvian
cultures at the time of the Spanish conquest.!#4 In the early Forma-
tive phases, such as the Cupisnique of Chicama,1** the Guafiape of
Vird,!*6 and the Early Supe and Early Ancon of the central coast,!87
villages were small and few. Maize was known, but canal irrigation
probably had not commenced. Pottery and small stone carvings
were of good quality. The construction of earth and stone or adobe
pyramids or other ceremonial buildings seems to have started at this
time, as evidenced by the structures in the Nepefia and Casma val-
leys.188 An outstanding phenomenon is the widespread Chavin art
style, named after the highland site of Chavin de Huantar.'*® The
late Formative stage phases see the disappearance of Chavin art as
an organized style, but they are linked together by a number of tech-
nical traits such as the white-on-red vessel painting of Salinar,
Puerto Moorin, and Chancay or the widespread “‘resist-dye”’ or
negative-painting technique on pottery.!*° Bennett!*! has noted that
  131. Kroeber, 1926.
  132. Gayton and Kroeber, 1927; Kroeber, 1944.
  133. W.C. Bennett, 19444.
  134. W. C. Bennett, 1948.                135. Larco Hoyle, 1941.
  136. Strong and Evans, 1952; Willey, 1953c.
  137. Willey and Corbett, 1954.
  138. Tello, 1943; Carriédn Cachot, 1948; Willey, 19510.
  139. W. C. Bennett, 19444; Willey, 19510.
  140. Willey, 1945a, 1948a.               141. Bennett and Bird, 1949.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY      ib 6
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
these late Formative phases mark the advent of new food plants,
and this also seems to be the time of the first canal irrigation in
the coastal valleys and of significant population increases.!# Com-
munities remained about the same size as they were earlier, but
they increased in numbers. Sizable fortifications were also con-
structed for the first time.
   In our opinion, the line between Formative and Classic on the
north coast of Peru should fall somewhere during the Gallinazo
period,   which   succeeds    the Puerto   Moorin     and precedes    the
Mochica in the Vird Valley.!4* Huge pyramid-mounds, urban living
clusters, and a stylistic climax in Gallinazo pottery date from the
Gallinazo III phase.'*4 In the Moche and Chicama valleys, Galli-
nazo-related cultures may also mark the inception of the great
adobe mounds; if not, the succeeding Mochica periods usher in a
full-blown Classic stage. On the central coast, mound-building of
this kind dates from the Florescent or Classic Maranga 3 phase.!4
On the south coast, Nazca culture has been considered Classic in
the light of its magnificent textiles and painted pottery, and there
is a likelihood that big adobe mounds and population centers were
constructed contemporaneously. In the highlands, the Recuay!”
and Classic Viahuanaco!® cultures are considered here as marking
the beginnings of the Classic stage.
   The prehistoric cultures of northern and central Chile and north-
western Argentina present the Peruvian Formative patterns in a re-
duced form. Many of the basic food plants, the agricultural tech-
niques, and the domesticated animals (Auchenia) are the same as
those of the central Andes, but the cultural achievements of the
Chilean and Argentinian phases do not equal those of the north.
In general, the living zones of the south Andean regions—the
desert oases of northern Chile or the guebradas and valleys of the
Argentine Andes—are small and their agricultural potential limited.
  142. Willey, 1953c.
  143. Strong and Evans, 1952.     146. Uhle, 1924a, 19244; Strong, 1954.
  144. W. C. Bennett, 1950.        147. W. C. Bennett, 1944.
  145. Stumer, 1954.               148. W. C. Bennett, 1934.



                                       FORMATIVE   STAGE   i i Fi
In Chile the Atacamefian culture of the north had some of its roots
in the old Archaic stage coastal fishing cultures of the same re-
gion,'#® but, with the advent of maize agriculture, new environmen-
tal adjustments were possible and populations settled in compact
oasis villages in the interior. These communities consisted of stone
and mud houses, the whole surrounded by a defense wall. Public or
ceremonial architecture is unreported.!°° To the south, in the vicini-
ty of Coquimbo, are the settlements of the Diaguita tradition.’
The environmental conditions in the Chilean Diaguita region are
less severe than in Atacamefio country, and there is more land
suitable for agriculture. Perhaps, in consequence of this, houses
are more widely scattered. Still farther south the Araucanian
peoples! farmed the wooded central valley of Chile by clearing
small, scattered plots. Settlements were small, and there are no
central sites with impressive permanent architecture. Political
centralization of the Araucanians seems to have been effected only
in time of war. As near as can be determined from present data,
maize and pottery diffused into Chile from the north or northeast
at a relatively late time. There are some indications that this may
have been as late as the Peru-Bolivian Derived Tiahuanaco periods,
although this is by no means certain.® The plain pottery phases of
Pichalo I and II*4 and the El Molle! culture of the Diaguita region
may stem from earlier Peruvian stimuli. Whatever the duration of
native farming villages in Chile, this stage of development was not
exceeded.
  The prehistoric cultures of northwestern Argentina are related
to those of Chile, both in particulars and in general stage of devel-
opment. Chronological evidence, both direct and inferential,
though limited, makes possible some generalizations about the
area.!°6 The earliest phases, such as La Candelaria‘®’ of the central
  149.   Bird, 1943.
  150. W.C. Bennett, 194 6c.      154. Ibid.
  151. Lothrop, 1946.            155. Cornely, 1944, 1953.
  152. J. M. Cooper, 1946.       156. Bennett, Bleiler, and Sommer, 1948.
  153. Bird, 1943.               157. Ryden, 1936.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY       Len
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY             8
region and Barreales!®* of the south, are characterized by small,
scattered settlements, flimsy architecture, and relatively simple,
decorated, incised, and painted pottery types. The middle and late
phases of the northern, central, and southern regions see the ap-
pearance of compact villages, sometimes fortified or with forts
nearby, stone or adobe architecture, small ceremonial structures
within towns, the frequent use of bronze and copper, and the pre-
dominance of polychrome ceramics. Peruvian Classic and Post-
classic elements are not found, however, in the same configurations
that distinguish their appearance in Peru. Neither northwestern
Argentina nor northern and central Chile was a center of native
American urbanism comparable to Peru.
   In South America east of the Andes, Formative level culture was
established in prehistoric times along the major river systems and
along much of the Caribbean and Atlantic coasts. We refer here to
cultures of the types characterized by Steward as “Tropical For-
est” and ‘“Circum-Caribbean.”’ Steward has equated a “‘Circum-
Caribbean” level of development with Formative stage cultures
in both Middle America and the central Andes. We would also
extend the Formative concept to include the lowland forest cultures
maintaining stable agricultural villages, even though features such
as mounds and ceremonial structures are lacking. Such an extension
of our definition of Formative embraces, as we have explained, the
settled, agricultural village life of the southwestern United States
and the comparable communities of the south Andes.
   In Venezuela there are at least two major culture subareas
through which Formative stage development can be traced. In the
Venezuelan Andes and the northwest region'®® such phases as the
Dabajuro and Guadalupe reflect influences probably related to
the Rio Rancheria section of northeastern Colombia. Eastward, on
the middle and lower Orinoco, there is another traditional center,
which is characterized by an earlier white-on-red and a later
broad-line incised pottery. The white-on-red pottery idea appears
  158. Debenedetti, 1931.      160. A. Kidder II, 19482, pp. 425 ff.
  159. 1949.                   161. Rouse, 1953, Fig. 2.



                                     FORMATIVE STAGE       179
to diffuse out of the Venezuelan Saladero phase’ into the West
Indian phases of Cedros and Cuevas. The later incised pottery is
first noted in the Early Barrancas phase of the lower Orinoco; sub-
sequently, it spreads to the West Indies to mark the various late
phases of the Taino tradition in those islands.'** The climax devel-
opments of the Formative stage in the West Indies come in these
Taino phases, especially in Puerto Rico and the Dominican Repub-
lic.164 These developments include the dance plazas, ball courts, and
specialized sculptured-stone paraphernalia associated with them.1®
The Igneri, or pre-Taino, manifestations, while reflective of an
agricultural village life, do not possess these more elaborate cere-
monial features.
    At the mouth of the Amazon River the Marajoara phase,! with
its deep village refuse pits, special cemetery mounds, and elaborate-
ly painted and modeled pottery,'*? almost certainly marks the Form-
ative stage. The preceding phases on Marajo Island and in near-
by regions are characterized by much smaller sites, locations which
suggest hunting and fishing rather than agriculture, and much less
elaborate funerary rites. The ceramics of these earlier phases are
much simpler than those of Marajoard and are usually decorated
with incision or brushing. They are probably closer to Archaic
   162. Radiocarbon dates on Saladero range from 925 +130 to 615 +130 B.c.
(Preston, Person, and Deevey, 1955, Nos. Y-42-44).
   163. Recent   excavations   on    the Ucayali   River   in eastern   Peru,   near
Pucallpa, have disclosed a ceramic complex which is surely related to the
Orinoco broad-line incised tradition. Although several thousand miles distant
from the lower Orinoco, Pucallpa is on the upper reaches of the Amazonian
river system, and, thus, by water, these two locations are not impossibly re-
mote from each other, even by canoe transportation (D. W. Lathrap [personal
communication, 1956]).
   164. Rouse, 1953.
   165. Rouse    (1953) has emphasized the distinction between the cultural
climax Taino phases of the West Indies, referring to these as ‘“Circum-
Caribbean” in type, and the earlier agricultural phases, which are designated as
“Tropical Forest.” This distinction has validity in the West Indian sequences,
but in the present paper we are grouping both as “Formative.”
   166. Evans and Meggers, 1950.
   167. Palmatary, 1950.


                                          METHOD AND THEORY       180
                                    IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
than to Formative standards. It has been noted that the Marajoar4
culture disappeared from the delta region and was replaced by
cultures reminiscent of the pre-Marajoara periods. Evans and
Meggers see in this the failure of intensive agriculture on the
flooded Marajé Island flatlands and the depature of the people who
brought this new subsistence pattern to the delta.1* Such would
argue for a retreat from a Formative level to something approach-
ing the old Archaic mode.
   Elsewhere on the Amazon, at Santarém,!*? Manaos,!7° and near
Trinidad on the Mamoré,!” there are evidences of settled villagers
manufacturing    competent    pottery   and, presumably,      practicing
agriculture. On the Atlantic Coast the Guarani tradition may have
been the first diffusion of an agricultural way of life southward,
eventually reaching the Parana Delta.1”
   168. Meggers, 1954; Evans, 1955.
   169. Palmatary, 1939.
   170. G. D. Howard, 1947.
   171. Nordenskiold, 1913.
   172. Lothrop, 1932.




                                        FORMATIVE   STAGE   1 81
                                                      Chapter 7




                                           Classic Stage
                                                     DEFINITIONS

In our previous article! we observed that the criteria of the Classic
stage are, to a large extent, qualitative and relative rather than
quantitative and absolute. We listed such qualities as excellence in
the great arts, climax in religious architecture, and general flores-
cence in material culture. We adhere to these definitions, but we
wish to add one more, which overrides them in importance. The
Classic stage in New World native cultures marks the beginning
of urbanism. It is the threshold of civilization in so far as “civili-
zation” is defined as city life. Our earlier hesitancy to see the
Classic as the stage of urbanism derived largely from our caution
in interpreting the archaeological record of Middle America and
Peru. For the succeeding stage, the Postclassic, both areas provide
certain architectural evidence of large, tightly massed population
concentrations. Such fitted, without cavil, the formal and physical
requirements of an urban community. For the Classic the record
in and on the ground is much less definite. In some instances,
such as the Teotihuacan Classic in the Valley of Mexico with its
numerous closely spaced apartment-like structures, or the Gallina-
zo III subphase of north coastal Peru with its thousands of “honey-
comb” adobe-walled rooms, there is material evidence of city
living. In other cases, however, of which the Classic Maya of the
Petén lowlands is a prime example, urban dwelling clusters are
either lacking or undiscovered. Nevertheless, for the Classic Maya,
   1. Willey and Phillips, 1955.


                                         METHOD AND THEORY   18 y
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
and for other archaeological phases adjudged as Classic by our
definitions, there is strong inferential evidence of an urban society.
The attributes of civilization in the commonly accepted sense of
the term—outstanding public architecture, great art styles, class
differentiations, codified intellectual systems (preserved in writing)
and some     knowledge      of science, formal hierarchies of deities,
widespread trade in raw materials and luxury goods—are there.
That such a complex achievement could have been effected without
an urban basis of some sort is most unlikely.? Accordingly, we
characterize the American Classic stage as urban.
   In establishing standards for Classic stage achievement, our
frame of reference has been the hemisphere. As stated in the fore-
going discussions, we appreciate the historical semi-independence
of the various New World cultures and concede that a ‘“‘classic”’
stage, in the sense of a climactic point, could be defined within
the limited context of any of these cultures; such a formulation
would have meaning for a study of the culture growth of a par-
ticular area, subarea, or region. In an evaluation of the Western
Hemisphere as a whole, however, an evaluation which considers
all agricultural America as a kind of vast historic entity, only in
two areas do cultures measure up to the criteria of urban civiliza-
tion. From our point of view the Classic stage in the New World
is limited to Middle America and the central Andes.
   At the risk of some repetition we restate, then, that the Ameri-
can Classic stage is characterized by urbanism and by superlative
performance in many lines of cultural endeavor. There is evidence
not only of the mastery of technologies and arts but of their con-
   2. This view emphasizes    the finceonal: rather than the purely formal,
definition of urbanism. It may well be that such attainments as those cited
above were reached by the ancient Maya without the concomitant of massed,
house-to-house settlement that the word “‘urban”’ connotes. The crucial factor
is the number of people who could be drawn upon and organized in the interests
of the society and the culture. Maya society undoubtedly drew upon and co-
ordinated the energies of agreat many people. This would have been possible
even with primitive methods of transportation, under conditions of dispersed
settlement.



                                              CLASSIC   STAGE   18 3
junction in single cultures and societies. The various and scattered
inventions and innovations of the Formative are now drawn to-
gether into rich, diverse, and yet unified patterns. The Classic 1s
the stage of great artistic achievements in so far as greatness can
be appraised not only subjectively but by the evident time, care,
and emotion devoted to the artistic products. It is the stage of
monumental and ambitious architecture, in the form of pyramids
and special buildings which seem to have been dedicated primarily
to religious purposes. Fine, specialized craft products designed as
burial furniture, ceremonial appurtenances, or luxury items were
turned out in profusion. In the Classic cultures of both Middle
America and Peru there is evidence of strong social class distinc-
tions and of heavy pomp and dignity surrounding the ruling
classes. With the perfection of writing and astronomy, intellectual]
interests as well as the arts flourished in Middle America. Here,
also, and to a lesser extent in Peru, there was active trade between
the regional centers in ceremonial and luxury goods. In spite of
this trade, however, it is noteworthy that a strong regional ethno-
centrism is reflected in sharply differing art and architectural
styles.

                                          MIDDLE   AMERICA

  The Classic civilizations of Middle America centered in the
Valley of Mexico and its environs, Oaxaca, the Guatemalan high-
lands, the Petén-Usumacinta-Motagua lowlands, and coastal Vera-
cruz. The status of regions such as Michoacan, Guerrero, the
Huasteca, Jalisco, Colima, and northwestern Mexico is less clear.
These lie within the historical orbit of the general Middle Ameri-
can tradition, but their native cultures were probably below Classic
standards in the arts and architecture. The chronological span of
the Middle American Classic civilizations probably varies region-
ally, but the characteristic developments seem to have originated
approximately around the beginning of the Christian Era. Gauging
chronology by early dated Maya monuments (with the 11.16.0.0.0
correlation), the round figure of a.p. 300 is frequently given as a


                                  METHOD AND THEORY   184
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
starting point for the Maya Classic of the Petén.? Radiocarbon
dates on late Formative phases in the Valley of Mexico indicate
that the Teotihuacan culture of that region had its Classic inception
about contemporaneously or only a little earlier. Cross-datings
with the Monte Alban sequence in Oaxaca‘ and the Kaminaljuyu
sequence of the Guatemalan highlands® suggest that the apogee of
the Zapotecan and highland Maya traditions is roughly coeval with
the central Mexican highland and the Maya lowland Classic cul-
tures. Tajin Totonac® of central Veracruz is, perhaps, only slightly
later. The La Venta—Middle Tres Zapotes phase’ of the Olmec re-
gional-cultural tradition of southern Veracruz and Tabasco may be
earlier than other early Classic developments; but, if so, it quite
likely overlaps with them chronologically.* The terminal dates of
the Middle American Classic cultures may coincide rather closely.
The figure of a.p. 900 (11.16.0.0.0 correlation) is one postulated
closing date for the Maya lowland Classic; a.p. 650 (12.9.0.0.0
correlation) is another. The apparently abbreviated and not well-
defined Teotihuacdn IV (Tlamimilolpa) phase of the Mexican
highland Classic may have closed prior to the collapse of the great
lowland Maya ceremonial centers, or it may have run contempo-
raneously with them.® A reasonable estimate for the fall of Teoti-
huacan is about 4.p. 800. According to the best archaeological cross-
referencing that can be effected, the end of the other Middle Ameri-
can Classic cultures is co-ordinate with these. In brief, and in gross,
the Classic phases span the first millennium a.p., or most of it.
   3. The 12.9.0.0.0 correlation, favored by Spinden, would place this date
260 years earlier. Recent radiocarbon dates (Kulp, Feely, and Tryon, 1951;
Libby, 1954a) have favored the 12.9.0.0.0 correlation.
   4. Caso, 1938.                               6. Garcia Payén, 1943.
   5. Kidder, Jennings, and Shook, 1946.        7. Drucker, 1952.
   8. There is considerable debate about whether Middle Tres Zapotes—La
Venta is contemporaneous with, or earlier than, the Tzakol phase of lowland
Maya. We are inclined to believe that it is essentially earlier. Recently an-
nounced radiocarbon dates (New York Times, December 29, 1956) are as early
as 400-800 B.c.
   9. See Armillas, 1950.



                                              CLASSIC STAGE   18 5
   The content of the Middle American Classic civilizations is well
known and needs no detailed itemization in this survey account.'°
The Classic culture of the Maya lowlands has its inception with the
occurrence of the Maya corbeled vault, the initial series dates and
stelae, and the ornate and unique Maya art style as this is expressed
both in sculpture and in painted pottery." The first appearance of
this complex is in the Petén, and there is every reason to believe
that it evolved, sui generis, in this locality or in nearby regions.
During the earlier part of the Maya Classic, sometimes designated
as the Tzakol phase,’? ceremonial         centers with stelae and charac-
teristic art were first constructed in the central Petén (Uaxactun,
Tikal). From here the Classic features spread to Oxkintok,!* in
Yucatan, and southeastward to Copan in Honduras. Somewhat later
the great sites of Yaxchilan and Piedras Negras!* were established
on the Usumacinta drainage to the west. Certain ceramic cross-
datings, utilizing the basal-flanged bowl form of Tzakol and the
frescoed tripod jar of Teotihuacan II-III, indicate that during this
earlier half of the Maya Classic the other major civilizations of
Middle America were becoming firmly established. It was at this
time that the principal monuments of Teotihuacan—the Pyramid
of the Sun, and Pyramid of the Moon, and the Ciudadela—were
constructed, and the distinctive pottery and moldmade-figurine
styles of that culture      came     into being.®     Similarly, the Monte
Alban IIIa phase of Oaxaca and the Esperanza phase at Kaminal-
juyu, in that order, were the first real blossomings of Classic cul-
tures in those regions.
   Aside from the few rather specific cross-finds of pottery and oc-
casional items of architectural detail, Tzakol, Teotihuacan II-III,

   10. See Thompson, 1954; Brainerd, 1954; Linné, 1934, 1942; Caso, 1938;
Caso and Bernal, 1952.
   11. Spinden, 1913.
   12. Thompson,   1943,   1945;   R. E. Smith,   1955;   Proskouriakoff,   1950;
Morley, 1946.
   13. Thompson, 1945.             14. Maler, 1901-3; Satterthwaite, 1933.
   15. Vaillant, 1941; Armillas, 1950.



                                         METHOD AND THEORY       18
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY            6
Monte Alban IIa, and Esperanza are alike only in that each ex-
presses this first full vigor and brilliance of a regional-cultural tra-
dition. As we have stated, the art styles are all unlike. Certain gods,
or god-themes, seern to have been held in common by some of these
cultures, but the particular expressions are quite different. Monte
Alban shared the trait of writing with the lowland Maya, but the
glyphic system is distinct and less developed. Competence in sculp-
tural art was a feature of the Maya, and the Olmec of La Venta,
but was less characteristic of the other Classic phases. The trick
of the ceramic mold possessed by Teotihuacan was not shared by
other Classic cultures until later.
   From these facts it is evident that two fundamental forces were
at work in these: Classic cultures. Intercommunication existed
among them and was an important factor in their growth. They
profited from being a part of a larger community of ideas more
than did the various cultures of the Middle American Formative.
Yet this intercommunication and interchange was by no means all-
embracing. Technologies, elements, goods—these were exchanged,
but complete idea systems remained regionalized. How this stylistic
regionalism may be interpreted in terms of sociopolitical structure
is a major problem for Middle American prehistorians.
    In the late Classic of the Maya lowlands (the Tepeu ceramic
phase) ,!° the number of active ceremonial centers increased greatly.
Huge building programs were undertaken. As in the early Classic
(and the late Formative), constructions were flat-topped pyramids
and platforms grouped around rectangular courtyards or plazas.
Temples and palaces and were elaborately carved and decorated
with sculptures. In the late Classic the palace type of building—
generally containing more rooms and situated upon a lower plat-
form than a temple—became somewhat more common than in
earlier times. The function of these Maya centers seems to have
been largely religious and ceremonial. These were the integrating
points in the network of Maya culture. It was in these centers
that the peasantry of an agricultural society gathered to be in-
   16. R. E. Smith, 1955; Proskouriakoff, 1950; Morley, 1946.



                                           CLASSIC   STAGE   18 7
 structed and inspired by the priest-leaders. The Maya aristoc-
 racy—regulators of agriculture, guardians of the seasons and of
 time—was maintained by, and in turn maintained Maya civiliza-
 tion with, a remarkable pact of mutual faith rather than force.
 When this pact dissolved, so also did the structure of Classic Maya
 society.!”
    The decline and abandonment of the Classic Maya centers about
 A.D. 900 (11.16.0.0.0 correlation) probably were preceded by the
 decline of the other regional Classic cultures. Teotihuacan appears
 to have been destroyed in the second half of the first millennium
 A.D.—quite possibly by invaders identified with the Tula-Toltec
 culture.'® Bearers of this same Tula-Toltec culture moved into other
 parts of Middle America at this time or shortly thereafter.1® The
 breakdown of the old regional states or confederacies of the Classic
 stage may, in part, be attributed to these invaders or to waves of
 social and political disruption and dislocation which they set in
 motion on the northern frontiers of the high civilizations. Other
 causes for these sweeping and radical changes in the cultures of
 Middle America at the close of the Classic have also been sug-
‘gested. One of these, for which archaeologists have only partial
 evidence, is overpopulation or the pressures of steadily increasing
 population. In the Guatemalan highlands there are indications that
 the population around Kaminaljuyu at the close of the Formative
 was as great as, or greater than, the population at any time there-
 after.2° In the Valley of Mexico, at Teotihuacdn, there is little
 doubt that population was more densely massed around that im-
portant center in the Teotihuacan IV phase than in the preceding
Teotihuacan II and III phases.” In the Maya lowlands we know
that more ceremonial centers were constructed in the latter part
of the Classic than in the earlier centuries. This certainly suggests
an over-all population increase for the jungle country, and recent
   17. Willey, 1956a.              19. Tozzer, n.d.
   18. Armillas, 1950.             20. Shook and Proskouriakoff, 1956.
   21. Armillas, 1950. See also Linné, 1934; Sanders, 1956.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY        18 8
studies of domestic settlements in the Belize Valley of British Hon-
duras support this suggestion.”

                                                  SOUTH   AMERICA

   The Peruvian Classic cultures, to which we have referred in our
discussion of the Formative, include the late Gallinazo-Mochica
phases of the north coast, Maranga 3? of the central coast, Nazca
of the south coast,” Recuay® and Cajamarca II and III of the
northern highlands,” and Classic Tiahuanaco”’ and, probably, Pu-
cara®® of the southern highlands. Dating control is poorer here than
in Middle     America.   Recent    estimates,?®    while lengthening    the
Formative stage phases back in time, have still held Classic cul-
tures, such as late. Gallinazo and Mochica, to the last half of the
first millennium .p. Radiocarbon dates, however, tend to push the
beginnings of the Classic phases back to the opening of the Christian
Era or even earlier.*° Terminal dates for the Peruvian Classic are
based on guesswork plus historical reckoning.** There has been a
general and provisional acceptance of a.p. 1000 as a closing date.
If Classic beginnings are set back on the chronological scale, per-
haps this figure should also be set back. The best we can conclude
is that Peruvian Classic cultures flourished, as did those of Middle
America, during the first millennium a.p. and that they were more
or less contemporaneous.
   The regionalistic tendencies of the Peruvian Formative crystal-
lized in the Classic stage into distinctive civilizations and styles. On
the north coast the early trends toward public building were brought
to fulfilment in the massive, flat-topped, adobe pyramids and palace
   22. Willey, Bullard, and Glass, 1955; Willey, 19560.
   23. Stumer, 1954.                     26. Reichlen and Reichlen, 1949.
   24. Gayton and Kroeber, 1927.         27. W.C. Bennett, 1934.
   25. Bennett, 19440.                   28. Kidder II, 19485.
   29. Strong and Evans, 1952; Willey, 1953c.
   30. See dates on Mochica and Nazca in Libby, 1952, and Broecker,Kulp,
and Tucek, 1956.
   31. Rowe, 1945.



                                            CLASSIC STAGE    1 89
complexes of the Chicama, Moche, Vir, and Santa valleys.” At
the same time, the old north coast predisposition for three-dimen-
sional or modeled art reached full scope in Mochica ceramics. In
this same region metallurgy, which also had beginnings as early
as the Chavin horizon,** was further developed to include casting,
alloying, annealing, soldering in gold and copper, and gilding, as
well as the manufacture of copper weapons and helmets.*4 The
south coastal regional tradition produced a contemporaneous but
separate brilliance. Multicolor painting of pottery, which began
with the Formative Paracas phase, reached a peak in the Nazca
ceramics; and the emphasis on elaborate textiles, another Paracas
trait, was also maintained in Nazca. Metallurgy, on the other hand,
remained in its infancy in this south coastal section, at least until
very late Nazca times.*
  Throughout the highlands there is a strong tradition of stone
architecture. The temple at Pucara is a Classic stage example, with
its dressed-stone blocks and complex plan, its numerous compart-
ments and subterranean chambers.?7 The famous Calasasaya in-
closure, the monolithic gateway, and the great stairway at Tia-
huanaco are even more notable examples,** and the carved stone
statues of both Pucara and Tiahuanaco are the outstanding repre-
sentations of Classic art in the southern highlands. Farther north,
the stone-carving and multiple-storied stone buildings of Recuay
show the continuity of an old regional tradition.?® In this instance
the earlier stone masonry and sculpture at Chavin de Huantar ap-
pears superior to the Recuay developments. As stylistic affinities
indicate that Chavin de Huantar is approximately contemporaneous
with the Formative coastal Chavin cultures, we may have here an
example of unconformity between time-horizon and stage, at least
in so far as architecture and sculpture are concerned.
  32. Willey, 1953c.                 33. Lothrop, 1941.
  34. Root, 19494; Larco Hoyle, 1938-39.
  35. Kroeber, 1944.                  36. Root, 19494; Lothrop, 1951.
  37. Kidder, 19484; Bennett and Bird, 1949.
  38. Posnansky, 1945.               39. Bennett, 19445.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY      190
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   Concerning settlement and community size, it is of interest to
note that large population clusters first came into being during the
north coast Classic.4® And these clusters, as was the case with
Teotihuacan in central Mexico, were formed around pyramid or
temple centers. An excellent example of this is the late Gallinazo
period aggregation of thirty thousand adobe-walled rooms around
the Gallinazo pyramid in the Virt Valley. Settlement surveys have
not yet been made in many parts of Peru, but such studies as are
available tend to confirm this urbanization tendency, at least for
the north coast of Peru.*t Another Classic change in north coast
Peruvian sequences is the appearance of buildings composed of
large rooms, courtyards, and corridors. These are usually in con-
junction with, or near to, the great pyramids. They have been in-
terpreted as “palaces”’ or special public or governmental buildings.
The comparability of this trend with a similar one in Middle Ameri-
ca has been pointed out.**
   Between the Peruvian and the Middle American civilizations
we have designated as Classic there are many differences, both in
configuration and in content. Despite these, however, some similari-
ties in the wider configurations are evident, particularly with ref-
erence to the place and apparent significance of the Classic stage
cultures in each historical setting. In the Guatemalan-Mexican re-
gions, as well as in Peru, the Classic cultures take form out of a
somewhat less differentiated Formative base. That is, in each of
these two major areas there is a greater homogeneity of culture in
the Formative than in the Classic stage. Also of interest, from the
point of view of history and diffusion, this homogeneity is shared
in the Formative between these two areas.** Subsequent to the
Formative, differentiation rises in accordance with regional in-
terests. Many of these Classic interests or preoccupations can be
seen in certain tendencies manifested in the Formative, but they
are underlined and dramatized during the Classic stage.
  40. Bennett, 1950; Willey, 1953c.
  41. Schaedel, 1951.                   43. Adams, 1956.
  42. Willey, 1953¢, p. 356.            44. Willey, 19554.


                                        CLASSIC STAGE   191
   Another phenomenon may also be noted at this point. At the
same time that regional differentiation moves to its Classic com-
pleteness in the various geographical localities of Peru and Middle
America, there is a growing trend for each of these two great cul-
ture areas, or co-traditions, to diverge from each other. Thus,
despite the parallelisms, it is also a fact that the civilizations of
Middle America and Peru are more unlike each other, both in con-
tent and in pattern, during their Classic stages than at any time
previously or later. In the Formative they present a cultural simi-
larity and evenness due, presumably, to the common possession of
many historically interrelated traits of a New World sedentary-
agricultural way of life. In the Postclassic there is again a leveling
of a more complex sort, historically distinct in the two areas and
deriving, as near as we can tell, from internal social and political
causes. The Classic cultures, between the Formative and the Post-
classic, enjoy the greatest freedom and independence from either
historical or functional causality.“
  45. Willey, 19555.




                                   METHOD AND THEORY   19 a
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
                                                    Chapter 8




                                 Postclassic Stage
                                                   DEFINITIONS

The Postclassic stage in Middle America and Peru is marked by
the breakdown of the old regional styles of the Classic stage, by a
continuing or increased emphasis upon urban living, and, inferenti-
ally, by tendencies toward militarism and secularism. Concerning
the leveling of stylistic regionalism, we have observed that diffusion
between regions in the Classic stage both in the central Andes and
in Middle America was either the not easily detectable movement
of technological ideas and isolated elements or the trade in actual
objects and manufactures. In the Postclassic we see the wide, in-
terregional transferences of total art and architectural styles. The
mechanisms behind these transferences are debatable, but it is rea-
sonable to interpret many of them as actual movements of large
groups of people often accompanied by military force. These
trends toward militarism and large-scale warfare are reflected in
the archaeological record by late Postclassic stage increases in forti-
fications and fortified communities in many Middle American and
Peruvian regions. The implications for a gradually increasing secu-
larization of culture and society in the Postclassic are less direct.
We would, however, argue that a decrease in the number, size, and
elaboration of pyramid mounds and other kinds of religious struc-
tures is one clue to the waning of religious authority. Another
is the aesthetic decline from Classic standards which characterizes
much of Postclassic art in Peru and Middle America. In some re-
gions this tendency is seen in standardization and mass production


                                     POSTCLASSIC   STAGE   19 3
of objects. In citing such definitions, we are attempting, it must be
remembered, to weigh and give classificatory value to trends. War-
fare and non-religious authority were certainly not absent from
either the Peruvian or the Middle American scene in the Classic
or even the Formative stages; but, in so far as we can measure such
things from the archaeological evidence, both militarism and secu-
larism were in the ascendancy during the Postclassic stage.
   We have discussed and defined urbanism in some of its aspects
in our treatment of the Classic stage, but it is from the Postclassic
level that we know most, from both archaeological and ethnohistori-
cal sources, about the native American city. These cities were
formed around politico-religious nuclei—pyramids, temples, pal-
aces—and the urban zones contained           not only the rulers, priests,
and their entourages but various craftsmen and handlers of produce.
In the Inca system all these city dwellers were governmental em-
ployees; under the Aztec many of them were independent artisans
and merchants. In brief, the native city of the New              World had
large population aggregates either within residence or within reach,
was the seat of politico-religious power, served as an economic and
social center, and maintained        complex and diverse divisions of
labor among its citizens.
                                                 SOUTH    AMERICA

   Peruvian Postclassic cultures include all those of the Tiahuanaco
horizon and of later times. Their time span is approximately from
A.D. 1000 to A.D. 1532.1 In the final years Inca sovereignty spread
over all Peru and into adjacent Andean territories,? but just prior to
this there were important regional kingdoms such as the Chimu,?
Cuismancu, and Chincha‘ of the coast and numerous smaller states
in the highlands.
   We know that in ancient Peru, cities so defined came into being
on the Classic stage, at least in some regions, such as the north and
   1. Rowe, 1945. As observed in the discussions of the Peruvian Classic, this
beginning date may have to be moved back two or three centuries.
  2. Means, 1931; Rowe, 1946.          3. Rowe, 1948.         4. Rowe, 1946.



                                      METHOD AND THEORY       194
                                In AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
south coasts. There is an important difference, however, between
the Peruvian Postclassic city and its presumed Classic stage proto-
type. The north coast Classic population aggregate appears to have
grown by accretion, somewhat haphazardly, around a temple cen-
ter, while the Postclassic city follows a planned or partially planned
layout.® It is as though the necessity for, and idea of, city life had
been accepted in Postclassic times whereas, in the earlier stage, the
problem had not yet been dealt with consciously. We are not cer-
tain of the time of the first appearance of the “planned city” in
Peru, but there are several indications that it may have marked the
beginnings of the Postclassic on the Tiahuanaco style horizon.’ By
the latter part of the Postclassic the symmetrically arranged urban
center was characteristic of north coast sites such as Chan Chan,
Pacatnamu, and El Purgatorio.’
   Coexistent with the Peruvian cities are the tendencies toward
secularism and militarism mentioned above as defining the Post-
classic stage. The big religious centers and shrines dominated pre-
historic Peru during the Formative and, particularly, the Classic.
Beginning with the castillo at Chavin de Huantar and the other
Chavin horizon temples in the Nepefia and Casma valleys,® the
temple pyramid reached gigantic proportions in Classic stage con-
structions such as the Huaca Cortada in the Chicama Valley, the
Pyramid of the Sun in the Moche Valley,® the Gallinazo and Huan-
caco mounds in the Vird Valley,!° and the Maranga pyramids in
the Rimac Valley." In the Postclassic, pyramids continued to be
built, but these were usually placed within the inclosures of large
architectural complexes.” Like the pyramids within the walls of
Chan Chan, they tended to be smaller in absolute size than those
of the Classic, and they lost still more in impressiveness by the size
   5. Willey, 1953c, pp. 396-99.
   6. Willey, 1953¢, pp. 412 ff.; Stumer, 1954.
   7. Schaedel, 1951.       8. Tello, 1943.            9. Kroeber, 1925.
   10. W. C. Bennett, 1950; Willey, 1953c.
   11. Jijén y Caamafio, 1949.
   12. Schaedel, 1951; Willey, 1953c; Stumer, 1954.



                                         POSTCLASSIC   STAGE   19 5
and numbers of the palaces and city buildings which surrounded
them. There are other trends which support these inferences drawn
from architecture. During the Postclassic, Peruvian art, as a whole,
moved away from representational or what could be interpreted
as god-themes. Following the Tiahuanaco horizon, the drift was
toward stultification and geometric decorative art. Also, we know
from ethnohistoric sources that the Inca state was highly secular-
ized. The Inca sun-god was imposed upon conquered peoples, but
there was no concerted effort made to obliterate local religions.1*
Power was conceived of as military and bureaucratic might.
   Militarism seems to have been a force in old Peruvian society
from an early time. In this, as in many other of its trends and
emphases, Peru differs from Middle America. Large fortifications
of a refuge nature have been identified as far back as the late Forma-
tive White-on-red horizon," and fortified strongholds, or castillos,
are a common feature of north coast Classic. There seems little
doubt, however, that organized warfare was stepped up at the close
of the Classic and throughout the Postclassic. The Tiahuanaco
stylistic horizon was probably propelled by military force,!® and
long-distance roads date from this time.'* Essentially, the differ-
ence between Classic and Postclassic warfare in Peru was probably
one of scope. Fighting was, undoubtedly, intense on an intravalley
or small intervalley scale in the Classic, but wide-scale geographi-
cal strategy and maneuvers belong to the later stage. This is indi-
cated by a change in the nature of fortifications as well as by ethno-
historic accounts of Inca activities.

                                                MIDDLE AMERICA
   The Postclassic centers of Middle America are those well known
in the literature of the ethnohistoric period. Aztec Tenochtitlan in
the Valley of Mexico is the most famous example.!7 Mitla in Oaxa-

   13. Means, 1931; Rowe, 1946.               15. Willey, 19482.
   14. Willey, 1953c, pp. 358-59.             16. Willey, 1953¢, p. 370.
   17. Prescott, 1843; Vaillant, 1941; Sanders, 1956.



                                      METHOD AND THEORY      19 6
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
ca,'§ ‘Tzintzuntzan in the Tarascan country,!® Totonacan Cempoala
in Veracruz, and Mayapan” in Yucatan are others. Most of these
cities were seats of power in the late centuries just antedating, or
coming up to, the Spanish conquest. Somewhat earlier, in the cen-
turies between A.D. 800 and a.p. 1200, there was another set of
centers such as Tula, in Hidalgo, and Mexicanized Chichén Itza.”
The Middle American Postclassic varies regionally in total time
range, as did the Classic. In the central Mexican highlands its be
ginnings may be considered coincident with the fall of the Teoti-
huacan IV culture and the concomitant rise of Tula (ca. a.p. 800).
Elsewhere, it may be a century or two later. The terminus of the
Postclassic is marked by the early sixteenth-century arrival of the
Spanish, who found Tenochtitlan full of vigor and Mayapan aban-
doned.
   The history of Middle American urbanism cannot be followed
in the same detail as that of northern Peru, but, as we have re-
marked, the Teotihuacan IV phase in the Valley of Mexico was a
foreshadowing of the city life seen later in sixteenth-century Te-
nochtitlan. The Aztec city, with an estimated population of sixty
thousand persons,” was supported by a thick fringe of chinampa
(floating garden) farmers on its margins and around the shores of
Lake Texcoco. Water transportation—a mobility factor—was al-
most certainly of importance in the maintenance of a community
of such size, and this same factor may well have been important in
Teotihuacén times. Temple pyramids were dwarfed by the large
and elaborate cities surrounding them in much the same fashion as
in Postclassic Peru. There is not much question that religion was
always a stronger force in the life of prehistoric Middle America
than in Peru, but there are indications that secular and military
powers were in the ascendancy during the Aztec regime. The
Tenochcas rose to dominance in central Mexico during several
  18. Parsons, 1936.                  20. Roys, 1950.
  19. Foster, 1948.                   21. Acosta, 1940, 1944, 1945.
  22. Morris, Charlot, and Morris, 1931; Tozzer, n.d.
  23. Sanders, 1956.



                                      POSTCLASSIC STAGE   19 7
centuries of bitter intercity fighting following the collapse of ‘Teoti-
huacan, and in this period the war-god rose to a commanding posi-
tion in Aztec society.”4
   Militarism, secularism, and urbanism in Postclassic*® Mexico and
Central America have been discussed at length by others; but,
apparently, these trends do not march evenly in all quarters of the
Middle American area. There are some indications that the high-
land basin environments were more favorable for urban growth
than the lowlands;?’ thus, the urban classification seems to fit better
in western Mexico, Oaxaca, and the Guatemalan highlands than on
the east coast or in the Maya lowlands. Yet there are significant
variations among the highland regions. In the Guatemalan high-
lands some of the largest site zones date from the Formative. The
Miraflores phase at Kaminaljuyu offers evidence of a great occupa-
tion zone and politico-religious center outstripping in size anything
that came later.?® Guatemalan highland late Postclassic sites are
well fortified, however, and attest to a period of widespread war-
fare and strife linked to the disruptions in central Mexico. In the
Maya lowlands at Chichén        Itza, the Tula-Toltec art and the new
constructions at an old Classic ceremonial center suggest that long-
distance conquest was a feature of the early Postclassic in that re-
gion. Just how much of an urban center Chichén Itza ever became
is not clear. There are numerous house mounds around the center,
but it is unlikely that the dwelling pattern here was comparable to
that of compact Tenochtitlan. Later, however, the Yucatecan Maya
attempted an urban center at the walled site of Mayapan. Within
the inclosing wall some four thousand household units have been
mapped over an area about two to three kilometers in extent.2? It
is the most urbanized of any known lowland Maya site, but whether
the greater part of its inhabitants lived within the walls most of the
year following non-farming occupations is still a matter for con-
  24. Vaillant, 1941.
  25. The term “‘Militaristic” has been used for this stage (Armillas, 1951).
  26. Ibid.                       28. Shook and Proskouriakoff, 1956.
  27. Sanders, 1953.              29. Ruppert and Smith, 1952.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY       19
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY            8
jecture. In any case, we can conclude that urbanization was decided-
ly less successful in the Maya lowlands than in the Valley of
Mexico.
  There is an important phenomenon connected with the Postclas-
sic stage of development that has not been significant in earlier
stages. This is, in effect, the large-scale exportation and implanta-
tion of the Postclassic features of militarism, secularism, and urban-
ism into and upon other cultural traditions where they had been
lacking. Mayapan may have been modified by such an implanta-
tion, deriving its Postclassic patterns from central Mexico. In Peru
this was certainly the case with the Inca empire. Roads, fortifica-
tions, and administrative quarters were constructed by the Inca
from Ecuador to central Chile. These traits and much of the Inca
system must have had profound effects upon the local inhabitants,
although we do not know to what extent these conquered cultures
were modified. Possibly, too, Postclassic phenomena exerted equal-
ly great, but less direct, influences in ways other than conquest and
incorporation. It has been suggested that real cities may have grown
up on the Ecuadorian    coast in response to the rich trade with the
Postclassic Chimu kingdom of the Peruvian north coast. If this is
true, the process which gave rise to some of the ancient Mediter-
ranean trading cities of the Old World would have its counterpart
in the New. Such a development is an excellent example of the in-
terlocking effects of diffusion and internal culture development.




                                     POSTCLASSIC STAGE   199
                                            Summary
We have postulated five major stages by which the culture-
history of aboriginal America may be recounted. These stages are
sequential and are derived from an inspection of archaeological
sequences throughout the hemisphere. Certain criteria were select-
ed for generalization from a detailed examination of numerous local
and regional sequences. The method is comparative, and the result-
ing definitions are abstractions which describe culture change
through time in native America. The stages are not formulations
which explain culture change. Explanation, we believe, lies in the
complex interplay of the multiple factors of natural environment,
population densities and groupings, group and individual psycholo-
gies, and culture itself. Our culture-stage constructs are fashioned
for the infinitely simpler purpose of describing types of cultures
and the arrangement of these types in sequential order in the
various parts of the New World.
    Our earliest stage, the Lithic, is characterized by chipped-stone
tools and weapons. These artifacts are found in environmental
contexts of the late Pleistocene, under conditions indicating a cli-
mate quite different from that of the present and often with re-
mains of extinct fauna. We have suggested the possibility of a
major division within this Lithic stage, an earlier era featuring
crude percussion-flaked choppers and scrapers and a later era in
which stone-chipping was much more finely finished and in which
lanceolate point forms were a diagnostic. As yet, however, the evi-
dence for such a division is not conclusive. In general, it is believed
that the period of the Lithic stage ranged from perhaps as early


                                  METHOD AND THEORY    200
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
as 20000 B.c. down to about 5000 B.c., although this later limit
varies considerably. Subsistence was based upon hunting and gath-
ering, with emphasis varying according to environmental condi-
tions. Populations were small and scattered, but by 5000 B.c., or
before, man had found his way over most of the New World. The
stage is best represented, however, in the High Plains and the
Greater Southwest of North America.
   Our next stage, the Archaic, sees the continuation of hunting
and gathering cultures into environmental conditions approximat-
ing those of the present. There is a dependence upon smaller and
perhaps more varied fauna than in the Lithic stage and, in many
places, an increase in gathering. Stone implements and utensils
used in the preparation of wild vegetable foods first appear in this
stage. Many of these were shaped by use rather than design, al-
though, in many Archaic stage cultures, techniques of stone-grind-
ing and stone-polishing were known. Domesticated plants, includ-
ing maize, are found in some Archaic contexts, but it should be
stressed that the presence of these food plants is not evidence for
agriculture in the full sense of that term. As near as the archaeolo-
gist is able to tell, the Archaic cultures in question had but slight
economic dependence upon these primitive crops. In most instances
where such domesticated plants do occur on the Archaic level, the
prehistoric societies involved seem tu have been composed of
smaller populations than the other Archaic cultures, where fishing
or gathering was the means of subsistence.
   Many Archaic stage sites of the rivers and coasts of the eastern
United States, of the California and nurth Pacific coasts, and of
the Atlantic littoral of Brazil show large, deep refuse deposits of
shell, suggesting sizable and stable populations. In addition to
numerous ground- and polished-stone implements and ornaments,
pottery is sometimes present, as are carved bone, shell, and horn
objects. Elaborate woodworking is an associated trait in many
regions. From all this it is fully evident that an Archaic-type
economy provided the basis for material wealth as well as socio-
political and religious complexity in those societies where food


                                            sumMARY    7)O l
supplies were adequate. Thus, in a sense, certain Archaic phases,
such as those of California or the Eastern Woodlands, represent
a climax for the New World hunting-gathering tradition.
   It is difficult to set meaningful date limits to the Archaic stage.
At the earlier end of the range there is obvious overlap between
cultures that we are forced to classify as Archaic and those whose
technological inventory and environmental context is of a Lithic
stage type. Thus, some Archaic cultures seem to antedate 5000 B.c.,
our very approximate and arbitrary upper limit for the Lithic
stage. At the other end of the time scale, we know that many
American cultures of the historic present subsist with an Archaic-
type economy and technology. This does not impute to them
“archaicism’” or “‘backwardness”’ in non-technological aspects of
culture but rather implies a great richness in the non-material]
fields for many of the prehistoric Archaic cultures that are known
only from the meager archaeological record.
   With the advent of the Formative stage there is, for most Ameri-
can areas, a fundamental economic shift from hunting-gathering to
agricultural food production. This is the most profound change in
our scheme of stages. The geographical focus moves from North
America to Middle America and, perhaps, even farther south to
the central Andes. All the gradual steps by which a sedentary,
village, Formative way of life was achieved are not yet clear. It is
likely that slow, steady experimentation and use of food plants by
Archaic gathering peoples, such as those who occupied the Tamau-
lipas or New Mexican caves, eventuated in village life in which the
primary dependence was upon crops like maize and beans. Agri-
cultural villages and towns appear in Middle America, in several
regions, in the earliest phases of Formative sequences and probably
date back to as early as the middle of the second millennium B.c.
In Peru similar agriculture-based village cultures are believed to
be as old as the beginning of the first millennium B.c. Presumably,
from these nuclear American centers, a knowledge of agriculture,
fully developed maize, and other plants diffused, or were carried,
over much of North and South America. By a.p. 1000, if not


                                  METHOD AND THEORY
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY    202
earlier, the southwestern and most of the eastern United States
were within this Formative orbit; and, in the other direction, the
southern Andes and much of lowland South America were fol-
lowing an agricultural, village or town tradition.
   A stable village or town life, with its potentialities for cultural
and social development may, however, be made possible by econo-
mies other than agricultural. We have noted that, in certain Archaic
stage archaeological phases, the size of the sites and the general
indications of stability and wealth approximate conditions which
are comparable to, or even surpass, those of the agriculture-based
Formative stage cultures. Hence, we have placed the emphasis of
our Formative definition upon settlement size, stability, and the
social and cultural implications which these carry, rather than upon
an agricultural economy per se. We have defined the Formative
stage for the New World “by the presence of agriculture, or any
other subsistence economy of comparable effectiveness, and by the
successful integration of such an economy into well-established
sedentary village life.” But, in so doing, we must keep in mind
that the economic potential for even the richest of the hunting-
gathering societies was definitely limited in such a way that fur-
ther development to what we have defined as a New World Classic
stage was precluded. Such a development was possible only with
agriculture and only in certain natural environmental settings.
   The agriculture-based Formative cultures are characterized by
the abundant use of ceramics. Weaving is usually well developed.
The competencies of the Lithic and Archaic stages in the chipping,
grinding, and polishing of stone are carried on. Site occupation
tends to be stable and of long duration. Houses and other buildings
are of permanent or semipermanent quality. The Formative vil-
lage is the basic sociopolitical unit, and in some regions it is of
town size. Specialized politico-religious architecture and/or sites
are frequently features of the Formative stage. These may take
the form of pyramidal mound-based temples within, or apart from,
the village or town communities,    as in Middle America or the
southeastern United States, or, as in the Puebloan Southwest, the


                                             SUMMARY   2.0) 3
special construction may be a subterranean kiva in the heart of the
settlement. In many places these special buildings or sites imply a
politico-religious organization and authority reaching beyond the
confines of a single site or community.
   The Classic stage marks the beginning of urban life in native
America. The early New World cities were built around the
temple pyramids and palace platforms of the ceremonial centers.
They would, thus, appear to be the logical developments out of
such centers and towns of the Formative stage. In many instances
they are, indeed, the same sites, showing earlier     Formative occu-
pation and architectural levels overlaid by the later habitations and
monuments of the Classic. These Classic stage cities were, most
certainly, the nuclei of political and religious governments, of
artistic and intellectual achievement, and of commerce and crafts.
The temples, palaces, and other public buildings of the Classic are
of great size and elaboration, attesting to the planning, skill, and
labor organization of the builders. The Classic stage is also charac-
terized by the appearance of great art styles, and these styles tend
to be limited to well-defined regions. Craftsmanship in ceramics,
weaving, stoneworking, carving of all kinds, and, in some places,
metallurgy is of a high order. Craft specialization is a certainty.
Differentiation in burial goods, in architecture, in the representa-
tions in art styles—all these things indicate the presence of a well-
developed class stratification.
   The Classic stage, as defined, is limited to southern Mexico and
adjacent upper Central America (the area called Middle America)
and to the Peru-Bolivian coast and highlands (the Central Andean
area). These are the two centers of aboriginal American civiliza-
tion, although it 1s possible that these Classic patterns may also be
found along the Ecuadorian coast. Middle American and Peru-
Bolivian Classic phases appear to be roughly contemporaneous and
to occupy most of the first millennium a.p.
  The Postclassic stage follows the Classic. It, too, is urban, per-
haps more so than the Classic. It is confined to Middle America
and Peru. At the onset of the Postclassic, each area sees the break-


                                  METHOD AND THEORY   2?
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY     04
down of the great regional art styles of the Classic. There are evi-
dences of population shiftings and migrations, of war and troubled
times. A decline in the aesthetic level of the Classic and in religious
architecture suggests an increasing secularization of society. An
increase in fortifications and fortified cities or towns gives a mili-
taristic cast to many of the Postclassic cultures. The Postclassic
civilizations are generally dated in the last six hundred years or so
preceding the Spanish conquests of Mexico and Peru.
   This completes our survey of a rather considerable sample of
the data of New World prehistory solely for the purpose of testing
a proposed historical-developmental classification. The difficulties
of this kind of interpretation and the defects of our particular
scheme have been. candidly exposed and need not be repeated here.
In its adherence to the broad outlines of historical reality the
 scheme has a certain value as a recapitulation of American archae-
ology, but it does not provide short and simple answers to the out-
 standing problems of history and process in that field. The adequacy
 of the data selected and the extent to which they have upheld the
 scheme we leave to the reader’s better judgment.




                                             SUMMARY    WUO 5
Bibliography
      -

«-_




          =f
                                       Bibliography
Acosta, JorcE R.
  1940 “Exploraciones en Tula, Hidalgo, 1940,” Revista mexicana de
         estudios antropologicos (Mexico, D.F.), 4, 172-94.
  1944   “La tercera temporada de exploraciones arqueoldgicas en Tula,
         Hidalgo, 1942,” ibid., 6, No. 3, 125-57.
  1945  “La cuarta y quinta temporada de excavaciones en Tula, Hidal-
        go,” ibid., 7, 23-64.
Apams, Rospert McC.
  1941  “Archaeological Investigations in Jefferson County, Missouri,”
        Transactions of the Academy of Science of St. Louis, 30, No. 5,
        151-221.
Apams, Rosert M.
  1956 “Some Hypotheses on the Development of Early Civilizations,”
         American Antiquity, 21, 227-32.
A.ecriA, Ricarpo, Nicuotson, H. B., and Wittey, G. R.
  1955   “The Archaic Tradition in Puerto Rico,” American Antiquity, 21,
         Lisi Pail
AMEGHINO, F.
  1911   “Une nouvelle industrie lithique,” Anales Museo Nacional (Bue-
         nos Aires), 20 (Ser. 3, Vol. 13), 189-204.
AMSDEN, CHARLES AVERY
  1949   Prehistoric Southwesterners from Basket Maker to Pueblo. Los
         Angeles: Southwest Museum.
ARMILLAS, PEDRO
  1948   “A Sequence of Cultural Development in Meso-America,” in
         A Reappraisal of Peruvian Archaeology, ed. WenvELL C. BEN-
         NETT, pp. 105-11. (Society for American Archaeology Memoir
         No. 4.) Menasha, Wis.
  1950   ‘“Teotihuacan, Tula, y los Toltecas: Las culturas post-Arcaicas y
         pre-Aztecas del Centro de Mexico: Excavaciones y estudios,
         1922-1950,” Runa (Buenos Aires), 3, 37-70.
  1951   ‘Tecnologia, formaciones socio-econdmicas y religién en Meso-
         america,” in The Civilizations of Ancient America, pp. 19-30.
         (Selected Papers of the XXIXth International Congress of Ameri-
         canists, ed. Sor Tax, Vol. 1.) Chicago: University of Chicago
         Press.



                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY   »)09
Arno_p, J. R., and Lipsy, W. F.
  1951 “Radiocarbon Dates,” Science, 113, No.       2927    (February 2),
         111-20.
AveLreyra Arroyo DE AnpbA, Luis
  1956 ‘The Second Mammoth and Associated Artifacts at Santa Isabel
         Iztapan, Mexico,’ American Antiquity, 22, 12-28.
AVELEYRA Arroyo DE AnpA, Luis, and MaLponapo-KoErrpDELL, MANUEL
  1953 “Association of Artifacts with Mammoth in the Valley of Mexi-
         co,” ibid., 18, 332-40.
Baerreis, Davin ALBERT
   1950 ‘Comments on South American Archaic Relations,” American
         Antiquity, 16, 165-66.
  1951   The Preceramic Horizons of Northeastern Oklahoma. (“Museum of
         Anthropology, University of Michigan, Anthropological Pa-
         pers,” No. 6.) Ann Arbor.
BaGGERLY, CARMEN
  1954 ‘‘Waterworn and Glaciated Stone Tools from the Thumb Dis-
         trict of Michigan,” American Antiquity, 20, 171-73.
Banco DE LA REPUBLICA
  1948   El Museo del Oro. Bogota, Colombia.
BarreETT, SAMUEL A., and Hawkes, E. W.
  1919   The Kratz Creek Mound Group. (Bulletin of the Public Museum
        of the City of Milwaukee, Vol. 3, No. 1.)
Bartetr, K.
  1942   “Notes upon a Primitive Stone Industry of the Little Colorado
         Valley,” Plateau (Northern Arizona Society of Science and Art;
         Museum of Northern Arizona, Flagstaff, Ariz.), 14, No. 3,
         37-41.
  1943   “A Primitive Stone Industry of Little Colorado Valley,” Ameri-
         can Antiquity, 8, 266-68.
Beats, R. L.
  1932   The Comparative Ethnology of Northern Mexico, before 1750.
         (“Ibero-Americana,” No. 2.) Berkeley: University of California
         Press.
BEARDSLEY, RIcHARD K.
  1948 “Culture Sequences in Central California Archaeology,” Ameri-
         can Antiquity, 14, 1-28.
Betous, Russexu E.
  1953   “The Central California Chronological Sequence Re-examined,”
         American Antiquity, 18, 341-52.                :


                                    METHOD AND THEORY      Da
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY           0
Bennett, Joun W.
  1944 “Middle American Influences on Cultures of the Southeastern
          United States,” Acta Americana (Mexico, D.F.), 2, 25-50.
  1952    “The Prehistory of the Northern Mississippi Valley,” in Arche-
          ology of Eastern United States, ed. James B. Grirrin, pp. 108-23.
          Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
BENNETT, WENDELL C.
  1934 Excavations at Tiahuanaco. (‘“American Museum of Natural His-
        tory, Anthropological Papers,” Vol. 34.) New York.
  19444 Archaeological Regions of Colombia: A Ceramic Survey. (“Yale Uni-
        versity Publications in Anthropology,”’ No. 30.) New Haven.
  19442 The North Highlands of Peru: Excavations in the Callejon de Huaylas
        and at Chavin de Huantar. (“American Museum of Natural His-
          tory, Anthropological Papers,” Vol. 39, Part 1.) New York.
  1946a   “The Archaeology of Columbia,” in Handbook of South American
          Indians, ed. JuLtaN H. Stewarp, 2, 823-50. (Smithsonian Insti-
          tution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 143.) Wash-
        ington, D.C.
  1946) Excavations in the Cuenca Region, Ecuador (“Yale University Publi-
          cations in Anthropology,” No. 35.) New Haven.
  1946¢   “The Atacamefio,” in Handbook of South American Indians, ed.
          Juuan H. Srewarp, 2, 599-618. (Smithsonian Institution, Bu-
          reau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 143.) Washington,
          D.C.
  1948    “The Peruvian Co-tradition,” in A Reappraisal of Peruvian
          Archaeology, ed. WenveLi C. Bennett, pp. 1-7. (Society for
          American Archaeology Memoir No. 4.) Menasha, Wis.
  1950    The Gallinazo Group, Vird Valley. (“Yale University Publica-
        tions in Anthropology,” No. 43.) New Haven.
BENNETT, WENDELL C., and Biro, J. B.
  1949 Andean Culture History. (“American Museum of Natural His-
          tory, Handbook Series,” No, 15.) New York.
Bennett, W. C., Bremer, E. F., and Sommer, F. H.
  1948 Northwest Argentine Archaeology. (“Yale University Publications
          in Anthropology,” No. 38.) New Haven.
Bennynorr, J. A.
   1950 “Californian Fish Spears and Harpoons,” Anthropological Rec-
        ords (Berkeley), 9, 295-337.
Berry, Brewton, and CHAPMAN, Cary
   1942 ‘“‘An Oneota Site in Missouri,” American Antiquity, 7, 290-305.



                                             BIBLIOGRAPHY   WA 1
Biro, J. B.
  1938    “Antiquity and Migrations of the Early Inhabitants of Patago-
          nia,” Geographical Review, 28, 250-75.
  1943    Excavations in Northern Chile. (“American Museum of Natural
          History, Anthropological Papers,” Vol. 38, Part 4.) New York.
  19484   “America’s Oldest Farmers,” Natural History, 57, 296-303, 334.
  1948    ‘‘Preceramic Cultures in Chicama and Viru,” in A Reappraisal
          of Peruvian Archaeology, ed. Wenve.y C. BENNETT, pp. 21-28.
          (Society for American Archaeology Memoir No. 4.) Menasha,
          Wis.
  1951    “South American Radiocarbon     Dates,” in Radiocarbon Dating,
          ed. Freperick Jounson.     (Society for American Archaeology
        Memoir No. 8.) American Antiquity, 17, No. 1, Part 2, 37-49.
Brack, GLenn A.
   1944 Angel Site, Vanderburgh County, Indiana. (“Indiana Historical
        Society, Prehistory Research Series,” Vol. 2, No. 5.) Indianapo-
        lis.
Buss, Westey L.
   1950 “Early and Late Lithic Horizons in the Plains,” Proceedings of
        the 6th Plains Archaeological Conference, 1948, pp. 108-14. (“Uni-
          versity of Utah Anthropological Papers,’’ No. 11.) Salt Lake
          City.
Boas, FRANZ
   1913 “Archaeological Investigations in the Valley of Mexico by the
         International School, 1911-1912,” Proceedings, 18th International
         Congress of Americanists (London), pp. 176-79.
iBOGGswo mas
   1944 “Excavations in Central and Western El Salvador,” Appendix C
         in J. M. Loneyear, Excavations in El Salvador, pp. 53-74.
          (“Memoirs of the Peabody Museum,” Vol. 9, No. 2.) Cam-
          bridge, Mass.
Borpen, Cuartes E.
  1950    “Preliminary Report on Archaeological Investigations in the
          Fraser Delta Region,” Anthropology in British Columbia, No. 1,
          pp. t3—27-
  1951    “Facts and Problems of Northwest Coast Prehistory,” ibid.,
          No. 2, pp. 35-52.
  1954    “Some Aspects of Prehistoric Coastal-Interior Relations in the
         Pacific Northwest,” ibid., No. 4, pp. 26-32.
Braipwoop, Roser J.
  1952    The Near East and the Foundations for Civilization. (London Lec-
          tures.) Eugene: Oregon State System of Higher Education.


                                    METHOD AND THEORY      2
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY          12
BraInerpD, Georce W.
   1953 “A Re-examination of the Dating Evidence for the Lake Mo- -
          have Artifact Assemblage,” American Antiquity, 18, 270-71.
  1954   The Maya Civilization. Los Angeles: Southwest Museum.
  Bray, Rosert T.
     1956 “The Culture-Complexes and Sequence at the Rice Site
           (23SN200), Stone County, Missouri,” Missouri Archaeologist
;          (Columbia, Mo.), 18, Nos. 1-2, 47-134.
Brew, JouHNn Oris
  1946 Archaeology of Alkali Ridge, Southeastern Utah. (“Papers of the
         Peabody Museum,” Vol. 21.) Cambridge, Mass.
Brew, Joun Oris, and Smiru, Watson
  1954 “Comments on ‘Southwestern Cultural Interrelationships and
         the Question of Area Co-tradition,’ by Joe Ben Wheat,” Ameri-
         can Anthropologist, 56, 586-88.
Broecker, W. S., Kup, J. L., and Tucex, C. S.
  1956 “Lamont Natural Radiocarbon Measurements III,”’ Science, 124
         (July 27), 154-65.
Bryan, ALAN LyLE
  1955   “An Intensive Archaeological Reconnaissance in the Northern
         Puget Sound Region.” Unpublished Master’s thesis, University
        of Washington, Seattle.
Bryan, Kirk, and McCann, Frankuin T.
  1943   ‘Sand Dunes and Alluvium near Grants, New Mexico,” Ameri-
         can Antiquity, 8, 281-90.
Bryan, Kirk, and Toutouse, Josep H., Jr.
  1943 ‘The San Jose Non-ceramic Culture and Its Relation to Pueblo-
          an Culture in New Mexico,” ibid., pp. 269-80.
Burnett, E. K.
   1945 The Spiro Mound Collection in the Museum. (“Contributions from
          the Museum of the American Indian,”’ Vol. 14.) New York:
          Heye Foundation.
BusuHne Lt, G. H. S.
  1951   Archaeology of the Santa Elena Peninsula in Southwest Ecuador.
         (“Cambridge University Museum on Archaeology and Ethnol-
         ogy, Occasional Publications,” No. 1.) Cambridge, England.
Byers, Dovetas S.
   1954 “Bull Brook, a Fluted Point Site in Ipswich, Massachusetts,”
         American Antiquity, 19, 343-51.
  1955   ‘Additional Information on the Bull Brook Site, Massachu-
         setts,” ibid., 20, 274-76.


                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY   yyl 3
Byers, Doucias S.—Continued
   1956 “Ipswich s.c.,” Essex        Institute Historical   Collections   (Salem,
         Mass.), July.
CaLpweLL, JosepH R.
  1954   “The Old Quartz Industry of Piedmont Georgia and South
         Carolina,” Southern Indian Studies (Chapel Hill, N.C.), 6, 37-39.
CaLpweLL, Josep, and McCann, CATHERINE
  1941 Irene Mound Site, Chatham County, Georgia. Athens, Ga.: Uni-
         versity of Georgia Press.
CaMPBELL, EvizasetH W. C., and Campseii, Witiiam H.
   1935 The Pinto Basin Site: An Ancient Aboriginal Camping Ground in
         the California Desert. With geological introduction by Davis
         ScuarF and description of the artifacts by CHartes AVERY
         Amspen. (“Southwest Museum Papers,” No. 9.) Los Angeles.
   1940 ‘A Folsom Complex in the Great Basin,” Masterkey (Southwest
         Museum, Los Angeles), 14, 7-11.
CampBeELL, Exizaseta W. C., et al.
  1937   The Archaeology of Pleistocene Lake Mohave. A symposium by
        Exizapetu W. C. Camppeit, Wittiam H. Campsei, Ernst
         Antevs, CHarLes Avery AMSDEN, JosEPH A. Barsieri, and
         Francis D. Bove. (“Southwest Museum Papers,” No. 11.) Los
         Angeles.
CAMPBELL, JoHN Martin, and Eris, Florence H.
  1952 “The Atrisco Sites: Cochise Manifestations in the Middle Rio
         Grande Valley,” American Antiquity, 17, 211-21.
CAMPBELL, IHomas N.
  1948 ‘The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with Al-
        luvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas,” Texas Archaeological
         and Paleontological Society Bulletin, 19, 7-35.
Cansy, Joet S.
  1951  ‘Possible Chronological Implications of the Long Ceramic Se-
        quence Recovered at Yarumela, Spanish Honduras,” in The Civi-
         lizations of Ancient America, pp. 79-85. (Selected Papers of the
          XXIXth Congress of Americanists, ed. Sov Tax, Vol. 1.) Chicago:
          University of Chicago Press.
Cartuson, Roy L.
  1954   “Archaeological Investigations in the San Juan Islands.” Un-
        published Master’s thesis, University of Washington, Seattle.
CarriON CacHot, REBECCA
  1948 “La cultura chavin. Dos nuevas colonias: Kuntur Wasi y
         Ancon,” Revista del Museo Nacional de Antropologia y Arqueo-
         logia (Lima, Peru), 2, 97-172.


                                     METHOD AND THEORY          D.14
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Carter, G. F.
  1949   “Evidence for Pleistocene Man at La Jolla, California,” Transac-
         tions of the New York Academy of Sciences, Ser. 2, 2, 254-57.
  1950   “Evidence for Pleistocene Man in Southern California,’ Geo-
         graphical Review, 40, 84-102.
  1952   “Interglacial Artifacts from the San Diego Area,” Southwestern
         Journal of Anthropology, 8, 444-56.
  1954   “An    Interglacial Site at San Diego, California,”      Masterkey
          (Southwest Museum, Los Angeles), 28, 165-74.
Caso, ALFonso
   1938  Exploraciones en Oaxaca, quinta y sexta temporadas, 1936-37.   (In-
         stituto Panamericano de Geografia e Historia Publicacién 34.)
         Mexico, D.F.
  1947   Calendario y. escritura de las antiguas culturas de Monte Alban.
         Mexico, D. F.: Talleres Graficos de la Nacién.
  1953   “New World Culture History: Middle America,” in Anthro-
         pology Today, ed. A. L. Krorzer, pp. 226-37. Chicago: Univer-
         sity of Chicago Press.
Caso, ALronso, and Berna, IGNAcIo
  1952   Urnas de Oaxaca. (““Memorias del Instituto Nacional de Antropo-
         logia e Historia,” Vol. 2.) Mexico, D.F.
CuaAMPE, Joun L.
  1946   Ash Hollow Cave. (“University of Nebraska Studies,” N.S.,
         No. 1.) Lincoln, Neb.
CHAPMAN, Car H.
  1948 “A Preliminary Survey of Missouri Archaeology. Part IV. An-
        cient Cultures and Sequence,” Missouri Archaeologist (Columbia,
        Mo.), 10, No. 4, 136-64.
  1952  “Recent Excavations in Graham Cave,” appendix to Graham
         Cave, an Archaic Site in Montgomery County, Missouri, by Wi-
         FRED D. Locan, pp. 87-101. (Missouri Archaeological Society
         Memoir No. 2.) Columbia, Mo.
  1954   “Preliminary Salvage Archaeology in the Pomme de Terre Reser-
         voir Area, Missouri,” Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 16, Nos. 3-4.
  1956   ‘Preliminary Salvage Archaeology in the Table Rock Reservoir
         Area, Missouri: A Résumé of Table Rock Archaeological Inves-
         tigations,” ibid., 18, Nos. 1-2, 6-45.
CuapMan, Cart H.,       Maxwe tt, Tuomas J., and Koztovicu, EuceNe
  1951   “A Preliminary Archaeological Survey of the Table Rock Reser-
         voir Area, Stone County, Missouri,” ibid., 13, No. 2, 3-39.


                                            BIBLIOGRAPHY   Dets
CuiLpe, V. Gorpon
  1946    What Happened in History. New York: Penguin Books, Inc.
  1950   Prehistoric Migrations in Europe. (Institutet fgr Sammenlignende
         Kulturforskning, Ser. A. Forelesninger, Vol. 20, Part 5.) Oslo.
Crariin, WittiaM H., Jr.
  1931    The Stalling’s Island Mound, Columbia County, Georgia. (“Papers
          of the Peabody Museum,” Vol. 14, No. 1.) Cambridge, Mass.
Crarke, J. G, D;
   1936 The Mesolithic Settlement of Northern Europe. Cambridge: Cam-
          bridge University Press.
   1952 Prehistoric Europe: The Economic Basis. London: Methuen.
CLemMeEnts, Tomas, and CLements, Lyp1a
   1951 “Evidence of Pleistocene Man in Death Valley, California” (Ab-
          stract), Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, 62, No. 12,
          Part 2, 1498-99.
Corr, Fay-Cooper
   1943   “Chronology in the Middle West,” Proceedings of the American
          Philosophical Society, 86, No. 2, 299-303.
Cote, Fay-Cooper, and Deve, THorNE
   1937 Rediscovering Illinois. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Coie, Fay-Cooprr, et al.
   1951 Kincaid, a Prehistoric Illinois Metropolis. Chicago: University of
         Chicago Press.
Cotter, DonaLp
  1946 “The Archaeology of Ecuador,” in Handbook of South American
        Indians, ed. JuLt1an H. Stewarn, 2, 767-84. (Smithsonian Insti-
        tution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 143.) Wash-
        ington, D.C.
  1955    Culturai Chronology and Change as Reflected in the Ceramics of the
         Vir Valley, Peru. (‘Fieldiana: Anthropology,” Vol. 43.) Chi-
         cago: Chicago Natural History Museum.
Coxuier, Donatp, and Morra, J. V.
  1943   Survey and Excavations in Southern Ecuador. (‘Field Museum of
         Natural History, Anthropological Series,”’ Vol. 35.) Chicago.
Cotutns, Henry B.
  1937   Archaeology of St. Lawrence Island, Alaska. (“Smithsonian Miscel-
        laneous Collections,” Vol. 96, No. 1.) Washington, D.C.
  1953a “Recent Developments in the Dorset Culture Area,” in Asia and
        North America: Transpacific Contacts, ed. Marian W. Smiru.
        (Society for American Archaeology Memoir No. 9.) American
        Antiquity, 18, No. 3, Part 2, 32-39.
  1953b “Radiocarbon Dating in the Arctic,” ibid., 18, 197-203.


                                     METHOD AND THEORY       2 16
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Cook, Harotp J.
  1927   “New Geological and Paleontological Evidence Bearing on the
         Antiquity of Mankind in America,” Natural History, 27, 240-47.
Cooper, Jonn M.
   1946  “The Araucanians,” in Handbook of South American Indians, ed.
        Juuian H. Srewarp, 2, 687-760. (Smithsonian Institution, Bu-
        reau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 143.) Washington,
         DIC:
Cooper, L. R.
   1933  The Red Cedar Variant of the Wisconsin Hopewell Culture. (Bulle-
         tin of the Public Museum     of the City of Milwaukee, Vol. 16,
        No. 2.)
Corne y, F. L.
   1944 “Cultura de El Molle,” Revista chilena de historia natural (Santi-
         ago, Chile), Vol. 48.
   1953 Cultura de El Molle. (Revision of 1944 article.) Santiago, Chile:
        Museo de Arqueologia de La Serena.
Correr, JoHN
  1954  “Indications of a Paleo-Indian Co-tradition for North America,”
        American Antiquity, 20, 64-67.
Crane, H.R.
  1955   “Antiquity of the Sandia Culture: Carbon 14 Measurements,”
         Science, 122, 689-90.
  1956   “University   of Michigan Radiocarbon     Dates,   I,” ibid., 124,
         664-72.
Cressman, L. S.
  1951   ‘‘Western Prehistory in the Light of Carbon 14 Dating,” South-
         western Journal of Anthropology, 7, 289-313.
Cressman, L. S., et al.
  1942   Archaeological Researches in the Northern Great Basin. (Carnegie
         Institution of Washington Publication 538.) Washington, D.C.
Cruxent, J. M., and Rousr, Irvine
  1956 “A Lithic Industry of Paleo-Indian Type in Venezuela,” Ameri-
         can Antiquity, 22, 172-79.
Cummines, Byron
  1933   Cuicuilco and the Archaic Culture of Mexico. (University of Ari-
        zona Bulletin, Vol. 4, No. 8; Social Science Bulletin, No. 4.)
        ‘Tucson, Ariz.
CunnincuaM, Wicsur M.
  1948   A Study of the Glacial Kame Culture. (“Museum of Anthropol-
         ogy, University of Michigan, Occasional Contributions,” No.
         12.) Ann Arbor.


                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY     o 17
Cusuine, F. H.
  1897 “A Preliminary Report on the Exploration of Ancient Key-
         Dwellers’ Remains on the Gulf Coast of Florida,” Proceedings of
         the American Philosophical Society, 35, 329-448.
Daucuerty, Ricuarp D.
  1956   Early Man in the Columbia Intermontane Province. (“University
         of Utah Anthropological Papers,” No. 24.) Salt Lake City.
Davis, E. Morr
   1953  “Recent Data from Two Paleo-Indian Sites on Medicine Creek,
         Nebraska,” American Antiquity, 18, 380-86.
Davis, E. Morr, and Scuuttz, C. BertraNnD
   1952 “The Archaeological and Paleontological Salvage Program at the
         Medicine Creek Reservoir, Frontier County, Nebraska,” Sci-
         ence, 115, 288-90.
DEBENEDETTI, S.
  1931   L’ancienne civilisation des Barreales. (“Ars Americana,” Vol. 2.)
         Paris: G. Van Oest.
DeJarnette, Davin L.
  1952 “Alabama Archeology: A Summary,” in Archeology of Eastern
                                                  ?,



         United States, ed. James B. GrirFin, pp. 272-84. Chicago: Uni-
         versity of Chicago Press.
DeJarnette, Davin L., and Wimserty, S. B.
  1941 The Bessemer Site. (Geological Survey of Alabama, Museum
         Paper 17.) University, Ala.
DELLINGER, S. C.
  1936 “Baby Cradles of the Ozark          Bluff Dwellers,’ Azerican An-
         tiquity, 1, 197-214.
Devutcer, S. C., and Dickinson, S. D.
   1942 “Pottery from the Ozark Bluff Shelters,” ibid., '7, 276-90.
Devet, Tuorne, et al.
   1952 Hopewellian Communities in Illinois. (“Illinois State Museum,
         Scientific Papers,” Vol. 5.) Springfield.
Dick, Hersert W.
   1952 “Evidences of Early Man in Bat Cave and on the Plains of San
         Augustin, New Mexico,” in Indian Tribes of Aboriginal Ameri-
         ca, pp. 158-63. (Selected Papers of the XXIXth International Congress
         of Americanists, ed. Sor Tax, Vol. 3.) Chicago: University of
         Chicago Press.
DiPeso, Cuarves C,
   1951 The Babocomari Village Site on the Babocomari River, Southeastern
         Arizona. (The Amerind Foundation, Inc., No. 5.) Dragoon,
         Ariz.


                                      METHOD AND THEORY       aA 8
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
  1953    The Sobaipuri Indians of the Upper San Pedro River Valley, South-
          eastern Arizona. (The Amerind Foundation, Inc., No. 6.) Dra-
          goon, Ariz.
Drucker, Pxivie
  1943  Ceramic Sequences at Tres Zapotes, Vera Cruz, Mexico. (Smithsoni-
        an Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 140.)
        Washington, D.C.
  1948    Preliminary Notes on an Archaeological Survey of the Chiapas Coast.
          (“Middle American Research Records,” Vol. 1, No. 11.) New
          Orleans: Tulane University.
  1952    La Venta, Tabasco: A Study of Olmec Ceramics and Art. (Smith-
          sonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No.
          153.) Washington, D.C
  1955    “Sources of Northwest Coast Culture,” in New Interpretations
          of Aboriginal American Culture History, pp. 59-81. (75th Anni-
          versary Volume, Anthropological        Society     of Washington.)
          Washington, D.C.
Durr, Witson, and Borpen, Cuarces E.
  1954 “A Scottsbluff-Eden Point from British Columbia,’ Anthropol-
        ogy in British Columbia, No. 4 (1953-54), pp. 33-36.
Duntevy, Marion L.
  1936 “A Comparison of the Cultural Manifestations of the Burkett
          and Gray-Wolfe Sites,” Chapters in Nebraska Archaeology (Lin-
          coln), Vol. 1, No. 2.
Exuoim, Gorpon F.
  1944    Excavations at Tampico and Panuco        in the Huasteca, Mexico.
          (“American Museum of Natural History, Anthropological Pa-
          pers,” Vol. 38, Part 5.) New York.
Ev_pripce, WitLiAM, and Vacaro, JosEPpH
   1952   ‘The Bull Brook Site, Ipswich, Massachusetts,” Bulletin of the
          Massachusetts Archaeological Society (Attleboro), 13, No. 4, 39-43.
Evans, Ciirrorp, Jr.
   1950 “A Report on Recent Archaeological Investigations in the Lagoa
         Santa Region of Minas Gerais, Brazil,” American Antiquity, 15,
          341-43.
   1954   “Spaulding’s Review of Ford: II,” American Anthropologist, 56,
          114.
   1955   “New Archaeological Interpretations in Northeastern South
          America,” in New Interpretations of Aboriginal American Culture
          History, pp. 82-94. (75th Anniversary Volume, Anthropologi-
          cal Society of Washington.) Washington, D.C.


                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY     2 l0)
Evans, Ciirrorp, Jr., and Meccers, B. J.
   1950 “Preliminary Results of Archaeological         Investigations   at the
         Mouth of the Amazon,” American Antiquity, 16, 1-9.
FarrBanks, Cuarwes H.
   1942  “The Taxonomic Position of Stalling’s Island, Georgia,” Ameri-
         can Antiquity, '7, 223-31.
  1949   ““A General Survey of Southeastern Prehistory,” in The Florida
         Indian and His Neighbors, ed. Joun W. Grirrin, pp. 55-75.
          (Papers delivered at an Anthropological Conference held at
          Rollins College, April 9-10, 1949.) Winter Park, Fla.
  1952  “Creek and Pre-Creek,” in Archeology of Eastern United States,
        ed. James B. Grirrin, pp. 285-300. Chicago: University of Chi-
        cago Press.
Fewxes, Jesse WALTER
  1924    Preliminary Archaeological Explorations at Weeden Island, Florida.
          (“Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections,” Vol. 76, No. 13.)
          Washington, D.C.
Ficcins, J. D.
  1927    “The Antiquity of Man in America,” Natural History, 27, 229-
          39.
  1933    ‘““A Further Contribution to the Antiquity of Man in America,”
          Proceedings of the Colorado Museum of Natural History, 12, No. 2,
          4-8.
Forsis, Ricuarp G., and Sperry, Joun D.
   1952  “An Early Man Site in Montana,”           American   Antiquity,   18,
         ZI.
Forp, James A.
  1936    Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and Mis-
          sissippi. (Department of Conservation,      Louisiana Geological
          Survey, Anthropological Study No. 2.) New Orleans.
  1951    Greenhouse: A Troyville—Coles Creek Period Site in Avoyelles Par-
          ish, Louisiana.   (“American Museum     of Natural History, An-
          thropological Papers,” Vol. 44, Part 1.) New York.
  1952    Measurements of Some Prehistoric Design Developments in the
          Southeastern States. (“American Museum of Natural History,
          Anthropological Papers,” Vol. 44, Part 3.) New York.
  1954a   ‘“Spaulding’s Review of Ford: I,” American Anthropologist, 56,
          OO lize
  1954b “The Type Concept Revisited,” ibid., pp. 42-54.
  1954¢ “Comment on A. C. Spaulding ‘Statistical Techniques for the
          Discovery of Artifact Types,’ ”” American Antiquity, 19, 390-91.


                                     METHOD AND THEORY        Do)
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
  1954d “Additional Notes on the Poverty          Point Site in Northern
        Louisiana,” ibid., pp. 282-85.
Forp, James A., Puriiies, Pamir, and Haac, Wittiam G.
   1955 The Jaketown Site in West-Central Mississippi. (“American Muse-
          um   of Natural History, Anthropological Papers,” Vol. 45,
          Part 1.) New York.
Forp, JaMes A., and Qumsy,       Georce I.
  1945    The Tchefuncte Culture: An Early Occupation of the Lower Missis-
          sippi Valley. (Society for American Archaeology Memoir No. 2.)
          Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.
Forp, James A., and Wess, CLARENCE H.
  1956    Poverty Point: A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. (“American Muse-
         um of Natural History, Anthropological Papers,” Vol. 46,
         Part 1.) New York.
Forp, James A., and Wittey, Gorpon R.
   1940 Crooks Site: A Marksville Period Burial Mound in La Salle Parish,
         Louisiana. (Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological
          Survey, Anthropological Study No. 3.) New Orleans.
  1941    “‘An Interpretation of the Prehistory of the Eastern United
          States,” American Anthropologist, 43, 325-63.
  1949    Surface Survey of the Vird Valley, Peru. (“American Museum of
         Natural History, Anthropological Papers,” Vol. 43, Part 1.)
         New York.
Foster, Greorce M.
  1948    Empires Children: The People of Tzintzuntzan. (Smithsonian In-
          stitution, Institute of Social Anthropology Publication No. 6.)
        Washington, D.C.
Fowke, GERARD
  1928  ‘‘Archaeological Investigations II,” Saithsonian Institution, Bu-
          reau of American Ethnology, 44th Annual Report, pp. 405-540.
        Washington, D.C.
Fowter, Metvin L., and Winters, Howarp
  1956  Modoc Rock Shelter: Preliminary Report. (Ulinois State Museum,
        Report of Investigations No. 4.) Springfield.
Garcia Payon, J.
  1943 Interpretacion cultural de la zona arqueologica de El Tajin. Mexico,
          D.F.: Universidad Nacional Auténoma de Mexico.
Gayton, A. H., and Krorser, A. L.
  1927.   The Uhle Pottery Collections from Nazca. (“University of Cali-
          fornia Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology,”
          Vol. 24, No. 1.) Berkeley.



                                             BIBLIOGRAPHY     D:1
Gippines, J. L., Jr.
  1951   “The Denbigh Flint Complex,” American Antiquity, 16, 193-203.
  1952   “Early Man      in the Arctic,”   Scientific American,   190, No. 6,
         82-88.
  1955   “The Denbigh Flint Complex Is Not Yet Dated,’’ American An-
         tiquity, 20, 375-76.
Girrorp, E. W., and ScHenck, W. EcBert
  1926   Archaeology of the Southern San Joaquin Valley. (“University of
        California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnol-
        ogy,” Vol. 23, No. 1.) Berkeley.
Gitmore, Metvin R.
  1930   ‘Vegetal Remains of the Ozark Bluff-Dweller Culture,” Papers
         of the Michigan Academy of Science, Arts and Letters, 14, 83-102.
Gyessine, G.
  1944  The Circumpolar Stone Age. (“Acta Arctica,” fasc. 2.) Copen-
        hagen.
Grapwin, Harotp S.
  1928 Excavations at Casa Grande, Arizona. (“Southwest Museum Pa-
        pers,” No. 2.) Los Angeles.
Guapwiw, H. S., et al.
  1937   Excavations at Snaketown: Material Culture. (“Medallion Papers,”
         No. 25.) Globe, Ariz.: Gila Pueblo.
Gocern, Joun M.
  1949   “Culture Traditions in Florida Prehistory,” in The Florida In-
         dian and His Neighbors, ed. Joun W. GrirFin, pp. 13-44. (Pa-
         pers delivered at an Anthropological Conference held at Rollins
         College, April 9-10, 1949.) Winter Park, Fla.
  1952   Space and Time Perspective in Northern St. Johns Archaeology, Flori-
         da. (‘Yale University Publications in Anthropology,” No. 47.)
         New Haven.
GonZzALEz, ALBERTO REx
  1952   “Antiguo horizonte preceramico en las Sierras Centrales de la
        Argentina,’ Runa (Buenos Aires), 5, 110-33.
Greenco, Rosert C.
  1957 “Prehistory in the Lower Mississippi Valley: The Issaquena
         Phase.”’ Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University.
         Pp. 369.
GrEENMAN, Emerson F.
  1927   “Michigan Mounds, with Special Reference to Two in Missau-
         kee County,” Papers of the Michigan Academy of Science, Arts
         and Letters, '7, 1-9.


                                       METHOD AND THEORY     De),
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY            2
  L932   “Excavation of the Coon Mound and an Analysis of the Adena
         Culture,” Ohio Archaeological and Historical Quarterly, 41, 369-523.
   1938  “Hopewellian Traits in Florida,” American Antiquity, 3, 327-32.
GRIFFIN, James B.
   1937  “The Archaeological Remains of the Chiwere Sioux,’ American
          Antiquity,
                2, 180-81.
  1943    The Fort Ancient Aspect: Its Cultural and Chronological Position in
          Mississippi Valley Archaeology. Ann Arbor: University of Michi-
          gan Press.
  1944    “The De Luna Expedition and the ‘Buzzard Cult’ in the South-
          east,” Journal of the Washington Academy of Science, 34, 299-303.
  1946    “Cultural Change and, Continuity in Eastern United States Ar-
          chaeology,” in Man in Northeastern North America, ed. FREDERICK
          Jounson, pp. 37-95. (“Papers of the Robert S. Peabody Foun-
          dation for Archaeology,” Vol. 3.) Andover, Mass.: Phillips
          Academy.
  1949    “The Cahokia Ceramic Complexes,” Proceedings of the Fifth
          Plains Conference for Archeology, pp. 44-58. (Laboratory of An-
          thropology, University of Nebraska, Notebook No. 1.) Lincoln.
  1950    “Review: “The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas,’
          by H. Perry Newell and Alex D. Krieger,” American Anthro-
          pologist, 52, 413-15.
  1951    “Some Adena and Hopewell Radiocarbon Dates,” in Radiocarbon
          Dating, ed. FREDERICK JoHNSON. (Society for American Archae-
          ology Memoir No. 8.) American Antiquity, 17, No. 1, Part 2,
          26-29.
  1952a   “Culture   Periods   in Eastern    United   States   Archeology,”   in
          Archeology of Eastern United States, ed. James B. Grirrin, pp.
        352-64. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
  1952b ‘An Interpretation of the Place of Spiro in Southeastern Archae-
          ology,” in “The Spiro Mound,” Missouri Archaeologist (Colum-
         bia, Mo.), 14, 89-106.
  1952¢  “Prehistoric Cultures of the Central Mississippi Valley,” in
         Archeology of Eastern United States, ed. James B. Grirrin, pp.
         226-38. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
GRIFFIN, James B., and Morcan, RicHarp G. (eds.)
  1941    Contributions to the Archaeology of the Illinois River Valley.
          (“Transactions of the American Philosophical Society,” Vol. 32,
          Part 1.) Philadelphia.
Gross, H.
  1951   “Mastodon,     Mammoth,     and Man in America,” Texas Archaeo-
          logical and Paleontological Society Bulletin, 22, 101-31.


                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY      Dis 3
Guernsey, E. Y.
   1939  ‘Relationships among Various Clark County Sites,” Proceedings
        of the Indiana Academy of Science, 48, 27-32.
   1942  “The Culture Sequence of the Ohio Falls Sites,” ibid., 51, 60-67.
Guernsey, S. J.
   1931 Explorations in Northeastern Arizona: Report on the Archaeological
        Field Work of 1920-1923. (‘Papers of the Peabody Museum,”
        Vol. 12, No. 1.) Cambridge, Mass.
Haac, WittiaM G.
  1942 “Early Horizons in the Southeast,” American Antiquity, 7,
          209-22.
Haac, Witiiam G., and Wess, CLarence H.
   1953   “‘Microblades at Poverty Point,” ibid., 18, 245-48.
Haropinec, M.
   1951 “La Jollan Culture,” E/ Museo (San Diego, Calif.), 1, 10-11,
          31-38.
Harp, ELMER
  1951  “An Archaeological Survey in the Strait of Belle Isle Area,”
          American Antiquity, 16, 203-20.
  1952   ‘The Cultural Affinities of the Newfoundland Dorset Eskimo.”
         Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University. Pp. 340.
Harrincton, M. R.
  1924    “The Ozark Bluff-Dweller,” American Anthropologist, 26, 1-21.
  1933    Gypsum Cave, Nevada.     (“Southwest Museum Papers,” No. 8.)
          Los Angeles.
  1934  “The Meaning of Gypsum Cave,” Texas Archaeological and Pale-
        ontological Society Bulletin, 6, 58-69.
  1948a “America’s Oldest Dwelling,” Masterkey (Southwest Museum,
        Los Angeles), 22, 148-52.
  1948b An Ancient Site at Borax Lake, California. (“Southwest Museum
        Papers,” No. 16.) Los Angeles.
  1948¢   ‘‘A New Pinto Site,” Masterkey, 22, No. 4, 116-18.
  1951    “Latest from Little Lake,”’ ibid., 25, No. 6, 188-91.
  1955    “Man’s Oldest Date in America,” Natural History, 64, 512-55.
Haury, Emit W.
  1932    Roosevelt: 9:6, a Hohokam Site of the Colonial Period. (‘‘Medal-
          lion Papers,” No. 11.) Globe, Ariz.
  1936    The Mogollon Culture of Southwestern New Mexico. (“Medallion
          Papers,’”” No. 20.) Globe, Ariz.
 1945     The Excavation of Los Muertos and Neighboring Ruins of the Salt
          River Valley, Southern Arizona. (‘Papers of the Peabody Muse-
          um,” Vol. 24, No. 1.) Cambridge, Mass.


                                    METHOD AND THEORY      2
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY          24
  1953a “Artifacts with Mammoth Remains, Naco, Arizona,” American
        Antiquity, 19, 1-14.
  1953b “Some Thoughts on Chibcha Culture in the High Plains of Co-
        lombia,” ibid., pp. 76-78.
Haury, Emu W., et al.
  1950    The Stratigraphy and Archaeology of Ventana Cave. Albuquerque:
        University of New Mexico Press.
  1956 “An Archaeological Approach to the Study of Cultural Sta-
        bility,” in Seminars in Archaeology: 1955. (Society for American
        Archaeology Memoir No. 11.) Salt Lake City.
Haynes, C. V.
  1955  “Evidence of Early Man in Torrance County, New Mexico,”
        Texas Archaeological Society Bulletin, 26, 144-64.
Herzer, Rosert F. —
   1941 “The Direct-Historical Approach in California Archaeology,”
        American Antiquity, 7, 98-122.
  1949    The Archaeology of Central California I: The Early Horizon.
        (“University of California Anthropological Records,” Vol. 12,
        No. 1.) Berkeley: University of California Press.
  195la “An Assessment of Certain Nevada, California and Oregon Ra-
        diocarbon Dates,” in Radiocarbon Dating, ed. Freperick JoHN-
        son. (Society for American Archaeology Memoir No. 8.) Ameri-
        can Antiquity, 17, No. 1, 23-25.
  1951b “Preliminary Report on the Leonard Rockshelter Site, Pershing
        County, Nevada,” ibid., 17, 89-98.
Heizer, Rosert F., and Fenenaea, F.
   1939  ‘Archaeological Horizons in Central         California,’ b American
         Anthropologist, 41, 378-99.
Heizer, Rosert F., and Lemert, E. M.
  1947    Observations on Archaeological Sites in Topanga Canyon, California.
          (“University of California Publications in American Archaeol-
          ogy and Ethnology,” Vol. 44, No. 2.) Berkeley.
Hipsen, Frank C.
  1937 “Association of Man with Pleistocene Mammals in the Sandia
        Mountains,” American Antiquity, 2, 260-63.
  1941  Evidences of Early Occupation in Sandia Cave, New Mexico, and
        Other Sites in the Sandia-Manzano Region. (“Smithsonian Mis-
        cellaneous Collections,” Vol. 99, No. 23.) Washington, D.C.
  1943    “Evidences of Early Man in Alaska,” American Antiquity, 8,
          254-59.
  1946    ‘The First Thirty-eight Sandia Points,” ibid., 11, 257-58.


                                            BIBLIOGRAPHY     » Dp5
Hissen, Frank C.—Continued
   1951  “Sites of the Paleo-Indian in the Middle Rio Grande Valley,”
         ibid., 17, 41-46.
   1955 “Specimens from Sandia Cave and Their Possible Significance,”
         Science, 122, 688-89.
Hint, A. T., and Kivetr, Marvin
   1940 ‘“‘Woodland-like Manifestations in Nebraska,” Nebraska History
         Magazine, 21, No. 3, 146-243.
Hit, A. T., and Wepet, W. R.
   1936 “Excavations at the Leary Indian Village and Burial Site,
         Richardson County, Nebraska,” ibid., 17, No. 1, 1-73.
Hitt, Matcorm W.
   1953  ‘What Was the Purpose of the Single-shouldered Yuma Blade?”
         Tennessee Archaeologist, 9, No. 1, 22-23.
Horrman, Bernarp G.
   1952 “Implications of Radiocarbon Datings for the Origin of the Dor-
         set Culture,” American Antiquity, 18, 15-17.
Ho per, Preston, and Wikre, Joyce
   1949  ‘The Frontier Culture Complex, a Preliminary Report on a Pre-
         historic Hunters’ Camp in Southwestern Nebraska,” American
         Antiquity, 14, 260-65.
Howarp, Enear B., et al.
  1935— “The Occurrence of Flints and Extinct Animals in Fluvial De-
    38 posits near Clovis, New Mexico,” Proceedings of the Academy of
        Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vols. 87-90.
Howarp, G. D.
  1947   Prehistoric Ceramic Styles of Lowland South America, Their Dis-
        tribution and History. (“Yale University Publications in Anthro-
        pology,” No. 37.) New Haven.
Howarp, G. D., and Wit.ey, G. R.
  1948  Lowland Argentine Archaeology. (“Yale University Publications
        in Anthropology,” No. 39.) New Haven.
Hucues, Jack T.
  1949 “Investigations in Western South Dakota and Northeastern Wyo-
        ming,” American Antiquity, 14, 266-77.
Hurt, Westry R., Jr.
  1942   “Folsom and Yuma Points from the Estancia Valley, New Mexi-
         co,” American Antiquity, 7, 400-402.
  1953   “A Comparative Study of the Preceramic Occupations of North
         America,” ibid., 18, 204-19.
Irvinc, WILLIAM
   1955 ‘“Burins from Central Alaska,” American Antiquity, 20, 380-83.


                                   METHOD AND THEORY     226
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
JenNeEss, DiamMonp
   1925   “A New Eskimo Culture in Hudson Bay,” Geographical Review,
         15, 428-37.
JeNNinGs, Jesse D.
   1953  “Danger Cave: A Progress Summary,”           El Palacio (Santa Fe,
         N.M.), 60, No. 5, 179-213.
Jennincs, Jesse D., and Norseck, Epwarp
   1955  “Great Basin Prehistory: A Review,” American Antiquity, 21,
         St.
Jij6n Y Caamano, J.
  1930   “Una gran marea cultural en el noroeste de Sudamerica,” Journal
         de la Société des Américanistes de Paris, 22, 107-97.
  1949   Maranga: Contribucién al conocimiento de los aborigenes del Valle
         del Rimac, Peru. Quito: La Prensa Catdlica.
JoHNson, FREDERICK
   1946 “An Archaeological Survey along the Alaska Highway, 1944,”
         American Antiquity, 11, 183-86.
  n.d.  “Radiocarbon Dates and Early Man in America” (MS). R. S.
         Peabody Foundation, Andover, Mass.
JouHNson, FREDERICK (ed.)
   1951 Radiocarbon Dating. (Society for American Archaeology Memoir
          No. 8.) American Antiquity, Vol. 17, No. 1, Part 2.
Jupp, New M.
   1954 The Material Culture of Pueblo Bonito. (‘Smithsonian Miscellane-
        ous Collections,” Vol. 124.) Washington, D.C.
Kettey, J. CHARLES
  1947a “The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the
        Clear Fork Focus,” American Antiquity, 13, 97-109.
  1947b “The Lehmann Rock Shelter: Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uval-
        de, and Round Rock Foci,” Texas Archaeological and Paleontologi-
        cal Society Bulletin, 18, 115-28.
  1951  “Review of ‘Stratigraphy and Archaeology of Ventana Cave,’ by
        Emil W. Haury, 1950,” American Antiquity, 17, 152-54.
Keviey, J. Caarves, Campsett, T. N., and Lenmer, D. J.
  1940   The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological De-
         posits in the Big Bend Region of Texas. (West Texas Historical and
         Scientific Society Publication No. 10.) Alpine, Tex.
Ketty, A. R.
  1933 ‘Some Problems of Recent Cahokia Archaeology,” Transactions
         of the Illinois State Academy of Science, 25, No. 4, 101-3.


                                            BIBLIOGRAPHY    yynD7
Keity, A. R—Continued
  1938    A Preliminary Report on Archaeological Explorations at Macon,
        Georgia. (Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnol-
        ogy Bulletin No. 119; ‘Anthropological Papers,” No. 1.)
        Washington, D.C,
Keyes, CHARLES
   1942 “An Outline of Iowa Archaeology,” Minnesota Archaeologist, 8,
        No. 1, 4-7
Kipper, A. V.
  1924    An Introduction to the Study of Southwestern Archaeology. New
        Haven: Yale University Press (for Department of Archaeology,
        Phillips Academy, Andover, Mass.).
Kipper, A. V., and Guernsey, S. J.
  1919 Archaeological Explorations in Northeastern Arizona. (Smithsonian
         Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 65.)
        Washington, D.C.
Kipper, A. V., Jennines, J. D., and SHoox, E. M.
   1946 Excavations at Kaminaljuyu, Guatemala. (Carnegie Institution of
        Washington Publication 561.) Washington, D.C.
Kipper, A., II
  1948a   “The Archaeology of Venezuela,” in Handbook of South Ameri-
        can Indians, ed. JULIAN H. Stewarop, 4, 413-38. (Smithsonian In-
        stitution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 143.)
        Washington, D.C.
  1948) “The Position of Pucara in Titicaca Basin Archaeology,” in
          A Reappraisal of Peruvian Archaeology, ed. Wenvett         C. BEN-
         NETT, pp. 87-89. (Society for American Archaeology Memoir
         No. 4.) Menasha, Wis.
Kine, ARDEN
   1950 Cattle Point: A Stratified Site in the Southern Northewst Coast Re-
         gion. (Society for American Archaeology Memoir No. 7.)
         Menasha, Wis.
KircuHorr, Paut
   1943 “Mesoamerica,” Acta Americana (Mexico, D.F.), 1, 92-107.
         (English translation, Sov Tax et al., Heritage of Conquest, pp. 17-
         30. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1952.)
   1954 ‘‘Gatherers and Farmers in the Greater Southwest,’’ American
         Anthropologist, 56, 529-50.
Kivetr, Marvin F.
  1949    “Archaeological Investigations in Medicine Creek Reservoir,”
          American Antiquity, 14, 278-84.


                                    METHOD AND THEORY       83
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY            8
   1952   Woodland Sites in Nebraska. (‘Nebraska State Historical Society,
          Publications in Anthropology,” No. 1.) Lincoln.
Kxerne, Harorp K.
  1953   ““A Remarkable Paleo-Indian Site in Alabama,”’ Tennessee Archae-
         ologist, 9, No. 2, 31-37.
K.LuckHoun, Crype, and Rerrer, Paut (eds.)
  1939 Preliminary Report on the 1937 Excavations, Be 50-51, Chaco Can-
        yon, New Mexico. (University of New Mexico Bulletin, Whole
         No. 345; “Anthropological Series,” Vol. 3, No. 2.) Albuquerque.
Kneserc, Mave Line
  1952   “The Tennessee Area,” in Archeology of Eastern United States,
          ed. James B. Grirrin, pp. 190-98. Chicago: University of Chi-
          cago Press.
  Mayee  “The Duration of the Archaic Tradition in the Lower Tennessee
         Valley,” Southern Indian Studies (Chapel Hill, N.C.), 6, 40-44.
Kriecer, ALEx D.
   1945  “An Inquiry into Supposed Mexican Influence on a Prehistoric
         ‘Cult’ in the Southern United States,” American Anthropologist,
          47, 483-515.
  1946    Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. (University
          of Texas Publication No. 4640.) Austin.
  1948    “Importance of the ‘Gilmore Corridor’ in Culture Contacts be-
          tween Middle America and the Eastern United States,” Texas
          Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, 19, 155-78.
  1951a “Early Man [Notes and News],” American Antiquity, 17, 77-78.
  1951b “A Radiocarbon Date on the Davis Site in East Texas,” ibid.,
          pp. 144-45.
  1952   “Review of ‘Greenhouse: A ‘Troyville-Coles Creek Period
         Site,’ by James A. Ford,” ibid., 18, 175-79.
         “New World Culture History: Anglo-America,” in Anthropol-
                                                          ”
  1953
        ogy Today, ed. A. L. Krorser, pp. 238-64. Chicago: alee
        of Chicago Press.
Kroeser, A. L.
  1916 Zuni Potsherds. (“American Museum of Natural History, An-
        thropological Papers,” Vol. 18, Part 1.) New York.
  1925 The Uhle Pottery Collections from Moche. (“University of Cali-
        fornia Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology,”
        Vol. 21.) Berkeley.
  1926 Archaeological Explorations in Peru, Part I: Ancient Pottery from
        Trijillo. (“Field Museum of Natural History, Anthropological
        Memoirs,” Vol. 2, No. 1.) Chicago.



                                             BIBLIOGRAPHY    D29
Kroeser, A. L.—Continued
  1939   Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America. (“University
         of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnol-
         ogy,” Vol. 38.) Berkeley.
  1940   ‘Conclusions: The Present Status of Americanistic Problems,”
         in The Maya and Their Neighbors, ed. C. L. Hay et al., pp. 441-
         90. New York: Appleton-Century Co.
  1944   Peruvian Archaeology in 1942. (Viking Fund Publications in An-
         thropology,” No. 4.) New York.
  1946   “The Chibcha,” in Handbook of South American Indians, ed.
        Juuian H. Srewarp, 2, 887-910. (Smithsonian Institution, Bu-
        reau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 143.) Washington,
         DG;
  1948   “Summary and Interpretations,’ in A Reappraisal of Peruvian
                                          Y4



        Archaeology, ed. WeNDELL C. Bennett, pp. 113-21. (Society
         for American Archaeology Memoir No. 4.) Menasha, Wis.
Kroeser, A. L. (ed.)
  1953   Anthropology Today: An Encyclopedic Inventory. (International
          Symposium on Anthropology, Wenner-Gren Foundation for
          Anthropological Research, 1952.) Chicago: University of Chi-
          cago Press.
Ku tp, J. Laurence, Ferry, Hersert W., and Tryon, Lansine E.
  1951    “Lamont Natural Radiocarbon Measurements, I,’’ Science, 114,
          No. 2970 (November 30), 565-68.
Lacuna, FREDERICA DE
  1946   ‘The Importance of the Eskimo in Northeastern Archaeology,”
         in Man in Northeastern North America, ed. FREDERICK JOHNSON,
         pp. 106-42. (“Papers of the Robert S. Peabody Foundation for
         Archaeology,” Vol. 3.) Andover, Mass.: Phillips Academy.
  1947   The Prehistory of Northern North America as Seen from the Yukon.
         (Society for American Archaeology Memoir No. 3.) American
         Antiquity, Vol. 12, No. 3, Part 2.
Lancaster, JAMEs A.., et al.
  1954 Archaeological Excavations in Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado,
        1950. (“U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service,
        Archaeological Research Series,”’ No. 2.) Washington, D.C.
Larco Hoyre, RaFaer
  1938— Los Mochicas. 2 vols. Lima: Rimac, S.A.
     39
  1941   Los Cupisniques. Lima: La Cronica y Variedades, S.A.
  1948   Cronologia arqueolégica del Norte del Peru. Buenos Aires: Sociedad
         Geografica Americana.


                                    METHOD AND THEORY      2 30
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Larsen, Hever, and Rainey, FRoeticu
   1948 Ipiutak and the Arctic Whale Hunting Culture. (“American Muse-
          um of Natural History, Anthropological Papers,” Vol. 42.) New
          York.
Laturap, DonaLp W.
  n.d.    “Preceramic South America.” (MS prepared in 1954.) Peabody
          Museum Library, Harvard University.
LaucuHutn, WitiiaM S.
   1951   “Notes on an Aleutian Core and Blade Industry,” American An-
          tiquity, 17; 52-55.
LaucHitn, WiLLiAM S., and Marsn, Gorpon H.
   1954 “The Lamellar Flake Manufacturing Site on Anangula Island,”
          ibid., 20, 27-39.
Laucaiin, WitiraM S., Marsu, G. H., and Leacu, J. W.
 ~ 1952  “Supplementary Note on the Aleutian Core and Blade Industry,”
         ibid., 18, 69-70.
LEECHMAN, DovucLas
   1943  ‘Two New Cape Dorset Sites,” American Antiquity, 8, 363-75.
Lewis, T. M. N.
   1953  “The Paleo-Indian Problem in Tennessee,”’ Tennessee Archaeolo-
         gist, 9, No. 2, 38-40.
   1954a “A Suggested Basis for Paleo-Indian Chronology in Tennessee
         and the Eastern United States,” Southern Indian Studies (Chapel
         Hill, N.C.), 6, 11-13.
   1954b “Sandia Points,” Tennessee Archaeologist, 10, No. 1, 26-27.
Lewis, T. M. N., and Kneserc, MApELINE
   1941 “Prehistory of the Chickamauga Basin in Tennessee.” (“Divi-
         sion of Anthropology, University of Tennessee, Tennessee An-
         thropological Papers,” No. 1.) Knoxville. (Mimeographed.)
   1946 Hiwassee Island: An Archaeological Account of Four Tennessee In-
         dian Peoples. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
   1947. The Archaic Horizon in Western Tennessee. (“Tennessee Anthro-
         pological Papers,”’ No. 2; “University of Tennessee Record Ex-
         tension Series,”’ Vol. 23, No. 4.) Knoxville.
   1951  “Early Projectile Point Forms, and Examples from Tennessee,”
         Tennessee Archaeologist, 7, No. 1, 6-19.
Lissy, W. F.
   1951  ‘Radiocarbon Dates, II,” Science, 114, 291-96.
  1952    Radiocarbon Dating. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
  1954a ‘“‘Chicago Radiocarbon Dates, IV,” Science, 119, 135-40.
  1954b “Chicago Radiocarbon Dates, V,” ibid., 120, 733-42.


                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY   D 3 it
Litxarp, J. B., Hetzer, R. F., and Fenenaea, F.
   1939 An Introduction to the Archaeology of Central California. (Depart-
             ment of Anthropology, Sacramento        Junior College,    Bulletin
             No. 2.) Sacramento, Calif.
Litiarp, JeremiAH B., and Purves, W. K.
   1936 The Archaeology of the Deer Creek-Cosumnes Area. (Department
         of Anthropology, Sacramento Junior College, Bulletin No. 1.)
         Sacramento, Calif.
Litty, Eur
   1937 Prehistoric Antiquities of Indiana: A Description of the More Notable
         Earthworks, Mounds, Implements and Ceremonial Objects Left in
         Indiana by Our Predecessors, Together with Some Information as to
             Their Origin and Antiquity, and the Prehistory of Indiana. \ndian-
         apolis: Indiana Historical Society.
Linné, SIGVALD
  1934 Archaeological Researches at Teotihuacan, Mexico. (“Publications of
        the Ethnographical Museum of Sweden,” N.S., No. 1.) Stock-
        holm.
  1942       Mexican Highland Cultures: Archaeological Researches at Teotihua-
         -   can, Calpulalpan and Chalchicomula in 1934-1935. (‘Publications of
             the Ethnographical Museum of Sweden,” N.S., No. 7.) Stock-
             holm.
Locan, Witrrep D.
  1952 Graham Cave, an Archaic Site in Montgomery County, Missouri.
             (Missouri Archaeological Society Memoir No. 2.) Columbia, Mo.
Loneyear, J. M., II
  1944  Archaeological Investigations in El Salvador. (“Memoirs of the
        Peabody Museum,” Vol. 9, No. 2.) Cambridge, Mass.
Lorurop, SAMUEL K.
  1927       Pottery Types and Their Sequence in El Salvador. (“Indian Notes
             and Monographs,”’ Vol. 1, No. 4.) New York: Museum of the
             American Indian, Heye Foundation.
  1932       “Indians of the Parana Delta, Argentina,’ Azmals of the New
        York Academy of Sciences, 33, 77-232.
  1937— Coclé: An Archaeological Study of Central Panama. (“Memoirs of
    42       the Peabody Museum,” Vols. 7 and 8.) Cambridge, Mass.
  1941       “Gold Ornaments of Chavin Style from Chongoyape, Peru,”
             American Antiquity, 6, 250-62.
  1946       “The Diaguita of Chile,” in Handbook of South American Indians,
             ed. JuLian H. Stewarp, 2, 634-35. (Smithsonian Institution, Bu-
             reau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 143.) Washington,
             DC:


                                       METHOD AND THEORY      2 3D
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
  1948   “The Archaeology of Panama,” ibid., 4, 143-68.
  1951   “Peruvian Metallurgy,” in The Civilizations of Ancient America,
         pp. 219-23. (Selected Papers of the XXIXth International Congress
         of Americanists, ed. Sov Tax, Vol. 1.) Chicago: University of
        Chicago Press.
Loup, L. L., and Harrineton, M. R.
  1929   Lovelock Cave. (“University of California Publications in Ameri-
         can Archaeology and Ethnology,” Vol. 25, No. 1.) Berkeley.
McCary, Ben C.
  1951   “A Workshop Site of Early Man in Dinwiddie County, Vir-
        ginia,” American Antiquity, 17, 9-17.
McGumsry, C. R., III
  1956   “Cerro Mangote: A Preceramie Site in Panama,” American An-
         tiquity, 22, 151-61.
McGrecor, Joun C.
  1950 ‘Weighted Traits and Traditions,” in For the Dean, ed. Erik K.
        Reep and Daie S. Kine, pp. 291-98. Santa Fe, N.M.: Hohokam
         Museum Association and Southwestern Monuments Association.
McIntire, WittiAMm G.
  1954 Correlation of Prehistoric      Settlements   and   Delta   Development:
         Trafficability and Navigability of Delta Type Coasts: Trafficability
         and Navigability of Louisiana Coastal Marshes. (Louisiana State
       University, Technical Report No. 5.) Baton Rouge.
McKern, W. C.
  1928   The Neale and McClaughry Mound Groups. (Bulletin of the Pub-
         lic Museum of the City of Milwaukee, Vol. 3, No. 3.)
  1930   The Kletzien and Nitschke Mound Groups. (Bulletin of the Public
         Museum of the City of Milwaukee, Vol. 3, No. 4.)
  1931a “Regarding the Origin of Wisconsin Efigy Mounds,” American
         Anthropologist, 31, 562-64.
  1931b A Wisconsin Variant of the Hopewell Culture. (Bulletin of the Pub-
         lic Museum of the City of Milwaukee, Vol. 10, No. 2.)
  1939   ‘The Midwestern Taxonomic Method as an Aid to Archaeologi-
         cal Culture Study,” American Antiquity, 4, 301-13.
  1956   “On Willey and Phillips’ ‘Method and Theory in American
         Archaeology’ [Letters to the Editor], American Anthropologist,
         58, 360-61.
MacNersy, R. S.
  1947 “A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico,”
        American Antiquity, 13, 1-14.
  1948  ‘The Pre-pottery Faulkner Site of Southern Illinois,” ibid., pp.
        232-43.


                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY     ys 3 3
MacNeisu, R. S.—Continued
  1950    “A Synopsis of the Archaeological Sequence in the Sierra de
          Tamaulipas,” Revista mexicana de estudios antropologicos (Mexico,
          D.F.), 11, 79-96.
  1951    ‘An Archaeological Reconnaissance       in the Northwest     Terri-
          tories,” in Annual Report of the National Museum of Canada, 1949-
          50, pp. 24-41. (Bulletin No. 123.) Ottawa.
  1952.   “The Archeology of the Northeastern United States,” in Ar-
          cheology of Eastern United States, ed. James B. GrirFin, pp. 46-58.
          Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
  1953    ‘Archaeological Reconnaissance in the Mackenzie River Drain-
          age,” in Annual Report of the National Museum of Canada, 1951-
          1952, pp. 23-39. (Bulletin No. 128.) Ottawa.
  1954a   ‘The Pointed Mountain Site near Fort Liard, Northwest Terri-
          tories, Canada,” American Antiquity, 19, 234-52.
  1954b An Early Archaeological Site near Panuco, Vera Cruz. (‘“Transac-
          tions of the American Philosophical Society,” Vol. 44, No. 5.)
        Philadelphia.
Manan, E. C.
  1954— “A Survey of Paleo-Indian and Other Early Flint Artifacts from
    55 Sites in Northern, Western and Central Alabama,” Tennessee
        Archaeologist, 10, No. 2, 37-58; 11, No. 1, 1-8.
Mater, Trosert
  1901— Researches in the Central Portion of the Usumatsintla Valley.
    3     (“Memoirs of the Peabody Museum,” Vol. 2, Nos. 1 and 2.)
        Cambridge, Mass.
Mancetsporr, Paut C., and Smiru, C. Eare
  1949    “New Archaeological Evidence on Evolution in Maize,” Botani-
          cal Museum of Harvard University Leaflets, 13, No. 8, 213-47.
Martin, Paut S.
  1939    Modified Basket Maker Sites in the Ackmen-Lowry Area, South-
        western Colorado. (‘Field Museum of Natural History, Anthro-
        pological Series,”’ Vol. 23, No. 3.) Chicago.
Martin, Paut S., Qummsy, Georce I., and CoLtter, DonaLp
  1947    Indians before Columbus: Twenty Thousand Years of North Ameri-
          can History Revealed by Archeology. Chicago: University of
          Chicago Press.
Martin, Paut S., and Rrnatpo, Joun B.
  1947  The SU Site: Excavations at a Mogollon       Village, Western New
          Mexico, Third Season, 1946. (‘Field Museum of Natural His-
          tory, Anthropological Series,” Vol. 32, No. 3.) Chicago: Natu-
          ral History Museum.


                                      METHOD AND THEORY      y 3
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY            4
  1950a   Turkey Foot Ridge Site:   A Mogollon Village, Pine Lawn     Valley,
          Western New Mexico. (“Fieldiana: Anthropology,” Vol. 38, No.
          2.) Chicago: Natural History Museum.
  1950b Sites of Reserve Phase, Pine Lawn Valley, Western New Mexico.
        (“Fieldiana: Anthropology,” Vol. 38, No. 3.) Chicago: Natural
          History Museum.
  1951    “The Southwestern Co-tradition,” Southwestern Journal of An-
          thropology, 7, 215-29.
Martin, Paut S., Rinavpo, Joun B., and Anrevs, Ernst
  1949  Cochise and Mogollon Sites, Pine Lawn Valley, Western New Mexi-
        co. (“Fieldiana: Anthropology,” Vol. 38, No. 1.) Chicago: Natu-
        ral History Museum.
Martin, Paut S., et al.
  1952    Mogollon Cultural Continuity and Change: The Stratigraphic Anal-
          ysis of Tularosa and Cordova Caves. (“Fieldiana: Anthropology,”
          Vol. 40.) Chicago: Natural History Museum.
  1956    Higgins Flat Pueblo, Western New Mexico. (“Fieldiana: Anthro-
          pology,” Vol. 45.) Chicago: Natural History Museum.
MartTINEz DEL Rio, PasLo
  1953   “La cueva mortuoria de Ja Candelaria,        Coahuila,”   Cuadernos
         americanos (Mexico, D.F.), July-August.
Mason, JoHN ALDEN
  1931— Archaeology of Santa Marta, Colombia. (“Field Museum of Natu-
    39 ral History, Anthropological Series,’ Vol. 20, Nos. 1-3.) Chi-
        cago.
Maxwe..,    Moreau S.
  1951    The Woodland Cultures of Southern Illinois: Archaeological Excava-
          tions in the Carbondale Area. (“Logan Museum Publications in
          Anthropology,” Bulletin No. 7.) Beloit, Wis.
Mayer-Oaxes, WiLi1AM J.
  1951    ‘Starved Rock Archaic: A Prepottery Horizon from Northern
          Illinois,” American Antiquity, 16, 313-24.
  1955    Prehistory of the Upper Ohio Valley: An Introductory Mey isoloaicat
        Study. (“Annals of the Carnegie Museum, Vol. 34, Anthropo-
        logical Series,” No. 2.) Pittsburgh, Pa.
Means, Puiu A.
  1931 Ancient Civilizations of the Andes. New York: Charles Scribner’s
        Sons.
Meccers, B. J.
  1954 “Environmental Limitation on the Development of Culture,”
          American Anthropologist, 56, 801-24.


                                            BIBLIOGRAPHY    o 35
Me teaarp, JorGEN
  1952   “A Paleo-Eskimo Culture in West Greenland,” American An-
         tiquity, 17, 222-30.
Mencuin, O. F. A.
  1952a “Las pinturas rupestres de la Patagonia,” Ruma (Buenos Aires),
         5597
  1952b ‘‘Fundamentos cronoldgicos de la prehistoria de Patagonia,”
         ibid., pp. 23-43.
  1953— ‘“Culturas preceramicas en Bolivia,” ibid., 6, 125-32.
     54
Menecuin, O. F. A., and Bormipa, Marceto
  1950   “Investigaciones prehistoricas en cuevas de Tandilia, Provincia
         de Buenos Aires,” ibid., Vol. 3, Parts 1-2.
Mixes, Suzanna W.
  1951   ‘A Revaluation of the Old Copper Industry,” American Antig-
         uity, 16, 240-47.
Miter, Cart F.
  1950 “Early Cultural Horizons in the Southeastern United States,”
         American Antiquity, 15, 273-88.
  1956   “Life 8000 Years Ago Uncovered in an Alabama Cave,” Na-
         tional Geographic Magazine, 110, No. 4 (October), 542-58.
Mitts, Witiram C.
  1902 “Excavations in the Adena Mound,” Ohio Archaeological and His-
        torical Quarterly, 10, 452-79.
  1909 “Explorations of the Seip Mound,” ibid., 18, 268-321.
  1922 “Exploration of the Mound City Group,” ibid., 31, 423-584.
Moore, CLARENCE B,
  1901   “Certain Aboriginal Remains of the Northwest Florida Coast,
         Part 1,” Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia,
         Ser. 2, 11, Part 4, 419-97.
  1902   “Certain Aboriginal Remains of the Northwest Florida Coast,
         Part 2,” ibid., 12, Part 2, 125-335.
  1903   “Certain Aboriginal Mounds        of the Florida Central West
         Coast,” ibid., Part 3, pp. 361-438.
  1905   “Certain Aboriginal Remains of the Black Warrior River,” ibid.,
         13, 125-244.
  1907a “Crystal River Revisited,” ibid., Part 3, pp. 406-25.
  19076 “Moundville Revisited,” ibid., pp. 337-405.
  1918 “The Northwestern Florida Coast Revisited,” ibid., 16, Part 4,
         514-77.



                                      METHOD AND THEORY      2 36
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Mooreneap, Warren K.
  1890 Fort Ancient. Cincinnati: Robert Clark & Co.
  1922a The Hopewell Mound Group of Ohio. (“Field Museum of Natural
        History, Anthropological Series,’ Vol. 6, No. 5.) Chicago.
  1922b A Report on the Archaeology of Maine. Andover, Mass.: Depart-
          ment of Archaeology, Phillips Academy.
MoorenHeap, Warren K., and Leicuron, Morris M.
  1923   “The Cahokia Mounds,” University of Illinois Bulletin, 21, No. 6,
         1-97.
Mooreneap, Warren K., et al.
  1929    The Cahokia Mounds. Urbana: University of Illinois.
  1932    Etowah Papers. New Haven: Yale University Press (for Depart-
        ment of Archaeology, Phillips Academy, Andover, Mass.).
Morean, RicHarp G.
  1952    “Outline of Cultures in the Ohio Region,” in Archeology of
          Eastern United States, ed. James B. GrirFin, pp. 83-98. Chicago:
          University of Chicago Press.
Mortey, SYLVANus G.
  1946  The Ancient Maya. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Morais, Earu H.
  1939 Archaeological Studies in the La Plata District, Southwestern Colorado
          and Northwestern New Mexico. Appendix, “Technology of La
          Plata Pottery” by Anna O. Sueparp. (Carnegie Institution of
          Washington Publication 519.) Washington, D.C.
Morris, Eart H., and Buren, Rosert F.
  1954    Basket Maker II Sites near Durango, Colorado. (Carnegie Institu-
          tion of Washington Publication 604.) Washington, D.C.
Morris, Eart H., Cuartot, J., and Morris, A. A.
  1931    The Temple of the Warriors at Chichen Itza, Yucatan. (Carnegie In-
        stitution of Washington Publication 406.) Washington, D.C.
Moss, Joun H., et al.
  1951    Early Man in the Eden Valley. (“University Museum, University
          of Pennsylvania, Museum Monographs.”) Philadelphia.
Mu tuioy, WiLiiAM
  1954    “The McKean Site in Northeastern Wyoming,” Southwestern
         Journal of Anthropology, 10, 432-60.
Murovock, Georce P.
   1949 Social Structure. New York: Macmillan Co.
Nasu, PHILLEo
  1933.   The Excavation of Ross Mound Group I. (Bulletin of the Public
          Museum of the City of Milwaukee, Vol. 16, No. 1.)



                                             BIBLIOGRAPHY    2 37
Newcoms, Wittiam W.
  1956 “A Reappraisal of the ‘Cultural Sink’ of Texas,’ Southwestern
         Journal of Anthropology, 12, 145-53.
Newe t, H. Perry, and Krrecer, Avex D.
  1949  The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. (Society for
         American Archaeology Memoir No. 5.) American Antiquity,
         Vol. 14, No. 4, Part 2.
NorpeENSKIOLD, ERLAND VON
  1913   “Urnengraber und Mounds in bolivianischen Flachlande,”’ Baess-
         ler Archiv, 3, 205-55.
Orr, KennetH G.
   1946 “The Archaeological Situation at Spiro, Oklahoma: A Prelimi-
         nary Report,” American Antiquity, 11, 228-56.
  1952   “Survey of Caddoan Area Archeology,” in Archeology of East-
        ern United States, ed. James B. GrirFtn, pp. 239-55. Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press.
Orr, Pui C.
  1943   Archaeology of Mescalitan Island and Customs of the Canalino.
         (“Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History, Occasional Pa-
         pers,’ No. 5.) Santa Barbara, Calif.
  1952   “Review of Santa Barbara Channel Archaeology,” Southwestern
         Journal of Anthropology, 8, 211-26.
Orssicu, Apam, and Orssicu, E. S.
   1956 “Stratigraphic Excavations in the Sambaqui           of Araujo   II,”
         American Antiquity, 21, 357-69.
Oscoop, CorNELIUS
  1942   The Ciboney Culture of Cayo Redondo, Cuba. (“Yale University
         Publications in Anthropology,” No. 25.) New Haven.
Pavmatary, H. C.
  1939 Tapajd Pottery.    (“Etnologiska    Studier,”   No.   8.)   Goteborg,
         Sweden.
  1950   The Pottery of Marajé Island, Brazil. (“Transactions of the Ameri-
         can Philosophical Society,” Vol. 39, Part 3.) Philadelphia.
Parsons, Evsrze CLews
   1936 Mitla, Town of Souls. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Puiwiies, Puiiie
   1939 “Introduction to the Archaeology of the Mississippi Valley.”
         Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University. Pp. 768.
  1940   “Middle American Influences on the Archaeology of the South-
         eastern United States,” in The Maya and Their Neighbors, ed.
         C. L. Hay et al., pp. 349-67. New York: Appleton-Century Co.


                                    METHOD AND THEORY        D4 3 8
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
  1955   “American Archaeology and General Anthropological Theory,”
         Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 11, 246-50.
Puituies, Pup,     Forp, James A., and Grirrin, James B.
  1951   Archaeological Survey in the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley,
          1940-1947. (‘Papers of the Peabody Museum,” Vol. 25.) Cam-
          bridge, Mass.
Puivurps, Poti, and WitLey, Gorpon R.
  1953   “Method and Theory in American Archaeology: An Opera-
         tional Basis for Culture-historical Integration,” American An-
        thropologist, 55, 615-33.
Porter, M. N.
  1953   Tlatilco and the Pre-Classic Cultures of the New World. (“Viking
         Fund Publications in Anthropology,” No. 19.) New York.
PosNansky, ARTHUR
  1945   Tihuanacu: La cuna del hombre americano (‘“Tihuancu: The
         Cradle of American Man”’). English trans. by J. F. SHearer.
         New York: Jj. J. Augustin.
Prescott, W. H.
   1843 The Conquest of Mexico. New York: Modern Library.
Preston, R. S., Person, E., and Dervey, E. S.
  1955 “Yale Natural Radiocarbon Measurements, II,’’ Science, 122,
         954-60.
Preuss, K. T.
   1931 Arte monumental prehistorico. Bogota:      Escuelas   Salesianas   de
         Tipografia y Fotograbado.
ProskourIAKOFF, TATIANA
  1950   A Study of Classic Maya Sculpture. (Carnegie Institution of Wash-
       ington Publication 593.) Washington, D.C.
Qumpy, Georce I.
  1941a The Goodall Focus: An Analysis of Ten Hopewellian Components in
        Michigan and Indiana. (“Indiana Historical Society, Prehistory
         Research Series,”’ Vol. 2, No. 2.) Indianapolis.
  1941b “Hopewellian Pottery Types in Michigan,” Papers of the Michi-
        gan Academy of Science, Arts and Letters, 26, 489-94.
  1942   “The Natchezan Culture Type,” American Antiquity, 7, 255-75.
  1951   The Medora Site, West Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana. (‘Field
         Museum of Natural History, Anthropological Series,” Vol. 24,
         No. 2.) Chicago.
  1952   “The Archeology of the Upper Great Lakes Area,” in Arche-
         ology of Eastern United States, ed. James B. Grirrin, pp. 99-107.
         Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



                                          BIBLIOGRAPHY      2.39
ReprieL_p, Rosert
   1953   The Primitive World and Its Transformations. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cor-
          nell University Press.
ReIcHEL-DoLMATOFF, GERARDO
  1954 ‘A Preliminary Study of Space and Time Perspective in North-
        ern Colombia,” American Antiquity, 19, 352-66.
  1955 ‘“‘Excavaciones en los conchales de la costa de Barlovento,” Re-
        vista colombiana de antropologia (Bogota), 4, 249-72.
ReicHeL-DoLmMaTorr, Gerarpo, and ReicHeLr-DoLMaTorF, ALICIA
  1951   “Investigaciones arqueoldgicas en el Departamento del Magda-
         lena, Colombia, 1946-1950,” Boletin de arqueologia (Bogota),
         Vol. 3, Nos. 1-6.
ReIcuLen, Henri, and ReIcHLEN, PAULE
  1949   “Recherches archéologiques dans         les Andes    de Cajamarca:
         Premier rapport de la mission ethnologique francaise au Pérou
         septentrional,”” Journal de la Société des Américanistes de Paris, 38,
         137-74.
Renavp, E. B.
  1938   The Black’s Fork Culture of Southwest Wyoming. (The Archaeologi-
         cal Survey of the High Western Plains, 10th Report.) Denver,
         Colo.: University of Denver.
  1940   Further Research in the Black’s Fork Basin, Southwest Wyoming,
         1938-1939.   (The Archaeological Survey of the High Western
         Plains, 12th Report.) Denver, Colo.: University of Denver.
Restrepo, V.
  1895   Los Chibchas antes de la conquista espanola. Bogota: Imprento de
         la Luz.
Ricketson, O. G., Jr., and Ricxetson, E. B.
  1937   Uaxactun, Guatemala: Group E—1926-1931. (Carnegie Institu-
         tion of Washington Publication 477.) Washington, D.C.
Ritcute, WitiraM A.
   1932 ‘“The Lamoka Lake Site,’’ Researches and Transactions of the New
         York State Archaeological Association (Lewis H. Morgan Chapter),
         7, No. 4, 79-134.
  1934   An Algonkian-Iroquois Contact Site on Castle Creek, Broome County,
         N.Y. (“Rochester Municipal Museum, Research Records,” No.
         2.) Rochester, N.Y.
  1938   Certain Recently Explored New York Mounds and Their Probable
         Relation to the Hopewell Culture. (“Rochester Museum of Arts
         and Sciences, Research Records,” No. 4.) Rochester, N.Y.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY        240
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   1944    The Pre-lroquoian Occupations of New York State. (Rochester Mu-
           seum of Arts and Sciences, Museum Memoir No. 1.) Rochester,
           N.Y.
   1949   The Bell-Philhower Site, Sussex County, New Jersey. (‘Indiana
          Historical Society, Prehistory Research Series,” Vol. 3, No. 2.)
          Indianapolis.
   19514 “A Current Synthesis of New York Prehistory,” American An-
          tiquity, 17, 130-36.
   1951b “Ground Slates: Eskimo or Indian?” Pennsylvania Archaeologist,
          21, Nos. 3-4, 46-52.
   1952   The Chance Horizon: An Early Stage of Mohawk Iroquois Cultural
          Development.    (New York State Museum Circular 29.) Albany.
  1953    “A Probable Paleo-Indian Site in Vermont,” American Antiquity,
           18, 249-58,
  1955    Recent Discoveries Suggesting an Early Woodland Burial Cult in the
         Northeast. (New York State Museum and Science Service Circu-
         Jar 40.) Albany.
Rircuie, Witttam A., and MacNersu, Ricuarp S.
   1949 “The Pre-Jroquoian Pottery of New York State,” American An-
         tiquity, 15, 97-124.
Rircuie, Wiiiiam A.., et al.
  1953    An Early Owasco Sequence in Eastern New York. (New York
          State Museurn Circular 32.) Albany.
RirzentHAcer, Roserr E., and Scuoiz, Paur
  1946 “The Osceola Site: An ‘Old Copper’ Site near Potosi, Wiscon-
         sin,” Wisconsin Archaeologist, 27, No. 3, 53-70.
RitzenTHALer, Roserr E., and Wirtry, Warren L.
  1952    “The Oconto Site: An Old Copper Manifestation,” ibid., 33,
          No. 4, 199-223.
Roserts, Frank H. H.
  1929 Shabik’eshchee Village: A Late Basket Maker Site in the Chaco Can-
          yon, New Mexico. (Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American
          Ethnology Bulletin No. 92.) Washington, D.C.
  1931    The Ruins at Kiatuthlanna, Eastern Arizona. (Smithsonian Insti-
          tution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 100.)
          Washington, D.C.
  1935    A Folsom Complex: Preliminary Report on Investigations at the
          Lindenmeier Site in Northern Colorado. (“Smithsonian Miscellane-
          ous Collections,” Vol. 94, No. 4.) Washington, D.C.
  19364 Additional Information on the Folsom Complex: Report on the Second
          Season’sInvestigations at the Lindenmeier Site in Northern Colorado.



                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY    241
         (“Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections,’ Vol. 95, No. 10.)
         Washington, D.C.
  1936b “A Survey of Southwestern Archaeology,” American Anthro-
         pologist, 37, 1-35.
  1937   “Archaeology in the Southwest,” American Antiquity, 3, 3-33.
  1939   Archaeological Remains in the Whitewater District, Eastern Arizona,
         Part I: House Types. (Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of Ameri-
         can Ethnology Bulletin No. 121.) Washington, D.C.
  1940   Archaeological Remains in the Whitewater District, Eastern Arizona,
         Part II: Artifacts and Burials. (Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of
         American Ethnology Bulletin No. 126.) Washington, D.C.
  1942   Archaeological and Geological Investigations in the San Jon District,
         Eastern New Mexico. (“Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections,”
         Vol. 103, No. 4.) Washington, D.C.
  1951   “Radiocarbon Dates and Early Man,” in Radiocarbon Dating, ed.
         FREDERICK JoHNSON. (Society for American Archaeology Mem-
        oir No. 8.) American Antiquity, 17, No. 1, Part 2, 20-22.
Rocers, Davin B.
  1929   Prehistoric Man of the Santa Barbara Coast. Santa Barbara, Calif.:
         Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History.
Rocers, Matcoim J.
   1929 “The Stone Art of the San Dieguito Plateau,”’ American Anthro-
        pologist, 31, 454-67.
  1939   Early Lithic Industries of the Lower Basin of the Colorado River and
         Adjacent Desert Areas. (‘San Diego Museum Papers,” No. 3.)
         San Diego, Calif.
  1945  “An Outline of Yuman Prehistory,”’ Southwestern Journal of An-
        thropology, 1, 167-98.
Roosa, Witi1AM B.
  1956   “The Lucy Site in Central New Mexico,” American Antiquity,
         21, 310.
Root, W. C.
   1949a “Metallurgy,” in Handbook of South American Indians, ed.
         Jutian H. Stewarp, 5, 205-26. (Smithsonian Institution, Bu-
         reau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 143.) Washington,
         DG:
  1949b “The Metallurgy of the Southern Coast of Peru,” American An-
         tiquity, 15, 10-37.
Rouse, [RvinG
  1941   Culture of the Ft. Liberté Region, Haiti. (‘Yale University Publi-
         cations in Anthropology,” No. 24.) New Haven.


                                     METHOD AND THEORY       242
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
  1948    “The Ciboney,” in Handbook of South American Indians, ed.
          Juuian H. Srewarp, 4, 495-503. (Smithsonian Institution, Bu-
          reau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 143.) Washington,
          Dic-
  1949    “The Southeast and the West Indies,”’ in The Florida Indian and
          His Neighbors, ed. Joan W. GrirFin, pp. 117-38. (Papers de-
          livered at an Anthropological Conference held at Rollins College,
          April 9-10, 1949.) Winter Park, Fla.
  195la   “Prehistoric Caribbean Culture Contact as Seen from Venezue-
          la,” Transactions of the New       York Academy of Sciences, Ser. 2,
          13, 342-47.
  1951b A Survey of Indian River Archaeology, Florida. (‘Yale University
        Publications in Anthropology,” No. 44.) New Haven.
  1952 Porto Rican, Prehistory. (‘Scientific Survey of Porto Rico and the
          Virgin Islands,” Vol. 18, Parts 3 and 4.) New York: New York
          Academy of Sciences.
  1953    “The Circum-Caribbean Theory: An Archaeological Test,”
          American Anthropologist, 55, 188-200.
  1954    “On the Use of the Concept of Area Co-tradition,” Azmerican
          Antiquity, 19, 221-25.
  1955    ‘On the Correlation of Phases of Culture,” American Anthro-
          pologist, 57, 713-22.
Rowe, Joun H.
  1945    “‘Absolute Chronology in the Andean Area,” American Antiq-
          uity, 10, 265-84.
  1946    “Inca Culture at the Time of the Spanish Conquest,” in Hand-
          book of South American Indians, ed. JoLian H. Stewaro, 2, 183-
          330. (Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology
          Bulletin No. 143.) Washington, D.C.
  1948    ‘The Kingdom of Chimor,” Acta Americana (Mexico, D.F.), 6,
          26-59.
RowLey, GRAHAM
  1940 “The Dorset Culture of the Eastern Arctic,” American Anthro-
          pologist, 42, 490-99.
Roys, R. L.
  1950    ‘Historical   Source    Material   for the History of Mayapan.”
          Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Institution of Washington. (Mime-
          ographed.)
Ruppert, Karv, and Smitu, A. L.
  1952    Excavations in House Mounds at Mayapan. (Carnegie Institu-
          tion of Washington, Current Report No. 4.) Washington, D.C.


                                               BIBLIOGRAPHY   24 3
Rypen, S.
  1936   Archaeological Researches in the Department of La Candelaria.
         (“Etnologiska Studier,”’ No. 3.) Stockholm.
Sanpers, Wituiam T.
   1953 “The Anthropogeography of Central Veracruz,” Revista mexi-
         cana de estudios antropologicos (Mexico, D.F.), 13, Nos. 2 and 3,
         27-78.
  1956   “The Central Mexican Symbiotic Region: A Study in Prehis-
         toric Settlement Patterns,” in Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the
         New World, ed. G. R. Wittey, pp. 115-27. (“Viking Fund
         Publications in Anthropology,” No. 23.) New York.
  n.d.   ‘“The Archaeology of the North and Central Coast of Ecuador’’
         (MS). Peabody Museum, Harvard University, files of G. R.
         Willey.
SATTERTHWAITE, LINTON
  1933 Description of the Site (Piedras Negras) with Short Notes on the
         Excavations of 1931-1932. (Piedras Negras Preliminary Pa-
         pers,’ No. 1.) Philadelphia: University Museum.
Savitz, M. H.
   1907— The Antiquities of Manabi, Ecuador. (“Contributions to South
      10 American Archaeology,” Vols. 1 and 2.) New York: Museum of
         the American Indian, Heye Foundation.
Saytes, E. B., and Anrevs, Ernst
   1941 The Cochise Culture. (‘Medallion Papers,” No. 29.) Globe,
         Ariz.: Gila Pueblo.
SCHAEDEL, RicHARD P.
   1951  “Major Ceremonial and Population Centers in Northern Peru,”
         in The Civilizations of Ancient America, pp. 232-43. (Selected Pa-
         pers of the XXIXth International Congress of Americanists, ed. Sou
         Tax, Vol. 1.) Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
ScHEeNcK, W. EcBert
  1926   The Emeryville Shellmound: Final Report. (‘University of Cali-
        fornia Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology,”
        Vol. 23.) Berkeley.
ScHENCK, W. Ecpert, and Dawson, Emer J.
  1929 Archaeology of the Northern San Joaquin Valley. (“University of
         California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnol-
         ogy,”’ Vol. 25, No. 4.) Berkeley.
ScuuLtz, C. Bertranp, and Frankrorter, W. D.
  1948   ‘Preliminary Report on the Lime Creek Sites: New Evidence of
         Early Man in Southwestern Nebraska,” Bulletin of the University
         of Nebraska State Museum, 3, No. 4. Part 2, 43-62.


                                       METHOD AND THEORY     244
                               IN   AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Sears, WiLLiAM H.
  1948   “What Is the Archaic?”’ American Antiquity, 14, 122-24.
  1951a Excavations at Kolomoki: Season I, 1948. (‘University of Georgia
        Series in Anthropology,” No. 2.) Athens.
  1951b Excavations at Kolomoki: Season II, 1950. (“University of Georgia
         Series in Anthropology,”’ No. 3.) Athens.
  1952   “Ceramic    Development    in the South Appalachian      Province,”
         American Antiquity, 18, 101-10.
  1953   Excavations at Kolomoki: Seasons III and IV, Mound D. (‘‘Univer-
         sity of Georgia Series in Anthropology,”’ No. 4.) Athens.
  1954   ‘A Late Archaic Horizon on the Atlantic Coastal Plain,” South-
         ern Indian Studies (Chapel Hill, N.C.), 6, 28-35.
  1956   Excavations at Kolomoki: Final Report. (‘University of Georgia
         Series in Anthropology,” No. 5.) Athens!
SELLARDS, FE. H.
  1941   “Stone Images from Henderson County, Texas,’ American An-
         tiquity, 7, 29-38.
  1952   Early Man in America. Austin, Tex.: University of Texas Press.
  1955   ‘Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Milnesand, New
         Mexico,” American Antiquity, 20, 336-44.
Sexiarps, E. H., Evans, Gien L., and Meape, Grayson E.
   1947  “Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainview, Texas’’
         (with description of artifacts by Avex D. Kriecer), Bulletin of
         the Geological Society of America, 58, 927-54.
SERRANO, A.
  1940a “Los Sambaquis,”’ in Los Sambaquis y otros ensayos de arqueologia
         brasilena, pp. 5-63. (Annais do III Congresso Sul-Riograndense
         de Historia e Geografia.) Porto Alegre, Brazil.
  1940   “La cultura litica del sur brasilefio,” ibid., pp. 65-101.
  1946   “The Sambaquis of the Brazilian Coast” in Handbook of South
         American Indians, ed. Jottan H. Stewarp, 1, 401-7. (Smithsoni-
         an Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 143.)
         Washington, D.C.
SHETRONE, Henry C.
  1926   “Explorations of the Hopewell Group of Prehistoric Earth-
         works,’ Ohio Archaeological and Historical Quarterly, 35, 1-227.
  1931   The Mound-Builders. New York: Appleton & Co.
SHETRONE, Henry C., and GrEENMAN, EMeErsoN F.
  1931   “Explorations of the Seip Group of Prehistoric Earthworks,”
         Ohio Archaeological and Historical Quarterly, 40, 343-509.


                                            BIBLIOGRAPHY    24 5
Supper, J. M.
  1948   ‘Nebo Hill: A Lithic Complex in Western Missouri,” American
         Antiquity, 14, 29-32.
SHoox, Epwin M.
  1951 ‘The Present Status of Research on the Pre-Classic Horizons in
        Guatemala,” in The Civilizations of Ancient America, pp. 93-100.
         (Selected Papers of the XXIXth International Congress of American-
         ists, ed. Sor Tax, Vol. 1.) Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
SHook, Epwin M., and Kipper, A. Y.
   1952 Mound E-III-3, Kaminaljuyu, Guatemala. (Carnegie Institution of
         Washington Publication 596.) Washington, D.C.
SHoox, Epwin M., and Proskouriakorr, T.
   1956 ‘Settlement Patterns in Meso-America and the Sequence in the
         Guatemalan Highlands,” in Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the
         New World, ed. G. R. Witiey, pp. 93-100. (“Viking Fund
         Publications in Anthropology,” No. 23.) New York.
SKINNER, ALANSON B.
  1919   Exploration of Aboriginal Sites at Throgs Neck and Clasons Point,
         New York City. (“Contributions from the Museum of the Ameri-
         can Indian, Heye Foundation,” Vol. 5, No. 4.) New York.
  1920   Archaeological Investigations on Manhattan Island, New York City.
          (“Indian Notes and Monographs,” Vol. 2, No. 6.) New York:
         Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation.
Smirn, A. L.
  1950    Uaxactin, Guatemala:     Excavations of 1931-1937.   (Carnegie In-
         stitution of Washington Publication 588.) Washington, D.C.
SmirH, BENJAMIN L.
  1948   ‘An Analysis of the Maine Cemetery Complex,” Bulletin of the
         Massachusetts Archaeological Society (Attleboro), 9, Nos. 2-3,
         21-70.
SMITH, CARLYLE S.
  1949   “Archaeological Investigations in Ellsworth and Rice Counties,
        Kansas,” American Antiquity, 14, 292-300.
SmitH, Ermer R.
  1941   “Archaeology of Deadman Cave,” Bulletin of the University of
          Utah, Vol. 32, No. 4.
  1952 .The Archaeology of Deadman Cave, Utah: A Revision. (“Univer-
        sity of Utah Anthropological Papers,”’ No. 10.) Salt Lake City.
SmirH, Hate G.
   1951  The Crable Site, Fulton County, Illinois. (“Museum of Anthropol-
         ogy, University of Michigan, Anthropological Papers,” No. 7.)
         Ann Arbor.


                                       METHOD AND THEORY       246
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Smiry, M. A.
  1955   “The Limitations of Inference in Archaeology,” Archaeological
        News Letter (London), 6, No. 1, 1-5.
SmirH, Marian W.
 ~ 1956 “The Cultural Development of the Northwest Coast,” South-
oo      western Journal of Anthropology, 12, 272-94.
SmitH, Rosert E, |
  1955   Ceramic Sequence at Uaxactiin, Guatemala. 2 vols. (Middle Ameri-
         can Research Institute Publication No. 20.) New Orleans: Tu-
         lane University.
Sopay, FRANK J.
   1954 “The Quad Site, a Paleo-Indian Village in Northern Alabama,”
         Tennessee Archaeologist, 10, No. 1, 1-20.
Sotecki, Rate S.      ~
  1951   “Archaeology and Ecology of the Arctic Slope of Alaska,” in
         Smithsonian Institution,   Annual   Report for 1950,   pp. 469-95.
         Washington, D.C.
SorENSON, Joun L.
  1955 A Chronological Ordering of the Middle American           Pre-Classic.
          (“Middle American Research Records,” Vol. 2, No. 3.) New
         Orleans: Tulane University.
SPAULDING, ALBERT C.
  1946 “Northeastern Archaeology and General Trends in the Northern
         Forest Zone,” in Man in Northeastern North America, ed. Frev-
         ERICK JOHNSON, pp. 143-67. (“Papers of the Robert S. Peabody
         Foundation for Archaeology,” Vol. 3.) Andover, Mass.: Phil-
         lips Academy.
  1952   “The Origin of the Adena Culture of the Ohio Valley,” South-
         western Journal of Anthropology, 8, 260-68.
  1953a “Statistical Techniques for the Discovery of Artifact Types,”
         American Antiquity, 18, 305-13.
  1953b ‘Review of ‘MeasurementsofSome Prehistoric Design Develop-
        ments in the Southeastern States,’ by James A. Ford,” American
        Anthropologist, 55, 588-91.
  1954a “Reply to ‘Spaulding’s Review of Ford: I,’ by James A. Ford,”
         ibid., 56, 112-14.
  1954b “Reply to Ford,” American Antiquity, 19, 391-93.
  1955   “Prehistoric Cultural Development in the Eastern United
         States,” in New Interpretations of Aboriginal American Culture
         History, pp. 12-27.   (75th Anniversary Volume, Anthropologi-
         cal Society of Washington.) Washington, D.C.


                                             BIBLIOGRAPHY   247
SPINDEN, H. J.
  1913   A Study of Maya Art, Its Subject Matter and Historical Develop-
         ment. (“Memoirs of the Peabody Museum,” Vol. 6.) Cambridge,
         Mass.
  1928   Ancient Civilizations of Mexico and Central America. (‘American
         Museum of Natural History, Handbook Series,” No. 3.) New
         York.
  1931   “Indian Symbolism,” in Introduction to American Indian Art, Part
         2. New York: The Exposition of Indian Tribal Arts, Inc.
Squier, E. G., and Davis, E. H.
  1848   Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley. (“Smithsonian Con-
         tributions to Knowledge,”’ Vol. 1.) Washington, D.C.
Sterns, Frep H.
   1915 ‘A Stratification of Cultures in Eastern Nebraska,’’ American
         Anthropologist, 17, 121-27.
STEWARD, JULIAN H.
  1937   Ancient Caves of the Great Salt Lake Region. (Smithsonian Institu-
         tion, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 116.) Wash-
         ington, D.C.
  1940   ‘Native Cultures of the Intermontane (Great Basin) Area,” in
         Essays in Historical Anthropology of North America, pp. 445-502.
         (‘Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections,” Vol. 100.) Wash-
         ington, D.C.
  1948   ‘‘A Functional-Developmental Classification of American High
         Cultures,” in A Reappraisal of Peruvian Archaeology, ed. Wen-
         DELL C. BENNETT, pp. 103-4. (Society for American Archaeol-
         ogy Memoir No. 4.)       Menasha, Wis.
  1949a “Cultural Causality and Law: A Trial of the Development of
        Early Civilizations,” American Anthropologist, 51, 1-25.
  1949b “South American Cultures: An Interpretative Summary,”            in
         his Handbook of South American Indians, 5, 669-772. (Smithsonian
         Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 143.)
         Washington, D.C.
  1953   “Evolution and Process,” in Anthropology Today, ed. A. L.
         KrorseEr, pp. 313-26. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
STEWARD, JULIAN H., et al.
  1955   Irrigation Civilizations: A Comparative Study.   A Symposium on
         Method and Result in Cross-cultural Regularities. (‘Social Sci-
         ence Monographs,” No. 1.) Washington, D.C.: Pan American
         Union.


                                    METHOD AND THEORY      248
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Stirtinc, MatrHew W.
  1949   “Exploring the Past in Panama,” National Geographic Magazine,
         95, No. 3, 373-99.
Stronc, Witiiam D.
  1930   “A Stone Culture from Northern Labrador and Its Relation to
         Eskimo-like Cultures of the Northeast,’ American Anthropolo-
         gist, 32, 126-44.
  1935   An Introduction to Nebraska Archaeology. (‘Smithsonian Miscel-
         laneous Collections,” Vol. 93, No. 10.) Washington, D.C.
  19484 “Cultural Epochs and Refuse Stratigraphy in Peruvian Archaeol-
        ogy,” in A Reappraisal of Peruvian Archaeology, ed. WeNvDELL C.
         BennetT, pp. 93-102. (Society for American Archaeology Mem-
         oir No. 4.) Menasha, Wis.
  1948b “The Archaeology of Costa Rica and Nicaragua,” in Handbook
         of South American Indians, ed. Joan H. Stewarn, 4, 121-42.
         (Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulle-
         tin No. 143.) Washington, D.C.
  1954   “Recent Archaeological Discoveries in South Coastal Peru,”
         Transactions of the New    York Academy of Sciences, Ser. 2, 16,
         No. 4, 215-18.
Srronc, W. D., and Evans, Ciirrorp, Jr.
  1952   Cultural Stratigraphy in the Viru Valley, Northern Peru. (‘“Colum-
         bia Studies in Archaeology and Ethnology,” Vol. 4.) New York:
         Columbia University Press.
Srronc, W. D., Kipper, Avrren, II, and Paur, A. J. Drexet, Jr.
  1938   Preliminary Report on the Smithsonian Institution—Harvard Uni-
         versity Archaeological Expedition to Northwestern Honduras.
         (“Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections,” Vol. 97, No. 1.)
         Washington, D.C.
Srum_er, L. M.
   1954 “Population Centers of the Rimac Valley, Peru,” American An-
         tiquity, 20, 130-48.
Suum, Dez ANN
  1955  ‘Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas,” Texas
         Archaeological Society Bulletin, 26, 7-54.
SuHuM, Dee Ann, and Kriecer, Avex D.
   1954 “An Introductory Handbook of Texas            Archaeology,”   ibid.,
         Vols 25.
SuLuivan, L. R., and Herrman, Mito
  1925   The Punin Calvarium. (“American Museum of Natural History,
         Anthropological Papers,” Vol. 23.) New York.



                                             BIBLIOGRAPHY   249
Swancer, J. L., and Mayer-Oaxes, W. J.
  1952 ‘A Fluted Point from Costa Rica,” American Antiquity, 17, 264-
          65.
SwanTon, Joun R.
   1924 ‘Southern Contacts of the Indians North of the Gulf of Mexi-
         co,” Annaes, XX Congreso Internacional de Americanistas (Rio de
         Janeiro), pp. 53-59.
Tax, Sor (ed.)
   1951— Proceedings and Selected Papers of the XX1IXth International Congress
     52   of Americanists. 3 vols. Vol. 1: The Civilizations of Ancient Ameri-
         ca; Vol. 2: Acculturation in the Americas; Vol. 3: Indian Tribes of
         Aboriginal America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Tax, Sor, et al. (eds.)
  1953, An Appraisal of Anthropology Today. Sapplement to Anthropology
         Today, ed. A. L. Krorper. Chicago: University of Chicago
         Press.
TayLor, WALTER W.
  1948    A Study of Archaeology. (American Anthropological Association
         Memoir No. 69.) Menasha, Wis.
Teruo, Jac.
  1943    “Discovery of the Chavin Culture in Peru,” American Antiquity,
          9, 135-60.
Terra, HELMUT DE
  1949 “Early Man in Mexico,” in Tepexpan Man. (“Viking Fund Pub-
        lications in Anthropology,”’ No. 11.) New York.
Tuompson, J. Eric S.
 1939   Excavations at San Jose, British Honduras. (Carnegie Institution of
        Washington Publication 506.) Washington, D.C.
  1940    Late Ceramic Horizons at Benque Viejo, British Honduras. (Carnegie
          Institution of Washington Publication 528.) Washington, D.C.
  1943    “A Trial Survey of the Southern Maya Area,” American An-
          tiquity, 9, 106-34.
  1945    “A Survey of the Northern Maya Area,” ibid., 11, 2-24.
  1954    The Rise and Fall of Maya Civilization. Norman, Okla.: Univer-
          sity of Oklahoma Press.
‘TitTerincton, Pau F.
  1938    The Cahokia Mound Group and Its Village Site Materials. St. Louis:
        Privately printed.
Tozzer, A. M.
  n.d.  ‘The Sacred Cenote of Chichen Itza and Its Toltec Relation-
        ships” (MS in press). Peabody Museum, Harvard University.


                                     METHOD AND THEORY       2 50
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Trecanza, Avan E.
  1952    Archaeological Investigations in the Farmington Reservoir Area,
          Stanislaus County, California. (“Reports of the University of Cali-
          fornia Archaeological Survey,” No. 14.) Berkeley.
TrREGANZA, ADAN E., and Ma.amup, C. G.
   1950 The Topanga Culture, First Season’s Excavations of the Tank Site,
          1947. (“University of California Anthropological Records,”’
          Vol. 12, No. 4.) Berkeley: University of California Press.
Tscuopik, Harry, Jr.
   1946 “Some Notes on Rock Shelter Sites near Huancayo,              Peru,”
          American Antiquity, 12, 73-80.
Unter, Max
   1913 “Die Ruinen von Moche,” Journal de la Société des Américanistes
          de Paris, 10, 95-117.
  1924a Explorations at Chincha. (“University of California Publications
          in American    Archaeology and Ethnology,” Vol. 21, No. 2.)
          Berkeley.
  1924b “Ancient Civilizations of Ica Valley,” Appendix C (pp. 128-33)
        to The Uhle Pottery Collections from Ica, by A. L. Krorper and
        W. D. Strone. (“University of California Publications in Amer-
        ican Archaeology and Ethnology,” Vol. 21, No. 3.) Berkeley.
   1930   “Spate Mastodonten in Ecuador,” Proceedings of the 23d Inter-
          national Congress of Americanists, pp. 247-58. New York.
VAILLANT, GEORGE C.
   1930 Excavations at Zacatenco. (“American Museum of Natural His-
         tory, Anthropological Papers,” Vol. 32, Part 1.) New York.
   1932   Some Resemblances in the Ceramics of Central and North America.
          (“Medallion Papers,’ No. 12.) Globe, Ariz.: Gila Pueblo.
   1935   Excavations at El Arbolillo. (‘American Museum of Natural
          History, Anthropological Papers,” Vol. 35, Part 2.) New York.
   1941   Aazztecs of Mexico. New York: Doubleday, Doran & Co,
Vienati, M. A.
   1927   “‘Arqueologia y antropologia de los conchales fueginos,” Revista
          del Museo de La Plata (Buenos Aires), 30, 79-143.
Wa ker, Epwin F.
   1951    Five Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in Los Angeles County, Cali-
          fornia. (“Publications of the Frederick Webb Hodge Anniver-
           sary Publication Fund,” Vol. 6.) Los Angeles: Southwest Mu-
           seum.


                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY    ns5 l
Wa.xer, Winstow M.
  1936    The Troyville Mounds, Catahoula Parish, Louisiana. (Smithsonian
          Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 113.)
          Washington, D.C.
Wattace, WiLiiAM J.
  1954    ‘The Little Sycamore Site and the Early Milling Stone Cultures
          of Southern California,’’ American Antiquity, 20, 112-23.
Watter, H. V.
  1948    The Pre-history of the Lagoa Santa Region (Minas Gerais). Belo
          Horizonte, Brazil.
Warine, A. J., Jr., and Hotper, Preston
  1945 ‘A Prehistoric Ceremonial Complex in the Southeastern United
        States,” American Anthropologist, 47, 1-34.
Waucuore, RoBert
  1950 A Tentative Sequence of Pre-Classic Ceramics in Middle America.
        (‘Middle American Research Records,” Vol. 1, No. 14.) New
        Orleans: Tulane University.
Wess, CLARENCE H.
  1944 “Stone Vessels from a Northeast Louisiana Site,” American An-
        tiquity, 9, 386-94.
  1948a “‘Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier Focus,” Texas Archaeological
        and Paleontological Society Bulletin, 19, 100-147.
  1948b “Evidence of Pre-pottery Cultures in Louisiana,” American An-
        tiquity, 13, 227-32.
Wess, WiLiraM S.
  1938    An Archaeological Survey of the Norris Basin in Eastern Tennessee.
          (Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulle-
          tin 118.) Washington, D.C.
  1939    An Archaeological Survey of Wheeler Basin on the Tennessee River in
          Northern Alabama. (Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American
          Ethnology Bulletin No. 122.) Washington, D.C.
  1946    Indian Knoll, Site Oh 2, Ohio County, Kentucky. (“University of
          Kentucky Reports in Anthropology and Archaeology,” Vol. 4,
          No. 3, Part 1.) Lexington, Ky.
  1950a   The Carlson Annis Mound, Site 5, Butler County, Kentucky. (‘“Uni-
          versity of Kentucky Reports in Anthropology,” Vol. 7, No. 4.)
          Lexington, Ky.
  1950b The Read Shell Midden, Site 10, Butler County, Kentucky. (“Uni-
        versity of Kentucky Reports in Anthropology,” Vol. 7, No. 5.)
        Lexington, Ky.


                                     METHOD AND THEORY       2 _»
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
  1951a The Parrish Village Site. (‘University of Kentucky Reports in
        Anthropology,” Vol. 7, No. 6.) Lexington, Ky.
  1951 “Radiocarbon Dating on Samples from the Southeast,” in Radio-
         carbon Dating, ed. Freperick Jounson. (Society for American
         Archaeology Memoir No. 8.) American Antiquity, 17, No. 1,
         Parti2= 30:
Wess, Wicuram S., and DeJarnette, Davip L.
  1942   An Archaeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in the Adjacent Por-
         tions of the States of Alabama, Mississippi and Tennessee. (Smith-
        sonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No.
        129.) Washington, D.C.
  1948a The Flint River Site, Ma°48. (Alabama Museum of Natural His-
        tory, Museum Paper 23.) University, Ala.
  1948b The Whiteshurg Bridge Site, Ma’10. (Alabama Museum of Natu-
        ral History, Museum Paper 24.) University, Ala.
  1948¢ The Perry Site, Lu°25. (Alabama Museum of Natural History,
        Museum Paper 25.) University, Ala.
  1948d Little Bear Creek Site, Ct°8, Colbert County, Alabama. (Alabama
         Museum of Natural History, Museum Paper 26.) University,
         Ala.
Wess, WiLi1aM S., and Haac, WiLLiaM G.
  1939   The Chiggerville Site, Site 1, Ohio County, Kentucky. (“Univer-
         sity of Kentucky Reports in Anthropology and Archaeology,”
         Vol. 4, No. 1.) Lexington, Ky.
  1940   Cypress Creek Villages, Sites Il and 12, McLean County, Kentucky.
         (“University of Kentucky Reports in Anthropology and
         Archaeology,” Vol. 4, No. 2.) Lexington, Ky.
  1947   Archaic Sites in McLean County, Kentucky. (“University of Ken-
         tucky Reports in Anthropology,” Vol. 7, No. 1.) Lexington, Ky.
Wess, WixuiaM S., and Snow, Cuartes E.
  1945   The Adena People. (“University of Kentucky Reports in Anthro-
         pology and Archaeology,”   Vol. 6.) Lexington, Ky.
Wess, WixiiAM S., and Witper, Cuarces G.
  1951   An Archaeological Survey of Guntersville Basin on the Tennessee
         River in Northern Alabama. Lexington, Ky.: University of Ken-
         tucky Press.
WeveL, WALpo R.
  1941  Archaeological Investigations at Buena Vista Lake, Kern County,
        California. (Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnol-
         ogy Bulletin No. 130.) Washington, D.C.


                                            BIBLIOGRAPHY   v:5 3
Wepre, Watpo R.—Continued
  1947. “Culture Chronology in the Central Great Plains,” American
         Antiquity, 12, 148-56.
  1953   “Some Aspects of Human         Ecology in the Central Plains,”
         American Anthropologist, 55, 499-514.
Wenporr, Frep, and Tuomas, Tutry H.
  1951  ‘Early Man Sites near Concho, Arizona,” American Antiquity,
         17, 107-13.
Wheat, Jor Ben
  1954 “Southwestern Cultural Interrelationships and the Question of
         Area Co-tradition,” American Anthropologist, 56, 576-86.
  1955   Mogollon Culture Prior to A.D. 1000. (Society for American
         Archaeology Memoir No. 10.) American Antiquity, Vol. 20,
         No. 4, Part 2.
WiLLey, Gorpon R.
  1945a “Horizon Styles and Pottery Traditions in Peruvian Archaeol-
       ogy,” American Antiquity, 11, 49-56.
  1945 “The Weeden Island Culture: A Preliminary Definition,” ibid.,
         10, 225-54.
  19484 ‘Functional Analysis of ‘Horizon Styles’ in Peruvian Archaeol-
         ogy,” in A Reappraisal of Peruvian Archaeology, ed. Wenvett C.
         BenneTT, pp. 8-15. (Society for American Archaeology Mem-
         oir No. 4.)
  1948b “The Cultural Context of the Crystal River Negative-painted
         Style,” American Antiquity, 13, No. 4, Part 1, 325-28.
  1949   Archaeology of the Florida Gulf Coast. (“Smithsonian Miscellane-
       ous Collections,” Vol. 113.) Washington, D.C.
 1951a “South American—Archaic Relations: Additional Comment,”
       American Antiquity, 16, 354-55.
 1951b “The Chavin Problem: A Review and Critique,’’ Southwestern
       Journal of Anthropology, 7, No. 2, 103-44.
 1953a “Archaeological Theories and Interpretation: New World,” in
       Anthropology Today, ed. A. L. Krorser, pp. 361-85. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press.
 1953b “A Pattern of Diffusion-Acculturation,” Southwestern Journal of
       Anthropology, 9, 369-84.
 1953¢ Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the Viru Valley, Peru. (Smithsoni-
       an Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 155.)
         Washington, D.C.


                                   METHOD AND THEORY       p. 54
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   1954    “Comments on Joe Ben Wheat’s ‘Southwestern Cultural Inter-
          relationships and the Question of Area Co-tradition,’ ”’ Ameri-
          can Anthropologist, 56, 589-91.
   1955a° “The Interrelated Rise of the Native Cultures of Middle and
          South America,” in New Interpretations of Aboriginal American
          Culture History, pp. 28-45. (75th Anniversary Volume, Anthro-
          pological Society of Washington.) Washington, D.C.
   1955b “The Prehistoric Civilizations of Nuclear America,” American
         Anthropologist, 57, No. 3, Part 1, 571-93.
   1956a “The Structure of Ancient Maya Society: Evidence from the
         Southern Lowlands,” ibid., 58, No. 5, 777-82.
   1956b “Problems concerning Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the
          Maya Lowlands,” in Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the New
          World, ed. G. R. Wittey, pp. 107-14. (‘Viking Fund Publica-
          tions in Anthropology,” No. 23.) New York.
WILLey, Gorpon R., Butyarp, W. R., Jr., and Grass, J. B.
   1955   “The Maya Community of Prehistoric Times,” Archaeology, 8,
          US —P25)
WiLtey, Gorpon R., and Corsett, J. M.
   1954   Early Ancén and Early Supe Culture: Chavin Horizon Sites of the
          Central Peruvian Coast. (“Columbia Studies in Archaeology and
          Ethnology,” Vol. 3.) New York: Columbia University Press.:
Witey, Gorpon R., and McGmsry, C. R.
  1954 The Monagrillo Culture of Panama. (“Papers of the Peabody Mu-
        seum,” Vol. 49, No. 2.) Cambridge, Mass.
WiLLey, Gorpon R., and Puitiips, Pup
  1944  “Negative-painted Pottery from Crystal River, Florida,”
          American Antiquity, 10, 173-85.
   1955   “Method and Theory in American Archaeology. II: Historical-
          developmental Interpretation,” American Anthropologist, 57,
          723-819.                                   :
Witey, Gorpon R., and Stopparp, THEODORE
  1954    “Cultural Stratigraphy in Panama: A Preliminary Report on the
          Giron Site,” American Antiquity, 19, 332-42.
WILLEY, Gorvon R., and Woopsury, R. B.           ~
  1942    “A Chronological Outline for the Northwest Florida Coast,”’
          ibid., 7, 232-54.
WiLiiaMs, STEPHEN
  1954   ‘““An Archaeological Study of the Mississippian Culture in South-
         east Missouri.” Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Yale Univer-
          sity. Pp. 327.


                                            BIBLIOGRAPHY   2 5 5
Wi.toucuBy, CuHarves C.
  1898 Prehistoric Burial Places in Maine. (‘“Papers of the Peabody Muse-
        um,” Vol. 1, No. 6.) Cambridge, Mass.
  1922  The Turner Group of Earthworks, Hamilton County, Ohio. (“Pa-
        pers of the Peabody Museum,” Vol. 8, No. 3.) Cambridge, Mass.
  1935   Antiquities of the New England Indians: With Notes on the Ancient
         Cultures of Adjacent Territory. Cambridge, Mass.: Peabody Mu-
         seum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard Uni-
         versity.
Wittnort, JoHN
  1952  “A Paleo-Indian Site in Eastern Pennsylvania,” Proceedings of the
        American Philosophical Society, 96, No. 4, 464-95.
Wirtry, Warren L.
  1951  “A Preliminary Study of the Old Copper Complex,” Wisconsin
        Archaeologist, 32, No. 1, 1-18.
Wirtry, Warren L., and RirzeNTHALER, Roserr E.
  1956   “The Old Copper Complex: An Archaic Manifestation in Wis-
        consin,” American Antiquity, 21, 244-54.
WoopLanp CoNFERENCE
  1943   “The First Archaeological Conference on the Woodland Pat-
         tern,” American Antiquity, 8, 393-400.
Woopwarp, A.
  1931   The Grewe Site. (“Los Angeles Museum of History, Science and
         Art, Occasional Papers,” No. 1.) Los Angeles.
WorminctTon, Hannay M.
  1949 Ancient Man in North America. (“Denver Museum of Natural
         History, Popular Series,’”’ No. 4.) Denver, Colo.
Wray, Donacp E.
  1952   ‘Archeology of the Illinois Valley:     1950,” in Archeology of
         Eastern United States, ed. James B. Grir Fn, pp. 152-64. Chicago:
         University of Chicago Press.
Wyman, JEFFRIES
  1868   “An Account of the Fresh-Water Shell-Heaps of the St. Johns
         River, East Florida,” American Naturalist, 2, 393-403, 449-63.
  1875   Fresh-Water Shell Mounds of the St. Johns River. (Peabody Aca-
         demy of Science, Memoir No. 4.) Salem, Mass.




                                    METHOD AND THEORY      sysj6
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Index
        3
        2

        _

=>*“4       ane
                                                                     Index
Abasolo complex, 140                            Archaeological   unit concepts, 11-
Acculturation, 5, 120                             43; social aspects of, 48-56. See
Acosta, Jorge R., 197                             also Basic archaeological units;
Adams, Robert M., 113, 191                        Integrative units; Maximum units
Adena culture, 42, 75, 119, 156-57,             Archaic stage, 23, 42, 52, 70, 73, 94,
   159                                            104-43; mixed Lithic and Archa-
Adena-Hopewell cultures, 42, 75                   ic, 112-14, 121, 125; in Arctic, 138—
Adobe houses, 154                                  39; in California, 131-35; in Great
Adobe mounds, 177, 189                            Basin, 131-33; in Middle and
Agriculture, 67-70, 72, 105; diffu-               South America, 139-43; in Mid-
  sion of, 146; maize, 63, 64, 120,               dle West, 119; on Northwest
   127-28,   139,   i41,   159,   163,   177;     Coast, 135-37; in Plains, 120-27;
  manioc,      144;    pre-agricultural           in Southeast; 115-17; in Wood-
  stages, 67, 72-73; in Archaic stage,            land cultures, 118-20; Summary,
  107-8, 118-19, 120, 122, 128, 137,              201-2
  140; in Formative        stage,   144-46,     Arctic areas, 97-99, 138-39
  147, 155, 163, 169, 174                       Area, defined, 20-21
Alaska, 97-99, 138                              Area chronology, 44-47, 64-78
Alegria, Ricardo, 143                           Area co-tradition, 35, 66-68
Aleutian Islands, 138                           Area synthesis, 44-47
Allen site (S.D.), 88                           Argentina, 76, 100-102, 177, 178-79
Alto phase, 164, 168                            Armillas, Pedro, 45, 66, 67, 185, 186,
Amargoso phase, 128-29                            188, 198
Ameghino, F., 102                               Arrica    (Chile), 141
Amsden, Charles A., 131, 153                    Arroyo Malo site, 142
Anasazi subarea, 151-53, 154                    Arroyo Sarandi culture, 141
Anda, Luis Aveleyra Arroyo de, 99               Astronomy, 184
Andover Radiocarbon Conference,                 Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis, 99
  91, 96, 98, 105, 130, 134, 157                Ayampitin phase, 102
Angel phase, 165                                Aztecs, 194, 196-98
Angostura type, 99, 125, 138
Annis site, 117                                 Badin site (N.C.), 114
Antevs, Ernst, 90, 152                          Baerreis, David, 124, 143
Anthropology, cultural, 1-7                     Baggerly, Carmen, 84
Archaeological periods, 65-66, 68-              Ball-game courts, 154, 171, 180
  69                                            Barlovento phase, 172, 173



                                                             INDEX       D 59
Barreales phase, 179                           Bryan, Alan L., 136
Barrett, Samuel A., 162                        Bryan, Kirk, 91, 130
Bartlett, K., 84                               Buena Vista Lake site, 133
Basic archaeological units, 21-28              Bullard, W. R., Jr., 189
Basket Maker culture, 124, 129,                Burgh, Robert F., 131
  130-31, 152-53                               Burial Mound        periods, 156-58, 163,
Basketry,     130                                164, 165, 169, 171
Bat Cave (N.M.), 128, 130, 152, 155            Burial   types,     12, 32,    110-11,   118,
Baum     phase, 167                              433, 156, 157, 162
Baumer      phase, 119                         Burnett, E. K., 166
Beals, R. L., 164                              Bushnell, G. H. S., 175
Beardsley, Richard K., 104, 134                Byers, Douglas S., 89
Becerra formations, 82-83
Belize Valley (British Honduras),              Cachot, Rebecca Carrion, 176
  189                                          Caddoan regions, 164, 167-68
Belous, Russell E., 134                        Cahokia site (Ill.), 165
Bennett, John W., 162, 164                     Cairo Lowland phase (Mo.), 165
Bennett, Wendell         C., 26, 35, 45, 66,   Cajamarca phase, 189
  103, 173, 174, 176, 177, 178, 189,           Calasasaya,   190
  190, 191, 195                                Caldwell, Joseph R., 114, 167
Bennyhoff, J. A., 143                          California cultures, 96, 131-35,         143
Bernal, Ignacio, 186                           Campbell, E. W. C., 95, 96, 132
Berry, Brewton, 167                            Campbell, John Martin, 128
Bessemer site (Ala.), 165                      Campbell, Thomas N., 126
Big Bend      culture,    126, 127             Campbell, William H., 96, 132
Bird, J. B., 26, 45, 70, 100-101, 102,         Canalino sequence, 135
   103, 140, 141, 147, 176, 178, 190           Canby, Joel S., 171
Black, Glenn A., 165                           Candy Creek phase, 119
Black Rock culture, 131                        Carlson, Roy L., 136
Black sand phase, 119                          Carrién Cachot, Rebecca,           176
Black’s Fork culture, 84                       Carter, G. F., 84
Bleiler, E. F., 178                            Casa Grande, 155
Bliss, Wesley L., 121                          Casapadrense complex, 101-2
Boas, Franz, 105                               Caso, Alfonso, 66, 149, 150, 185, 186
Boggs, S. H., 171                              Catlow culture, 131
Bolas stones, 101, 141, 142                    Cedros phase, 180
Bolivia, 102, 103                              Ceramics. See Pottery
Bone artifacts, 81, 110, 139, 141              Ceremonial        centers,    149, 152, 173-
Bonnevill continuum, 131                          74, 176, 185, 186, 187-88
Borax Lake site, 97, 129, 133                   Cerro Jaboncillo culture, 175
Borden, Charles E., 97, 136, 137                Cerro Mangote complex, 140
Bormida, Marcelo, 102                           Cerro Zapote phase, 170
Braidwood, Robert J., 55, 72                    Chalco complex, 140
Brainerd, George W., 95, 186                    Champe, John L., 122
Bray, Robert T., 124                            Chan Chan (Peru), 195
Brazil, 102, 142, 143                           Chapman, Carl H., 113, 123, 124,
Brew, John O., 151, 153                           167
British Columbia, 97                            Charlot, J., 197
British Honduras, 29, 189                       Chavin de Huantar, 190, 195




                                      IN
                                              METHOD AND THEORY
                                           AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY             260
Chavin style, 55, 147, 176                         Cook, Harold J., 86
Chibchan Indians, 174                             Cooper, John M., 178
Chicama Valley, 70, 103, 140, 176,                Cooper, L. R., 159
   177, 190                                       Copan, 186
Chicanel phase, 148, 150                          Copena culture, 160-61
Chichén Itza, 197, 198                            Corbeled vault, 186
Childe, V. Gordon, 14, 55                         Corbett, J. M., 176
Chile, 102, 141, 143, 177-78                      Cornely, F. L., 178
Chimu region, 194, 199                            Costa Rica, 171-72
Chincha region, 194                               Cosumnes phase, 134
Chisos focus, 126, 127-28                         Cotter, John, 35, 81
Chriqui culture, 172                              Crab Orchard phase, 119
Cienegas complex,        140                      Cressman, L. S., 92, 94, 95, 131
Circum-Caribbean          cultures,        179,   Cruxent, J. M., 103
  180                                             Crystal   River   Mound         (Fla.),   160
Cities. See Urban society                         Cuba, 143
Civilization, 46-47, 51, 55-56, 62.               Cuevas phase, 180
   See also Urban society                         Cuicuilco phase, 148
Claflin, William H., Jr., 104, 115                Cuismancu region, 194
Clarke, J. G. D., 145                             Cultural lags, 74-76, 123
Classic stage, 23, 25, 40, 54-56, 76,             Cultural stages, 64; definitions and
  150-51,     182-92, 204                           formulations,      72-78.      See      also
Clear Fork focus, 121, 125-26                       Archaic  stage; Classic              stage,
Clements, Lydia, 84                                 Formative stage; Lithic              stage,
Clements, Thomas, 84                                Postclassic stage
Climax phases, 39-40, 135                         Culture, 46-47, 62; social aspects
Clovis culture, 84-85, 86-90, 92, 94,               of, 51-56
  95, 97                                          Culture-historical integration, 4, 6,
Coahuila complex, 140                                11-43, 77; defined, 12; expressed
Cochise     culture, 90-91, 93, 127-29,             by horizons     and traditions,         28-
  152, 154                                          43
Coclé culture, 151, 172                           Cumberland      phase, 165
Coe, Joffre, 114                                  Cummings,      Byron,     148
Cole,   Fay-Cooper,         117,   119,   159,    Cunningham, Wilbur M., 119
  165                                             Cupisnique phase (Peru), 176
Coles     Creek-Plaquemine          culture,      Cushing, F. H., 162
  53, 164, 167, 168
Collier, Donald, 26, 65, 174                      Dabajuro phase, 179
Collins, Henry, 97, 98, 99, 138, 139              Dallas (Tenn.) phase, 165
Colombia, 172-75                                  Danger caves, 131       -
Colonial period (Hohokam),                154     Daugherty, Richard D., 138
Community,       49-50                            Davis, E. H., 157
Complicated      Stamp      Pottery,      161,    Davis, E. Mott, 87, 122
  165                                             Davis site, 164
Component: community as, 49-50,                   Dawson, Elmer J., 134
  defined, 21-22, 25; diagram, 41                 Deadman culture, 131
Concho complex, 130                               Death Valley (Calif.), 84
Content units. See Basic archaeo-                 Debenedetti,    S., 179
  logical units                                   Deer Creek phase, 167



                                                                 iwosx 26]
DeJarnett, David L., 104, 115, 161,       Eldridge, William, 89
  165                                     Ellis, Florence H., 128
Dellinger, S. C., 124                     Enterline culture, 89
Denbigh flint complex, 98, 138            Eskimo culture, 97-98, 117, 136-39
Dendrochronology, 44, 45                  Esperanza phase, 186
Deptford phase, 119, 161                  Ethnography,       4, 38, 50
Descriptive correlation, 45-46            Ethnology, 4, 6
Desert cultures, 90-94, 114,       IVAF   Etowah     phase, 161, 164, 166, 167
  126, 127-32, 140                        Eva   phase, 116
Deuel, Thorne, 119, 159                   Evans, Clifford, Jr., 13, 26, 88, 102,
Developmental interpretation.      See      174, 176, 177, 181, 189
  Historical-developmental _ inter-
  pretation                               Fairbanks,    Charles     H.,         115, 119,
Diablo phase (Mexico), 100, 139             161, 165, 167
Dick, Herbert W., 128                     Farmington (Calif.),          96
Dickinson, S. D., 124                     Faulkner phase, 116
Diffusion, 5, 11, 50, 137; in Forma-      Fenenga, F., 134
  tive stage, 150-51, 176                 Fewkes, Jesse Walter,           160
DiPeso, Charles C., 155                   Field work, 4
Distributional correlation, 30, 32-       Figgins, J. D., 86
  33, 44, 45                              Figurines, 148, 149, 150
Dolmatoff,   Alicia Reichel-.      See    Finley site (Wyo.), 87
  Reichel-Dolmatoff, Alicia               Fishing,   FLO} FLL. 135) F772) 180
Dolmatoff, Gerardo Reichel-.       See    Florescent   phase,     177
  Reichel-Dolmatoff, Gerardo              Florida,   19, 29, 119, 143, 160-62
Domesticated animals, 177
                                          Focus, defined, 21-22
Dominican Republic, 180
                                          Folsom culture, 86-90
Dorset culture, 139
Drucker,   Philip, 137, 140, 150, 185
                                          Folsum-Yuma cultures,              86, 123
Duff, Wilson, 97                          Food-gathering.         See           Hunters-
Dunlevy, Marion L., 169                     gatherers
                                          Forbis, Richard G., 87
Early Ancon phase, 176                    Ford, James A., 13, 26, 27-28,               65,
                                            67, 96, 115, 116, 156, 160, 164, 165
Early Lithic stage, 73, 79
                                          Formal units 21. See               also   Basic
Early Milling Stone culture,       96,
                                            archaeological units
  133
                                          Formative stage, 23, 25, 52-53, 74,
Early Supe phase, 176
                                            75, 120, 144-81; agriculture in,
Ecuador, 172-75
                                            144-46; in California, 134-35; in
Eden-Scotsbluff culture, 87-90, 97,         east, 155-60; in Middle America,
  98, 99, 122,
             138                            170-72; in Northwest,     136; in
Edwards    Plateau   (Tex.), 125, 126       South America, 172-81; in South-
Effigy Mound     culture   (Wis.), 162      east, 160-62; Summary, 202-4
Ekholm,    Gordon    F., 148              Fort Ancient site, 158, 166-67
El Arbolillo phases, 148                  Fort Rock caves, 131
FE] Cerrillo culture, 141                 Fort Walton (Fla.) phase, 29, 164,
FE] Horno phase, 174                         167
EI Molle culture, 178                     Fortifications, 177, 179, 193, 196
El Purgatorio (Peru), 195                 Foster, George M., 197



                                                                  262
                                       METHOD AND THEORY
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Fowke, Gerard, 160                             Gypsum      Cave      (Nev.), 94-95, 126,
Fowler, Melvin L., 113                           132
Frankforter, W. D., 87, 122                    Gypsum types, 109, 126
Fraser River region, 137
Friesenhahn Cave (Tex.), 83                    Haag, William G., 96, 104,             115,
Fulton aspect, 168                                134, 156
                                               Haiti, 143
Gallinazo     period,   177,     182,   189,   Harding, M., 96, 133
  191, 195                                     Harp, Elmer, 138
Garcia Payon, J., 185                          Harrington, M. R., 83, 95, 97, 124,
Gayton, A. H., 176, 189                          129) 131, 132,433
Genetic correlation, 30-31, 33, 38,            Haury, Emil W., 38, 86, 89, 92, 95,
  40, 45                                         129, 152, 154, 174
Georgia, 46, 115, 119, 161, 167                Hawkes, Christopher, 137
Gibson aspect, 168                             Hawkes, E. W., 162
Giddings, J. L., Jr., 98                       Haynes, C. V., 92
Gifford, E. W., 134 ,                          Heizer, Robert F., 95, 96, 131, 134
Gila-Salt region, 18                           Hellman, Milo, 103
Gilmore, Melvin R., 124                        Hibben,     Frank     C., 84, 91, 92, 99
Gjessing, G., 117                              Hidden     Valley Shelter site, 113
Glacial Kame culture, 119                      Hill, A. T., 122, 167
Glades Region, 19, 115, 161, 162               Hill, Malcolm W., 92
Gladwin, Harold S., 19, 154, 155               Historical-developmental interpre-
Glass, J. B., 189                                 tation, 67; defined, 71-72, 77
Goggin, John M., 19, 36-37, 115,               Hiwassee Island phase, 165
  162, 166                                     Hoffman, Bernard G., 139
Gonzalez, Alberto R., 102                      Hohokam subarea, 19, 128,             129,
Graham Cave site, 113, 114                       151,    154-55
Grant Mound        site (Fla.), 162            Holder, Preston, 104, 121, 166
Grave Creek Mound (W.Va.),              157    Hopewell cultures, 157, 158-63, 169
Great Lakes region, 162
                                               Hopewellian    cultures,  120, 138,
Great Serpent Mound            (Ohio), 157       159-60
Green     River   phase, 116
Greengo, Robert C., 160
                                               Horizon, 29-34, 37-38, 42-43; dia-
                                                 gram, 41; in multiple-area syn-
Greenland, 138
                                                 thesis, 62; social aspects of, 51;
Greenman, Emerson F., 157,              158,
                                                 and tradition, 39-40
  159, 160                                     Horizon-style concept, 31-33, 166
Griffin, James B., 13, 46, 65, 104-5,
  118-20, 155-56, 157, 159, 164, 165,          Horner site (Wyo.), 87
  166, 167                                     House construction, 133, 139. See
Gross, H., 103                                   also Adobe houses; Pit-houses
Grove focus, 124                               Howard, Edgar B., 86
Guadalupe phase, 179                           Howard, G. D., 142, 181
Guanape phase (Peru), 176                      Huaca Prieta culture, 70, 140
Guangala phases, 175                           Huanaco     mounds,      195
Guarani     tradition, 142, 181                Huasteca     phase, 148, 150
Guatemala,    25-26, 29, 43, 184, 197          Hughes, Jack T., 88
Guernsey, E. Y., 116                           Hunters-gatherers, 68, 69, 70, 72;
Guernsey, S. J., 131                             in Lithic stage, 80-81; in Archaic



                                                             INDEX      My6 3
   stage, 107, 122, 123, 127, 129, 130;         Krieger, Alex D., 67, 121, 125, 126,
  in California, 134, 135                          164,      166,     168;     on      percussion
Hurt, Wesley R., Jr., 92, 132                     stage, 82-85; quoted, 68-70
                                                Kroeber, A. L., 3, 26, 31, 45, 66,
Imlay Channel       (Mich.), 84                   174, 176, 189, 190, 195; quoted,
Incas, 76, 194, 196                               137
Indian Knoll site, 116
Indian River (Fla.), 115, 161, 162              La Candelaria phase, 178-79
Integrative     units, 29-43.     See also      La Jolla culture, 96, 133
  Horizon; Tradition                            La Loma phase, 174
Ipiutak phase, 139                              La Perra phase, 139
Ipswich (Mass.), 89                             La Venta        phase, 185
Irene phase (Ga.), 167                          Lagoa Santa caves,             142
Iroquois Confederacy, 53                        Laguna, Frederica            de, 137, 139
Irrigation, 154, 176, 177                       Lake Mohave            sites, 95, 132-33
Irving, William, 138                            Lamar phase, 161, 164, 167
Isla de los Indios phase, 172-73                Lamoka phase, 104, 116-17
Issaquena phase, 160                            Lancaster, James A., 153
Iyatayet site (Alaska), 98, 138                 Larco Hoyle, Rafael, 66, 103, 176,
                                                  190
Jenness, Diamond, 139                           Larsen, Helge, 98, 139
Jennings, Jesse D., 22, 43, 94, 126,            Las Flores phase, 170
  LPH   “SL. ESS                                Lathrap, Donald W., 143, 180
Jijon y Caamafio, J., 175, 195                  Laughlin, William S., 138
Johnson, Frederick, 82, 91, 99, 128             Laurentian formulation, 117
Judd, Neil M., 155                              each eave iss
                                                Leechman, Douglas, 139
Kaminaljuyu        (Guatemala),        25-26,   Lehmer, D. J., 126
  43, 148, 185, 186, 188, 197                   Leighton, Morris M., 165
Kelley, J. Charles, 91, 125, 126, 130,          Lemert, E. M., 96
  140                                           Leonard Rock Shelter culture, 131
IaNg ANG Le GIL, GSS                            Lerma     phase, 99, 100, 139
Key Marco site, 162                             Lewis, T. M. N., 89, 92, 113, 116,
Keyes, Charles, 167                               119,    165
KaddenwAne Vc 225-2       Sao Oued       slot   Lewisville site (Tex.), 87
  148, 155, 170, 171, 185, 190                  Lillard, Jeremiah B., 134
Kidder, Alfred, II, 179                         Lilly, Eli, 159, 165
Kincaid phase, 165                              Lime Creek sites (Tex.),      121-22
King, Arden, 136                                Lind Coulee site (Wash.), 97
Kirchhoff, Paul, 20, 128, 147                   Linné, Sigvald, 186, 188
Kivas, 153                                      Lithic stage, 23, 52, 73-103; in Arc-
Kivett, Marvin F., 122, 168                        tic, 97-99; Desert cultures, 90-
Klamath Lake, 94                                  94, Folsom-Yuma culture, 86-90;
Kleine, Harold K., 89, 92                         in Middle and South America,
Kluckhohn, Clyde, 65                              99-103; mixed Lithic and Ar-
Kneberg,      Madeline,   89,   115,     116,     chaic stages, 112-14, 121, 125;
  119, 165                                        percussion stage, 82-85; Sum-
Kolomoki      site (Ga.), 46, 160                 mary,      200-201.        See     also   Clovis
Kozlovich, Eugene,        124                     culture;          Eden-Scottsbluff          cul-




                                                                             264
                                             METHOD AND THEORY
                                       IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   ture; Folsom    culture;    Sandia     Maranga phase, 177, 189, 195
   culture                                Maravillas focus, 126
Little Lake site (Calif.), 132            Marksville phase, 27-28, 160
Little Sycamore site (Calif.), 133        Marsh, Gordon H., 138
Livermore focus, 127                      Martin, Paul S., 35, 65, 67, 128, 152,
Local sequence, 23, 24-26                    153
Locality, defined, 18                     Martinez del Rio, Pablo, 140
Logan, Wilfred D., 113                    Mason, John Alden, 164, 174
Longyear, J. M., III, 171                 Maximum units, 47-48; social as-
Los Llanitos   (Honduras),    171           pects of, 51-56
Lothrop, Samuel      K., 141, 142, 170,   Maxwell, Moreau S., 116, 119
  172, 178, 181, 190                      Maxwell, Thomas J., 124
Houde          131                        Maya regions, 21, 25, 28-29, 43; in
Lovelock Cave, 131                          Formative    stage, 148, 150; in
Lower Loup phase, 169                       Classic stage, 54-55, 182-86; in
Lubbock site (Tex.), 87                     Postclassic stage, 198
Lucy site (N.M.), 85.                     Mayapan, 197, 198
                                          Mayer-Oakes, William J., 100, 113,
McCann, Catherine, 167                       120
McCann, Franklin T., 130                  Meade,   Grayson     E., 88
McCary, Ben C., 89                        Means, Philip A., 194, 196
McGimsey, C. R., III, 140, 172            Medicine Creek site, 87, 121,      122
McGregor, John C., 36                     Meggers, B. J., 174, 181
MacHaffie   site (Mont.),    87           Meighan, Clement, 96, 134
McIntire, William G., 28                  Melgaard, Jorgen, 138
McKean site (Wyo.), 123
                                          Menghin, O. F. A., 101, 102, 103
Mackenzie Valley, 99, 138
                                          Mesoamerica. See Middle America
Mckern, Wi. C5 21930) 135,136,
  159, 162                                Mesolithic stage, 98, 118, 145
MacNeish, R. S., 45, 99, 100, 116,        Metallurgy, 63, 172, 173, 175, 190
  117, 138, 139, 148, 167                 Mexico, 20, 82-83; Lithic stage in,
Macon Plateau phase, 165                    99, Archaic stage in, 139-40, 143,
Madisonville phase, 167                     Formative stage in, 147-50; Clas-
Magellanic sequence, 100-101,       141     sic stage in, 184-85, 191; Post-
Mahan, E. C., 89                            classic stage in, 196-97
Maize agriculture. See Agriculture        Miamisburg Mound (Ohio), 157
Malabar phase, 162                        Miccaotli phase, 148
Malaga Cove (Calif.), 96, 133             Middle America, 20-21, 43, 45; Ar-
Malakoff (Tex.), 83                         chaic stage in, 139-40; Formative
Malamud, C. G., 96, 133                     stage in, 147-51; Classic stage in,
Maldonado-Koerdell, Manuel, 99              54-56, 65, 66-68, 182-89; Post-
Maler, Teobert, 186                         classic stage in, 196-99
Mammoths, 86, 99-100                      Migration, 11, 154
Mamom phase, 148, 150                     Miles, Suzanna W., 117
Mangelsdorf, Paul C., 128                 Militarism, in Postclassic stage, 193,
Manioc agriculture. See       Agricul-      195, 196, 197-98
  ture                                    Miller, Carl F., 114, 115
Manta site, 175                           Mills, William C., 157, 158
Marajoara phase, 180-81                   Milnesand (N.M.), 88



                                                      INDEX     265
Mississippi cultures,      120, 151, 163-        Norbeck, Edward, 94, 127, 131
  67, 169                                        Nordenskidld, Erland von, 181
Mississippi     Valley,   27-28,     53, 89,
   125, 138, 162-67                              Oak     Grove      culture, 96, 133
Mitla, 196                                       Oakes, W. J. Mayer-. See Mayer-
Moche Valley (Peru), 190, 195                       Oakes, W. J.
Modified Basket Maker. See Bas-                  Oaxaca,      184, 185, 186
  ket Maker culture                              Obion      phase    (Tenn.),     165
Modoc Rock Shelter site, 113, 114                Old Bering Sea phase, 139
Mogollon subarea, 128, 151-52                    Old Copper culture, 117
Mohave      Desert, 84                           Oliviense complex, 101
Mohica      phase, 55, 189                       Olmec style, 55, 148, 150, 185
Momil phase, 172, 173                            Oneota culture, 167
Monagrillo culture, 140, 172                     Orr, Kenneth G., 166
Monks Mound, 165                                 Ores Ph Ge 135
Monte Alban phase, 186                           Orssich, Adam, 142
Moore, Clarence B., 160, 165                     Orssich, E. S., 142
Moorehead, Warren K., 117, 158,                  Osgood, Cornelius, 142
  165,    166                                    Owasco-Iroquois culture, 167
Morgan, Richard       G., 119, 158, 159          Ozark Bluff-dweller culture, 124
Morley, Sylvanus G., 186, 187                    Ozark Plateau, 123-24
Morris, A. A., 197
Morris, Earl H., 131, 153, 197                   Pacatnamu (Peru), 195
Moss, John H., 87                                Paisley Five Mile Point (Ore.), 94,
Mossy Oak phase, 119, 161                          131
Mound-building,       156-58,      163,   164,   Palaces,    187, 189, 191, 194
  1655, LOO WL      2,    U7.                    Paleo-Indian stage, 112-14
Mound City site (Ohio), 158                      Palmatary, H. C., 181
Moundville phase (Ala.), 165                     Panama, 140, 151, 172
Mount Royal site (Fla.), 162, 166                Paracas phase, 190
Mouse Creek phase, 165                           Parkin phase, 165
Mulloy, William, 122-23                          Parrish site (Ky.), 89
Murdock, George P., 49, 168                      Parsons, Elsie Clews,          197
Murra, J. V., 174                                Patagonia, 101, 143
                                                 Paul, A. J. Drexel, Jr., 170, 171
Naco phase, 170, 171                             Pecos classification, 65
Nash, Philleo, 162                               Pecos River focus, 126
Natchez phase, 167, 168                          Percussion      stage, 82-85
Nazca culture, 55, 177, 189, 190                 Periods,     archaeological.         See   Ar-
Nebo Hill (Kan.), 123                              chaeological periods
Neighborhood       organization, 168             Peru, 26, 34-35, 37-38, 43; Lithic
Neolithic stage, 118, 145                          stage in, 102-3; Archaic stage in,
New York Hopewellian phase, 120                    70, 140; Formative stage in, 147,
Newcomb, Williarn W., 126                           176; Classic stage in, 54, 66, 182,
Newell, H. Perry, 168                              189-92; Postclassic stage in, 193
Nicaragua, 171-72                                Petén region, 25, 28-29, 182, 185,
Nicholson, H. B., 143                              186
Nodena phase, 165                                Phase, 21-24, 25, 27, 30-31; in cli-
Nogales    phase, 139, 140                         max, 39-40; diagram, 41; in rela-




                                                                          266
                                            METHOD AND THEORY
                                      IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   tion to maximum units, 47-48;              Pueblo Bonito, 155
   relation of region to phase, 29,           Pueblo periods, 153
   44; as “society,” 49-51                    Puerto Rico, 143, 180
Phillips, Philip, 13, 73, 79, 96, 144,        Purves, W. K., 134
  156, 160, 164, 165, 166, 167, 182           Pyramids,    150, 175,    176,   177, 184,
Pichalo phases 141, 178                         186, 187, 189, 191, 193, 194, 195
Piedras Negras site, 186
Pinto-Gypsum, 129, 132                        Quebrada de Humahuaca             region,
Pinto types, 109, 126, 130, 132, 133            76
Pioneer period (Hohokam), 154                 Quimbaya region, 172
Pit-houses, 152, 153, 168                     Quimby,      George   I., 27, 65,     116,
Plainview types, 88, 90, 95, 122,               159, 167, 168
  125, 138
Platform mounds, 150                          Rainey, Froelich, 139
Playa de los Muertos phase, 170               Reagan site (Vt.), 89
Portacelli phase, 174                         Recuay phase, 177, 189, 190
Porter, M. N., 148                            Red Ocher phase, 119
Posnansky, Arthur, 190                        Redfield, Robert, 55, 72
Postclassic stage, 23, 54-56, 76, 193-        Region, defined, 19-20, 29, 44
  99, 205                                     Regional sequence, 23, 26-27, 28-
Potter Creek Cave, 83                           29, and phases, 44
Pottery: cere-perdu casting, 64;              Reichel-Dolmatoff, Alicia, 174
  Complicated Stamp, 161; Early               Reichel-Dolmatoff, Gerardo, 172,
  Napier, 161; fiber-tempered, 115;              174
  negative painting, 63, 166, 176;            Reichlen, Henri, 189
  Nicoya polychrome, 171; Ori-                Reichlen, Paule, 189
  noco     broadline    incised,  180;        Reiter, Paul, 65
  rocker-stamped, 173; white-on-              Religious architecture. See Cere-
  red, 34-35; in Archaic stage, 100;            monial centers; Pyramids; Tem-
  in Classic stage, 186, 187, 190; in           ples
  Early Woodland cultures, 118-               Renaud, E. B., 84
   19; in Postclassic stage, 196; in          Repelo complex, 140
  Argentina, 179; in Brazil, 180; in          Restrepo, V., 174
  Chile, 178; in Ecuador, 175; in             Ricketson, E. B., 25
  Mexico, 148, 150; in Panama,                Ricketson, O. G., Jr., 25
   140; in Plains, 122; in Venezuela,         Rimac   Valley, 195
  179-80                                      Rinaldo, John B., 35, 67, 152
Poverty      Point   culture,   138,   156,   Ritchie, William A., 89, 92, 104,
  157, 159                                      116, 117, 118, 120, 139, 159, 167
Preformative stage, 73-74, 105, 127,          Ritzenthaler, Robert E., 117
  145, 151, 159                               River-channel and river-terrace se-
Prehistory, synthesis of, 61-72                 quences,   44
Prescott, W. H., 196                          Roaring Springs culture, 131
Preuss, K. T., 173                            Roberts, Frank H. H., 65, 86, 88,
Processual interpretation, 4, 5-6               122, 153
Promontory       culture, 131                 Rogers, David B., 96, 133
Proskouriakoff,      Tatiana,   186,   187,   Rogers, Malcolm J., 84, 95, 96, 129,
  188, 198                                      133
Pucara phase, 189, 190                        Roosa, William B., 85, 86, 92



                                                           INDEX       2 67
Root, W. C., 190                                 Sellards, E. H., 83, 86, 88
Round Rock focus, 125                            Sequence. See Local sequence; Re-
Rouse, Irving, 30-34, 35, 44-45, 67,               gional sequence
  103, 115, 142, 143, 162, 179, 180              Serrano, A., 102, 142
Rowe, John H., 189, 194, 196                     Shell artifacts, 110, 141, 142
Rowley, Graham, 139                              Shetrone, Henry C., 157, 158
Roys, R. L., 197                                 Shippee, J. M., 123
Ruppert, Karl, 198                               Shook, Edwin      M., 22, 26, 43, 148,
Russell Cave (Ala.),        114                    185, 188, 198
Ryden, S., 178                                   Siberian cultures, 98
                                                 Signal Butte I and II (Neb.),     121,
Sacramento—San          Joaquin          Delta     123
  culture,   134                                 Silver Lake site, 132-33
Safety Harbor (Fla.) phase, 29                   Sioux Indians, 167
St. Johns    River     (Fla.),    115,    161,   Site, defined, 18
  162                                            Skinner, Alanson B., 104
Saladero phase, 180                              Smith, A. L., 25, 198
Salado culture, 18, 155                          Smith, Benjamin L., 117
Salvador, 170                                    Smith,   C. Earle, 128
Sambaqui phases, 142                             Smith,   Carlyle S., 122
San Agustin, 173                                 Smith,   Elmer R., 131
San Dieguito—Playa culture, 95                   Smith,   Hale G., 167
San Francisco Bay regions, 134                   Smith,   M. A., 49
San Jon (N.M.), 88, 95                           Smith,   Marian W., 137
San José culture, 130                            Smith, Robert E., 25, 148, 170, 186,
San Juan Anasazi region, 124, 130                  187
San Pedro phase, 126, 128, 129                   Smith, Watson, 151
Sanders, William T., 175, 188, 196,              Snow, Charles E., 157
  197, 198                                       Social aspects of archaeological
Sandia culture, 84-85, 91-92, 95                   units, 48-56
Santa Marta towns, 174                           Society, 49-51
Santa Rita phase, 170                            Soday, Frank J., 89
Santa Rosa    Island    (Calif.), 83             Solecki, Ralph S., 99
Santa Rosa-Swift      Creek          (Fla.)      Sommer,    F. H., 178
  phase, 29, 160, 161                            Sorenson, John L., 45
Santa Valley (Peru), 190                         South   America,  26,     31, 3435;
Sarigua phase, 140                                 Lithic stage in, 100-103; Archaic
Satterthwaite, Linton, 186                         stage in, 140-43; Formative stage
Savannah phase, 167                                in, 170-81; Classic stage in, 189-
Saville, M. H., 175                                92; Postclassic stage in, 194-96
Sayles, E. B., 90, 91                            Southern Cult style, 33, 55, 166, 170
Schaedel, Richard P., 191, 195                   Spatial divisions, 18-21
Schenck, W. Egbert, 134                          Spatial-temporal relationships, 11-
Scholz, Paul, 117                                   17, 23-24, 29, 30; difficulty in
Schultz, C. Bertrand, 87, 122                      controlling, 41-42; expressed by
Sears, William H., 42, 46, 117, 118-               area chronologies, 44-47; in hori-
  19, 160,   161                                   zon-style concepts, 32
Seed-gathering,  111                             Spaulding, Albert C., 13, 117, 157,
Seip site (Ohio), 158                              158; quoted, 15-16




                                                                       268
                                               METHOD AND THEORY
                                         IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Sperry, John D., 87                       Tepeu phase, 170, 187
Spinden, H. J., 105, 164, 185, 186        Tequisquiac      (Mexico), 82-83
Spiro site, 166                           Terra, Helmut de, 83, 99
Squier, E. G., 157                        Texas, 125, 143
Stages in archaeology. See Archaic        Thomas, Tully H., 130
  stage; Classic stage; Cultural          Thompson, J. Eric S., 29, 186
  stages, Formulative stage; Post-        Tiahuanaco culture, 177, 189, 190,
  classic stage                             194, 196
Starved Rock site, 113                    Ticoman phase, 148
Stelae, 186                               Tierra del Fuego, 101, 143
Sterns, Fred H., 122                      Time-space relationships. See Spa-
Sterns Creek phase (Neb.), 122              tial-temporal relationships
Steward, Julian H., 13, 66, 67-70,        Titterington, Paul F., 165
  71, 131, 179                            Tlaltilco phase, 148, 150
Stimulus diffusion, 5                     Toldense complex, 101
Stirling, Matthew W., 172                 Topanga culture, 96, 133
Stoddard, Theodore, 172                   Totonacan Cempoala, 197
Stone architecture, 190, 195-96           Toulouse, Joseph H., Jr., 130
Stone sculpture, 146, 148, 150, 171,      Toynbee, Arnold, 66
  173, 175, 180, 186, 190                 Tozzer, A. M., 188, 197
Strong,   William    D., 26, 66,   103,   Trade, 11, 32, 199
  121, 122, 139, 168, 170, 171, °176,     Tradition, 34-39; defined, 37; dia-
  177, 189                                  gram, 41; and horizon, 39-40; in
Stumer, L. M., 177, 189, 195                multiple-area    synthesis, 62-64;
Subareas, defined, 20-21                    social aspects of, 51
Subphases, 24, 25                         Treganza, Adan E., 84, 96, 133
Suhm, Dee Ann, 69, 125, 126, 168          Tres Zapotes (Mexico), 150, 185
Sullivan, L. R., 103                      Tribe, 19-20, 52-53
Sulphur Spring phase, 127-28              Trinity culture (Tex.), 126
Swanger, J. L., 100                       Tropical Forest cultures, 179
Swanton, John R., 126, 164                Troyville phase, 160
Swift Creek phase (Ga.), 29, 160,         Tschopik, Harry, Jr., 103
  161                                     Tula (Mexico), 197
                                          ‘Tula Springs (Nev.), 83
Taino culture, 180                        Tula-Toltec culture, 188
Tairona towns, 174                        Tularosa Cave (N.M.), 126, 152
Tajin Totonac phase, 185                  Turner Mounds site (Ohio), 158
Tandilense phase, 102                     Tzakol phase, 185, 186
Taxonomy, 5, 12-13                        ‘Tzintzuntzan,        197
Taylor, Walter W., 6, 11
Tazumal (Honduras), 171                   Uaxactin sequence, 25, 28-29
Tchefuncte phase, 116                     Uhle, Max, 31-32, 103, 177
Tello, J..C., 176, 195                    Ulua Bichrome phase, 170, 171
Temple mounds, 151, 163, 164, 169         Unit concepts. See Archaeological
Temples, 175, 187, 194, 195, 197            unit concepts
Tennessee River, 115                      United States: eastern, 36, 46, 65-66,
Tenochtitlan, 196, 197                      67, 70, 89, 111, 118-20, 155; Great
Teotihuacan culture, 55, 148, 182,          Basin,     94-95,         111,   114,   Great
  185, 186, 188                             Plains, 88-93, 114, 120-27; Middle




                                                        INDEX          D:69
  Atlantic,     89; Mississippi        Valley,        Webb, William S., 89, 104, 115,
  27-28,      119,   162-67;    Ozark       Pla-        116, 157, 161
  teau,   123-24, 126-27; Prairies,                  Wedel, Waldo R., 122, 133, 167, 168
  113; Pacific Coast, 88, 96-97;                     Weeden Island phase, 29, 160, 167
  Southeast, 20, 33, 45-46, 111,                     Wendorf, Fred, 130
  115-17, 164-68; Southwest, 18-19,                  Wheat, Joe Ben, 45, 152
  36, 90-94, 151-55                                  Wike, Joyce, 121
Upper Republican culture, 168                        Wilder, Charles G., 115
Urban society, 182-83, 194-98                        Willey, Gordon R., 11, 26, 27, 29,
Uvalde focus, 126                                       32, 34-35, 43, 45, 65, 66, 67, 79,
                                                        115, 119, 140, 142, 143, 144, 156,
Vacaro, Joseph, 89                                      160, 165, 167,172;     173, £/6;5hie
Vahki phase, 154                                        182, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 195,
Vaillant, George C., 148, 164, 186,                    196
  196, 198                                           Williams, Stephen,      165
Valley     of Mexico,        147,    148,   150,     Willoughby, Charles C., 117, 158
  184, 188, 196                                      Wimberly, S. B., 165
Venezuela, 103, 142, 143, 179                        Winters, Howard, 113
Ventana Cave (Ariz.), 92, 95, 129                    Witthoft, John, 89, 157
Ventana-Amargosa I, 126                              Wittry, Warren L., 117
Veracruz, 184, 185, 197                              Woodbury, R. B., 160
Veraguas culture, 172                                Woodland culture, 42, 118-20, 155-
Vignati, M. A., 101                                     63
Virt Valley, 26, 176, 190                            Woodward, A., 154
Viscachani      (Bolivia),     103                   Wormington, Hannah M., 92, 95
                                                     Wray, Donald E., 119
Walker, Edwin F., 96, 133                            Writing, 182, 184, 186
Walker, Winslow M., 160                              Wyman, Jeffries, 104
Walker-Gilmore site, 122
Wallace, William J., 96, 133                          faxchilan site, 186
Walter, H. V., 102                                   Yucatan, 186, 197
Waring, A. J., Jr., 104, 115, 166                    Yukon Valley, 99
Water transportation, 197
Watts Bar phase, 119                                 Zacatenco: Early, 147, 148; Middle,
Wauchope, Robert, 45, 149                               148
Weaving, 130, 146                                    Zapotec style, 55, 185
Webb, Clarence H., 156, 168                          Zuni Indians, 26




                                       PRINTED     IN U.S.A.
               oy         De»     yy
          ie         -   VigA
        "Oa                 - a
        ene
          math ote


>         -




,




                                       ———




               a                             -



    .




                                             Nv




          \
     s

 At
 Gi




ii
 dok
                   Ne
                    Ri
                    t

                   ae




          sae
          Serene
        seman            Banas
ise
peers
    rales
      poe




 eee
pees
