                        Circumcision and Marriage
                                               O




                          Circumcision: Sunatan
A lthough some sort of circumcision may have been practiced in Java
before the beginning of the Islamic period in the sixteenth century, almost
no traces of such a pre-Moslem initiation rite are today apparent in Modjo-
kuto. The ceremony celebrating the circumcision has been largely patterned
after the marriage ceremony, with the subtraction of those elements per­
taining to the actual joining of the couple. Thus the food at the islaman
(circumcision, also called sunatan) and kepanggihan (marriage) slametans
is identical, and both rites provide the primary occasions for conspicuous
spending in Javanese and social life. Elaborate hired entertainment—a shadow
play and percussion orchestra, a Western-type orchestra complete with fe­
male vocalist, or a traveling drama or dance troupe—is often presented. As
many as two hundred people may be fed at a secular reception following
the slametan (which is, in any case, confined to eight or ten participants);
and guests are expected either to bring presents or to give money. In a
sense, both marriage and circumcision are puberty rites for the Javanese, the
first for girls, the second for boys, and should be viewed in this light as a
linked pair of coming-of-age ceremonies, one for each sex.*
     Most Javanese boys are circumcised sometime between the ages of ten
and fourteen, although I knew one santri whose five-year-old had just had
the operation. Most Modjokuto boys are circumcised separately, but some­
times groups of two or three brothers, cousins, and neighbors are taken at
 one time.
     Traditionally the operation was performed by a specialist called a tjalak
 (or bong) who was often also either a barber, a butcher, or a curer. Nowa­
   * It is reported that around Surakarta in Central Java incision is sometimes practiced
on eight-year-old girls, but this ceremony does not occur in Modjokuto.
                                           51
»52«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
days many urbanites have the operation performed at a hospital by a male
nurse (m a n tr i ), but the great majority probably still employ a tja la k if only
because it is cheaper. The local office of the Ministry of Religious Affairs in
Modjokuto had eleven tjalaks officially registered for the subdistrict. The most
active of these was also a curer and a h a d ji, who had learned the skill from
his father, and who, although he owned about two acres of rice land, said
that his practice brought in the greater part of his income (he charged from
twenty to fifty rupiahs, depending upon the distance from Modjokuto, where
he lives, and, I imagine, upon the class standing of the client). Under govern­
ment health regulations he is required to apply an antiseptic, which is fur­
nished by the Ministry of Health. As he put it, “My father used to chant
and cut. Now I chant, cut, and apply the medicine. It’s just the same, it makes
no difference.”
     After a p é tu n g a n system has been applied and an auspicious day chosen
a sla m eta n is given the evening before the circumcision is to take place.*
This sla m eta n , called the m anggulan, is exactly the same as the one given the
evening before a wedding (m id a d a r è n i) . It includes nearly all the foods
mentioned earlier plus rice pressed out flat onto a large tray until it forms
a wafer-thin disk. This rice disk is intended to symbolize the idea that
everyone at the sla m eta n is free of secret feelings of envy, hate, jealousy,
and the like; that everyone’s emotions have been flattened out to the point
where all present are calm, peaceful, and undisturbed “within.” Also, there
is in addition to the usual three kinds of porridge—red, white, and mixed—
a fourth. Made from pounded rice husks, it is called p a m -p a n t —literally,
“lungs.” Javanese believe, or many of them do, that the seat of life is in
the human breath—which, however, they also connect with the beating of the
heart—and so paru -p a ru is to honor “the spirit of life within the breath of
the person being circumcised or married.”
    Various sadjèns are put around in the house corners, the toilet, the rice
bin, and so on for the sétans; and after the slam etan is over, the boy is given
a lukewarm herb medicine and massaged by a d u k u n p id je t (a masseuse)
and covered with a yellow powder.
     The next morning he soaks in a tub of water for an hour or so and then
dresses. He wears a new white muslin cloth under his sarong, and after he has
been circumcised he sits on new white muslin as well. Another sa d jèn is
prepared for the spirits, the boy reads the Confession of Faith, and is cir­
cumcised by the tjalak, who uses a knife called w e si taw a, literally, “iron
you can’t feel.” If the boy faints, his mother rubs his face with her sarong.
When the operation is completed, he is laid on a low bed and his mother
steps across him three times, demonstrating that she, too, is free of any
hidden feelings toward the boy which might hamper the necessary process
of his growing emotionally away from her toward manhood. This state of
weakened emotional investment in one’s immediate environment, or self-
    * A boy may not be circumcised on any day on which either of his parents or any
of his four grandparents died. No circumcision can take place during the month of the
Fast, whereas the months of Besar, Mulud, Djumadilakir, Redjeb, and Ruwah are espe­
cially favorable ones. Similar conditions hold for weddings.
The Slametan Cycles: Circumcision and Marriage                                  »53«
induced distance and disciplined aloofness from all events in the transient
world of men—they call it having a “flaccid heart”—is among the most valued
of Javanese feeling patterns: iklas.
    That evening the feast and entertainment take place, and the boy may
find himself, pale, wan, and in not a little pain, forced to sit immobile atop
a great pile of pillows through the greater part of a night-long shadow play.
Nevertheless, the general opinion is that only a small percentage of children
fear the ritual, and in fact many request their parents to hold it before the
latter think the child is really old enough to stand it, or, perhaps, before the
parents can afford it.
  Sutrisno (aged about 11), her son, wants to be circumcised this year and as
  a matter of fact started up a campaign of his own, telling his grandmother and
  various aunts that he was going to be circumcised this month and for them
  to give him new clothes. This embarrassed Minah very much when they came
  to her and asked what day this would be, because she has no money now and
  will have to put it off for some months, till after the rice harvest, when she and
  her relatives will have rice.




                          Marriage: Kepanggihan
until recently in Java, most first marriages were arranged by the parents
of the bride and groom. Even when a boy had some ideas of his own as
to which girl he would prefer to marry, he would work for his aims through the
good auspices of his parents—if he could convince them of the wisdom of
his choice. This is still the pattern among many of the more traditional and
“old-fashioned” groups, but the pattern of romantic love is making rapid and
steady encroachments in contemporary Modjokuto. Among the educated,
Dutch-influenced, upper class of the town one even finds engagement cere­
monies now and then in which gold wedding bands are exchanged between
a man and his fiancée. Called tukar tjintjin (“to exchange rings” ), a term
borrowed from Indonesian, the new (to a Javanese) national language spoken
mainly in the cities and larger towns, this ring ceremony seems so far to
be largely confined to the student group, who tend to have long engagement
periods as a result of their extended schooling.
     For most people, even though in a great number of the cases the boy
and girl have already come to an understanding of their own in the matter,
the old lomaran pattern of formal request by the groom’s parents to the bride’s
is still carried out, at least in form.
     In the /amaran the groom’s family visits the bride’s family and engages
in an elaborate version of the kind of hyper-correct empty formalism in the
practice of which the Javanese are past masters. The father of the boy may
open matters with a remark such as, “Frost in the morning means rain in the
evening,” by which he means to communicate that the problem he has come
to discuss is a “cool” one, i.e., a simple one which should stir up no strong
»54«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
feelings. Slowly and in similarly metaphorical manner, he arrives at the
point and says he would like to become in-laws with his host, to marry his
son to the latter’s daughter. There will be much false protesting at this point
by the host that his daughter is spoiled, that although she is an adult she acts
like a child, and the host would find her highly unwelcome as a daughter-in-
law, and so on. At length—after perhaps two or three such visits—the
matter will be settled one way or the other. A meeting is then arranged at
the girl’s house at which the groom, the bride, and all the would-be parents-
in-law are present. Called the n o n to n i — “the looking (over)”—the occasion
is marked with the same strained pretense: the conversation is about every­
thing but marriage; the girl, rigid with shyness, serves the boy tea without
speaking to him, and he views her out of the corner of his eye to see (in the
traditional case, this would be the first time they had seen each other) what
he is getting. If he likes what he sees, he says so on the way home to his
parents, and the marriage is set.
     The marriage ceremony is called the kep a n g g ih a n (“the meeting”) and is
always held at the home of the bride. All parents, the theory goes, have an
inescapable obligation to provide one major festival for each of their children;
for the boys this is their circumcision, for the girls their marriage. As the
parents of the bride are paying for the wedding, they will usually try to
wait until after the next harvest before holding the ceremony; but if the
boy is in a hurry, he can help pay for part of the ceremony.* Failing this,
he can get an official marriage at the mosque and skip the abangan part of
the celebration for six months or so until he gets enough money together to
hold it. This is quite often done, especially among the poorer urban groups.
     The boy traditionally had to give two bridal gifts to the girl: the paningset,
usually clothes and jewelry, given, often with a sla m e ta n for the bride’s
parents, after the wedding has been finally decided upon; and the sasrahan —
traditionally a buffalo or ox and house furniture, but now usually reduced,
when it is given at all, to a few kitchen utensils—which is presented to the
girl at marriage. Both of these bridal gifts are rare in Modjokuto today.
     Since one is supposed always to marry off one’s daughters in descending
age order and this is commonly done, although not always, the first and last
wedding ceremonies given by a household are usually rather more elaborate
than those given for other daughters. The ceremony for the first daughter
is called b u b a k , which has roughly the same meaning as b a b a k: to clear
land or open up virgin territory. The ceremony for the youngest daughter
is called the p u n d jim g tu m p le k or, rather freely, “the completed honors.”
     I shall describe the marriage ceremony in the fullest form in which it
 appears, but I shall include no practice not carried out on the occasion of at
 least one wedding I saw during the time I was in Modjokuto. It must be
remembered not only that ceremonies for middle daughters are usually
 somewhat less elaborate, but also that various people omit various parts
 of the ceremony pretty much at will. At some weddings little more than
 necessary is done: the bride and groom go to the mosque and pronounce the
   * Mulud and Besar are the two best months for weddings, and when one of these
immediately follows the harvest a tremendous number of weddings takes place.
The Slametan Cycles : Circumcision and Marriage                               »55«
Moslem Confession of Faith, return home to shake each other’s hand, and
hold a secular reception for their guests.
     As in the islam an, the sla m eta n for a wedding is given the evening before
the actual ceremony. Called the m id a d a rèn i, except for the traditional prayer
that the bride and groom will prove to be as inseparable from one another
as are the male and female Moluccan crabs, it is identical to the m ang g u la n
given before the circumcision ceremony. Only the bride is present at the
m id a d a rèn i, and if the groom, having come from afar, has already arrived in
the neighborhood, he is kept hidden from her, for they are not supposed to see
one another before the actual meeting.
     After the sla m eta n , the bride is dressed in very simple clothes. If the
house is of the old-fashioned type which has a ceremonial bedroom in the
center (the se n to n g tengah —only about five houses in all of Modjokuto still
have these), the girl is seated in front of it; if not, then just the center of
the house will do. Here she sits perfectly immobile for about five hours until
midnight, during which time an angel comes down and enters her, remaining
until five days after the wedding. Thus it is that all brides look so much
more beautiful on their wedding day than on any other.
     While the girl is seated there, her mother performs the ritual of the
buying of the k e m b a n g m a ja n g — “blossoming flower(s).” The k e m b a n g
niajang are large composite plants. Their stems are made of banana-tree
trunk, their “blossoms” of scalloped tree leaves of various types, and they
are wrapped with green coconut branches. They represent the virginity of
the bride and the groom, two being constructed for each of them. If the man
has been married before, only two k e m b a n g m a ja n g are made; if the girl has
been married, no kepanggihan need be held at all. The person who has made
the k e m b a n g ttiajang, usually an older man, sits on the floor with them, and
the mother of the bride pretends she is a guest:
   Mother: May I come in?
   H ost:         Please do.
   Mother: Is this a rich and fertile village?
   H ost:         Yes, this is a rich and fertile village. What village are you from?
   Mother: I am from the village Sidowareg.
   H ost:         My, but you have come a great distance! What do you want?
   Mother: I want something very much: I will beg for it by weeping. My child
     wants a kembang majang.
   H ost:   Yes, we have them here, but are you sure you wish to buy them?
     They are expensive.
   Mother: Yes, I will buy them. How much do they cost?
   H ost:   Oh, the price is two and a half rupiahs.
The mother then pays the money, places the k e m b a n g m a ja n g by the girl, and
the evening is over.
    The actual wedding comes the next morning. For this day the p étu n g a n
system is applied to each hour to discover whether it is good or bad and so
that the various parts of the ceremony are timed to occur at the right moment.
At one of these auspicious times in the early forenoon the groom goes off
with his entourage to the office of the naib, the government religious official
»56«                                            T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
empowered to legitimize and register marriages. The entire company is led
by the m o d in , the village religious official, whom the boy has notified of his
plans several days in advance and who has consequently checked to be
sure the boy is not already married and then arranged the appointment with
tlie naib. Although there is one m o d in for each village (as well as, usually,
several assistant m o d itis ), there is but one naib for each subdistrict, and
his office is in the subdistrict capital. In the Modjokuto subdistrict the capital
is Modjokuto town, and the naib serves eighteen villages within a radius of
about fifteen miles; and so the trip, usually accomplished in a long train of
horse carts gaily decorated with green coconut leaves, red and white bunting,
and numerous Indonesian flags, may be a relatively long one.*
      The bride does not usually go along on this trip to the n a ib ’s office
 (sometimes humorously referred to as “going on the Pilgrimage”), but is
represented by her legal guardian under Moslem law, her w ali. A girl’s w a li
is her nearest living male relative in her paternal line—either her father,
father’s brother, brother, or paternal grandfather. If her paternal relatives
are all dead or very distant from the scene of the marriage, then the naib
himself may act as her w ali, in which case he is called a w a li h a k im or “court-
appointed guardian.” The girl, her w ali, and the m o d in typically visit the
naib a few days before the actual marriage without much fanfare. Nowadays,
when the pretense that the boy and girl have never met until their wedding
 day is almost universally transparent, the girl may just go a few minutes
 before the boy with a wedding procession of her own made up of women.
      At the n a ib ’s office, which in Modjokuto is located at the main mosque,
 the w ali formally requests the naib to marry his daughter to the boy. The
 naib asks the boy whether he wishes to marry the girl. Then the boy is
 requested to repeat the Confession of Faith word by word after the n aib,
 first in Arabic (about which many people, able only roughly to approximate
 the Arabic pronunciation, feel very embarrassed) and then in Javanese. The
 n aib informs the boy that if he does not feed his wife, sleep with her, or
 provide her a place to live in, or if he abandons her for three months with
 no information as to his whereabouts, the girl will be entitled to demand a
 divorce from him. The naib chants a prayer in Arabic, which the assembled,
 seated in the usual palm-upwards, face-raised prayer posture, punctuate with
 appropriate amens; sees that the groom gives the w ali the five-rupiah m as
 ka w in (“marriage gold” ) for the girl demanded by Moslem law; and
 concludes the services by pronouncing the boy and absent girl man and wife.
 For the santris this is the crucial part of the marriage, that which makes it
 official in the eyes of God (and of the government, which regards the id jab,
 as this ceremony is called, as the legal marriage ceremony for everyone ex­
 cept Christians); and they never fail to mention this fact in the speech to
 the guests at the reception which follows. For the abangans, however, the
  really important part of the ceremony is yet to come.
      Back at the home of the bride the festivities are about to begin. Yellow
     * Wealthier people in the town of Modjokuto usually pay the naib about 25 rupiahs to
 come to them, but this is beyond the means of the poorer class of townsmen and all but
 the very well-to-do village people.
The Slametan Cycles : Circumcision and Marriage                         »57«
coconut branches have been bent in a half-circle arc over the entrance to the
quarter to indicate to all who pass by that a family within “has work”
 (duwé gawé)—i.e., is having a marriage or a circumcision. A special extension
of the roof has been built out over the yard to shelter the guests, who sit
there sipping coffee, nibbling djadjan, and exchanging pleasantries. Inside
the house the girl is being dressed either by her female relatives or by a
woman expert called the tukang paras.
     Traditionally the bride (mantèn) dressed as a princess, the groom (also
called mantèn) as a prince, and each marriage re-enacted a royal marriage.
The girl wore a black blouse trimmed with flowers and a very fine sarong from
one of the great court centers. Her face was made yellow with powder; little
black points, looking like so many widow’s peaks, were painted along the
top edge of her forehead, and her mouth was colored a bright red. Three
necldaces of silver or of flowers hung across her chest, and silver ornaments
were placed on her ears, silver armlets on her arms. The boy (also dressed
by the tukang paras) wore a new sarong, too, and a black coat trimmed in
yellow. On his head was placed a Javanese turban to which was attached a
large jeweled brooch. He too was draped with flowers, and in his belt was
stuck a huge, flower-covered kris, a conscious symbolization of the phallus.
In the old days a high prijaji marrying a girl of lower standing (usually as
a second wife) would not come to the wedding in person but just sent his
kris. This now obsolete pattern got a curious reactivation while I was in
Modjokuto. When a boy from the north coast failed to show up at his wedding
at the girl’s home in Modjokuto, the distressed and extremely ashamed bride’s
family satisfied the naib by producing a letter from the boy stating his in­
tentions and then married the girl to his photograph.
    In Modjokuto the traditional dressing pattern is now found, for the most
part, only among the prijajis—the two most elaborate examples of it during
my stay being the weddings of the daughter of the district officer and the
daughter of a retired assistant director of the government pawnshop. What­
ever they did in the past—and it appears rather doubtful that this pattern
at its most elaborate ever extended to the villages to any large degree—
abangan girls in Modjokuto now wear Western dresses (for which they still
get sharply criticized as practicing tjara njonjah-njonjah—i.e., the way of
the Dutch women and their big-city imitators) or, more commonly, some­
what better-quality clothes of the same style as the average Javanese woman
wears every day, with flowers and the like added. The abangan boy appears
in a Western jacket, a sarong, and the small black overseas cap, the pitji,
that has become the prime symbol of nationalism so far as dress is concerned.
Santri girls, especially those in town, wear pure white gowns, something like
our wedding gowns, and the Moslem head shawl or kudung, while the man
wears Western clothes topped by the pitji. Village santri girls wear the shawl
with usual Javanese dress.
    Now things are ready for the actual meeting. An old sarong belonging
to the girl is laid down outside in front of the house where they will meet,
the spot having been determined by pétungan and the direction from which
the boy will approach having been fixed by considering the naga dina. On
»58«                                           T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
top of this sarong a brass bowl containing flower water and a chicken egg
are placed, and under it a yoke for a pair of oxen. A special sa d jèn offering
to be placed at the se n to n g tengah (or its equivalent) is prepared containing
soybeans, green beans, yellow beans, onions, pepper, a small piece of batik
cloth in a little bamboo tube, rice, money, various herbs, a mirror, two
bunches of bananas, a green coconut with the husk off, an egg, a tiny water
jug filled with water and with the spout plugged up, and a small kerosene
lamp. Similar sa d jèn s may be placed in dangerous places around, a coconut
is thrown into the well, and the d u k im m a n te n goes about sprinkling water over
which he has chanted a spell so that none of the family’s property will be
lost, broken, or stolen during the ceremony.
     At the chosen moment the girl emerges from the house, followed by two
virgin girls carrying the k e m b a n g m ajang, and the boy advances from outside,
followed by two virgin boys carrying his k e m b a n g m a ja n g . Both the bride
and the groom have a small package of betel nut in their hands, and as they
draw near they throw these at one another, the theory being that the one
who hits the other first with the betel will be the dominant partner in the
marriage. There is an unwritten rule that the girl is supposed to see to it
that she loses this contest, which she seems invariably to do.
     When they come face to face and are standing on the girl’s discarded
sarong (symbolizing her nakedness before her husband and her willingness to
prostrate herself before him), either the girl performs the traditional gesture
of obeisance from an inferior to a superior—the se m b a h * — or they will
simply touch palms in the Islamic handshake (s a la m a n ). One would be likely
to encounter a sem b a h only in a prijaji wedding nowadays, and santris in­
variably employ only the salam an.
     This act completed, the two virgin girls and the two virgin boys exchange
their mock plants diagonally with one another, crossing in front of the
couple, which symbolizes the mutual relinquishment of virginity by the bride
and groom. The girl kneels, breaks the egg on the boy’s foot (the white
symbolizing her loss of purity, the yolk the breaking of the hymen), and
then washes his feet in the flower water. This latter act, which symbolizes
her subservience to her husband, is often eliminated nowadays as inconsistent
with contemporary notions as to the equal status of men and women.
     The girl then rises, turns facing the house again, and takes her place
next to the boy, standing with him on the double ox yoke, symbolizing their
inseparability and the fact that only two people, those actually involved, ever
know what really goes on between man and wife. Sometimes each then takes
a sip of flower water from a coconut dipper offered by the wife’s mother,
and a shawl is circled around the wife’s mother, her daughter, and her son-in-
law as if she were cradling them both in a sléndan g , the shawl a mother
uses to carry her baby around on her hip until the child can walk. This
latter gesture is intended to suggest that the bride’s mother has adopted the
    * The palms are pressed together with fingers extended upwards and thumbs pressed
to the nose, while the unturned head is moved in a strictly horizontal plane, first to
the right and then to the left. The gesture, which has been called “the horizontal nod,”
is usually performed in a crouching position.
The Slametan Cycles: Circumcision and Marriage                                 »59«
groom as her child along with the bride, and the former that she will continue
to nurse them both.
      The bride and groom now return to the house, where they are seated in
front of the se n to n g tengah (or its equivalent), there to remain immobile
except for a few ritual acts and the greeting of the guests as they file by.
Immobility is associated with spiritual force in Javanese minds. To sit abso­
lutely quiet, without food or sleep, and with your whole mind concentrated on
a single imaginary point until it is empty of all thought and sensation—to
ta p a — is the major road to inward strength and outward power. Thus, as
the ancient kings sat as rigid as a bronze Buddha during their inauguration
or whenever their country was in serious danger, and as the great shadow-
play heroes practiced long tapa feats before engaging in either love or war,
so the unborn child, the just circumcised boy, the newly married couple, and
the recently deceased corpse display that trance-like immobility that signi­
fies spiritual power.
      As the d u k u n m a n ten , who has conducted affairs since the beginning of
the ceremony, seats the bride and groom, he (or she) chants a spell:
      In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!
      My intention is to seat the bride and groom.
      Male guardian spirit, female guardian spirit of
        Sumbersari [the villagel,
      The land of mBah Nur Wakit [the name of the guardian spirit],
      This is the place of birth of the bride.
      May she stay fixed in position with her husband, by the will of Allah!
      O, forty-four angels, come and help guard the bride and groom!
      I see her from the front—she looks like a princess;
      I see her from the left, she looks likes Sembadra
            [the beautiful first wife of Ardjuna, the shadow-play hero];
      I see her from the right, she looks like Sfikandri
            [the beautiful second wife of Ardjuna];
      From behind she looks like an angel.
      Jaullah, Jaullah, Jaullah.
    Following this chant a sla m eta n is held with a layer of yellow rice on top
of a layer of white—for love and purity—in each person’s banana-leaf dish.
The bride and groom eat from one another’s dish, but they do not finish
their food. The boy’s dish is inverted over the girl’s to make one unit which
remains in place by the se n to n g tengah for five days. When it begins to smell,
which is likely to be soon in the tropics, it indicates that the girl is no longer
a virgin and the consummation of the marriage has taken place, but only the
immediate family members are allowed to inspect this omen.
    For the first daughter a special ceremony is performed at this time.
(There is some conflict as to whether it ought properly to be held the night
before, but in the single case I saw it was held after the kep a n g g ih a n ). Two
large painted earthenware vessels are brought out and placed on either side
of the couple. Inside one of the vases is old rice, old soy beans, old money,
and old vegetable seeds; in the other there are various lands of djadjan —
fish chips, popcorn, and so forth—and rice. The father of the bride opens
»60«                                             T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
one vase and takes a piece of djadjan out and gives it to the mother of the
bride, who announces in a loud voice the name of the d ja d ja n and takes a
bite of it. The father asks: “How does the djadjan I just gave you taste?”
The mother replies: “It is tasty, sweet, and altogether pleasant.” They go
through this process several times until there is no more dja d ja n , and then
the father takes out the rice and asks his wife: “What is this, Mother
[i.e., of the bride]?” “Oh, that’s rice, Father.” Father: “Oh, this is my wealth;
receive it!” Wife: “Yes, Father, I receive it with freedom and happiness in
my heart. I will use it to secure well-being for your daughter from this day
forward. I receive it gladly.” The father pours the rice into her upturned
sarong hem and she carries it into the kitchen and mixes it with the rice
the guests will later eat.
      The d u k u n m a n te n then comes forward and the old money, seeds, and so
forth are poured into the hem of his sarong; he pours them into the hem of
the groom; and the groom pours them into the hem of the bride, symbolizing
the fact that the groom is willing to surrender all his riches to the bride. The
d u k u n meanwhile chants a spell:

     In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!
     My intention is to make as one the bride and groom.
     I do not separate them from wealth, I separate them from sickness,
     Old money, old rice, old seeds, old soybean.
     The male ancestors say nothing will happen,
     The female ancestors say nothing will happen,
     Grandfather spirit, you witness that I make the bride and groom as one.
     May they be able to adjust to one another,
     May the two separate bodies come to know one another!
     The male ancestors say nothing will happen,
     The female ancestors say nothing will happen.
     Wherever you go, may you be safe [slamet],
     Safe, by the will of Allah.
    The k e m b a n g m a ja n g are now thrown on the roof, the bridal couple greet
each guest in turn, and the ceremony is completed—although the entertain­
ment, shadow play or whatnot, may continue all through the night.
    Following the ceremony, if traditional ways are followed strictly, the
couple remain incommunicado for five days at the home of the bride’s
mother and then move to the groom’s house until the thirty-fifth day after
marriage. It never occurs that way in Modjokuto any more. Some couples
remain for the five-day period at the bride’s home, but hardly ever without
any guests as they are supposed to do. Many people have a sla m eta n following
the ceremonial procession from the bride’s house to the groom’s, and in
some cases this may be quite large.* One of the most elaborate feasts—
complete with hired dancers—that I saw in Modjokuto was given by a some­
what ambitious prijaji for his son on such an occasion, as the boy had been
married in Solo in Central Java and his father was anxious not to miss an
opportunity to have a dinner party to which he could invite local people of
    * This slametan is called the kirab (literally: to shake off dirt as a chicken will, or
as a wet dog shakes off water), or the penindjoan (“the visit”).
The Slametan Cycles : Circumcision and Marriage                           »61 «
importance. But people remain at the groom’s house only a night or two,
and the 35-day slametan is never held now so far as I could tell.
     For a bride who has not yet menstruated there is added to the regular
marriage rites a special ceremony called the djago-djagoan. A friend of the
groom, a boy, makes a large white cock (djago) out of papier-mâché or
muslin and puts Chinese money (the kind with a hole in it), rice, and an
egg inside. He then carries it—followed by a long train of clowning young
comrades of the groom all crowing like cocks—in a sléndang, as though it
were a baby, around town, ending up at the groom’s house. Then, after
the kepanggihan, the girl is made to sit on the cock. If the egg breaks it
means she has menstruated but has not told anyone. If it does not break,
the bride is called a mantèn pangkon, a “lap bride,” for, although the
boy may hold the girl on his lap, he cannot sleep with her. This ceremony
is still quite common in Modjokuto and the villages around it.



          Social and Economic Aspects of Circumcision
                   and Wedding Ceremonies
the Javanese call holding a wedding or circumcision ceremony duwé gawé,
literally “to have work,” and claim it to be a prize example of a value
they call rukun, best translated perhaps as “traditionalized cooperation.”
The qualifier “traditionalized” is necessary not only because rukun is rather
more talked about than practiced in Modjokuto today but also because in
its correct meaning it refers to specific and concrete practices of labor and
capital exchange—in house building, in rice field cultivation, and in irrigation,
road building, and other village work—rather than to a general valuation of
cooperation as an abstract concept applicable in all contexts of life and
completely generalizable— a fact not always taken into account by those who
prescribe Western cooperatives for Java’s economic ills or argue for the
natural social democracy of Javanese village life.
     Rukun, as a value, ties together a group not of oversocialized primitive
communists but of rather self-contained peasant materialists with a clear
realization of where their own interests lie; and it does so not so much
by appealing to vague notions of universal brotherhood as by defining actual
modes, means, and forms of specifically limited inter-individual cooperation
within clearly defined social contexts. As a ceremony, the duwé gawé
comes as close to generalizing and summarizing these separate obligations
to rukun as any other institution in traditional Javanese society, for the
social function of religious ritual is just to provide such understandable
generalizations and summaries of approved social practices in symbolic form.
But in what might be called its material aspect—the manner in which
the food, entertainment, and spiritual power it mobilizes are organized,
financed, and consumed—it provides a clear example of the form these
obligations take in actual practice.
»62«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
    On the consumption side, the secular aspects of a wedding or circum­
cision are usually quite set off from the directly religious aspects. The
ceremony proper is most often held in the morning, and one invites only
one’s near neighbors (plus, in the case of a wedding, perhaps a few of one’s
closer friends and relatives).
  The actual siametan food was the usual. . . . and when the time came, the
  oldest boy went around to the neighbors and invited them. The Setros—real
  urbanites who lived in the center of Modjokuto town—didn’t even know the
  names of a good number of these neighbors. I asked Pak Setro why he didn’t
  invite his friends instead of these people he doesn’t know very well. He said:
  “If there is ever any trouble you don’t go far off looking for your friends, you
  go to the man next door. So, if you have slcimetans, you invite your neighbor
  so as to make friendly relations with him so that if you do have trouble the
  neighbor will help you.”
    But in the evening, when the secular feast is held and the entertainment
presented, one invites as many guests as one wishes and can afford.
  Went last night to the Sosro wedding reception. Rather elaborate—catered
  by ICiet’s, the Chinese bakery, with very elaborate food, including a kind of
  Western meat-and-potato dish. Just about everybody who is anybody was
  there, and they were divided, the men anyway (the women as usual were in
  the inside room where the bride and groom were sitting), into about five spa­
  tially distinct groups. All the high prijajis, about a dozen, headed by the sub-
  district officer, were up in the southwest corner of the room in the best seats.
  All the santris of both [of the two main Moslem political] parties came in more
  or less en bloc and sat in the southeast corner. Thus the Javanese dancers
  (hired from a local dance school) performed in between these two groups.
  . . . In the northwest corner, across the aisle from the prijajis, were mostly
  Chinese; and in the southwest corner, across the aisle from the santris, was
  a band of about 40 young men, evidently friends of the groom from Surabaja.
  . . . who went home in a body about 10 o’clock. Between them and the
  Chinese were some somewhat lower prijajis (mostly teachers), some older
  abangan men, and so forth. All in all, maybe 150 people, not counting per­
  haps half that many women inside. The whole reception was one of the
  fanciest J.’d seen, with gamelan, dancers, fine food, and all.
     The above notes record, of course, one extreme; but that was not an
isolated case. One elderly prijaji hired the local equivalent of the town hall
to hold his shadow play in and must have drawn five or six hundred people
and fed them all; and the subdistrict officer had large receptions on two
successive evenings, one with dancers and one with a shadow play. Even
relatively poor people will give fairly elaborate receptions, as can be seen
from the following note describing a reception given by a fairly poor
railroad worker who lived in a two-room bamboo shack near me:
  Went to a wedding at Pak Reso’s in the kampong across the road. . . . The
  women sat inside in the front room. The men sat outside at small square
  tables in a thatched bamboo shelter erected for the purpose and were served
  one cup of coffee (one only—one man was given a second cup by accident,
  and it was taken back) and small djadjan of various kinds. There was a seven-
The Slametan Cycles: Circumcision and Marriage                                 »63«
  piece band, all string (bass, violins, guitars, etc.), complete with a female
  singer with pearls and thin voice, and the effect of the whole thing, with
  lanterns, tables, and all, was like a night club. The girl sang Indonesian popu­
  lar songs, as did some of the other members of the otherwise all-male band.
  It was rather dull, nobody talking very much, and after a while people began
  playing cards at a few tables. (Card-playing continued all night. Gambling is
  always a prime feature at such receptions; at fancy weddings you may find
  Chinese-run roulette wheels.)
    Even for the near-destitute some sort of reception must be arranged, as
this description of a circumcision celebration held by a family in which the
father had no work (he also was seriously ill with tuberculosis) shows:
  Inside the house the women were sitting chatting. This was an extremely
  simple affair— one strand of palm leaves over the door, no furniture, just
  mats to sit on, nothing fancy in the way of djadjan. mBok Mun and her sister
  explained to me that the boy came to them less than a week ago and said, “I
  want to be circumcised this week.” They answered: “Why not wait till after
  the harvest?” and he is supposed to have said no, he didn’t want too much
  fuss. So they borrowed or got money somehow and had it now. The boy
  said he was getting ashamed of being so old (he is about 12). . . . The boy
  came in to sit in a chair prepared for him and, with much advice from every­
  one about keeping his sarong from touching his penis and keeping his legs
  spread, sat in state there. They let his local playmates come in and sit around
  him. . . . I went home and ate, and when I got back later the front room
  was packed with about 40 people playing cards (and they had all been served
  food). The card playing continued all through the night, but there was no
  other entertainment.
   A better idea of the sacrifice these people had made to give this reception
can be gained from a later interview with the same family:
  I went to see mBok Mun down the street. Her husband had gone out to look
  at the water situation in one of her sister’s rice fields. Her husband only works
  here and there nowadays, mainly because he is sick, I guess. He gets work
  once in a while from whomever happens to need someone—three or four
  days a week if he is lucky; if not, less. Evidently family fortunes have gone
  steadily downhill in the last couple of years. He used to be a sharecropper
  with two oxen of his own. One ox he sold to marry off his eldest daughter.
  . . : The other ox he sold a while later to circumcise his oldest son. mBok
  Mun seemed to think it absolutely necessary to give these big duwé gawé
  affairs and regarded their coming as a kind of natural affliction. . . . She said
  her husband might have to go off somewhere else to look for work and leave
  her home alone, but she is too old to worry about that anymore. She said
  things were very tough, and that as far as she could see there was much
  more unhappiness in the world than there was happiness.
    Having shown something of the range of variation in the patterns of
expenditure of wealth at the duwé gawé, it remains next to show where this
wealth comes from and how it is mobilized. A man giving such a feast
has a number of sources of support. He can draw on the labor of his
relatives and, especially if he is wealthy and of high status to start with,
»64«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
friends. He can spend money out of his own savings, as mBok Mun did
when she sold her oxen, or borrow, at ruinous rates of interest, from either
friends or moneylenders. Finally, he receives a small cash payment called
a buwuh, from all those who attend the feasts. Almost always a man
will draw on all these sources, although he will avoid borrowing if it is
at all possible—which is rare.
     The ability to call on others for labor is perhaps the feastgiver’s greatest
economic asset. For the slametan this is traditionally confined to his relatives,
for the ideal pattern is that a set of kin prepares a slametan and a set of
neighbors consumes it. At a slametan in a village near Modjokuto, the
following people worked for two days to prepare the slametan and the
various meals which surrounded it: the wife of the younger brother of
the pregnant girl (the occasion was a tingkeban); the father’s younger sister
and the sister of her husband; her older sister (she came from another village
nearby); two of her nieces; the wife of her younger brother; the mother-
in-law of her older sister; and two neighbors she had known since child­
hood. The attached males butchered the goat, built the shelter for the
guests, and so forth. Thus in the village context this pattern still holds up,
at least to a degree, as it does among many of the poorer townspeople.
     In such a situation an exact reciprocalty is maintained. Each person who
worked for the pregnant girl and her husband had the right to call on them
for a day’s work for a similar purpose at a later date, and such obligations,
no matter how complex they become, are remembered. Evidently, also, there
are variations in the ability of different families to cooperate internally.
  Talking about rukun again, she said that some families are more able to
  rukun than others. The family of her sister-in-law, the wife of Prijo, are very
  rukun, and if any one of the ten people in the family who live around there
  has a feast, everyone chips in about 50 rupiahs. But Minah’s in-laws—none
  of them will do that. They will help in the kitchen, but they will never con­
  tribute any money.
     The more elaborate town weddings tend to draw not merely on relatives
but also on a larger group of friends, neighbors, and, most particularly since
the revolution, fellow women’s-club members. For santris the group of
women belonging to the ladies’ auxiliaries of the two Islamic political parties
forms a kind of rotating work force for one another’s weddings and circum­
cisions; for the prijajis the women’s nationalist organization Perwari forms
a similar group; and for some abangans women’s groups connected with the
labor unions play a similar role. In these arrangements the reciprocality
may not be exact, especially between people of differing status. Thus, for
example, the wife of the district officer, who had about 50 people working
in her kitchen for three days before her daughter’s wedding, would be
expected to work, if at all, in return for only a select handful of the highest-
status women. But a general equivalence of contribution is expected even
if among the more exalted it often approaches the merely symbolic.
    As for spending from their own savings, people may, like mBok Mun,
sell capital equipment such as bicycles, textiles, or jewelry, or they may
The Slametan Cycles: Circumcision and Marriage                                »65«
merely pawn it. Pawning may seem on the surface more like borrowing than
spending out of savings, and insofar as interest must be paid to the pawnshop
 (which is government-owned and -run), perhaps it is. But from the Javanese
point of view, such items as bicycles, textiles, and gold jewelry (which is
sold by the Chinese goldsmith complete with a ticket saying how much he
will give in pawn for it if the purchaser brings it back to him) are often
seen primarily as claims on stored cash, as we see credits in a bankbook. Since
people know how much they can pawn various items for, expensive textiles
and jewelry sometimes serve almost entirely this notational purpose, being
very seldom worn. They are, in fact, purchased in the first place with
the expressed purpose that the buyer is trying to build up a pawnable surplus
for use in circumcising and marrying off his children. Oxen, goats, chickens,
and the like are often purchased with the intent to raise them and then sell
them when the time comes for a ceremony; and petty clerks in town will often
buy a quarter of an acre or so of village land and rent it out for a similar
purpose.
    Very little Javanese saving, then, is in the form of cash or bank credit;
most of it is in hard goods. One method by which cash may be saved more
directly is through the various cooperative savings societies, of which there
are literally dozens around town. People form these among their friends,
neighbors, fellow club members, fellow workers, and in fact in almost
every conceivable social group. Each person puts in, say, five rupiahs
a week. (Among the wealthy, the weekly contribution may be as much as
50 rupiahs.) Each week lots are drawn, and the “winner” gets (if there are
ten people in the society, which is about average) 50 rupiahs, such money
being quite often used for slametans. This system also appears in the
popular burial societies. Each person contributes so much a month, and
his family receives a set sum—to be used to pay for his funeral—at his
death. The same general principle is applied to the buying of plates, glasses,
and other utensils needed for feasts. Each person pays a share of the
cost and then can use the equipment when he needs it, paying a small
fee to the others if he uses it out of turn.
    Borrowing, the third source of possible resources, is, at least verbally,
not approved; and for the slametan proper it is prohibited, for it makes
the ceremony religiously invalid.
  She said it was important not to borrow for a slametan because if one does, it
  won’t be valid. The spirits will come and look, but they won’t eat. It is better
  just to take what little rice one has [and add a few simple side dishes] than
  to give a complicated slametan if one doesn’t have the money.
   Nevertheless, borrowing is just about inevitable for feasts of any size
and often leads to quite serious difficulties.
  The village clerk then went home to Sawahredjo [a village near Modjokuto],
  and in about half an hour he was back dashing in to Ali’s and telling us he
  was on his way to the subdistrict office to report a suicide by hanging, naming
  the woman and going on. Ali and the clerk both knew the woman. Ali specu­
  lated that the cause of the woman’s suicide was that back in the month of
»66«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  Besar she had held a circumcision for which she borrowed money from her
  friends, and now she couldn’t pay it back, and so was embarrassed and killed
  herself. This was all based on no evidence, so far as I could see, just a sur­
  mise, although perhaps there were rumors about her insolvency, the size of
  the circumcision ceremony being too large, and so on. (Ali’s speculation on
  further investigation turned out to be correct.) Ali said it was better to give
  a little ceremony within one’s means than to borrow from friends and then
  not be able to pay back.
    The fourth major source of wealth for the feast given is the buwuh,
perhaps the most interesting from the theoretical point of view, since it
reveals the value premises upon which the whole duwé gawé pattern rests.
The buwuh is typically a monetary contribution by the guest to the host
in return for the food and hospitality he receives. The usual manner of
presenting it is to place it in the palm of one’s hand and press it secretly
in the host’s palm on shaking his hand upon departing, at which point the
host diffidently hands the giver’s wife a small paper sack of djadjan tidbits as
a symbol of the contribution he has made to the giver during the evening
by feeding and entertaining him. Again a sharp sense of reciprocity is in­
volved here.
  Lots of weddings coming up, she (the informant) said. She has been invited
  to one at Ichwan’s, one at Abdullah’s, and one at the home of a man named
  Rasdi in Sumbersari. The last one she doesn’t know well; so she doesn’t have
  to go and doesn’t have to give a buwuh. (If she were obligated to give a
  buwuh, she would do so whether she attended the celebration or not; if she
  did not go, she would send her child with the buwuh and receive a banana-
  leaf dish full of food in return.) As for Abdullah, she knows the wife ex­
  tremely well, and, besides, the wife gave her a buwuh when she had a baby,
  and so she must go and give a buwuh in return. Ichwan is a neighbor; and she
  feels that, since in a year or so she is going to have a circumcision for her
  son, Sustrisno, it is rather like “saving” for her to give buwuhs to her neign-
  bors. It is very sad when someone gives a ceremony and no one buwuhs; and
  this is because the person himself didn’t go to many and didn’t give buwuhs.
  The other day she went to a slametan given to a niece of her neighbor. Pak
  Senèn, who had just had a baby, and there was not much giving of buwuhs.
  She had taken her Iittlest child with her, and he kept eating all the djadjan; and
  so out of shame she gave a buwuh although she hadn’t intended to.
    Evidently the buwuh was originally the actual food used at the feast,
or a direct replacement for it. Close relatives still often give food instead
of money; and at death—which often occurs unexpectedly—everyone con­
tributes rice rather than cash, for the food is immediately needed for the
slametan. Thus the buwuh is, as is the labor contribution, ideally a form
of rukun.
    Nowadays, especially in the town, the buwuh is sometimes viewed more
cynically as a possible source of profit, and many people are said to hold
celebrations mainly in hopes of material gain from the guests’ contributions.
  He said he had heard that some man in a village some distance from here
  had hired an acting group for a wedding, and he said the man would prob-
The Slametan Cycles: Circumcision and Marriage                                 »67«
  ably make lots of profit. He said the bttwuh, which used to be a matter of
  rukun, particularly in the days when it was not money but goods like food
  and so forth, has degenerated into a simple money-making proposition on the
  part of the person giving the duwé gawé affair. Most of the time the money
  coming in is more than what is put out; so the host profits; and so lots of
  people like to hold feasts now just to make a profit. People say it is too bad
  if one doesn’t have any children of his own to have marriage and circum­
  cision celebrations for, because one loses out on a chance to make some
  money. He said that santris for the most part don’t approve of this and don’t
  practice it. (As the informant was himself a santri, this is hardly an un­
  biased observation. However, insofar as santris tend to disapprove of large
  expenditures of wealth in general, there is probably a grain of truth in it.)
  But for most people now this notion of the slametan as a business proposi­
  tion is a recognized thing. He said Merto, the curer, is a prime practitioner of
  this sort of thing. Recently he had a marriage in which he used not his own
  child but a girl borrowed from a poorer relative, and since he did not have
  much entertainment he must have made an enormous profit.
    There is, however, another tendency, somewhat in opposition to this
more commercial one. Many people attempt to gain prestige through lavish
celebrations, some of them on a truly remarkable scale. Among the prijajis,
who show this tendency most clearly, the buwuh pattern insofar as it
concerns money is rejected as crass, and a giving of presents, especially at
weddings, replaces it.
  We spoke about the difference between village and town patterns of duwé
  gawé, and she said the buwuh pattern was different. She said that the people
  on the Pohredjo row (this is the elite section of town, inhabited almost entirely
  by prijajis) wouldn’t accept buwuh. They only accept gifts (called cadeau,
  following Dutch usage), and then they note down the price of the gift, and
  when the giver has a duwé gawé they return something of exactly the same
  value. In the village, on the contrary, one must give a buwuh, and if one
  doesn’t he feels ashamed. (Her younger brother said, “You give a buwuh
  because you don’t want the other person to be stuck with a tremendous debt,
  and you figure your turn will come around next time and you’ll want to get
  your buwuhs.”). . . . She said in the village the thing is all supposed to even
  out, but usually the host loses. . . . But she still thought the giving of buwuhs
  was a good thing, because it showed the rukun of neighbors and friends. She
  said that among the police (her husband was a member of the central govern­
  ment police force) at her level (vice constable) and below they accepted
  buwuhs, while above her level they followed what she called the Pohredjo
  pattern.
Chapter 6                          The Slametan Cycles:
                                                 Death




                           Funerals: Lajatan
I n contrast to other rites of passage, all funerals (lajatan) are still in­
evitably conducted by the tnodin, the official religious specialist of the
village. A few people call him now and then to lead prayers for birth and
circumcision ceremonies (he is almost always a strong santri), and in
any case he must take the groom down to the naib’s office for the Islamic
part of the marriage ceremony; but it is at death that he really comes
into his own as general director of the entire affair.
     When there is a death in a family the first thing they do is to send for
the modin, and the second is to spread the word around the neighborhood
that a death has occurred. If death occurs in the late afternoon or during
the night, they wait until the next morning to begin the funeral process.
     Javanese funerals occur as quickly as possible after death. A man
dead at 10 a .m . will be buried by noon or shortly thereafter, and a man
dead at 4 p .m . will be in the grave by ten the next morning. Although the
family will sometimes delay an hour or so if some relatives are coming from
a distance, apparently they rarely delay long enough: these distant relatives
never seemed to be on time for any of the funerals I saw. The usual reason
given when one asks why there is so much haste is that the spirit of the
dead man is flying around loose (it is often conceived of as a bird) until he
is buried, and this is dangerous to everyone, especially to the survivors.
The sooner he is buried, the sooner his spirit can return to its natural home.
     As soon as they receive the news of a death, the neighbors drop what­
ever they are doing and go off to the house where the death has occurred.
 (Even salaried workers on the railroad and in the government offices leave
immediately on such news.) Each woman brings a tray of rice, which,
 after a handful of it has been thrown out the door by the bereaved, is
 immediately cooked for a slametan. The men bring tools with which to
                                      68
The Slametan Cycles: Death                                               »69«
make grave markers, a litter to carry the body to the grave (in most cases,
however, this is rented or provided by the burial society), and wooden
supports to put inside the grave. Actually, only a half-dozen or so of the
very close neighbors need bring tools; the other men just come and stand
around chatting in the yard.
     More than any other single passage rite the funeral draws everyone.
Class lines, ideological antagonisms, and personal quarrels often modify
the strictly geographical attendance at other slametans, especially in the
town of Modjokuto, but everyone who lives near a dead man and any­
one in the town who knew him at all well or is in any way related to him
comes to his funeral. Again, one finds the notion that one should go to other
people’s funerals so they will come to his. When I questioned one man
about a burial society to which he belonged, he said that the money one gets
at death is only nominal. What is important is that all the members of the
society are obligated to come to a member’s funeral.
     When the modin arrives, he strips the corpse, laying a sarong loosely
over the genitals, ties the jaw up with a string over the top of the head
so it cannot drop open, and ties the feet together. The arms are crossed
on the chest, right hand over left, with the tips of the fingers touching the
shoulders, and the body is laid with its head to the north, a lamp being
sometimes lit above the head. The corpse is then washed by the close
relatives and friends of the deceased—preferably (but not necessarily) the
women if the deceased is female, the men if male—under the direction of the
modin. The relatives hold the corpse on their laps while sitting on chairs
so the water drenches them and their clothes. This act is called pangkon,
the same word which is used when one cradles a small child on one’s lap,
or when the groom cradles the not yet pubescent wife, and as such is a last
demonstration of nurturing love by the survivors for the deceased.
     The corpse is bathed in the front yard, protected from general view by
hastily erected bamboo matting—although people feel free to look over
the matting at will. Usually three different kinds of water, each in a different
earthenware container, are used: one with flowers in it; one with money, a
special kind of tree leaf, and various herbs in it; and one plain, without any­
thing in it. In addition, there is a shampoo for the hair made of burned rice
 stalks. The modin pours the first dipper of water on the corpse, and then
the other relatives each take a turn.
     Being able to hold one’s deceased father, wife, sister, uncle, or whom­
 ever on one’s lap while he is being washed, is called being tegel—able to do
 something odious, abominable, and horrible without flinching, to stick it out
 despite an inward fear and revulsion. No one is absolutely required to do
 this; and if none of the family members or close relatives is tegel, the
 corpse may be laid crossways on three banana-tree trunks. Since they are
 expected to be tegel and if they are not are severely criticized, most people
 would feel deeply ashamed to withdraw from this duty or to show any strong
 open emotion while performing it. A young girl I knew was crying slightly
 when her father died rather suddenly, and her relatives told her she would
 not be allowed to wash the body if she did not stop crying, which she
»70«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
immediately did. Two reasons are given for the prohibition of tears near
the corpse: it malees the atmosphere dark so that the deceased will have
great difficulty finding his path to the grave; and it so upsets the deceased
that he cannot bear to leave the house.
    After the bathing the bathers wash their hands and feet in the water
which is left. The orifices of the body are plugged with cotton dipped in
perfume, the body is wrapped in white muslin and tied in three places (feet,
waist, and top of the head) by the modin, and then about a half-dozen
santris begin to chant the Koran under his leadership. The chant takes place
next to the corpse, which has now been placed in the main living room, and
lasts from five to ten minutes. Then the body is placed on the litter, a bamboo
framework over which brand new textiles have been stretched with strings of
flowers laid across them. These textiles are not buried with the corpse;
and one of the standing graveyard jokes seems to be to bargain with the
man who carries them back from the grave as though he were peddling them.
     The litter is carried into the yard, where the descendants (usually
children) of the deceased duck back and forth under it three times. This
is to indicate that they are iklas—that their emotions have been quieted
and have been flattened out into a true detachment, that they feel no psy­
chological pain at the departure of the deceased, and that their hearts are
already free. A few coins wrapped in paper are then distributed to each person
at the funeral to symbolize the same idea: as they can give away money
without feeling any remorse, so they can let the deceased go with no wish to
cling to him emotionally. (Sometimes, but not always, a few of the guests
are given banana-leaf dishes of rice to eat at this time, in which case they
get no coins, for the latter are a substitute for the former.) A vessel filled
with water is thrown on the ground and broken, also to symbolize iklas, and
the litter moves off to the graveyard, carried by the men, while the women
remain behind at the house, scattering salt so the soul will not come back
and disturb them. (Children, except the dead man’s own, are kept away
from funerals because they are so easily entered by spirits.)
     As there is almost always a graveyard within a half mile, the funeral
procession is not extended. At the head of it walk the men carrying the
homemade wooden grave markers— sharply pointed ones for a male corpse,
flat or rounded ones for a female—marked usually only with the name and
date of death of the deceased. They are followed by the men carrying the
planks for the grave.* Next comes a man carrying a golden or bronze bowl
containing yellow rice, turmeric, various coins, flowers, and betel, all of which
he strews along the ground as he walks to show the following corpse, borne
usually by four to eight men, the way to the grave. Behind the corpse, over
whose head is held a parasol to shield it from the sun, comes the body of
attending men, rarely less than fifteen, sometimes as many as two hundred.
    * The grave is prepared during the time the washing and winding are going on. It
is dug about three feet wide and about two or three feet deep. In the floor of the
excavation a slit-trench just wide and deep enough for the corpse is cut. The planks
are placed over the trench after the body has been placed in it so that when the
grave is filled no earth falls directly on the corpse.
The Slametan Cycles: Death                                                     »71«
People change off in the jobs of scattering the rice and flowers, holding
the parasol, and bearing the corpse, for it is considered necessary that all
male members of the family and very close friends should “feel the weight
of the corpse” for at least a short time.
     The ceremony at the graveyard is brief. The body is taken off the
litter and put into the grave on its side, being handed down to three men
standing in the grave. The body is laid to rest on seven stones with its head
pointed to the north. The strings on the shroud are loosened and the face
exposed so that the cheek touches the earth, and then either the modin
or some other santri jumps down into the grave and shouts the Confession
of Faith three times into the dead man’s ear. The planks are then laid in
place, the dirt pushed into the grave, and the grave markers erected. The
modin reads the tèlkim, a set funeral speech addressed to the deceased, first
in Arabic and then in Javanese (some old-fashioned modins refuse to trans­
late it, however, regarding this as against the strict tenets of Islam) :
  Oh, you are already living in the world of the grave (Moslem corpses remain
  slumbering in the grave until Judgment Day—a kind of limbo). Do not
  forget the Confession of Faith. You will shortly be visited by two messengers
  of God, two angels (Mungkar and Nakir, who visit each new corpse to ques­
  tion him about his faith, etc.). (The angels will say:) “O human being, who is
  your God and what is your religion, and who is your prophet and what is
  your religious lodestar, and what is the direction in which you turn to pray,
  and what has been commanded of you and who are your brothers?” You must
  answer clearly and forthrightly; you must not be afraid or startled: “The Lord
  Allah is my God; Islam is my religion; Muhammad is my Prophet; the Holy
  Koran is my lodestar; I turn toward the Black Stone of Mecca to pray; the
  five daily prayers are what I have been commanded; all Moslems, men and
  women, are by brothers.” O Pak Tjipto (the name of the deceased), you know
  already know that the questions of the angels do in fact exist, that life in
  the grave does in fact exist, that the balancing of good and evil deeds does in
  fact exist, that heaven and hell indeed do in fact exist, and that the Lord Allah
  will wake each individual in the grave on Judgment Day is a fact as well.
    After this the great mass of mourners goes back to their homes or jobs,
but a small group of close neighbors, friends, and relatives returns to the
house for a slametan. (This group must include all those who actually worked
at the funeral—who dug the grave, made the grave markers, etc.). All death
slametans are marked by two special food symbols : the small round rice-
flour pancakes called apem, which are the special food of the dead and
of one’s ancestors;* and a flattened-out disc of rice with two large cones of
rice seven or eight inches high. The flattened rice again symbolizes iklas;
but in addition the contrast between the flat disk and the cones is supposed to
suggest the difference between death and hie—the flattened-out featurelessness
of death and the phallic upward-directedness of life. However, some
others say one of the cones is for the living, the other for the dead.
   Slametans of exactly the same form, but of increasing size in terms of the
   * Sometimes one finds apem cakes at other slametans too, where their intent is
always to honor the ancestors; but their real place is in death rituals.
»72«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
number of guests and the length of the chant, are held three, seven, forty,
and one hundred days after death, on the first and second anniversaries of
the death, and on the thousandth day after death. Each child of the deceased
who maintains a separate household must give the whole series of sla m eta n s.
The last sla m e ta n , which marks the point at which the body is thought
to have decayed entirely to dust, is the most elaborate. One is supposed to
kill ritually a dove, goose, or other fowl, which is then washed in flower
water, shampooed, and wrapped in muslin exactly as the corpse was. (This
ceremony is called the k ê k a h , and sometimes occurs at an earlier sla m eta n ,
but in any case only once. It is often omitted altogether nowadays.) The
a p em and the rice-disc symbol of death are omitted; the whole chicken for
the Prophet and the various other foods used for sla m e ta n s on happier
occasions are re-introduced; and once again one gives out coins to the
guests as a symbol of one’s final turning from the dead toward the living.
After this sla m e ta n the gap between the dead and the living is absolute, but
for one’s parents one should go to their grave to strew flowers on each an­
niversary of their death, on the day before the Fast begins, when one is ill
or when one’s children are, and any time one happens to dream of them,
for this means that they are hungry and wish to be fed. (One may, if the
dream is vivid enough, give a small sla m e ta n and take some of it to a
prayer house and have the santris there chant a while for the dead; or one
may merely put some food, tea, and flowers at the crossroad.)
     After death one also puts out food for the dead—the kind of food the de­
ceased especially liked—near the s e n to n g tengah spot in the house or
by the bed he died in for 40 days after death, and usually a sa d fèn is added.
One I saw included an ancient photograph of the deceased. If one wishes,
he may for about 35 rupiahs hire some sa n tris to chant in their prayer
house an hour or two each night for seven days after death, and even some
pretty anti-Islamic people do this. As an old sa n tri lady said to me in
reference to my vigorously abangan landlady, “People like Bu Ardjo hate
santris like me, but they need us to do their praying for them.”




             Beliefs and Attitudes concerning Death
the mode of a Javanese funeral, as one can see from the foregoing
description, is not one of hysterical bereavement, unrestrained sobbing, or
even of formalized shrieks of grief for the deceased’s departure. Rather
it is a calm, undemonstrative, almost languid letting go, a brief ritualized
relinquishment of a relationship no longer possible. Tears are not approved
of and certainly not encouraged; and one sees remarkably few of them.
The effort is to get the job done, not to linger over the pleasures of grief.
The detailed busy-work of the funeral, the politely formal social intercourse
with the neighbors pressing in from all sides, the series of sla m e ta n s stretched
out at intervals for almost three years—the whole momentum of the Javanese
The Slametan Cycles: Death                                                      »73«
ritual system—are supposed to carry one through the grief process evenly
and without severe emotional disturbance.
    Iklas, that state of willed affectlessness, is the watchword, and although it
is often difficult to achieve, it is always striven for.
  I went to buy a sarong from Mudjito, whose wife died suddenly about two
  weeks ago. Mudjito was still rather upset about it evidently, smiling a nervous
  smile from ear to ear and talking about it without a pause for breath from
  the moment I came in until the moment I left. . . . He said first, as Javanese
  inevitably do when they “have trouble,” “I beg your pardon a thousand times
  because my wife is not here” (that is, please lighten my burden of grief by
  giving me your pardon) ; and I mumbled in return that I was sorry I had
  not come to see him sooner. He then went on at great length about how he
  was iklas, that it was God that took his wife away, and that he had no right
  to complain. He said that he was just iklas and bent to the will of God
  (Mudjito was a santri and thus more likely to ascribe things to the will of
  God than an abangan would be). There was nothing he could do anyway.
  When first she died, he could see no reason to go on working (I noticed him
  already in the store the day after the death, people going in and out paying
  their respects). What was the point of it? He said that he felt that his wife was
  not evil and had done no wrong, and he felt that she didn’t deserve to die so
  young. But after a while he began to see that . . . he should be iklas, and
  he slowly talked himself into being iklas, and now that he was truly iklas he
  didn’t feel anything at all any more. He said that’s the way one should feel.
  One’s feeling should be flat, even, always on the same level. One shouldn’t
  go up and down in feeling, very unhappy one minute and very happy the
  next, but try to keep one’s feelings evened out. He said that happiness and
  unhappiness are irrevocably connected with one another; so, if one is happy
  now, he will surely be unhappy later on, and one should not indulge himself
  in either feeling. If one feels happy, one should remember the unhappiness he
  had before and that he will have again; and if one is unhappy, he should
  remember the happiness he had before and he will have again later, and so
  keep his emotions averaged out. This is what he has tried to do. It is the right
  thing to do. It is wrong to be very sad, depressed, and upset; one should try
  to keep his feelings without mountains and valleys—on a level plain. He
  said one shouldn’t keep strong emotions locked up in his heart, but iklas. “Just
  like when I sell you this sarong, I should feel I got the right price, and you
  should too, so that neither of us is upset inside his heart. We must be iklas
  toward it, and that is the way I feel about my wife’s death.” . . . He said he
  felt at first as if he would like to die too, but then he talked himself out of it
  and said he had to carry on to see the children raised.

   Sometimes this self-discipline proves to be too difficult and more direct
measures need to be applied.
  I asked him if he was upset when his mother died a few years ago, and he
  said no, she was already old; and besides, he had been down to see her about
  four or five days before she died, and she was very ill, and so he knew she
  was going to die. So he was not startled by it. . . . He said one doesn’t get
  upset when people are old and sick and then die. How about for babies, I
  asked. He replied, “Yes, for them you often get very upset. If they are only
»74«                                           T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  a month or two old, you don’t get very upset,* but if they are already a year
  or a year and a half old and you have been watching them play around and
  they are very cute and all and then they die, you can get quite upset.” He
  said that when his youngest child died (evidently not so Tong ago) at the age
  of one and a half, his oldest son, who is about 17 or 18, cried solidly for a
  week, couldn’t eat, couldn’t sleep or anything. Finally, he went and got a
  dukun for him, and the dukun came and gave the boy some magic tea to
  drink and uttered a spell over the boy enjoining him to forget about the death,
  which he then did. He stopped crying and ate and slept normally.
     Despite deviations such as this, most people do what can only be called
a remarkable job of at least not showing their grief.
     Death does not seem to hold any overwhelming terrors for most Javanese,
and people talk about it directly with little show of anxiety. Once at a funeral
of a man whom I did not know and had never seen I was sitting with two old
men, one about sixty, the other about seventy. “How old was the deceased?”
I asked, somewhat tactlessly trying to find out how much of a blow his death
had been to his family. “Was he already old or did he die in middle age?”
“Oh,” said the sixty-year-old, “he was already quite old; it was already his
time to go. He was just a little younger than Pak Paidin here,” pointing grace­
fully with his thumb to the seventy-year-old, to which Pak Paidin immediately
agreed without any show of gloom or even graveyard humor, but merely as a
man would agree with any simple statement of fact.
     Whatever the deeper psychological reasons for this relative equanimity
about personal extinction may be, assuming it is real, there are beliefs on the
intellectual level to which one might point in partial explanation. One inform­
ant insisted that curers can never have any effect on the length of one’s life. If
one is going to die at thirty, he will die at thirty; if at sixty, sixty. All the
dukun can do is make life easier for one so that, instead of being ill from one’s
thirtieth year until one’s fated death, at, say, seventy-five, one goes to a dukun
to be cured and live happily to the day of death. There are variations on this
belief in fate, however; for some hold that a man’s life will be lengthened
if he behaves ethically, and other people (or sometimes the same ones—the
logical compatibility of separate beliefs is not usually a serious issue for
abangans) think that premature death may be the result of sheer accident,
sorcery, consorting with evil spirits, taking a false oath, an especially fast pace
of living, persistent and prolonged emotional upset, or a sudden trauma of
some sort.
     But perhaps the major intellectual reason Javanese seem not to fear death
so much as some other peoples is that it seems to them to bear the character­
istics of that emptiness of emotional and intellectual content, that inner re­
straint of the will, that they value so highly.
  He talked a little about his attitude toward death. It was all determined ab­
  solutely by God, so there was no use worrying about it and no use feeling
  sorry when someone else died. I asked him why some sinners flourished as
    * Funerals for infants arc almost always abbreviated, and usually only the initial
slametan and perhaps the three-day slametan are held; also, as the baby is innocent, the
tèlkim speech at the grave is omitted, as it is for children generally.
The Slametan Cycles: Death                                                    »75«
  the green bay tree, and so forth, and he said that he thought God was giving
  them a chance to understand. He laughed and said, “Yes, you often see old
  bent-over men who are real sinners.” And he said he thought that God keeps
  them living in hopes they’ll finally see the light, whereas the young good ones
  are all right anyway and so they die early, as a kind of reward, for it is a
  good thing to be dead. He spoke happily, not in any Weltschmerz mood. I
  asked why he thought this, and he said, “Well, when you are dead, you don’t
  want anything: you don’t want an auto, you don’t want money, you don’t
  want a wife, you don’t have any wants at all. Like God—God doesn’t need
  any money, or wife, or auto, does He? Well, that’s wonderful, not to want any­
  thing; and after you’re dead, that’s the way it is.” I said, “Well, if it is so
  good being dead, why don’t people kill themselves?” He was properly offended
  at this idea and said, “That would be wrong because it would be from your
  own will. It is up to God to decide when you should die, not yourself. It is
  wrong to commit suicide because you are trying to take into your own hands
  affairs which are properly God’s.” But he said he was ready to die any time
  (he was about seventy) ; he thought it a good state not to want anything, not
  to need anything, like God, and he seemed to find it rather unimaginable
  (m boten m asuk akal —literally, “it doesn’t go into the mind”) that this didn’t
  seem like an obvious and self-evident proposition to me.
     Three separate notions of life after death, again often held concurrently
by the same individual, are present in Modjokuto. The first is the Islamic ver­
sion of the concept of eternal retribution, of punishment and reward in the
afterworld for the sins and good deeds in this one. This is, naturally enough,
strongest among the santris, often—especially among the more modern groups
— complete with ideas of hell-fire, the constant moral inspection of the indi­
vidual by God, and the awfulness of absolute Judgment (but never, of course,
original sin, a concept notably absent in Islam). One finds it throughout the
society, although usually rather vaguely conceived and only half believed in
outside of strictly Moslem circles.
     Much more popular with abangans is the concept of sampurna, which
means literally “perfect” or “complete” but which indicates in this context
that the individual personality completely disappears after death and nothing
is left of the person but dust. (Like many peoples around the world, the Jav­
anese, although they often conceive of the dead as spirits annoying the living
or demanding worship from them, never consider seriously what it must be
like to be a spirit and never reflect that they will become one themselves. One
sometimes hears the idea that spirits of the dead who attack people are those
of individuals who have been evil in their lifetime, and sometimes also sêtans
and the like are held to originate partly from this source, although this is as
often explicitly denied.)
     The third view, which is extremely widely held by all but santris, who
condemn it as heretical, is the notion of reincarnation—that when a person
dies his soul enters shortly thereafter into an embryo on its way to being bora.
The usual way in which this occurs is that a pregnant woman feels a sudden
intense craving for some special food—an orange out of season or a duck egg
—and the soul is inside this food and so enters the woman’s womb and is re­
born as her child; Often but not always reincarnation occurs within the same
»76«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
family, although the relationship may be rather distant and the individual in
whom the soul is reincarnated need not necessarily be of the same sex as the
deceased. It may be heralded by a dream on the part of the mother or es­
tablished by a similarity of features in the child and the recently deceased or by
a similar birthmark. It is not wise to tell a child when it is still young of
whom it is the reincarnation, for this might make the soul within the child
ashamed, and he would fall sick. After he is over six or so, it does not matter
any more. When I asked people of whom they were the reincarnation, they
never seemed to know, although they could almost always tell me of whom
their children were reincarnations. Sometimes people hold to the Hindu notion
of advancement and regression in the stages of being according to one’s de­
portment while alive; but most abangans leave this sort of thing to prijajis to
reflect upon and use the idea of reincarnation primarily to explain personal
peculiarities in their children and strange behavior on the part of an odd
animal now and then, such as dogs who fast, as humans often do, on Mondays
and Thursdays.
    The Javanese have sometimes been said to worship their ancestors, but,
except for the vague apostrophes to “the ancestors” taken generally or to one’s
own ancestors as “grandfathers and grandmothers” in spells and at slametans,
the burning of incense to “ancestors” on Thursday nights by a few people,
and the decoration of family graves now and again, evidence of any kind of
ancestor cult is absent in Modjokuto. Javanese claim they reckon kinship
ascent eight generations back and have terms for each level (father, grand­
father, great-grandfather . . .); but I never knew anyone who knew his
ancestors by name back farther than his grandfather, and I have never heard
of an ancestor, other than parents, being petitioned by name. Javanese “an­
cestor worship”, in present-day Modjokuto at least, amounts to little more
than a pious expression of respect for the dead plus a lively awareness of the
necessity of being on good terms with one’s own deceased father and mother
and of being sure to feed them some rice or flowers when they appear in one’s
dreams.
Chapter J                      The Slametan Cycles:
                               Calendrical, Village,
                          and Intermittent Slametans



                           Calendrical Slametans
I n addition to the cycle of slametans connected with the points of passage in
the life of the individual, there is another cycle, much less elaborated and
emphasized, connected with the yearly Moslem calendar.* Having adopted
the Islamic pattern of time reckoning by lunar months and the holy days which
are attached to it (the orthodox significance of which remain a concern only
of santris), the Javanese have felt obliged to celebrate its sacred time periods
in the only way they know: by giving slametans. However, except for the
Prophet’s Birthday and the complex of slametans centering around the Fast,**
these ceremonies have remained simple and rather unimportant and are given
only sporadically.
    The following are calendrical slametans which the Javanese recognize:
       1 Sura: This is a Buddhist rather than a Moslem holiday, and as such it
  is celebrated only by those who are self-consciously anti-Moslem. With the
  development since the war of some vigorously anti-Moslem sects and indi­
  vidual religious teachers preaching a return to “original” Javanese customs,
  slametans on 1 Sura have perhaps increased slightly in frequency. Some par­
  ticularly anti-Islamic individuals even fast in Sura instead of in Pasa, but this
  is rather rare.
       10 Sura: In honor of Hasan and Husein, the grandsons of the Prophet,
    * The Moslem year has 354 days (355 in leap years) and is divided into twelve
lunar months. In the following list of the months, the Arabic names are given, with
the popular Javanese names in parentheses: Muharram (Sura), Safar (Sapar), Rabi’u-
lawal (Mulud), Rabi’ulachir (Bakdamulud), Djumadilawal (Djumadilawal), Djumadila-
chir (Djumadilakir), Radjab (Redjeb), Sja’ban (Ruwah), Ramadan (Pasa), Sjawal
(Sawal), Dzulka’idah (Sela), Dzulhidjah (Besar).
    ** The word pasa means “fasting” in general. Pasa is also the popular name for
the month of Ramadan, during which it is forbidden to eat, drink, or smoke between
sunrise and sunset.
                                          77
»78«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
 who, the story goes, wanted to give a slametan for Muhammad when the
 Prophet was fighting with the infidels. They carried rice (where they got
 rice in Arabia is not discussed) to the river to wash it, but the horses of the
 enemy came by and kicked it away into the river. The two boys wept and
 then picked up the rice and found it mixed with sand and pebbles, but they
 made porridge of it anyway. Thus this slametan is marked by two bowls of
 porridge— one with pebbles and sand in it for the grandsons to eat, and one
 with peanuts and bits of fried cassava in it to represent the impurities, which
 the people eat. Although some people said this essentially ShVite but locally
 distorted ritual was still sometimes given, I never saw one in Modjokuto, and
 it is at any rate quite rare.
      12 Mullid: The day on which, by agreed convention, the Prophet both
 was born and died. This slametan is called Muludan (this and the name of the
 month itself, Mulud, are derived from the Arabic mauliid, “nativity”). It is
 marked by a whole stuffed chicken (the insides are taken out, cleaned, and
 replaced, and the chicken is then tied up), the major offering to the Prophet
 at all slametans. This slametan is perhaps the most regularly given of the
 calendrical slametans.
     27 Redjeb: This slametan (called Redjeban) celebrates the Mi'radj, the
 one-night ascension of Muhammad to face God. The food is the same as on
 Muludan, and although it is given fairly frequently (always on a very simple
 scale) very few non-santris have much of an idea what its purpose is supposed
 to be.
      29 Ruwah: The beginning of the Fast, called Megengan (from pegeng,
 “to wean”). This slametan is invariably given by all those who have at least
 one parent dead. {Ruwah, the name of the month, comes from the Arabic
 arwah, “souls of the dead.” ) Like the death slametans proper, it is marked by
 the presence of the rice-flour pancake called apem, which is the Javanese food
 symbol of death. Just before the slametan one goes to the cemetery to scatter
 flowers on the graves of the parents involved, and the dead parents supposedly
 come to the slametan to eat the odor of the food. One also bathes thoroughly
 to purify oneself for the Fast. The Megengan is given, unlike most other
 slametans, just before (rather than after) sunset, and as such marks the last
 legitimate daylight eating before the Fast.
      21, 23, 25, 27, or 29 Pasa: The slametan held on one of these dates is
 called Maleman (from malem, “night, evening”) because it is given at night,
 eating in the daytime being forbidden during Pasa. (Relatively few non-
 santris, however, actually observe this prohibition, and people who are not
 keeping the Fast show no reluctance about eating publicly during the daytime
 while others are fasting.) One chooses one of these dates either just offhand
 or by a pétungan divination applied to one’s birth date. The last date, the
 29th, is called Djagalan—the Day of the Butcher—because traditionally the
 butcher spent the other days slaughtering animals for other people’s slametans,
 and so the last day was reserved for him alone; but this is no longer observed.
 Sometimes people say that the 21st, 23rd, and 25th are for “true Moslems”
 (i.e., santris), the 27th for young people, and the 29th for the old; but how
 widely held this belief is I am not certain. Just about every abangan gives a
 Maleman on one or another of these dates. In the villages both Muludan
 and Maleman are commonly village-wide celebrations held at the village
 chief’s house, to which all the families of the village bring slametan offerings
 which are then exchanged, much as at the village cleansing celebration to be
 described later.
The Slametan Cycles : Calendrical, Village, and Intermittent                       »79«
     1 Sawal: The breaking of the Fast, called Bruwah.* Yellow rice and a kind
  of omelet are the special foods. Only people who actually fast are supposed
  to give this slametan, but some non-fasters do so also. The dead are some­
  times held to return to earth for this slametan too, and people then follow it
  with another trip to the graves of their parents.
      7 Sawal: A small slametan called Kupatan. The only people who are sup­
  posed to give this are those who have had small children who have died—
  which must include nearly every adult in Java, although this slametan is
  not in fact very frequently given. At seven in the morning one makes kupats,
  which are little packets of glutinous rice, and somewhat similar packets
  called lepets. Some of these are hung outside the door so that the small dead
  children can return and eat out there without bothering anyone inside.
      10 Besar: This is the day honoring Abraham’s sacrifice and the day on
  which the pilgrims gather in Mecca for the re-enactment of the sacrifice.
  Although the holiday is important to santris, who butcher oxen and goats
  for the poor, the slametan is only rarely given. It should be noted that in none
  of these “Islamic” slametans are sadjèns prepared—or at least they are not
  supposed to be.
    Muludan, the slametan for the birthday of the Prophet, and Malematt, the
evening slametan toward the end of the Fast, are the two most important of
the calendrical ceremonies. Abangans have a saying: “If you are willing to
give the Maleman and are willing to give the Muludan, you are already a
Moslem. If you don’t give the Maleman and don’t give the Muludan, you are
not of Muhammad’s community”—a view of Islamization which is, need­
less to say, strongly rejected by the orthodox. To say to a man that he “doesn’t
know Muludan (or Maleman) ” is to say to him that he has no religion and is
therefore an animal, a rather serious thing to say to a Javanese, for whom
sheer animality is the quintessence of evil. (The only punishment for incest
I could ever elicit was that “they would be made to eat grass like animals.” )
    The exact meaning of Maleman is not easy to discover; everyone you
meet seems to have a different idea—or no idea at all—about it. I have been
told that it was on these days that the Prophet readied his arms and army to
return to the war against the infidels, resting on the even-numbered days in
between (which are called trowongan—“holes, gaps” ), and finally returning
victoriously to the battlefield on Rijaja, the great holiday which ends the
Fast. Another rather ingenious gentleman, a puppeteer, told me the Prophet
was incarcerated in hell all through the Fast, and toward the end people were
expecting him to return and so prepared a feast for him; but on the 21st he
didn’t come, on the 23rd he didn’t come, and so forth, and he finally arrived
on Rijaja. Some say that it is one of these days—no mortal knows which—
that the angels in heaven fix a mortal’s fate for the coming year, and so one
gives a slametan in the hope that they will go easy on him.** Others say that
    * This date, 1 Sawal, is also the great Javanese holiday Rijaja, which is described in
the Conclusion of this report.
    **This notion is evidently derived from the more general Malaysian-Islamic con­
cept of the Lailatul Kadar, the Night of Power. On this night—it is one of the Maleman
dates, but again no human can predict which one—God sends an angel down to earth,
and all who are fortunate enough to be giving a slametan on that night will receive
great blessings in the coming year.
»80«                                            T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
 the Koran began descending on the 21st, continued to do so on the 23rd, and
 so on, being completely in the hands of Muhammad by Rijaja. (Actually, the
date that the Koran began to descend is 17 Pasa, but only santris celebrate this
day, and they do so with prayers in the mosque and through sermons.) Pak
Parto, my most reliable informant in matters of this sort, said that for aban-
gans the Maiemans represent the first, third, fifth, seventh, and ninth months
of pregnancy; Rijaja is the birth of the baby; and Kupatan represents the
burial of the umbilical cord—all of which is ingenious, if nothing else. Still
other interpretations of Maleman are that people are merely inviting the dead
to return on Rijaja; it represents the abangan method of zakat-fitrah, the
obligatory giving of alms of Rijaja; or it has no meaning whatsoever and rep­
 resents the pagan love of ritual on the part of the Javanese who are unable or
 unwilling to embrace the strict simplicities of pure Islam. Stripped of its
 evaluative elements, this last statement probably comes as close to the truth as
 any.
      Unlike the rites-of-passage slametans, Muludan, Megengan, Maleman,
 and Bruwah are given by everyone at the same time, the result being not only
that prices in the market go up somewhat but that on those days people go
around from slametan to slametan in a kind of neighborhood trading-off
pattern. The neighborhood principle is most strong in these slametans , and
one rarely invites anyone but the eight or so nearest neighbors, so that one
sees small groups of men going about from one house to the next to hold
five-minute slametans (which, nevertheless, take the women of the house the
entire day to prepare), one right after the other. In my case I went to six
slametans during the Maleman period and held my own on the 27th—the
composition of the audience being just about the same at each one. One can
avoid a little of this by sending out tondjokans (or berkats) — i.e., slametan
food wrapped in banana-leaf baskets—to the homes of a few of the more
distant people or to relatives living elsewhere whom one wishes to honor.*
For a person not to invite someone to his slametan who has invited him or who
has sent him food, or to ignore a very close neighbor, would be a terrible
insult, and seems never to occur (except that sometimes when two people are
mutually angry, they will break off all communication entirely, in which case
they wiU be omitted from each other’s slametans).
     In connection with calendrical slametans we may discuss the ceremonies
surrounding the agricultural cycle. In the town of Modjokuto these rituals are
given very seldom and when given are not felt to be of much importance. Even
in the countryside they seem no longer to have the importance or show the
degree of elaboration ascribed to them by earlier writers. In general, crop
slametans are given only in connection with the cultivation of rice, not for
the cultivation of dry crops, although sometimes someone will put out a small
offering in connection with an onion or soybean crop.
     When the rice season is approaching, the peasant seeks out an older more
knowledgeable man who applies a pétungan numerological system to select
the correct day on which to “open” (i.e., begin plowing) the land. When this
    * In the villages this pattern of sending out tondjokan food packets is rather more
extensive and amounts to a wholesale exchange of food among the various households.
This pattern is also sometimes called wèwèhan, “mutual gift-sending.”
The Slametan Cycles : Calendrical, Village, and Intermittent »81 «
day arrives, a small slametan called wiwit sawah (“beginning the rice field” )
is held at midmoming in the field, and anyone who happens to be passing by
must be invited to participate. In the evening of the same day a small slametan
is often held in the peasant’s house. Another small slametan is sometimes held
in the house when the rice is sown in the nurseries, and yet another at the
time of transplanting, although both of these are quite commonly omitted.
Toward the end of the growing season, after the first weeding has taken place
and the rice is beginning to bend over with the weight of its grains, a tingkeban
or, roughly, “rice pregnancy” slametan, is held, also in the house. But the
most important crop ceremony is the slametan m etik, a harvest or first-fruits
ritual, and this is still often carried out on a fairly elaborate scale, especially
in the villages.
     Behind the harvest ritual lies the story of Tisnawati and Djakasudana.
Tisnawati, the daughter of Batara Guru, the king of the gods, fell in love with
Djakasudana, a mortal. In anger, her father turned her into a rice stalk and,
pitying her human husband, who merely sat and gazed sorrowfully at his trans­
formed wife, changed Djakasudana into a rice stalk also. The harvest ritual
re-enacts their marriage, and is often referred to as temantèn pari, or “rice
marriage.”* For this ceremony a specialist called a tukang m etik is employed.
 ( Meti/c means “to pluck.” ) About a month before the harvest is to occur
the tukang m etik chooses a day by numerology. If he chooses, for ex­
ample, Ngahad-Kliwon (Ngahad is another name for Minggu, or Sunday),
then on the fourth consecutive Ngahad-Kliwon after his computation is made
the harvest ceremony takes place, and the harvest itself the day after that. On
the day of the ceremony the tukang metik, usually accompanied by guests of
the owner of the field, circles the field several times, chanting a spell which
begs for the forgiveness and blessings of Tisnawati (or mBok Sri) and Djak­
asudana. Then he bums incense, sets out offerings, and cuts a small number
of stalks, depending upon the number of the day (usually 13, for example, in
the case of Ngahad-Kliwon), these stalks being called the manten (bride
and groom). They are taken back by the tukang metik, usually at the head
of a procession of the guests, to the rice granary and hung up on the wall,
where they remain until that year’s rice harvest has been entirely consumed
or sold. Back at the house a slametan is held. That night the tukang m etik
returns to the field for more offerings, incense, and propitiatory spells, and
 the next day the harvest takes place, the output of the field having been in­
 creased by virtue of the ceremony.



                 The Village Slametan: Bersih Désa
both passage and calendrical slametans are oriented toward the sacralization
of certain points in time, the former within the life cycle, the latter within
    * There is another somewhat similar legend which accounts for the origin of rice
in terms of a transformation of a goddess named Déwi Sri into a rice stalk by Wisnu
(Vishnu), and this legend is sometimes syncretized with the Tisnawati story so that
Tisnawati is called mBok (Mother) Sri. There are also origin stories of a similar
nature for other crops, but they are of very little importance.
»82«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
the yearly round of social activities. The bersih désa, or “cleansing of the vil­
lage” siametan, is concerned with sanctifying relationships in space, with
defining and celebrating one of the basic territorial units of Javanese social
structure—the village. What the village is cleansed of, of course, is dangerous
spirits. This is accomplished by giving a siametan in which food is offered to
the danjang désa (“guardian spirit of the village”) at the latter’s place of
burial. In strong saniri villages the bersih désa may take place in the mosque
and consist entirely of Moslem prayers. In villages where there is no rec­
ognized place of burial for the danjang or where the place is inconvenient, the
rite may be held at the house of the village headman. To this siametan each
family in the village is supposed to contribute food, and the adult head of each
family is in theory obligated to attend.
     The bersih désa is always held in Sela, the eleventh month of the lunar
year, but on different days in different villages according to local tradition. The
celebration differs somewhat depending upon the personal characteristics
attributed by the people to the danjang désa. For example, in one village near
Modjokuto the danjang désa, whose name is “Bearded Grandfather,” is some­
thing of a reprobate and so demands that opium be burned for him and that
a tajaban, a slightly disreputable form of entertainment involving female street
dancers (who commonly are also prostitutes) and the ritual drinking of
Dutch gin, be given. This is known to be what he wants because once he en­
tered a man who was passing the spring in which he lives and demanded the
opium and tajaban as the price for returning home and leaving the poor un­
fortunate man sane again. In another village the danjang désa is a more proper
and aesthetic type, and for him a shadow play must be given.
     In the suburban village in which I lived, the danjang désa was, as I have
said, a pious santri who was buried in the center of the village. Thus the bersih
désa in that village took the form of a death siametan for the danjang désa
complete with Arabic chanting, apem cakes, and so forth. The date for it was
fixed—always Rebo-Legi in Sela— so that people would not forget when it
was; but the modín, who conducted it the year I was there, said that the night
before it was to occur he dreamed that Hadji Abdur, the village’s headman,
wealthiest citizen, and leading santri for over twenty years, as well as a sup­
posed direct descendant of the danjang désa, who died during the Japanese
occupation, came to him and said, “Now [the m odirí s name], I am looking
for food.” This was a sign, said the modin, that it was time for the bersih désa
to be held, for it is directed not only toward the village founder but toward all
 who have led the village since then.
     About 50 or 60 of a possible 500 or so adult men attended the siametan,
and I counted about 135 trays of food, the surplus being sent by means of
 small boy messengers by adults too busy or too uninterested to come them­
 selves. Most of the trays were put out by the grave, but about 30 were brought
inside the prayer house where the siametan proper was held and where all the
village officials and leading santris were gathered. (In this village it just so
happened that, although the village was almost evenly divided between
abangans and santris, with a scattering of prijajis near the town, the village
 government was almost entirely in santri hands.) The village chief made a
 short speech (a local abangan made one to the people outside by the grave),
The Slametan Cycles : Calendrieal, Village, and Intermittent                 »8 3 «
explaining who the d anjang was and the purpose of the sla m eta n , and then
led an Arabic chant for 15 or 20 minutes. Then each person took a bite or
two of the food, the leftovers being given to the hundreds of children crowding
around begging for them. Each guest participant took a little food home to
put under his pillow or to make into a salve for well-being.
    In the town of Modjokuto, where village political structure has rather
atrophied and where most upper-class people feel themselves directly under
the subdistrict officer rather than the village chief (who is more or less of an
invalid anyway), the bersih désa is also rather attenuated. It was held at the
graveyard, in which all past village chiefs are supposed to have been buried,
on the edge of town. Although a rather large number of people came (due
mainly to the fact that only one ceremony was held for the whole of Modjo­
kuto— some 20,000 people), they were without exception, so far as I could
see, all “little people,” many of them extremely poor and obviously there in
hopes of a free meal. None of the social or political elite of the town was
present (though some were said to have sent trays of food), and the cere­
mony was very perfunctory. The village chief—it was the first and last time
I saw him out of his house during my stay—gave a very brief speech, saying
that he was sorry that he was ill and that he could not get around much to
see people and hoped that both he and the village would improve in health in
the coming year. The m o d ln then recited a very brief Arabic prayer, and the
ceremony was over almost as soon as it had begun. No one with whom I
spoke could name the da n ja n g désa or tell me who was buried in the main
grave in the center of the yard.
    The bersih désa , designed originally to integrate people not too unlike
one another, sometimes has difficulty doing so in the more urban contexts
where geographical proximity is less important than ideological commitment
or differences in social status. Thus in the village mentioned above, in which
the d a n ja n g désa demands a tajuban, two are given: the first in the afternoon,
to which come only peasants, coolies, and other rural or lower-class types; the
second in the evening, to which come mostly government officials, clerks,
teachers, and the like. Even the ceremony I have recorded for my village
seems to symbolize as much conflict as it does harmony.
  The modín said that the purpose of the bersih désa was to bring well-being
  to the village. . . . He said there were two interpretations of it. Abangans
  thought that the prayer was to the dead danjang, but this was wrong and the
  worst sin you could commit. Wito gave this interpretation of the ritual in his
  speech outside, and he, the modín, would have prohibited it if he could be­
  cause this was like having an extra God, and such a sin was never pardoned.
  The prayer was sent directly to God, he said.



                          Intermittent Slametans
what I shall call “intermittent” slam etans, those given from time to time for
some special occasion or purpose which does not typically recur at any set
intervals, are somewhat less common in Modjokuto than the regular ones
»84«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
described above and almost always rather simple affairs. Slametans for change
of residence, change of name, embarking on a journey, bad dreams, prevention
or encouragement of rain, anniversaries of clubs and fraternal organizations,
sorcery, curing, and for an only child—all fall within this category. A name­
changing slametan I gave for myself and my wife is typical. The impetus for it
came from the headman of the village next to ours, who decided that our
American names were too difficult either to pronounce or to remember.
  In the evening the village chief of Sawahredjo came by. His rural accent is
  very thick, but I gathered he had come to name my wife and me. The chief
  chose the name according, he said, to the appearance of my body (he
  mentioned another name as being unsuitable, being too “big” for me), my
  character, and so forth, and came up with Kartopawiro. Karto seems to
  mean something like “orderly,” and pawiro “manly” or “brave”— all of which
  is encouraging. He asked me if the name fitted, because if it didn’t, it wouldn’t
  be proper. I said it did and that he was undoubtedly an expert in choosing
  names; and he said, indeed, it was a difficult business to choose a name for
  a person, for if it didn’t fit, bad things would happen. Many people came to
  him to help them choose a new name that would fit them and bring them good
  fortune. He said he had learned how to do this from his parents, but not only
  from them but from all of his ancestors. He said that all my ancestors would
  come to my slametan, and that I could inform them as well as my neighbors
  of the new name.
    Since the slametan I gave under the direction of my landlord more or less
duplicated the pasaran five-days-after-birth ceremony, in a sense I was “re­
born” under my new name. A similar pattern occurs sometimes when a mar­
riage does not go well. In order to try to save the marriage, a second ceremony
and slametan are held, called bangun nikah —“to build up a marriage”—in
which some of the events of the original ceremony are duplicated on a smaller
scale and the same foods prepared for the slametan. Sometimes a slametan of
this sort will be given just because a husband says to his wife, “I’ll divorce
you,” and doesn’t mean it. If such a slametan were not to be given, then the
marriage would probably soon break up.
    This pattern of the slametan as a defensive reflex against any unusual oc­
currence—having your house robbed, your child fall from a tree, or an out­
size toadstool grow in your backyard—is quite common and is perhaps best
seen in the reaction to anxiety dreams.
  He said that Javanese believe dreams foretell the future. “If you dream some­
  thing, it must happen; when—in a year, a month, a week—you can’t tell,
  but it must happen. If you dream about something fearful happening but
  you don’t necessarily know what, you have to give a slametan to prevent it.
  If you see someone giving slametans all the time, this may be the reason—be­
  cause he has had many bad dreams.”
     Yet another stimulus for the giving of intermittent slametans is an ad­
herence to the “heterdox” teachings of some self-appointed religious teacher
(g u ru ) . Thus, for example, one of my informants followed the teachings of
a man who claimed that the truly Javanese way to do things was to give a
slametan on your birthday each 35 days, but no others. Although the in­
The Slametan Cycles : Calendrical, Village, and Intermittent              »8 5 «
formant was unable to avoid the regular slametans, as advised, she did add
these new slametans as extra protection. Influence from Dutch customs—
mostly among the prijajis—sometimes leads to out-of-the-ordinary slametans;
some people, for instance, give silver wedding anniversary slametans or en­
gagement parties. There are certain traditional occasions for slametans which
are irregular in occurrence, such as the necessity to give one for an only child
so he will not be eaten by the Hindu demon Batara Kala. One must give a wa-
jang with this, and its expense prevents it from occurring very frequently nowa­
days, although sometimes people give it in combination with another occasion,
such as a circumcision. Lastly, there are slametans which can only be ascribed
to the effect of the “new era” in Indonesia; for instance, a beer-crate manu­
facturer gave a slametan in honor of his new diesel wood-sawing machine just
imported from Western Germany.
Chapter 8                                    Curing, Sorcery,
                                                   and Magic




I f spirit beliefs and slametans are two of the most general subcategories of
abangan religion, the complex of curing, sorcery, and magic centering around
the role of the dukun makes up a third. Strictly speaking, restricting dukuns to
the abangan context is not correct, for belief and disbelief in their powers, as
well as actual practitioners of the art, are spread throughout Javanese society,
among prijajis and santris as well as abangan. But both their greater frequency
and their greater everyday importance, and probably a generally greater be­
lief in them, among the abangans can justify their being considered here as a
predominantly abangan phenomenon, with santri and prijaji dukuns being
taken as secondary variations.




                     The Dukun: Curer, Sorcerer,
                      and Ceremonial Specialist

there are all kinds of dukuns: dukun baji, midwives; dukun pidjet, masseurs;
dukun préwangan, mediums; dukun tjalak, circumcisors; dukun wiwit, harvest
ritual specialists; dukun temantèn, wedding specialists; dukun pétungan, ex­
perts in numerical divination; dukun sihir, sorcerers; dukun susuk, specialists
who cure by inserting golden needles under the skin; dukun djapa, curers who
rely on spells; dukun djampi, curers who employ herbs and other native
medicines; dukun siwer, specialists in preventing natural misfortune (keeping
the rain away when one is having a big feast, preventing plates from being
broken at the feast, and so on) ; dukun tiban, curers whose powers are tempo­
rary and the result of their having been entered by a spirit.
    Usually one man is several kinds of dukun; he may be everything but a
                                        86
Curing, Sorcery, and Magic                                                    »87«
midwife, a status reserved to women.* Some types—dukun temanièn, for
example—are not true specialties, usually being taken on rather casually for
the particular occasion by any older person who commands the necessary
knowledge of tradition. A man who is able in several of these specialties at
once is called a dukun bijasa—“common dukun”— or just dukun without
a qualifier, and it is he who is the most important. He is the general magical
specialist in the traditional society, useful for all that ails one physically or
psychologically, predicter of future events, finder of lost objects, insurer of
good fortune, and usually not unwilling to practice a little sorcery if that is
what one desires.
    This type of practitioner is in the typical case the son of a similar practi­
tioner. To be a dukun is thought to be dangerous to the individual, for the
extraordinary power with which he traffics can destroy him if he is not
spiritually strong. Since madness is a typical outcome for people who attempt
too much along these lines, it is a help to be a descendant of a man with
proven ability to support such power, for then one is also likely to have the
necessary spiritual resources. But this is not necessarily so. One dukun I inter­
viewed said that his father had originally tried to teach his specialty to each
of the informant’s two older brothers, but both of them fell ill, showing that
they were not strong enough for it; and so he, the third brother, got his chance
to become a dukun.
    Further, although the capacity to be a dukun is at least in part inherited,
the actual ability is not; it is a learned skill. Just what is learned varies some­
what from dukun to dukun. Prijaji dukims tend to emphasize ascetic disci­
pline—extended fasts and long periods of wakeful meditation—and to claim
that their power is entirely spiritual. Santris usually employ chanted passages
from the Koran interpreted mystically, or magic bits of carefully drawn Arabic
script chewed up and swallowed, or die like; and some santris claim that what­
ever curing “real Moslems” do is based on scientific medical knowledge in­
cluded in the Koran hundreds of years before it was “discovered” in the West.
Abangan dukims, finally, tend more to emphasize specific techniques, amulets,
spells, herbs, and the like. Admittedly, however, these lines blur; most dukims
employ something of all these techniques, and some sort of spiritual prepara­
tion is necessary in any case.
  He said that when he started being a dukun he fasted for a hundred days,
  eating no rice, only leaves off trees, and such things. Another time he did this
  for a year, for this is the way he gets his power. He said now he just fasts
  on Monday and Thursday of every week; the rest of the time he can eat as
  much as he wants. On Monday and Thursday he doesn’t eat or drink any­
  thing from daybreak to sunset as in the Fast. I asked him why fasting gave
  him power, and he said, “When you fast your spirit (he didn’t use a word,
  just pointed to his head) goes directly to God. If you don’t, it is much more
  likely to get distracted to the side somewhere.”
   “'Women sometimes, perhaps typically, become dukun liban and dukun préwangan,
and quite commonly dukun pidjel or dukun temanièn, but almost never any of the
others.
»88«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
    Whatever it is that the practitioner learns, he learns from another dukun,
who is thus his guru (teacher); and whatever he learns he and others call
his ilmu (science), llmu is generally considered to be a Idnd of abstract knowl­
edge or supernormal skill, but by the more concrete-minded and “old-fash­
ioned” it is sometimes viewed as a kind of substantive magical power, in which
case its transmission may be more direct than through teaching.
  On Sunday morning we stopped at the house of Abdul’s sister, who had
  dropped in at our house the day before on her way out to (a nearby village),
  where their father has been dying for the past ten days. . . . She said what
  was holding things up was that the breath (which the Javanese regard as
  the seat of life) was still inside of him and hadn’t yet come out. She felt
  that it was probably trying to come out, trying to come out, and trying to
  come out, but hadn’t yet been able to make it. She felt that it probably had
  left the stomach and that it was now in the throat and struggling to get free
  and when it finally did, when it finally came out, he would be dead. . . .
  Then someone who could bear it and was watching at the right time would at­
  tempt to swallow it in order to take over the ilmu of the old hadji. What
  one does is wait for the final expulsion of the breath (known by the appear­
  ance of saliva at the lips, but the ilmu itself has no shape and can’t be seen)
  and then put one’s lips to those of the dying man and catch his magical knowl­
  edge (kepinteran—literally “cleverness”) in one’s mouth and swallow it. The
  old man evidently has lots of ilmu, as one can tell by how rich he is. He got
  the power in the first place from a kijaji (Koran scholar and teacher) up by
  the north coast. He went to this kijaji’s school when he was but a boy, and the
  kijaji taught him the ilmu, which involved secret meanings for Koranic pas­
  sages. The kijaji would write down passages and explicate them to the young
  man and tell him to commit the knowledge to memory and never, ever, to
  write it down again. This went on for some time, evidently, and then the
  hadji came home and became rich, lived a long time and the like—all due
  to this ilmu. That is why it would be a great loss if it merely escaped into
  the air and got away and why Abdul, her brother, has been at the bedside
  more or less continually for the past two or three days.
     What a man can do with his ilmu more or less depends upon what kind it
is. Some ilmu is quite specific. There is ilmu for causing people in a house one
is robbing to sleep soundly, for finding lost objects (some ilmu enables one to
tell where the object is exactly, other ilmu just tells one in which direction it
lies), for getting rich, for seeing what is going on in other places, and for
becoming invulnerable. This latter ilmu was very popular during the revolu­
tion. At the time of the battle against the British in Surabaja about a hundred
young men setting off to fight were first each given a small glass of tea over
which one of Modjokuto’s leading dukuns had chanted a spell which was
supposed to render them invulnerable. There is also ilmu for telling where
to drill a well so the water will not be foul, where to build a house so the
occupants will not sicken, for attracting the affections of someone else’s
spouse. There is even ilmu for predicting world events. One seer gave out
that World War III would begin within a year or two, that Russia would
occupy almost all of Asia including Indonesia but would be finally defeated by
the United States, and that then the United States, England, and Indonesia
Curing, Sorcery, and Magic                                                     »89«
would be the three major world powers. This man is said to have predicted
both the triumph and the downfall of the Japanese in Indonesia.
    Other ilmu is quite general and consequently rarer, enabling one to do
almost anything—fly, disappear, turn into a tiger—but somehow the really
powerful practitioners of tihis sort seem always to have existed in the past,
there being a rather general belief that so far as ilmu is concerned people are
not so skilled as they once were.
  I talked to Djojo on the corner the other night about his marvelous grand­
  father. . . . He said his grandfather was able to disappear magically. Also
  he could go great distances in a short time. He would walk out of the house
  and announce to his wife that he was going to Semarang [three or four hun­
  dred miles away] and in fifteen minutes he would walle back in, saying he had
  just come back from Semarang. He had pupils to whom he taught this ilmu,
  but none of them are left now, and the ilmu is lost. No one can do these
  things any more now, said Djojo. . . . His grandfather was arrested once by
  the Dutch and taken to Bragang and put into jail because of his ilmu—all his
  pupils walking along behind as he was led in. When they returned home,
  they found him there in the house ready to teach, and it turned out later that
  he was in both places at once: in jail and in his house teaching. He evidently
  applied his magical powers in the jail toward freeing prisoners, and so the
  Dutch thought perhaps it would be better if they just let him go. But now he
  was stubborn and wouldn’t leave. “You sentenced me to seven years,” he
  said, “so I’ll stay here seven years. . . . ” I asked Djojo whether his grand­
  father could cure people, and he said, yes, he could. He said that now there
  are plenty of people who say they can cure people, but they really can’t, they
  are just swindlers deceiving people. I asked Pale Parman (the village’s best
  known dukun), and he said, “Oh, he is just a stupid man; he can’t do anything
  and just cheats people out of their money. There was a man out in Sumber-
  sari who could really cure, but he died a few years back and now there is
  no one.”
    Today the leading dukuns in Modjokuto are all at least middle aged, but
none is really old. Of the really well-known ones, three are abangans; one is a
santri; and one, the subdistrict officer, a prijaji. All but the subdistrict officer
are sons of dukuns, and all but him are also small landholders (from one-half
to about two acres) who either rent their land to sharecroppers in order to be
free to cure or (in one case) work it themselves. Thus no one in Modjokuto
makes a living entirely from being a dukun; it is at best a part-time specializa­
tion. None of the leading dukuns is extremely poor, and none, again excepting
the subdistrict officer,* is particularly well off. All are members of that peculiar
economic category the Javanese call tjukupan—they “have enough.”
    As to personality, nothing seems to set the leading dukuns off from their
neighbors. They show no unusual character traits and no obvious neurotic
behaviors, nor are they considered peculiar by others. With one possible ex­
ception there is little sign that these dukuns chose their vocations because of
frustrated prestige or power drives, for they are not the type of men to whom
    ♦The subdistrict officer came to Modjokuto in 1952, and so has no roots there. He
practices only among his friends, the upper status people among the prijajis, a rather
limited group in number; but among them he has a high reputation.
»90«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
the normal channels to power and prestige are closed; and, in fact, the dukun
role, although it carries some prestige, also tends to draw suspicion, for some
people always suspect the dukun of either fakery or sorcery. All in all, it is
hard to escape the impression that within the abangan context the dukun role
is a fairly straightforward one which people adopt for fairly understandable
reasons: it brings a certain monetary reward, although seemingly not an ex­
tremely great one; it carries some prestige, although this is ambivalent at best;
and they believe in their own skills and enjoy practicing them successfully.
     The impression of “normality” in the dukun’s role is strengthened by the
consideration that, in addition to the five fairly well-known dukuns, there are
literally dozens much less well-known—mostly abangans—whose powers are
considered much less but who nevertheless draw part of their income from
curing, seeking lost objects, practicing sorcery, and the like. In each neighbor­
hood there always seems to be some man, usually a little older and somewhat
more intelligent than the rest, to whom people look for help in the event of
illness, theft, and so on, turning to the better known dukuns only rarely and in
more serious cases. In fact, since almost every adult male knows at least a few
spells and may be called upon to try his hand at curing a neighbor, finding a
lost ring, or attracting a girl’s affections, the role of the dukun, although a
professional specialty, shades off at the edges into an irregular amateurish
practice. If one stays in Modjokuto long enough one will hear just about every
man in town referred to as a dukun at one time or another, although it will
be clear that only certain people are really considered to be very good as
dukuns and spend very much time at this practice.
     Another peculiarity of the dukun role is that the reputation of a first-class
dukun is almost always greater outside of his home region than in it. Really
good dukuns draw a great part of their clientele from a distance; and it is said
that they are more effective with people who are not otherwise acquainted with
them, although exactly why this is so no one really seems to know. Many
Modjokuto people go off to dukuns in other parts of East Java. My landlord
went to a man near Malang, some 60 miles to the east, to get some sorcery
practiced against a thief; and one old man who had been ill for some time
went a hundred miles on the back of a truck to see a dukun he had heard
about only vaguely, the trip in itself almost killing him. Similarly, the leading
dukuns in Modjokuto drew many of their patients from as far away as Sura­
baja, 100 miles to the north, even though they were often thought to be frauds
by their closest neighbors. Just how people at this distance know about curers
in Modjokuto I never was quite able to discover. Whenever I asked this ques­
tion of a dukun, he assured me that it was God who brought his patients to
 him.
     Finally, there is the problem of the belief in dukuns. A partial skepticism
about dukuns and their ability to do the things they claim to do is nearly uni­
versal. Nearly everyone with whom I spoke about the matter in Modjokuto
believed in dukuns in general, in their possibility; but opinions about the
powers of any one given dukun living in the area varied tremendously. I heard
 opinions expressed about each of the leading dukuns which ranged from abso­
Curing, Sorcery, and Magic                                                 »91«
lute belief to outright accusation of fraud, but I never heard a denial that at
least some dukuns were good, honest, and miraculously powerful.
     Also, the concept of tjotjog—fittingness—which is so important in nu­
merical divination plays a crucial role here too. A particular dukun may be
very powerful and very clever, but he still may not tjotjog with one. There
may be no question of his skill—for example, in a case of illness, he may have
cured far more difficult cases but if the patient and he do not tjotjog, there
will be nothing he can do and the patient will remain sick. So, when a man
is ill, he tries one dukun after another until one cures him, never concerning
himself about the reasons for their failure, and not necessarily holding it
against them that they were unable to help him. It is just the same with
Western-trained doctors. People would say earnestly to me: “Sometimes they
tjotjog and cure you and sometimes they do not. The only difference is that
you have to pay a doctor even if you die in his hands, while a good dukun
expects payment only if he succeeds.”



                           Curing Techniques

despite all the wonderful things really powerful dukuns can do, their real
forte, and the basis of their prestige, is their curative powers. As does any
medical practice, the dukun’s treatment has two main aspects or stages: first,
diagnosis and selection of the appropriate method of treatment by the practi­
tioner; and second, the actual application of the treatment. Diagnosis can be
based on any one of three main methods or any combination of them: nu­
merology (péfungan), intuitive insight through meditation, analysis of symp­
toms.
    The general pétungan process has already been described. Suffice it to say
in this context that the usual method is to take the day on which the individual
was born in connection with the day on which he fell sick and by various
calculations come up with a number which then corresponds to a form of
treatment (usually an herb medicine) and in some cases indicates the cause
of the disease as well. This is the most common method of diagnosis, especially
among second-rank dukuns, for it is the quickest and easiest to apply.
     The method of intuitive insight through meditation is more difficult, for it
takes years of practice. Both cases of it which I encountered were among
prijaji dukuns. The dukun meditates, going into a near trance and clearing
his mind entirely of any “pictures” until he gets an abstract and formless feel­
ing which tells him what the disease is and what the cure should be. Despite
the lack of mental pictures, however, the diagnosis and cure may be quite
 concrete.
  I asked him for an example of someone he had cured. He said there was a
  woman in (a neaby village) who had had an enlarged swollen stomach for
  three years. She went to several dukuns, but none could help her. She went to
  several doctors, but they all wanted to operate and she wouldn’t permit it.
»92«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  Finally, after three years, she came to Dono (the informant) out at his house
  with her husband, very desperate. Dono meditated for a while and figured
  out that the toilet at her house, which had been built just three years before,
  had been built on land that didn’t want it there (because, evidently, spirits
  were living there); and so he told her that if she moved the toilet over to the
  other side of the house she would get well. She went home and they moved
  the toilet. That night she felt as if she collided with two spirits. Dono said
  they didn’t enter her, but it was more as though they were trying to carry
  her off or something. All night long she was very sick and nearly died, but
  in the morning her stomach had gone down to normal size, and she was well
  again. However, when he told her the cure, Dono had told her, too, that she
  had to be patient and calm and not get depressed or angry for three years
  afterwards, or the sickness would come back; that she must not get emo­
  tionally upset in any way. Unfortunately, she did get upset and often angry,
  and so in about a year and a half her sickness returned. So she came back to
  Dono again, but this time, after suitable meditation, he said he couldn’t help
  her at all any more; so she went to the hospital at one of the sugar factories
  and was operated on, and they took five big containers of water out of her
  stomach. But it came back again, and at this point her distraught husband
  came to Dono to see if he couldn’t do something for her. Dono meditated
  again, said no, he couldn’t do anything for her, and said she was surely going
  to die in a week. Exactly a week later she died.
    Analysis of symptoms is particularly appropriate to more specific illnesses
with well-defined disease pictures and rests on a categorization of such pic­
tures at once elaborate and, seemingly, quite accurate, which is widely diffused
among the populace generally. One boy, not a dukun, listed 47 separate
diseases for me, each with a special name and symptom pattern, in the space
of a half hour; and four other informants did almost as well. Among diseases
commonly listed are: fever, chills, rheumatism, headache, red eyes with and
without pus, boils, infected wounds, pimples on face and hands of adults and
adolescents, white blotches on the skin, toothache, running nose, venereal
diseases, paralysis, old age, rash (itchy or painful), yaws, smallpox, upset
stomach, dysentery (with or without blood in the stools), short breath, gasp­
ing breath, tuberculosis (marked by continual coughing and extreme weak­
ness), unclear eyesight, simple-mindedness, insanity (violent or nonviolent),
measles, convulsions, malaria (called by that name; alternating fevers and
chills), menstruation, frequent urination, tumors (external or at least perceiv­
able to the touch), goiter, piles, swollen jaw, swelling in the groin, broken
bones, and bums.
    For each of these there are appropriate herbs (which are appropriate to
which illnesses differs somewhat from informant to informant and dukun to
dukun), mechanical methods of manipulation (massage, rubbing glass on the
skin, bone setting), and specialized techniques such as the insertion of gold
needles under the skin or die administration of mercury to be swallowed. The
herb pharmacopoeia is very large and elaborate. Since it has been reported
on at great length,* it need not be described here except to note that in the
   * See especially K. Heyne, De Nuttige Planten van Nederlandsch-Indie (3 vols., Den
Haag, 1927), and R. A. Seno-Sastroamidjojo, Tentang Obat Asli Indonesia (Djakarta,
1948).
Curing, Sorcery, and Magic                                               »93«
Modjolcuto area the most commonly employed medicinal herbs (they are
grown in the house gardens, but may also be bought in Chinese drugstores)
are kunir (tumeric, Curcuma longa), kentjur (Kaempferia galanga), kemiri
(Aleurites triloba), djaé (ginger, Zingiber officinale), lombok (chili pepper,
Capscium annuum), and laos (Alpinia galanga). All these and hundreds of
others are used for nearly everything, both internally and externally. Turmeric
seems to be the most common laxative; kentjur is frequently used to settle the
stomach; and ginger is common as a salve for rheumatism and headaches.
However, as all the informants said, which medicine you use depends on the
one that “fits” you, and if one doesn’t work, you try another. “Doctors have
only two medicines—pills and injections; Javanese have thousands.”
    When one goes to a dukun one gets not only an herb but a spell with it.
The dukun holds the herb in his hand and chants over it—in Arabic if he is
a santri dukun, in Javanese if an abangan—and then either spits on it or
blows on it when treating a child for worms.
    In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!
    “Grandmother spirit” [the dukun addresses the spirits],
    “Grandfather spirit, where are you going?”
    “To the Purwosedjati mountain" [they answer].
    “What are you seeking?”
    “We’re seeking dringo herb and onions.”
    “Why, whatever for!”
    “We are going to medicate the little baby.”
    The harmful worms—may they all die.
    The good worms—may they stay for the whole length of the child’s life.
    Ah, the medicine looks black [the dukun spits into it]—
    Yes, I am medicating the child.

    As it is the spell, or more exactly the spiritual power, of the dukun which
counts, he does not necessarily have to use an herb if he is powerful enough;
and, in fact, perhaps the most common medicine dispensed by dukuns is just
plain tea over which they have chanted and into which they have spat. This
tea is then drunk by the patient or perhaps rubbed on his navel, for many
dukuns conceive of their function as calling back to the patient the two
guardian spirits who were born with him in the amniotic fluid and his umbilical
cord. It is these who cure, they argue, by chasing off spirits, not the dukun;
and the latter’s only function is to enable the patient to get in touch with his
invisible twin guardians, which he cannot do unaided and which the dukun
accomplishes for him through his concentration, his chanting, and his applica­
tion of the tea to the navel. Instead of tea, liquid concoctions made of egf
yolk, coconut juice, or mashed vegetables are often used. It is of perhaps some
interest that the word for the sipping of such a liquid medicine is the same as
for suckling at the breast: mile.
    Finally, one of the most common curing techniques is the massage or
pidjet. The massage may be a simple secular massage with no mystical over­
tones of any sort, but it may also be accompanied by a spell and a spitting:
»94«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!
  May the Prophet Adam repair [the person],
  May Eve order [the person].
  Untangle the tangled veins,
  Right the dislocated bones,
  Make the fluids of the body feel pleasant,
  Make everything well again,
  Well again, well as at the beginning [i.e., before the sickness].
  Health falls with my white spittle [she spits three times on the neck of the
     patient],
  Well, well, well, by the will of God.
    Many other curing techniques are used. For example, Hadji Rasid was a
specialist in what one might call metallic medicines. He gave people mercury
to swallow for syphilis, iron filings pounded into a dust for general strengthen­
ing, and egg burned black and rubbed with silver for dysentery; but the tech­
nique for which he was most famous was susuk: injecting small slivers of gold
under the skin. These slivers—the Hadji said he had about sixty or so of them
in himself, and I knew dozens of people who had been injected by him, the
slivers often still being visible under the skin—are injected where the pain is.
A man with continual headaches will have them inserted in his forehead;
someone with eye trouble will have them put in near the eye; a man with a bad
stomach will have them injected near his navel. (For insane or upset people,
one inserts them in the stomach also in order to calm their “heart,” which is
in their stomach.) Rasid’s reliance on medicines was perhaps somewhat
stronger than other dukuns*, and, unlike some others, he charged (Rp 6.50
for the gold slivers; Rp 15 for the mercury treatment, which is also good for
making you strong) whether he cured one or not. The way he put it was that
he charged only for the medicine but cured for nothing.
     In sum, there are three elements in the curing process: the medicine, the
spell, and what Malinowski used to call “the condition of the performer”—
in this context the spiritual strength of the dukim, his ability to so concentrate
his mind that the spell reaches the ears of either God or the patient’s twin
guardian spirits. In Trobriand curing and sorcery Malinowski found the spell
 the essential part and so called them “magical practices”; among the Azande,
Evans-Prichard emphasized the medicine as basic and held the other two
 aspects secondary. It is of interest that in Java the third, the condition of the
 performer, is the crucial element.
   Then he went on about dukuns. I asked him who was a good dukttn here, and
  he said Pak Tèn (the subdistrict officer) was the best. He said no, his power
  was not inherited, his father could not cure, but Pak Tèn had been able to do
  it since he was 12 years old. It all comes from meditation (sumèdi), fasting
  and not sleeping, and general abstinence. Pak Tèn recently worked over the
  father of Bu Wirjo. He had a stroke, said the doctors, but they said nothing
  could be done to help him; he was paralyzed and struck dumb. Pak Tèn said
  a spell over him, gave him some tea, etc., and he improved. He is not all well,
  but he can get around and can talk again, and this in spite of the fact that the
  doctors said he wouldn’t be able to. He said that he, Harijo, himself had
  talents along these lines, and put his lighted cigarette out with his tongue to
Curing, Sorcery, and Magic                                                    »95«
  prove it to me, saying that he had lots of other things equally marvelous he
  could do, but this would serve as an example. He said he could cure people
  but only used his powers for his children, for if people knew he could cure
  they would all come around for treatment, and he wouldn’t be free any more
  and would have no time for himself. He said his powers came from not eat­
  ing or sleeping much.
    Each of the three elements—medicine, spell, and condition of the per­
former—may be used separately. Medicines may be employed in the home
with or without the advice of a dukun. Individuals may be cured simply
through meditating on their problems and giving them advice to move the
toilet, rebury their child’s umbilical cord, or sleep with their head at the other
end of the bed, without any spells or medicines at all. People may be massaged
and chanted over with no medicines and no particular power of concentration
necessary on the part of the masseur. But more commonly all three are em­
ployed as interdependent parts of a unitary curing method in which the spell
and the medicine are energized by the spiritual abilities of the dukun. The
spell the dukun chants reaches God or the guardian twins because the curer’s
intense mental concentration drives it into their consciousness, and then they
act in response to the spell’s plea back through the dukun as he spits into the
medicine to make it really powerful. So each element lends to the others some
of its own efficacy, but it is the state of superior spiritual strength in the dukun,
a state conceived of in psychological terms, upon which the process as a whole
depends.



                      Theory of D isease and Curing
that the reputation of dukuns as a class is not entirely good is evident from
the general belief that they inevitably die a violent death and from the fact
that if one asks a curer if he is a dukun he always denies it and says he is
merely trying to help people.
  Went again to see Pak Parman, the “dukun" who says he isn’t one, because
  the name indicates someone who takes money and he, Parman, doesn’t (he
  accepts gifts, however), so he should be called a pindung (helper). He said
  there are many people around who say they can cure, promise to do so for
  everybody (one sign of a dukun is that he tells one he can certainly cure him;
  Parman never does that—always says maybe he can and maybe he can’t ) , and
  also claim that it is they themselves who cure you rather than God. But these
  people are all talking empty talk and just want one’s money.
   Everyone else in town, however, thought Parman was a dukun and called
him one, including his chief rival, Hadji Rasid.
  He, however, denied he was a dukun. He said Parman was, although Parman
  wouldn’t admit it if one asked him. He said the difference between the way
  he practiced and a dukun was this: “A dukun tells you the cause of your
  disease, a pitulung just cures it for you.” For example, a dukun will tell one
»96«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF       JAVA
  that the reason for his disease is that a sétan has entered him. Rasid considers
  this unwise from a religious standpoint, for if one tells people sêtans are
  what are disturbing them, they will start to fear sétans, and the Koran says
  one is not to fear sétans, only God. People should not pay too much attention
  to sétans but ignore them. Though he often knows that a sétan is the cause
  of his patient’s sickness, he doesn’t tell the patient—just cures him . . . Or a
  dukun will say the reason one is ill is that Pak so-and-so is witching him. Rasid
  doesn’t do this either—although he often can see that a particular patient has
  been witched—because it often leads to fights with people. He said he used
  to practice as a dukun now and then but learned better from bitter experience.
  He said once a sick woman came to him and he told her it was her husband
  who was making her sick. The husband was very angry, and when later he
  fell sick he blamed Rasid for it, accusing him of sorcery, and it was unpleasant
  all around. Another difference between dukuns and people like him is that
  dukuns have other powers than mere curing; for example, they can find lost
  things. He doesn’t do that—just cures.
   And the third most popular dukun (and the most notorious money-
grubber) had the same story;
  He said he is not a dukun but merely a pitulung (I have never heard this term
  applied except by a man to himself; for everyone else, this man was a dukun) .
  I asked him what the difference was, and he said a dukun takes money, but
  a pitulung doesn’t—just helps people out. He said he can’t always cure people;
  sometimes he can and sometimes he can’t. If he could say for certain, “I can
  cure you,” there would be two gods. As it is, he just supplicates God and
  sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn’t, although he admitted he said
  spells over three hen’s eggs as one of his techniques (the eggs are then eaten
  or made into a salve) and that he accepted gifts from satisfied patients.
     As these excerpts from my notes indicate, there are several factors cluster­
ing around the psychological relationship between the dukun and his patient
which seem to account for the ambivalent attitude most people show toward
dukuns, for the fact that they regard them both as supportive figures and as
threatening ones. The first is the problem of the uncertain outcome of treat­
ment, the essential contingency of the curative process involving as it does
the possibility that one’s hopes for well-being will be frustrated. The second
is the degree to which the dukun may become involved in his patient’s per­
sonal life and the necessity from the dukun’s point of view for the careful
handling of this problem. And the last is the inherent ambiguity of the dukun1’s
power, trafficking as he does both with God and with devils, able to sicken
people as well as to cure them, and engaging both in devout supplications to
a high God and in dubious contracts with less elevated spirits—ndukuni (“to
dukun someone”) means both to cure a person of a disease and to sorcerize a
 person into having one.
      Something of the quality of the relationship between the dukun and his
 client can be seen from the fact that the major alternative term for dukun is
 tijang sepuh, which means (in the respectful speech style) “parent” ; that the
 client is usually said to “beg pardon” (nuwun pangèstu) from the dukun; and
 that the former is often held to be seeking “advice” and “good counsel” from
 the latter, “as one does from one’s own parents.”
Curing, Sorcery, and Magic                                                    »97«
  I asked her to whom she would go for help if she had some great problem.
  She asked me what sort of problem, and I said it was up to her; and she said
  she would go to someone she “looked upon” as a father, such as the curer in
  a nearby village. They used to go to one near Bragang, but he’s dead now.
  Once when she was very sick, Pak Wirjo went to the Bragang one, “begged
  forgiveness,” and told him about the sickness. He was given a bit of sugar
  which the curer had prayed over (illustrated by holding a pinch of sugar be­
  fore her and closing her eyes for a moment). The dukun directed him to give
  it to her to eat. This even though they had already gone to the doctor. Also
  if she is having money troubles—for instance, she once gave a shadow play
  and borrowed money from a Chinese for this (before the war). The time for
  repayment came and she didn’t have the money, and the Chinese wouldn’t
  let her extend the period but insisted on her paying up all at once, so she was
  very troubled and went to this curer and “begged pardon.”
     Dukuns are quite aware, at least peripherally, that much of their power is
psychological; and all Javanese seem to hold that there are two main kinds
of disease: one kind, with discoverable physical causes, which is amenable to
treatment by Western doctors; and a second kind in which there are no medi­
cal findings but still the person is ill, the latter type being the kind dukuns are
peculiarly competent to cure. Thus Pak Parman said that he was at his best
on convulsions and temporary insanity. But if the person with convulsions
or the insane man came from parents who were also liable to convulsions or
were mentally ill, he very rarely could help them and usually refused even to
try. All dukuns emphasize the necessity for absolute trust and belief in the
dukun and ascribe many of their failures to the fact that the patient had inner
reservations about the curer’s ability. The psychological causation of physical
illness is a commonplace.
  When Pak Ardjo went to Djakarta to visit his son whose wife had just died,
  he went by train with the mother of the wife. On the trip he began to feel ill,
  and by the time he got there he was very sick and spent the entire visit in bed.
  He said the reason he got sick . . . was that he was angry (pegel—anger
  concealed in the heart; unexpressed, secreted anger) toward the woman whose
  daughter it was who had died because she seemed not to be grieving at all
  over her daughter’s decease. At every stop almost, she got herself something
  to eat and ate and ate all the way there (Ardjo did not eat the whole day, he
  said proudly), and he was angry at her but didn’t show it, and this being held
  inside him was what made him sick.
    The connection between emotional stability and physical health is usually
put in more concrete form, especially by abangans. If one is upset, startled, or
severely depressed, one becomes confused and disoriented, and one’s soul is
then empty and easily entered by the spirits. Sometimes the spirit is held to
displace the soul, in which case the curing process is stated in even more
metaphorical form :
  “When a sêtan enters you, it chases out your own spirit (he said he didn’t
  know where it went to—just ‘away’) because it struggles with the sétan and
  loses because your soul is weak, and so you become insane. When you are
  cured—with the aid of a dukun—the soul comes back, struggles with the
»98«                                           T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  sétan; the sétan loses, departs, and you are well again. You have been reor­
  ganized,” he said.
     Among the specialists themselves, particular psychological stresses may be
explicitly connected to particular physical symptoms. One dukim, something of
a prijaji actually, said he treated two kinds of diseases: specific ones, such as
toothaches, broken bones, upset stomach, and dysentery; and general all-over
ones, of which latter type there were four main varieties: dirty blood (dcirah
kotor), a shortage or lack of blood (kurang darah), an empty soul, perhaps
entered by spirits but not necessarily (djiwa kotong), and air, “heat,” or some
other foreign substance inside the body, sometimes induced there magically
through sorcery.
     The first, dirty blood, he said could be caused in one of two ways. Eating
bad food—spoiled or too peppery, or merely food which one is not used to
eating—which “startles” your stomach and so makes you upset in the “heart”
will dirty your blood. Secondly, continual anger, greed resulting in frequent
frustration of your wishes, or secreted emotions like envy or jealousy will up­
set your “heart” and dirty your blood. The symptoms of dirty blood are
general sluggishness, perhaps a rash or boils, alternation between fevers and
chills,*1* and a “dark mind”—i.e., confused and suspicious thought, liability
to sudden thrusts of passion.
     Lack of blood the dukun traced to nagging fear, anxiety, or depression
without an obvious cause. This thins out one’s blood, leading to a shortage
of it. Symptoms are paleness, weakness, and general lassitude of mind—one
just lies around and does nothing all day. Lack of blood may also follow as a
second stage after dirty blood.
     An empty soul, on the other hand, is due to a lack of spiritual discipline—
a failure to exercise the soul by fasting, staying awake, and meditation—
which leaves one very liable to sudden startle and prey to marauding spirits.
The general symptoms are: if a spirit has entered, intellectual disorientation,
delirium, strange behavior—in a word, “insanity” ; and, if no spirit has yet
entered, a general inability to persist in an activity, indirection, aimlessness,
and so forth—a kind of loss of inward strength quite often ascribed by older
 Javanese to younger ones of the rising generation.
   I talked with Tjipto and the old man who takes care of the graveyard for a
   few minutes. Both were bemoaning the younger generation. The younger gen­
   eration, they said, are very clever, but they are not very wise. They have a lot
   of knowledge but no wisdom; they think they know everything and they really
   don’t know anything. In the old days people accepted their lot, were always
   peaceful in their hearts, and one could count on them. If they said they were
   going north, they went north in fact; they didn’t go south first. Tjipto said that
   in the old days if he went out of the house and told his wife he was going
   north and someone invited him to go south, he would refuse because he had
   said where he was going and his will was set. In those days people did not
    * This may also, of course, be due to malaria. Since many Javanese hold that
malaria is caused by eating newly harvested rice (a view which is reasonable enough,
considering that it is at the harvest time that the irrigation streams are beginning to
stagnate and thus the mosquitoes multiply), it too is sometimes seen as a “dirty blood”
disease.
Curing, Sorcery, and Magic                                                   »99«
  spend so such time fooling around as they do now. They fasted, slept little,
  and went in for self-control. They led a much more ordered life. Nowadays
  people just sit around and talk all the time, stop in at a coffee shop here and
  a coffee shop there, chit-chat with everyone they meet. They thought this was
  bad—just following your will of the moment. In the old days people were
  stronger, and their wills were pure; they were single-minded, and they weren’t
  drawn here and there by irrelevancies. The younger generation are no longer
  peaceful either, and the result is they don’t live so long. There used to be
  people who lived for 150 to 200 years because they were so peaceful; now at
  sixty they are already old.
    Finally, the last variety of general disease is caused either by air entering
the body, by heat entering it, or by foreign objects—nails, glass, human hair—
introduced into the stomach by means of sorcery. Air in the body (masuk
angin) produces symptoms much like our “cold”—coughing, sneezing, and
general aches. Heat in the body (panas mlebu) leads to somewhat more lo­
calized pains. The symptoms of a disease due to sorcery are more violent:
vomiting blood, convulsions, and the like. Again, those most liable to sorcery
are those who are weak spiritually, but anyone may have air or heat enter
merely by sitting in a draft or in wet clothes.
    This particular analysis is but one man’s view, and it would be unwise to
take it as definitive. However, categories like “dirty blood,” “lack of blood,”
“empty soul” are nearly universal and are given interpretations of the same
general order as those presented above, although many would dispute details,
and the great mass of people have little theory beyond the terms themselves,
which they apply more or less haphazardly. At any rate, this dukun said
that there were for a Javanese two things of chief importance in staying well,
and on this I think he would get general assent: watching one’s food to make
sure it is clean and not too “startling”; exercising one’s soul to gain spiritual
strength.
    On this basis he went further to argue that no dukun ever cures a general
disease (he may, of course, cure specific ones) but just alleviates it, for he
does not touch the underlying cause. For example, if one has a rash caused
by dirty blood, the iimu of the dukun can make it go away, but the blood
will still be dirty, and the rash may later come back, or one may get another
symptom to replace it caused by the underlying dirty blood. So it is that
one sees people who have a rash cured by a dukun only to develop boils;
the boils go away, and they get headaches; the headaches vanish, and they
are laid up with rheumatism. One can’t clean up dirty blood with a spell, he
said; only meditation by the patient and a careful diet can do that. However,
he admitted rather sadly, some dukuns will promise one anything.



                 The Possessed Curer: Dukun T iban

if the common dukun is protected against the inevitable ambivalence with
which the public views the curer of souls in any culture by the social “nor­
»100«                                      T H E R E L I G I O N OF     JAVA
mality” of his role, by the regularity of the traditionalized procedures he
employs, by the strictness of his discipline and the breadth of his learning,
by his insistence that he cures only with the aid of God, by his pseudoparental
status, and by his own usually sound enough civic reputation—these “bour­
geois virtues” balancing off the morally equivocal forces with which he deals
and the possibilities for doing evil with which he is presented—the dukun
tiban has no such protection. He exchanges the social acceptability of the
common dukun’s practice for the greater power possible in a more simple,
direct, and uncircumspect approach to the darker powers.
     The roles of the dukun bijasa and the clukun tiban differ in almost every
particular. Where the power of the former is based on learning plus, some­
times, an inherited factor, that of the latter comes suddenly, without any prep­
aration on his part, by “divine stroke” ( tiban means “fallen,” “fallen as a
wonder from the sides” ). Where almost all of the former are men, perhaps
a majority of the latter are women. Where the former seem usually to be
psychologically stable and economically secure, the latter are said usually to
be at least somewhat unbalanced and to come from among the economically
depressed. Where the power of the former is continuing and, relatively speak­
ing, moderate, the power of the latter disappears as suddenly as it comes (usu­
ally within a year, almost always within three) and is of much greater in­
tensity while it lasts. Where the former are numerous everywhere, the latter
are rare and occur only sporadically (most informants said one seemed to turn
up somewhere around Modjokuto about once every five years or so). And
where there is at most only a mild skepticism about either the effectiveness or
the morality of the practices of the former, there is sharp disagreement con­
cerning both the reality and the ethical character of the forces upon which the
tiban calls.
     The only dukun tiban of any importance to appear in the Modjokuto area
for the past five or six years “occurred,” luckily enough, during the period of
field study in the village immediately to the north of town. About the first
of November in 1953 (and at the beginning of the Javanese year in the month
of Sura ) a poverty-stricken onion peddler in the town market (her debt-ridden
husband owned no land and was reduced to seeking casual farm work wher­
ever he could find it) lost a ring. She looked high and low for it for two or
three days with no success. Then one night in a dream she saw a great beam
of light come down from heaven and strike the floor. The brick where the light
had been focused was broken open and found to contain the ring, and she
knew—how, I was never quite able to discover—that if she dipped the ring
in home-made medicine she would have the power to cure.
     Within a week her fame had spread over the entire Modjokuto area and
farther (it was said that the first patients came to her, instructed to do so in
dreams, from a distance of 50 to 60 miles). Everyone was discussing her—the
general opinion was that she had been entered by an evil spirit—and her
miraculous cures of the deaf, the halt, and the blind. One man, unable to un­
clench his fist for 15 years, could now flex it normally after one treatment.
Another person had been cured of blindness, but later said evil things of the
dukun and the blindness returned. The wife of a well-known religious teacher
Curing, Sorcery, and Magic                                               »101«
—himself something of a curer but ineffective with his wife (dukuns are gen­
erally held to be unable to cure relatives)—had been cured of a lingering ill­
ness. Literally hundreds of people flocked to the new dukun’s house for treat­
ment week after week, often from great distances (many of her patients
seemed to come from the old plantation areas south and east of Modjokuto),
the trade slowly dropping off until by the end of December it was reported
that she had lost her power, and some of the people she had cured began to
wonder if this meant that they would fall ill again.
    During the time her power was at its height the dukun liban held mass
curing sessions in her small bamboo house almost every afternoon. There
never seemed to be less than ten people crowded into the tiny front room,
some paralyzed, some weak and pale, some coughing their lungs out, and all,
like the sick everywhere, extremely interested in their own symptoms, which
they discussed with one another and with the dukun insofar as they could
communicate with her at all. One ancient lady complained that she seemed
to be forgetting things more and more and losing her eyesight. A rabbity little
man said he had been sick to his stomach for two months. (He later told me
he had been cured.) Another man had brought his young son, whose eyes had
been operated on by Indonesia’s most famous eye specialist, a Chinese doctor
in Djogjalcarta, about a month before, because, he said, despite the operation
the boy’s eyes were not yet “perfect.” There was a young man of about 25
looking deathly ill, who said he didn’t know what was wrong with him but he
had been too weak and trembling to do much but lie in bed for almost a year.
Others had fevers, bloody stools, shooting pains, headaches, or were infertile;
and one woman said she had come in order to curb her husband’s gambling.
My landlord, who accompanied me on one occasion to see what the dukun
could do for his tuberculosis (he later assured everyone that the dukun had
told him what was wrong with him without asking him, although I saw him
describe his symptoms to her), said that many people visited the dukun liban
to get rich or to be successful in the market, but I could never get anyone to
admit such a purpose to me.
    The dukun, an extremely hyperactive woman of about 30 who suckled an
infant through part of one of her performances, moved nervously and fitfully
among this crowd, paying only minimal attention to individuals; now chanting
bits of the Confession of Faith, punctuated with cries of Allahu Akbar (“God
is most Great” ); now grasping someone’s hand (“How many fingers do I
have?”—“Which is better, left or right?”) and commanding them to rub tea
on their foreheads or stomachs; now throwing out such cryptic fragments as
“Your parents enter your soul and the devils go out,” “I seek only good, not
evil,” and “God is inside me” (pointing to her chest); now firing questions
suddenly at people such as, “Do you choose the way of life or the way of
death?” (The correct answer if you are ill is “the way of death”; if you seek
riches, “the way of life” ) and, “Is it better to be rich or poor?” (“rich”); now
going out back to the kitchen, where an assembly line of female relatives was
brewing pots full of a yellow-green medicine made of eggs and herbs, into
each batch of which they dipped the magic ring, then emerging again to bid
each patient drink a glassful of this concoction in a single gulp; now greeting
»102«                                      T H E R E L I G I O N OF     JAVA
new arrivals with assalam alaikum (an Arabic salutation meaning “peace be
unto you”) and a string of formal Javanese greeting phrases (she spoke, how­
ever, a very low Javanese all of the time) ; now presenting departing patients
with a banana-leaf package of lime, water, and flowers on which they were to
sleep and with which they were to rub themselves, collecting Rp 1.10 from
them and telling them that when they were cured they were obligated to pre­
sent her with a coconut (toward the middle of her period of power her back
yard was filled with what must have been 150 coconuts) and a raw egg (to
replace the one in the medicine).
     So she went on unceasingly, hour after hour, ever-moving, ever-talking in
her curious whining tone, half argumentative and defensive, half explanatory
and exhortatory, stringing one magical sentence after another in such a dis­
ordered profusion that even the Javanese understood her only once in a while,
with a physical stamina which, given the heat, smoke, and sweaty dampness
of the room, was quite astounding. It seemed to me at the time as though she
were calling on afl her reserves of strength and gathering up all the spells,
medicines, and magical techniques of which she had ever heard in a last des­
perate attempt to heal both herself and her patients. She seemed in the throes
of an undisciplined spasm of the kind of trans-human force that in the regular
diikun is regularized, rationalized, and carefully controlled. She seemed, in
fact, definitely unbalanced.
     Toward the middle of the second month of her power, I think because she
felt her power was slipping, although she never said this, she gave a large
slametan to which she invited everyone whom she had cured, although of
course only those nearby were able to come—about 20 or 30 people. The
slametan was a usual one, marked by two large cones of rice representing, the
dukitn said in her udjub speech (she was the only woman I have ever seen
participate directly in a slametan ), her hope that her power would continue.
She said that despite what anyone might have said she had used her power
not for self-gratification or for money but to help people, and that she had
cured many people. She said that if her power left her she would immediately
stop curing and not deceive people. She said that her power came from God,
from her dead parents, and from the danjang of the village, and not from evil
spirits. She told her guests that with this slametan they no longer had any
obligations toward her as a result of her having cured them; they owed her
nothing more. (In addition to the coconut and the money they had been ob­
ligated to pay her for a cure, people of very serious ailments, or ailments they
took to be serious, would be likely to give more elaborate presents as a sign
of gratitude and as an insurance that the cure would last. The dukun man­
aged to build a new brick outhouse and purchase two goats with her fees, and
she had definitely improved her general economic position with her practice.)
     All in all, she seemed much more subdued than usual. Although after the
slametan she rose to her usual phrenetic heights at a few points in curing a
new patient or two, the continually heightened excitement of the earlier visits
seemed gone and she looked tired and discouraged. Two or three weeks later
I heard her power was gone. The last time I saw her was at a village election
a few months before I left Modjokuto, when, although she pushed her way
Curing, Sorcery, and Magic                                                  »103«
up among the prijaji election observers on the front platform, she seemed
quite quiet and withdrawn. People to whom I talked were not much impressed
with her, saying they had never believed in her in the first place, that most of
her supposed cures had relapsed, and that she had been dealing with evil
spirits; they made jokes about her sitting among the p rijajis, when she was
just a little ignorant village girl.
     This woman being the only d u k u n tiban I ever saw, I am hardly in a po­
sition to argue that her case is absolutely typical even though my informants
said that most tib a n s were as odd and peculiar as she and operated in a similar
manner. As for d u k u n p réw angan, who are also said to be unstable and un­
trained and to be mostly women, I have never seen or heard of one around
Modjokuto, although many people assured me that they occur from time to
time in other parts of Java. These are mediums who become possessed by the
spirits of the dead at will, enabling one to present petitions to one’s deceased
relatives directly.



                    Secondary Curing M ethods:
                M agic, Drugs, and Western M edicine
in addition to the d u k u n s, tib a n or common, to whom they have access, Mod­
jokuto Javanese have two other possible sources of help in the face of dis­
ease: home curing and the more or less scientific Western-type medical care
provided by the two hospitals in town.
     The home curing methods are several. There are various kinds of amulets,
such as small daggers worn inside the belt or pebbles strung around one’s
neck. There are packaged medicines of the “good for all that ails you” type,
which traveling salesmen áre forever hawking in the market or the town
square. There are Chinese drugs, such as ground dragon’s tongue, which can
be purchased at the local Chinese drugstores (while one waits they are mixed
up by the druggist ( sin g sè h ), to whom one has described his symptoms).
There are the special time-honored techniques for specific diseases (e.g., polli-
wogs rubbed on the skin for measles). And there are the peculiar, all-purpose
protectors the Javanese call d jim a ts . Commonly, a d jim a t is a written amulet,
usually in Arabic and often made by the more old-fashioned Koranic scholars
for their followers. They not only cure but also may be worn, like amulets
generally, as invulnerability charms or as instruments of sorcery. The term
d jim a t also tends to be used for a “snips and snails” kind of medicine in which
otherwise repulsive substances, particularly waste products from one’s own
body, are ingested, worn, or hung over the doorway. The following is a fair
sample:
  He described another of these djimats to me. When the baby is newly bom,
  the palms of its hands are wet with a kind of white oil. One blots this up with
  a tiny piece of kapok. Soon afterwards the baby will have his first bowel
  movement. “The faeces are always black,” said Wirjo, “like black rice por-
»104«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF       JAVA
  ridge. You keep this and put the kapok in it. In a day or so the stub of the
  umbilical cord falls off, and you add that to the collection. On the thirty-fifth
  day he gets his first haircut, and you put the clippings in the collection too,
  and you save the whole business, and later when the child is about 15 years
  old (if he is ill, or for general protection against illness, or general spiritual
  strength), you go out and buy him a gold ring which is the same weight as
  all this stuff and then he wears the ring and eats the stuff (he can put it in a
  banana to make it go down easier) and the child will be strong. He won’t
  have to go to a specialist, for he has his own djimat.”
     The patent medicines, with their supposed scientific legitimacy, their ap­
peal to the Javanese conviction that the West, whatever its spiritual draw­
backs, has discovered the technological key to all the material problems of life,
and the extreme simplicity of applying them (“take two spoonfuls for tubercu­
losis, three for indigestion” ), stand halfway between the indigenous curing
system and the intrusive system of Western-type medical care institutionalized
in the town’s two hospitals, its three Western-trained doctors, and its group of
locally trained male nurses (mantri). Patent medicines are advertised in the
newspapers and sold in the stores, but the most vivid hawking of them is by
the traveling medicine men who can be found three or four times a week at
the center of a large crowd in the town square and almost every day in the
market.
  I took a walk in the morning. There was a man in the town square under the
  sacred banyan tree selling patent medicine. He was dressed in Western style
  with a white shirt, polka-dot brown and yellow tie, two-tone shoes, and slicked-
  down hair. About 25 to 30 years old, he spoke with great rapidity, all in Indo­
  nesian. He said his medicine was good for everything from heart trouble,
  coughing (he coughed as an example), and stomach ailments to insanity. He
  said he was from Djakarta and in Djakarta all the government leaders used
  this medicine regularly. He said in America too they used it and mentioned
  something about Eisenhower. He had pictures from Life magazine and various
  medical journals, all in glorious Technicolor, spread on the ground. He said
  that when one eats all the food goes into the stomach and gets all messed up.
  He put some food in a glass of liquid and showed how repulsive it looked after
  a while. Americans, he said, and Djakarta people are always cleaning out their
  stomachs, but Indonesians may go two, three, four years without doing so. He
  said the medicine was made in Djakarta, not by stupid people, but by clever
  ones—specialists in chemistry. He said that if one’s blood gets dirty, this
  affects all the parts of the body—the lungs (he coughed, wheezed; showed
  pictures of X-rays of chest) ; the head (he picked up a cutaway picture of the
  skull). It gives one smallpox (he had a picture of that); bowel trouble (he
  gave imitation of someone trying to evacuate and not being able to do so; he
  had a picture of the bowels, too). It disturbs a woman’s menstruation (he gave
  an imitation of a groaning woman, “Oh, my husband! . . . Oh!”); and it
  causes syphilis (he had a picture of a diseased penis all shrunken up). He
  went on about syphilis, saying that it spreads from the penis to the face, and
  one loses his nose and has to get a rubber nose, called an “atom” nose, and
  when one is riding along in a betjak (bicycle rickshaw) and it stops, the nose
  flies off. He also had a picture of a model all cut open in various parts, saying
  that if one didn’t take his medicine, later the doctor would cut him up. He
Curing, Sorcery, and Magic                                                 »105«
  pulled out a small bottle of penicillin and quoted how much it cost compared
  to his one-rupiah medicine. He demonstrated his medicine, which was a
  crystal which fizzed in water, and then sold a dozen or more packages, packed
  up, and went off.
    The three doctors* and two hospitals in the small town of Modjokuto are
certainly not typical for Java. It is rather the accidental result of three circum­
stances. One of the two main East Java hospitals of the Handelsvereniging
Amsterdam (HVA), the huge prewar Dutch plantation concern, happens to
be located in Modjokuto. Mainly because a building was available, the govern­
ment hospital for the whole of the Bragang area comprising four districts and
hundreds of thousands of people happens to be located in Modjokuto rather
than in Bragang, the capital city of the area, as it normally would be. And the
man who was the government doctor is now past retirement age and has been
replaced in the hospital itself by an imported Austrian doctor, but, owing to
the shortage of doctors in Indonesia generally, continues to travel around the
rural areas holding clinics and still maintains some of his private practice
within the town itself. As a result, Modjokuto is something of a medical cen­
ter; but for most abangans this can hardly be said to be of much importance
in their life, except insofar as it provides them with jobs as launderers, jani­
tors, gardeners, and ambulance drivers.
     Only a few of the higher-status people of some wealth go to the HVA
hospital in any case, unless they happen to be employees of the company, for
the fees for private patients are exorbitant. The government’s hospital main­
tains a daily clinic for a flat fee of one-half rupiah, and many people in the
town itself (but relatively few outside of it) go to it each day; but the patient-
doctor ratio is so extremely large and the financial resources of most people
with which to pay for any extended medical care so sharply limited that only
minimal treatment is possible. As a result, the main contact that most people
in the Modjokuto area have with the hospitals and with rational scientific
medicine is through the male nurses called mantri.
     Generally trained for simple laboratory work or pharmacy, the mantris
are forbidden by law to dispense medicines, but as a matter of fact they do so
quite freely. For many people, going to a mantri has replaced or supplemented
going to a diikun, with the result that the mantris are carrying a rather strik­
ing amount of the medical load in Java these days and have become a mod­
ernized version of the traditional curing specialist. Where the dukun has spells
and herbs, the mantri has pills and injections, and there is apparently little
greater scientific understanding of illness in the latter case than in the former.
The mantri has become the agent for the Javanese reinterpretation of Western
medicine and has simply been added to the traditional armory of curing means
available to the average Javanese.
     People everywhere tend to face a crisis such as illness with all the cultural
resources upon which they can call and to interpret what they are doing in
terms of the categories which they learned as children; and so the Javanese
    * Of the three doctors, one was an Indonesian from Sumatra who received his
medical education in France, the second was an Austrian trained in Austria, and the
third was a Javanese who studied medicine in Djakarta.
»106«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
flails at his health difficulties with any stick his culture gives him and sees im­
ported methods as but new elements in an age-old pattern. Dukuns, herbs,
patent medicines, mantris, and doctors—all get called into play in a desperate
attempt to alter an impossible situation, but somehow in the end the vivid
word pictures of the dukun give him an edge on his new-fangled competitors.
  mBok Minah, the woman who lives next door, has a granddaughter, Ti, aged
  about two, who has been sick for the past two weeks—so seriously that at
  one point she was given up for dead. They said she had a very high fever and
  nothing much else in the way of symptoms. At the height of the fever her nose
  bled. Now the fever has subsided, but the little girl has regressed to babyhood
  — only suckles and won’t talk, although it is evident she understands what is
  said to her. She is completely flaccid, won’t respond to people, just looks at
  them. If she isn’t fed, she makes no indication she is hungry. . . . Pak Ardjo
  (our landlord) said a dukun had discovered that the child was possessed by
  spirits, and everyone seems to agree with this diagnosis. While she had the
  fever, many kinds of herb remedies were tried, every neighbor suggesting a
  different one. The child was taken to the mantri, Pak Wisto, who “injected”
  her and gave her some cough medicine (although she had no cough). Several
  Chinese medicines from the drugstores were tried, and the famous Chinese
  patent medicine “Tiger Balm” was rubbed on her. She was at length taken
  to Pale Harso (the semi-retired government doctor), who said he could find
  no illness. This was after the fever had subsided. In between times several
  dukuns were called but all without change. After all this, Pak Ardjo suggested
  a dukun who works on the railroad, and the man came and said a spell over
  some salt and spread it on the child and went out back to examine the river.
  He then said the trouble was that the child had played or urinated in the river
  without the parents noticing it and had upset the games of four little spirit
  children, who live 15 yards up the river in the clump of bamboo trees behind
  the house, and the spirit children were angry and made her sick. The spirit
  children didn’t actually enter the sick child, being too small and weak to do
  so, but just stood by her side pressing up against her. If they did enter her,
  she would die. The reason she was so sick was that there were four of these
  spirit children after her. . . . The notion that it was urinating in the river
  that caused the trouble is a common one and had been advanced as a theory
  by some of the women around her before the dukun himself came.




                                    Sorcery

there is an underside to everything, and so far as Javanese curing and magi­
cal practices are concerned the underside is sorcery. Sorcery, like curing, is
largely in the hands of specialists. If one wants to sorcerize someone, one has
to hire a dukun to do it. Most dukuns will deny that they practice sorcery, but
evidently it is not hard to find one who will do it if the price is right—about
a hundred rupiahs for visiting someone not too far away with a relatively
severe sickness, and up to several hundreds for a death. The only defense
Curing, Sorcery, and Magic                                                     »1 0 7 «
against sorcery is to get a better d u k u n one whose spiritual strength is
greater than that of the dukun one’s enemy has employed against him. A
struggle between dukuns, on a mystical plane of course, then takes place, and
if one’s dukun is indeed stronger than his adversary’s, he will turn die latter’s
magic back upon him, and die enemy will fall ill with the disease he has
wished on one. In either case, the dukuns, like contending lawyers in a civil
suit, remain unharmed.
     There are several different types of sorcery, all of which bear a family
resemblance one to the next, but true witches, able to harm others as a result
of a purely natural ability and without ritual manipulation, seem not to exist
among the Javanese. The general term for sorcery is sikir or sihir, and the
three most virulent varieties are tenung, djènggès, and santèt.
     The symptoms of tenung sorcery are such as vomiting blood, violent sick­
ness in the stomach, or a raging fever, without any traceable cause. The
dukun's performance (an informant told me; with one exception I have never
seen witchcraft performed) consists of a kind of Black-Mass mock slametan.
The dukun sits chanting spells in the center of a half-circle of sadjèns—food
offerings for the evil spirits—pleading for the destruction of his victim. The
sadjèns consist of unbroken pieces of incense and opium mostly, although
various other things of which sétans are especially fond, such as mirrors, may
be added. If one intends to kill the victim rather than merely sicken him, one
must break the incense into small bits and wrap it in white muslin tied in three
places as though it were a corpse, and one can chant a little tahlil (the chant­
ing one does at funerals) if he wishes.
     In djènggès a similar rite is performed, except that objects such as nails,
hair, broken glass, and pieces of iron and needles are added to the sadjèns.
The dukun spells his spell and concentrates upon his evil intent and by so
doing is able to persuade the spirits to induce the objects into the stomach of
the victim, who will hear a sudden explosion all around him and then fall
dreadfully sick. Sometimes a long piece of wire may be employed which is
induced into the victim’s arm or leg, thereby paralyzing him. This seems to be
the most common form of serious sorcery, and observed cases of it were re­
ported to me by about a half-dozen people, including one of the town doctors
 (the Javanese). He said a seriously ill woman came into the hospital only a
year or so before, but he could find nothing wrong with her. The X-ray re­
vealed bits of glass, metal, and hair in her stomach, which were then removed
by a stomach pump and which are still in the hands of the police. The woman
had refused to marry a young man to whom her parents had betrothed her,
and she accused him of the sorcery. The doctor said that his Western training
had made him skeptical of sorcery, and in 30 years or so of practice all over
Indonesia he had not seen a case until this one, but now he had changed his
mind and felt perhaps it was possible after all.
     The term santèt is also sometimes used for inducing foreign objects into*
    * But a well-practiced soul is valuable as a general protective measure. As in the
case of ordinary illness resulting from entry by spirits, a man who often fasts, stays
awake, and meditates is very difficult to harm. Of course, if he does enough of this, he
is probably himself a dukun by simple virtue of the fact.
»108«                                            T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
the stomach of the victim, but, strictly speaking, it refers to the kind of sorcery
in which the dukun must actually approach the victim and rub pepper grains
(or something of the sort) against him while repeating a spell soundlessly in
his mind. The victim then contracts incurable diarrhoea.
    Agreement on terms is far from complete, but other lands of sorcery—all
on a similar pattern—include being able to make a person come to a set place
against his will (gendam) and various sorts of love magic (one man outlined
four types of increasing strength to me) to attract reticent men (or women)
to one’s bed (gima) :*
  He said his father had told him that his (the informant’s) uncle, now dead,
  was once in love with a girl, but she wouldn’t have him. So he went to a
  dukun, who advised him to fast for seven days in a room with all the windows
  and doors shut. He did this, turning somewhat black in the process; but the
  girl began to go in large circles around him in the market when he returned
  to sell again; and finally they were married. Unfortunately, this hard-earned
  marriage lasted only a few months, and then they were divorced.
There is also thieves’ magic, which causes people to sleep deeply while being
relieved of their valuables (sirep).
  After the alarm had been given that my landlord had been robbed, people
  came running over from all directions. Everyone’s immediate reaction was
  that there must have been some magic operating. The thief must have been
  able to sirep, cast a charm so that everyone slept unusually soundly that night.
  Bu Mudojo, the seamstress from across the street, said she couldn’t keep her
  eyes open after nine the night before.
And there is sorcery which compels the victim to do whatever one commands
him to do (nuraga), for which the following is a suitable spell:
               As the head of the carabao hangs down,
               Stiff as a sea-shell,
               May Pak Sastro lower his head as my servant,
               Bow down as though he were the servant of my penis.
     The satanic pacts for the purpose of gaining riches described earlier also
fall into the category of sorcery in Javanese minds, as does the ability of some
people to turn others into animals by means of the proper rites.
   He talked about sorcery and people doing evil to others by magical means. He
   said: “People can also turn into animals. What you do is you and your wife
   work it together with the aid of a dukun. You get wrapped up in white muslin
   like a corpse and lie on the table with an oil-candle lamp by you. Then you
   can become a wild boar (you leave your apparently dead body behind you
   lying on the table), and if you go to someone’s outhouse and smell the waste
   water coming out of it, their money will flow out of it too, and you can get it.”
   If the boar should happen to get into trouble, say be surrounded by village
   people who are out to capture him, then the lamp will begin to flicker, and if
   the wife stays awake and is faithful, she will blow the candle out, which will
   cause the boar to disappear right in front of the eyes of the village people and
   return to the “corpse.”
     * Gima, like all these terms, is often used to apply to sorcery generally, of whatever
type.
Curing, Sorcery, and Magic                                                  »109«
     Accusations of witchcraft are common enough, but they are never made
openly and directly against anyone; they are only whispered to others as
malicious gossip or discussed rather abstractly as hypotheses to account for
peculiar behaviors. Thus a woman whose third marriage to the same man had
just ended the same way the first two had—with his losing all their money
at cards—when asked why on earth she had married him again anyway said
matter-of-factly that she supposed she had been sorcerized. When the first
village-chief election in my village was declared invalid by the government,
many people ascribe it to the successful employment of a dukun by the
losing candidate. One man told me that two years after his wife had died
suddenly he discovered that an old enemy of his had sorcerized her. When
I asked if he were now going to sorcerize the culprit in return or do any­
thing else to him, he said, no, that was all in the past now. His main interest
in the sorcery notion seemed to be mainly as an explanation of something
for which he could not otherwise account.
     In many instances the immediate suffering from sorcery is psychologically
real and the accusations fervent. A young man whose proposal of marriage
had been turned down blamed his very severe depression over the matter
on the fact that the girl had not been content just to turn him down but had
got a dukun after him as well; and he spent a few weeks eating in the pitch
dark, praying for three hours every night (he was a santri) and, I suspect,
getting a dukun friend of his to send out a few counterimprecations against the
girl. Even in cases of this sort where the hurt is real and immediate, accusa­
tions are never expressed directly to the assumed culprit, nor is a public charge
made; gossip to all one’s neighbors is the typical pattern.
  Bu Min drew me over to her house. (She was a neighbor of ours, as were the
  people she accused.) She showed me two glasses of water, one for each of her
  deceased parents, that she had prepared. Also with them were a glass of coffee
  and a box of the makings for betel-nut chew. She said there should also be a
  cigarette for the dead father. Then, having sat me down, she began whispering
  to me at a great rate, and finally I figured out what she was saying to me. She
  had been sick for 27 months now, she said—head aching, itch, fever— all due
  to the sorcerizing of the coffee shop owner, Nur, and his wife. They were do­
  ing this because they were evil and because they wanted her to get out of the
  house (it belonged to them) and because she had more money than they and
  could have nicer clothes. She said they went to a dukun in (a village about
  20 miles away) and had this done. She described the way of doing it—four
  persons sitting in a square with one in the middle who chanted, and with a
  fire. She said that if one paid a hundred rupiahs the dukun would guarantee
  that the victim would die within 24 hours with a great swollen stomach. She
  herself had gone to a kijaji (Koran teacher) who had given her three “letters,”
  at a cost of 25 rupiahs, which were written in Arabic and which said, he told
  her, that she was being sorcerized by these people and which had also magic
  words which would make a counter-effect. These “letters” were wrapped in a
  little cloth bundle with thread tied around it—she said she got them that way
  — and she kept it tied to the end of her waist band. She had also been fasting
  —had eaten no rice, only cassava—and stayed up as much of the night
  as she could—until 4 a.m . or so. . . . She also showed me, in each comer of
»110«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  the house, a sort of cactussy plant with big thorns which was to keep the
  spirits away that were being sent her by the evil coffee shop owner and his
  wife.
    Sorcery, then, as the Javanese conceive of it, tends to be practiced on
neighbors, friends, relatives, and other acquaintances fairly close at hand.
Of course, the dukun employed may be a distant one and so be attacking
someone far away from where he is performing his rite, but the actual
instigator of the deed is always someone near at hand. Unlike some other
peoples, Javanese do not accuse outsiders of sorcery: “The enemies of the
people in Tebing live in Tebing,” I was told when I asked a man who had
told me that there was much sorcery in this nearby town if the people
there ever sorcerized the people in Modjokuto.
     Secondly, sorcery is always practiced for a specific reason, never for sheer
malevolence. It seems to follow no definite kin or class lines, but instead there
seems to be a tendency for a man to accuse another of sorcerizing him if
he, the victim, conceives of himself as having either frustrated the wishes of
the attacker or angered him in some way.
     Finally, there is no way in which sorcery can be established as a public
crime or even a tort. In all the cases of sorcery of which I heard, I never
discovered a case in which direct confrontation by the victim of the accused
took place or where any general open accusation was made or any claim for
punishment or damages instituted even informally—there being no formal
procedures for doing so in any case. Sorcery is a mystical act to be mystically
combatted. Although one may gossip about it and make secret accusations
to one’s heart’s content (which will in most cases get back to the accused in
one fashion or another), any open attempt to organize public opinion against
an accused sorcerer would be almost certain to fail. Similarly, one finds no
private individuals in Modjokuto with a wide reputation for instigating
sorcery. Although some dukuns are suspected as all-too-willing agents, even
these are in no way socially ostracized.
     In certain circumstances sorcery may be a near-legitimate, though still
morally questionable, act, as in the case of my landlord, who had been robbed
twice in a single month, a really terrible blow to him both financially and
psychologically:
  Pak Ardjo has taken steps against the thief who has come in twice in the last
  month. When the thief’s handiwork was discovered, Pak Ardjo was very strict
  that no one disturb the traces, and later he put a plank across the threshold of
  the door which had been dug by the thief so that no one’s footprints would
  disturb the dirt. He also found a footprint of the man in the back yard, which
  he covered with a pot so that it wouldn’t be disturbed. Then the next day after
  the theft (i.e., the second one) he went away overnight, and it turned out later
  that he had gone to Malang, a large city about 60 miles to the east, to visit a
  famous dukun there. He took with him to this dukun a bit of the dirt from
  the place where the thief had been digging and a bit of the dirt from the foot­
  print of the thief, plus the hat that the thief had left behind him at his work.
  When he came back from the dukun, he had his wife set up a charcoal stove
  with burning coals in it and with an earthenware pot over it. Then he rigged
Curing, Sorcery, and Magic                                                    »111
 up a sort of support on which to hang within the pot where it was hot from
 the fire the hat of the thief, which was rolled up in the shape of a sausage and
 covered with white cloth to represent the muslin of death. This sausage
 looked rather like the wrapped-up body of a man, and Pak Ardjo said that
 was what it was. This was all covered with a lid and hidden behind the door
 and the fire has been kept going day and night to this day (about a month
 after the theft). Pak Ardjo says, with no little satisfaction, that as a result
 of this the thief is in a high fever; he can’t sleep, he tosses to and fro, and he
 can’t go out of his house and reap the benefits of his theft. The thief can get
 well only if he comes to Pak Ardjo and begs his pardon, and then Pak Ardjo
 will take the equipment back to the dukun and have a spell said over it again
 to remove the sorcery. (This idea that one can remove a sorcery spell by beg­
 ging pardon of the instigator is general, but I never heard of anyone who ever
 did it.) Pale Ardjo said that he had to pay the dukun 25 rupiahs, which is the
 flat rate, plus 50 rupiahs for a slametan which the dukun held—the same slame-
 tan which is held for a dead person. On top of this were the expenses of the
 trip. He said this kind of magic is evil except when one is in the right, as he is;
 but he asked us not to tell anyone about it, for they might misunderstand his
 motives.
Chapter 9                                   Fermai:
                              A Modern Abangan Cult




I n addition to the distinction between abangan, santri, and prijaji which
I have been stressing, there is a second distinction to be made without which
much religious belief and behavior in Modjokuto is extremely difficult to
interpret. This is the distinction between kuna (or kolot) and modéren. Kuna
means old-fashioned, traditional, the ancient way. Modéren means exactly
what it sounds like—modern; and the contrast between the very Javanese
word and the second term, which strictly speaking is not Javanese at all but
Dutch borrowed by way of Indonesian, gives something of the contrast be­
tween religious, ideological, and moral beliefs to which the terms refer. For
kuna people the ways of their fathers are good enough, and the temptations
of the present a snare and a delusion; for modéren people, mostly but not
entirely clustered in the town, there is a need to reform the beliefs of the
past to make them consonant with what they take to be the demands of the
present. That such reform should paradoxically sometimes take the form
of a return to a supposed earlier and purer form of belief considered to be
more adequate than the degenerations which followed it is not so surprising
in the light of anthropological studies of revivalist religious movements in
different parts of the world, or, in fact, in the light of our own religious history;
our prophets, too, condemn the present in terms of the past.
    The kuna-modèren contrast appears most sharply among the santris,
where it has led to a serious internal rift within the group, but it cuts
across the entire society and all the categories, giving rise among the
abangans to one of its most interesting manifestations—a politico-religious
sect in which “original” Javanese religious beliefs are fused with a nationalistic
Marxism which enables its adherents both to support Communist political
policy in Indonesia and to purify abangan rituals of even the remnant of
Permai: A Modern Abangan Cult                                                   »113«
Islam still contained in them. This sect, Permai,**represents an attempt to
lend contemporary relevance to traditional abangan beliefs, to give Javanese
spirit ideas, slametan practices, and curing techniques a meaning within a
social context far different from that in which they arose, and, so far as its
leaders are concerned, to reap some political advantages from this trans­
formation.
    On the national scene, Permai is a political party with members in
the parliament, a central organization, and a platform. The general nature
of the latter may be ascertained from the following excerpt from the state­
ment of the Permai position in an official almanac of political parties pub­
lished by the government Ministry of Information in 1951 : * *
  Thus the “common people”! are those who, although oppressed, exploited,
  and despised, still have belief in their own power, which they organize in
  order to oppose and evict, indeed to shatter, imperialism and capitalism, and
  to destroy all arbitrary oppression and exploitation. The common people . . .
  is that group in society composed of those who have indeed become poor and
  despised, but who still respect themselves as human beings who must live in
  the world and are conscious of their rights. With this consciousness there
  arises a flaming will to claim those rights.

    In Modjokuto this aspect of things is largely confined to the leaders,
one of whom, a young, highly urbanized man, was said by one of the members
of the party to be “in contact with the Central Governing Board” and may
have been a professional organizer. (He left Modjokuto in the middle of my
stay.) Among the, for the most part, politically naive abangans Permai
represents three things: a powerful curing cult; a set of esoteric beliefs pat­
terned on typical abangan ones but with special twists and hidden meanings
accessible only to the initiates; and a vigorously anti-Islamic social organi­
zation composed mainly of town laborers, employed or unemployed, im­
poverished rural radicals, and estate workers past and present.
    Permai, its adherents hold, is based on “pure native science,” on “original”
Javanese beliefs as they were before they were corrupted with Hindu and,
most particularly, Islamic additions. “Each people has its own science,” one
of the leaders explained. “The Westerners have theirs, the Moslems have
theirs, and we Javanese have ours. It fits in with modem life just as well as
any other. The trouble is that Indonesians have always tried to be Hindus,
or Arabs, or Dutchmen, rather than Indonesians. Now that we are free, we
    * Permai is short for Persatuan Rakjat Marhaen Indonesia, which roughly trans­
lated means “Organization of the Indonesian Common People.” Actually, the short
name forms the kind of abbreviating pun of which modem politicized Indonesians
seem especially fond; for the contracted form in itself has a meaning. Permai is an
Indonesian word for “beautiful.”
    ** Kepartaian di Indonesia (Djakarta, 1951). The expositions of party programs
in this almanac were prepared not by the Ministry of Information but by the respective
political parties, and thus represent authoritative statements of their public platforms
as of the date of publication.
    t Permai uses a special term for “common people,” marhaen; and the Permai doc­
trine is known as “Marhaenism.”
» 114«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
have to seek the philosophy of our ancestors and throw away all those foreign
sciences.” Permai anti-Hinduism is merely pro forma, and many of the
ideas and practices these people take for “original” are Indian in origin,
but the opposition to Islam is extremely virulent and well worked out.
  He (a Permai member) went into a diatribe against the Moslems. He said
  there were two kinds of Islam in Indonesia, Arabic Islam, which was foreign,
  and Islam lugu (literally: “starting capital”). This latter was the original re­
  ligion here, and the other was a foreign importation. Then he went through a
  point-for-point comparison of the two. He said the Arab Moslems have the
  five prayer times, but the Javanese Moslems pray just any time; they may
  pray forty times a day or may not pray at all, depending on the situation. In
  addition, they can’t be seen when they pray. It is an interior thing and nothing
  is said aloud, it is all in the head, whereas the santris pray aloud and move
  their bodies through the various prayer postures. Secondly, the alms. For
  the santris it is so much once a year, a fixed amount, rice given to the poor.
  Permai people, he said, regard the banana-leaf baskets of food one gives out
  at a slametan as alms, and they do this all year round; they don’t just wait for
  Rijaja (the holiday that ends the Fast). For the abangans, if one is eating and
  a man outside is hungry, one should give him half one’s food. The Pilgrimage,
  he said, is not necessary, in the sense of going to Mecca. For him it is just
  traveling around, mixing with people and gaining experience, and one can
  travel anywhere. He said the pilgrims were actually the victims of a colonialist
  plot. Mecca was owned by the British, and the Dutch, being under the British,
  then deceived the Javanese into going there and throwing all their money
  away. . . . For the “original” Javanese it is the way a man behaves that is
  important, and the mere fact that a man has been to Mecca doesn’t make
  him anything special; he may be doing bad just the same. “In fact,” he said,
  “it takes a lot of money to be a pilgrim, doesn’t it? Thus they are mostly rich,
  which shows they are more dishonest than other people.” He said, “Some
  pilgrims enter Permai, but they have to take off their turbans and become
  Javanese again. As for the Confession of Faith, the Permai people have their
  secret word.”
    To join the organization one must take a secret oath, sealing it by
drinking a cup of tea in the presence of other members; and it is said that
if a member reveals the secrets of the organization he will sicken and die
or go insane. One also learns a secret word, whispered to the novice six
months after his initiation in the dead of night, which when pronounced
soundlessly over tea enables one to cure illness. Here, evidently, the basis of
curing ability has been shifted from individual spiritual discipline to
organizational membership as symbolized by the single secret word; for the
curing ability is said to be universal among members, and I know of a few
cases in which Permai members not otherwise dukuns have attempted to
cure fairly serious diseases by the secret-word method.
    In addition there are books, mostly written by the founder of the
movement,* with glosses giving esoteric significance to key words in the
text—“unlike the Koran, where everything means what it says.” The content
    *The founder is, as a matter of fact, not a Javanese but a Sundanese from West
Java. He is supposed to have come upon the science in the traditional manner—by
meditating in the woods.
Permai: A Modern Abangan Cult                                                 »115«
of the doctrine thus revealed in these otherwise straightforward nationalist
pamphlets being secret, I had only partial access to it. In general, it seems to
consist of a fusion between modern nationalist ideology, particularly as set
forth in the Pantjcisila, President Sukarno’s famous “Five Points” (Monothe­
ism, Nationalism, Humanism, Social Justice, and Democracy), which are the
official philosophical base for tie new Republic of Indonesia, and such tradi­
tional Javanese religious patterns as calendrical divination, food symbolism,
and methods of spiritual discipline, plus a new note of explicit moralism
designed to combat Moslem moralism on the one hand and to connect up
traditional peasant values such as rukun (“cooperation” in house building,
irrigation, etc.) with Marxist ethics on the other.
     All these themes appeared quite clearly in the public meetings Permai
held in several villages in the Modjokuto area on or about the first of Sura,
the beginning of the Javanese New Year, in 1953, a day in itself symbolic of
“Javanese” as against “Moslem” belief. In my village, something of a Permai
stronghold, this annual meeting was held at the home of a hospital worker.
His small bamboo house was decorated for the occasion as though he were
marrying oif a daughter or circumcising a son. Yellow coconut branches were
bent over the gateway, the house was draped with red and white bunting, and
a temporary matted-leaf roof extended out over the yard to protect the
male guests from the rain. The women sat, as usual, inside the house. On
the front porch there was a speaker’s stand piled high with various kinds
of farm products: corn, cassava, peppers, soybeans, onions. On the front
of it hung a large Indonesian flag.
      The meeting opened with a brief slametan with rice cones, incense, and all
  —although there was no Arabic chanting. Pak Min (the hospital worker)
  went through the usual forms of politesse. He explained that this was a Permai
  meeting, that Permai was a religious science, and that the intent of this
  science was to enable everyone to rukun—to be able to live together peace­
  fully and to help one another advance in these new times. Wito, the aggressive
  young leader of the group from Modjokuto, attired in a snappy grey busi­
  ness suit, two-tone shoes, and a loud tie, leapt to his feet at this point and led
  us in Indonesia Raya (the Indonesian national anthem) and in several
  vigorous shouts of “Freedom” (the slogan of the Indonesian revolution). Min
  then presented a four-page “special message” from party headquarters in
  Djakarta, which turned out to be not on political matters but on religious
  ones. As it was in Indonesian, which I imagine very few people in the audience
  could follow, the rest of the meeting was largely spent in explicating this text
  in Javanese. The first speaker to attempt this was a young man dressed in very
  traditional style—complete with turban, black-and-brown striped jacket, and
  hand-painted sarong. He looked like a picture in the ethnography books. Very
  nervous and shy, he spoke in a mechanical mumble and kept getting coached
  from the sidelines. He explained the meaning of the Javanese months as they
  were set forth in the text. For example, “Sura (the name of the first month)
  means courage; so we must have courage to do the right.” He went through
  a similar routine with the letters of the Javanese alphabet, each letter starting
  a sentence of general moral instruction—like “A is for Always wash your face
  before dinner” in the old primers. In both cases the original sentence in the text
»116«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  was first quoted in Old Javanese and then translated into Indonesian, and the
  boy said the sentences were actual sentences written a long time ago by the
  audience’s ancestors and so represented the wisdom of the ancients. He said
  that this wisdom had been neglected, nay, suppressed in the colonial period, but
  was now being taught again by Permai. He said this wisdom was still useful
  today as a “compass,” and we shouldn’t just ignore it. An older man followed
  him, explicating a complicated numerical divination system which was also in
  the original text, but which was so complex that I understood little of it in
  either language. Next came a lively little man hopping up out of the audience
  and placing himself back of the speaker’s stand with all the farm products on
  it. He gave a long, very clever (and evidently very funny, because he had the
  audience in the aisles, though most of the jokes went by me), and seemingly
  impromptu speech. He snatched up each of the fruits and vegetables in turn
  and gave a short political-moral sermon on it. “See,” he said, “how all these
  bananas are joined together at the base,” holding a bunch aloft. “This is how
  we must all hang together if we are not to be kicked around. All these crops
  grow easily in fertile Java, but we, the children of the land in this country,
  are all still unhappy and hungry because the imperialists steal most of them
  from us.” Lastly, we got Wito. He spoke with a very demagogic delivery. He
  waved his hands and mopped his brow, paced up and down, shouted and
  whispered, repeated continually for emphasis, and demanded responses from
  the audience (“Is there anyone here who is not a man?”—“No!”—“Is there
  anyone here who is a carabao?”— “No, there isn’t anyone!”— “Who here is
  an ox?”— “No one, there aren’t any oxen!”— “Then why, my brothers, should
  we stand being treated like carabao and oxen?” Nobody seemed to know.)
  “Indonesians are free now,” he cried. “There are no more colonists here. But
  we are still fighting among ourselves (a reference to the Moslem rebellion
  then going on in West Java). Why is this? Because we were set one against
  the other by the Dutch for three hundred years.” He attacked the Dutch for
  not turning over West New Guinea to Indonesia as they promised, attacked
  Islam for “insulting” womanhood by permitting polygyny, and attacked the
  Ministry of Religion for not allowing civil marriage for non-santris (i.e., a
  ceremony in which it would not be required to repeat the Moslem Confession
  of Faith). He went over each point in the Pcintjasila, giving it a vaguely
  Marxist political interpretation ( “We must demand social justice for the poor
  as well as the rich!”), and ended his speech after a half hour of intense ex­
  ertion with a cry of “Freedom!,” collapsing exhausted into his chair to receive
  the only applause of the evening. The meeting closed with a minute’s silent
  meditation during which Wito asked us to concentrate our thoughts to the
  end that the reactionaries who were trying to take over Indonesia and oppress
  the common people might not succeed.*
    The doctrine concerning “non-Islamic” marriages and funerals is not
merely theoretical but has actually led to some of the sharpest open conflicts
between abangans and santris in die Modjokuto area. The marriage argument
is perhaps the strongest from an abstract point of view, especially since
the government allows Christians to have their own ceremonies. It is also
the most difficult to carry out because, in die absence of a government
decision either recognizing Permai as an official religion—as Islam and
    * This is not a direct transcription of my fieldnote on the meeting but a slightly
reorganized synopsis of it.
Permai: A Modern Abangan Cult                                                  »117«
Christianity—or legitimizing completely secular marriages, any Permai mem­
bers who marry without repeating the Confession of Faith before the subdis­
trict religious officer ( the naib) are living in sin, and this stigma is difficult for
the rank-and-file members to bear even in the name of anti-Islam or the
Rights of the Common Man. A very violent Moslem speaker from Djakarta
speaking in a town near Modjokuto got his greatest ovation when he accused
Permai and the Indonesian Communist Party (which also supports secular
marriage) of intending to raise a generation of bastards in Indonesia.
     So, for the moment, Permai is reduced on the marriage question to
lobbying in Djakarta. On the local level little can be done, although a few
sporadic attempts have been made.
  I asked the religious officer—modin—of my village about marriage. Do the
  Permai people go to the naib for that? He said that they tried not to in a nearby
  village not so long ago. As all the people involved were Permai members, they
  went to the village chief with a written contract and a tax stamp and wanted
  him to sign it and bring it in to the subdistrict officer—that being the whole of
  the ceremony. The subdistrict officer refused to allow this, and so all these
  people along with the Modjokuto heads of Permai went in and made a big
  fuss with the subdistrict officer, but didn’t get anywhere. He said that the
  Ministry of Religion recognized only Christian and Islamic marriage cere­
  monies, and he just carried out government regulations. They went to the
  district officer and got the same answer. The district officer said he couldn’t set
  up his own country; he had to follow the decrees of the central government.
     But the funeral situation is rather different, for the employment of the
modin at a funeral is not a law but a custom, and, at least theoretically,
one is free to use him or not. After Permai leaders complained vigorously
about Islamic funerals for non-Islamic corpses to the subdistrict officer, the
latter warned all the modins in his bailiwick that they would be well advised
in cases of Permai death just to take down the name, age, and illness of
the deceased and go home. Otherwise, they might get into trouble, and
he, the subdistrict officer, would not be responsible for them if they did.
The hitch in this logically impeccable abstention doctrine is that since the
modin is also the technical and the religious specialist in preparing people
for burial, the Javanese “undertaker,” people are rather lost without his help.
     Also, since it is only rarely that someone dies who has been consistent
enough to have only Permai people for relatives, under the stress of grief,
when people are not much interested in social reform in any case, there is
always strong pressure for a traditional funeral. The woman I mentioned
earlier as having hanged herself because of debts incurred in giving an over-
elaborate circumcision ceremony was married to a Permai man. The second
in command of Permai in Modjokuto, a shoe repairman, hurried out to the
village where she lived and told the modin on duty that the husband was
Permai and that he should go home and mind his own business; which
the modin, mindful of the subdistrict officer’s advice, did with all haste.
But the husband, broken up enough over his wife’s death by her own hand
 and not wishing to incur any more problems, shortly thereafter came weeping
to the modin’s home and asked him for God’s sake to go through the Islamic
»118«                                      T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
routine of bathing, wrapping, and praying over the body; and the modin,
I imagine with some satisfaction, obliged.
     An even more dramatic case of the same conflict occurred in my neighbor­
hood. A young boy of about ten or eleven who was living with his aunt and
uncle, the latter a street peddler of iced drinks and a strong Permai member,
died very suddenly. The modin, following the subdistrict officer’s policy,
refused to officiate. As a result, the funeral stalled completely, and the boy’s
body lay all morning in the house without anything being done to prepare
it for the grave. After a while a santri acquaintance of the uncle—less rigid
than most—tried to help out and bathe the body; but he was advised by the
modin that he was talcing on a great responsibility and so hesitated in fear of
committing a mortal sin. All the guests just sat around, expressionless as ever,
in an atmosphere of growing tension, wondering what would happen next.
(Because of the pull of the tradition that all neighborhood people should
turn up at a funeral, there were both abcmgans and santris present, but
they sat separately.)
     After about an hour, the father and mother of the child arrived from
their home in Surabaja, and, probably in part stimulated by the general
disorganization, the mother and aunt soon dissolved into hysterics, the only
case of emotional outburst at a funeral I saw in Modjokuto. The santri friend
of the uncle now approached the father—the modin, as a government official,
did not feel that he himself should do it—and asked him if he wanted an
Islamic funeral. The father, not being Permai, said yes. The modin thereupon
leapt gleefully back into his role and the funeral was completed in the usual
pattern. The third-day slametan, however, turned out to be a political meeting
of Permai at the uncle’s home rather than the usual feast and chanting, and
no santris were present.
     Perhaps the most interesting thing about this whole affair was the fact
that at one point the modin asked the leaders of Permai to officiate at the
funeral, but, lacking confidence, they refused. And they lost yet another test
case when the father eventually accepted the Moslem ritual. (When asked if
he wanted it, he said, “Of course, I don’t hold much with religion, but I’m
not a Christian!” ) Had they accepted, we would have seen a genuine case
of ritual change in action. We would have caught the historical process at the
elusive point at which things stop being what they were and become something
else, where a pattern dissolves and a new one replaces it. In any case, in the
Permai movement one sees the abangan religious system as it attempts to
widen out to include a new social experience, as it readjusts itself in a con­
text where things once held immutable have altered and where more than
simple reciprocity and emotional restraint are demanded. It is a religious
system designed for a peasant come to town.
Part T wo



            U
