                                           1
»2«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
volved are not absentee nor are their holdings any larger, with one or two
not very dramatic exceptions, than those of the peasants themselves.
     On the fourth side of Modjokuto, the southwest, lies either forest or
dry, broken, largely unirrigable land on which, in the early part of this
century, an extensive plantation system in coffee, rubber, and sugar was
built up. Dutch-owned, Dutch-managed, and Javanese-worked, this network
of plantations and sugar mills had a heavy impact on the economy of
Modjokuto before the war. As the town was founded only toward the latter
half of the nineteenth century, the interaction between die small-scale, in­
tensive wet-rice farming system practiced by the independent Javanese peasant
and the large-scale, extensive cash-crop estate agriculture of the Dutch
shaped the economic history of the region almost since the beginning.
     The Dutch are gone from Modjokuto now, their estate and factory
system shaken by the depression and shattered by the war and revolution.
What remains is a peasantry very used both to money and to foreign goods,
tremendous underemployment both rural and urban, and an overcomplex
economic system in which the Chinese minority controls the main streams
of trade. The Chinese form the heart of the economic circulatory system
of Modjokuto, pressing goods, many of them imported, down through its
arteries, pulling back goods, the greater part of them agricultural, through
its veins, and passing them on to the large urban centers for further dis­
tribution. Javanese commercial activity becomes relevant only between the
ends of the two channels—where they braid out into a complex network of
tiny, doubled-over, and marvelously interwound economic capillaries reach­
ing into the small crevices of native life.
     There are two business districts, both of them lined with small, open-front,
wooden stores, almost all Chinese-run. Inside the stores one finds hardware,
home furnishings, various types of food, jewelry, false teeth, automobile and
bicycle parts, building materials, textiles, and drugs—from sulfa to such
promising herbs as crocodile tongue and cat’s beard. Even more important in
terms of economic power, the Chinese control the trade in dry-season crops
grown in Javanese fields, and their mills process the rice from those fields
 (although for the past few years a great part of the actual buying has been
done under government contract and, nominally, under government control).
They own almost all the trucking, almost all the stringrand-bailing-wire jitneys
which carry a great proportion (with the busses and the train) of inter-local
travel, and almost all the bicycle rickshaws which, Javanese-pedaled, provide
the bulk of passenger transport within the town. The larger small-scale fac­
tories in town and outside it—rice, lumber, soda pop, bread, charcoal—are,
with a few notable exceptions, in Chinese hands. Chinese own the movie and
the theater where Javanese plays are given, and they manage the carnival
when it comes to town. They, are prevented from totally dominating the
economy by only one restriction: they are forbidden, by a Dutch law con­
tinued into the Republican period, to hold farm land.
     The Javanese stores, almost all of them marginal, number about a dozen,
most of them in the secondary business section. The core of native-run com­
mercial life is the market, where each day hundreds of professional or semi­
Introduction                                                                »3«
professional Javanese salesmen and speculators, both men and women, bar­
gain vigorously in a desperate attempt to earn a living or part of a living
from small-scale, person-to-person trade. Textiles, daily food supplies, and
diy-season crops probably form the bulk of the business; but buttons, dried
fish, mats, baskets, perfumes, religious books, cooked food and hot coffee,
chairs and tables, nails, ready-made clothing, meat, patent medicines, leather
goods, parasols, pots and pans—in fact, almost everything portable—are
each day passed from hand to hand to someone’s (usually small) profit.
      In the market you can have your hair cut, your bicycle fixed, and your
pants mended while you wait. For an Indonesian quarter you can rent a spot
under a tree or a wooden shed and sell cigarettes for a cent more than you
just paid for them in a Chinese store across the street. You can buy a basket
of corn in the morning and sell it at noon, never leaving the market—getting
your profit out of the slight rise in price which takes place every day as the
market day wears on. (If you are a friend or a paying acquaintance of the
man who runs the scales, you may make something out of the greater weight
the corn has when you sell it than when you bought it.) Or, for two rupiahs
a day (and a few hundred rupiahs capital), you can become one of the aris­
tocrats of the market with a three-meters wide stall of your own, selling im­
ported and domestic textiles for as much more than they are worth as you
can wheedle an unwary peasant into paying. For the Modjokuto Javanese,
whether buyer or seller, the market is the very model of commercial life, the
 source of nearly all his ideas of the possible and the proper in economic be­
 havior.
      Aside from petty commerce, three other nonagricultural activities play an
important part in the Javanese sector of the economy: simple manual labor,
independent craft and repair work, and white-collar office work. The manual
 laborers, if they find work at all, may be employed by the Chinese in their
 rice mills, lumber yards, or other enterprises; by the government fixing roads,
 building irrigation dams, or sweeping streets; or by one of the scattered “here
 today, gone tomorrow” Javanese cottage industries. A great many are em­
 ployed on the narrow-gauge railroad which runs four short passenger trains
 a day from the regional capital through Modjokuto to connect with the main
 Surabaja line fifteen miles northward. Many, too, are servants of the richer
 townsmen, although the departure of the Dutch has markedly reduced job
 opportunities in this field. The independent artisans—carpenters, chauffeurs,
 bricklayers, blacksmiths, watchmakers, barbers, tailors—are spread unevenly
 throughout the town, for they work mostly in their own homes, accepting jobs
 as they come fitfully to them, and drifting uneasily into unskilled occupations
 if forced to by economic pressure.
       The white-collar clerks, teachers, and government officials form the in­
 tellectual and social elite of Modjokuto, inheritors of a political tradition in
 which the ability to read and write was confined to a hereditary court class
 bom to rule and venerated for doing so. Many of the old caste marks of the
  literati are nearly gone now—the variously colored parasols symbolizing
  rank, the deep bow of the inferior to touch the knee of the standing superior,
  the proclamation of pedigree through the use of court title, the tongue-tied
                                              T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
shame of the peasant in the presence of the government official—but the
general attitude of respect and subservience on the part of the uneducated
toward the educated remains.
     The number of the educated has been increasing rather rapidly of late
with the post-revolutionary expansion of the school system. In Modjokuto
there are a half dozen six-grade government elementary schools, a govern­
ment technical school at the junior high level, three private junior high
schools, a government school for elementary teachers, and scattered other
private schools including Chinese and Catholic elementary schools. Further,
each of the surrounding villages has a school of its own, and there is still a
number of old-style religious schools in the area which have recently been
semi-modernized. The result of this sudden florescence of educational activ­
ity is that teachers, on the one hand, and advanced students, on the other,
form two of the most clearly defined and dynamic social groups within the
society, perhaps the two groups who are least closely bound to the Javanese
past and whose relationships with the rest of the society are the most am­
biguous.
     There are two major government offices in Modjokuto, for it is the capital
both of a district ( kewedanan ) !,: and a subdistrict (ketjam atan) . The sub­
district, the lowest level to which the wholly appointive national bureaucracy
reaches, administers eighteen villages all lying within ten miles of town. The
district administers five contiguous subdistricts, including that of Modjokuto
itself, and is in turn subordinate to the regional ( kebupaten ) government,
the capital of which is the nearby city of Bragang. In addition, the regional
headquarters of the central government police force is in Modjokuto rather
than in Bragang, as are also the government pawnshop and the government
hospital for the area. Offices concerned with the repair of roadways, the
building and maintenance of irrigation systems, the improvement of agri­
culture, and the administration of the market further swell the total of white-
collar workers employed or underemployed by the government, as do the
post office and the office of the local representative of the Ministry of Religion.
     These five major occupational types—farmer, petty trader, independent
artisan, manual laborer, and white-collar clerk, teacher, or administrator—rep­
resent the Javanese population of Modjokuto, grouped according to their
economic activity. The crystallized typology of work patterns reflects the
underlying organization of the economic system of the town of which it is an
outcome. Similarly, the same population grouped according to their world
outlook—according to their religious beliefs, ethical preferences, and politi­
cal ideologies—yields three main cultural types which reflect the moral
organization of Javanese culture as it is manifested in Modjokuto, the general
ideas of order in terms of which the Javanese farmer, laborer, artisan, trader,*
    * The spelling of Indonesian words conforms to the current official orthography.
Javanese words are spelled in accordance with the system currently employed by Balai
Pustaka (a publishing agency of the Ministry of Education) in its publications in that
language. This is identical with the orthography of Th. Pigeaud’s Javaans-Nederlands
Handwoordenboek (Groningen, n.d.), except that oe is replaced by u. Arabic words are
also spelled in accordance with the Javanese system.
Introduction                                                                   »5«
or clerk shapes his behavior in all areas of life. These are the abangan, santri,
and prijaji.
     There are, it seems to me, three main social-structural nuclei in Java to­
day: the village, the market, and the government bureaucracy—each of them
taken in a somewhat more extended sense than is common.
     The Javanese village is as old as the Javanese, for it is likely that the first
Malayo-Polynesian peoples to come to the island already possessed knowl­
edge of agriculture. The evolution of the Javanese village to its present form
has at each stage been regulated and expressed by a more or less unified re­
ligious system, itself, of course, evolving too. In the days before the Hindus,
who began to come to the island around 400 a.d. or before, it seems likely
that the sort of “animism” common still to many of the pagan tribes of
Malaysia comprised the whole of the religious tradition; but this tradition has
proved, over the course of the centuries, remarkably able to absorb into one
syncretized whole elements from both Hinduism and Islam, which followed it
in the fifteenth century. Thus today the village religious system commonly
consists of a balanced integration of animistic, Hinduistic, and Islamic ele­
ments, a basic Javanese syncretism which is the island’s true folk tradition,
the basic substratum of its civilization; but the situation is more complex
than this, for not only, as we shall see, do many peasants not follow this
syncretism, but many townsmen—mostly lower-class displaced peasants or
sons of displaced peasants—do. The abangan religious tradition, made up
primarily of the ritual feast called the slametan, of an extensive and intricate
complex of spirit beliefs, and of a whole set of theories and practices of curing,
sorcery, and magic, is the first subvariant within the general Javanese religious
system which I shall present below, and it is associated in a broad and general
way with the Javanese village.
     The second major social substructure, the market, must be taken in a
broad sense to include the whole network of domestic trade relationships on
the island. For the most part, the inter-local aspects of this trade are in
Chinese hands, the more local aspects in Javanese hands, although there is
a good deal of overlap. The association of the Javanese trading element with
a more puristic version of Islam than is common in Java stretches back to
the introduction of the Mid-Eastern religion into the island, for it came as
part of a great trade expansion, stimulated ultimately by the rise of the
Age of Exploration in Europe, along the Java Sea. The coming of the
Dutch crushed the lively Javanese trade which had sprung up in the north
coast ports—Surabaja, Gresik, Tuban, and others— as part of this expansion,
but the trading culture did not wholly die; it persisted, although much
changed and weakened, down to the present. The rise of reformist move­
ments in Indonesian Islam in the early part of this century as part of the
general nationalist movement which in 1945 finally brought Indonesia her
freedom from Dutch rule revivified and further sharpened the sense for a
purer Islam, less contaminated with either animism or mysticism, among the
 small-trader element in Javanese society.
     The purer Islam is the subtradition I have called santri. Although in a
 broad and general way the santri subvariant is associated with the Javanese
»6«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
trading element, it is not confined to it, nor are all traders, by far, adherents
of it. There is a very strong santri element in the villages, often finding its
leadership in the richer peasants who have been able to make the pilgrimage
to Mecca and set up religious schools upon their return. The market is, on
the other hand, especially since the war and the disappearance of the Dutch
demand for servants and manual workers, clogged with swarms of small
abctngan traders attempting to make a marginal living, although the greatest
number of the larger and more vigorous traders are still santris. The santri
religious tradition, consisting not only of a careful and regular execution of
the basic rituals of Islam—the prayers, the Fast, the Pilgrimage—but also
of a whole complex of social, charitable, and political Islamic organizations,
is the second subvariant of the general Javanese religious system which I
shall present below.
     The third is the prijaji. Prijaji originally referred only to the hereditary
aristocracy which the Dutch pried loose from the kings of the vanquished
native states and turned into an appointive, salaried civil service. This white-
collar elite, its ultimate roots in the Hindu-Javanese courts of pre-colonial
times, conserved and cultivated a highly refined court etiquette, a very
complex art of dance, drama, music, and poetry, and a Hindu-Buddhist
mysticism. They stressed neither the animistic element in the over-all Javanese
syncretism as did the abangans, nor the Islamic as did the santris, but
the Hinduistic. In this century, the ascendant social and political position of
this group so far as the native Javanese society is concerned (the Dutch
of course occupied the genuinely dominant position until the revolution) has
been weakened, access to the bureaucracy has become easier for the low­
born but well educated, and an increasing number of nongovernmental “white
collar” jobs has appeared. Further, it was upon this “bureaucratic” group
that the Dutch had their most direct acculturating influence, leading ulti­
mately to the production of the highly secularized, Westernized, and, com­
monly, somewhat anti-traditional political elite of the Indonesian Republic.
As a result, the traditional court culture has weakened. Nevertheless, the prijaji
variant not only remains quite strong among certain of the conservative ele­
ments in the society but also plays a basic role in shaping the world view, the
ethics, and the social behavior of even the most Westernized element in the still
dominant white-collar group. The refined politesse, the high art, and the
intuitive mysticism all remain highly characteristic of Java’s social elite;
and, although somewhat attenuated and adjusted to changed conditions, the
prijaji style of life remains the model not only for the elite but in many
ways for the entire society.
     Abangan, representing a stress on the animistic aspects of the over-all
Javanese syncretism and broadly related to the peasant element in the popu­
lation; santri, representing a stress on the Islamic aspects of the syncretism
and generally related to the trading element (and to certain elements in
the peasantry as well) ; and prijaji, stressing the Hinduist aspects and related
to the bureaucratic element—these, then, are the three main subtraditions
I shall describe. They are not constructed types, but terms and divisions the
Javanese themselves apply. They indicate the way the Javanese in Modjokuto
Introduction                                                               »7 «
themselves perceive the situation, as will, I hope, be apparent from the exten­
sive quotations from my field notes which I have included in the text. All these
quotations are, perhaps, not absolutely necessary for the simple description of
Modjokuto religion, but it seems to me that one of the characteristics of good
ethnographic reporting—and this essay claims to be nothing more than a report
—is that the ethnographer is able to get out of the way of his data, to make
himself translucent so that the reader can see for himself something of what
the facts look like and so judge the ethnographer’s summaries and generaliza­
tions in terms of the ethnographer’s actual perceptions.
     Java—which has been civilized longer than England; which over a
period of more than fifteen hundred years has seen Indians, Arabs, Chinese,
Portuguese, and Dutch come and go; and which has today one of the world’s
densest populations, highest development of the arts, and most intensive
agricultures—is not easily characterized under a single label or easily pic­
tured in terms of a dominant theme. It is particularly true that in describing
the religion of such a complex civilization as the Javanese any simple unitary
view is certain to be inadequate; and so I have tried in the following pages
to show how much variation in ritual, contrast in belief, and conflict in values
lie concealed behind the simple statement that Java is more than 90
per cent Moslem. If I have chosen, consequently, to accent the religious
diversity in contemporary Java—or more particularly in one given town-
village complex in contemporary Java—my intention has not been to deny
the underlying religious unity of its people or, beyond them, of the Indo­
nesian people generally, but to bring home the reality of the complexity,
depth, and richness of their spiritual life.
      THE
“ ABANGAN”
  VARIANT
Chapter 1                                         The Slametan
                                              Communal Feast
                                              as a Core Ritual



A t the center of the whole Javanese religious system lies a simple, formal,
undramatic, almost furtive, little ritual: the slametan (also sometimes called a
kendurèn). The slametan is the Javanese version of what is perhaps the
world’s most common religious ritual, the communal feast, and, as almost
everywhere, it symbolizes the mystic and social unity of those participating in
it. Friends, neighbors, fellow workers, relatives, local spirits, dead ancestors,
and near-forgotten gods all get bound, by virtue of their commensality, into a
defined social group pledged to mutual support and cooperation. In Modjokuto
the slametan forms a kind of social universal joint, fitting the various aspects
of social life and individual experience together in a way which minimizes
uncertainty, tension, and conflict—or at least it is supposed to do so. The
altered form of twentieth-century urban and suburban life in Java makes it
rather less efficient as an integrating mechanism and rather less satisfying as a
religious experience for many people; but among the group here described as
abangan—the more traditionalized peasants and their proletarianized com­
rades in the towns—the slametan still retains much of its original force and
attraction.
     A slametan can be given in response to almost any occurrence one wishes
to celebrate, ameliorate, or sanctify. Birth, marriage, sorcery, death, house
moving, bad dreams, harvest, name-changing, opening a factory, illness, sup­
plication of the village guardian spirit, circumcision, and starting off a political
meeting may all occasion a slametan. For each the emphasis is slightly dif­
ferent. One part or another of the total ritual is intensified and elaborated;
another part is toned down. The mood changes somewhat, but the underlying
structure of the ritual remains the same. There is always the special food
 (differing according to the intent of the slametan) ; there is always incense, the
Islamic chant, and the extra-formal high-Javanese speech of the host (its con­
tent, too, naturally, varying with the occasion) ; and there is always the polite,
                                          li
»12«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
embarrassed, muted manner which suggests that, despite the brevity and lack
of drama the ritual displays, something important is going on.



                          T h e Slametan Pattern

m ost  slametans are held in the evening, just after the sun has gone down and
the evening prayer—for those who perform it—is done. If the occasion is, say,
a name-changing, a harvest, or a circumcision, the host will have employed a
religious specialist to determine an auspicious day according to a numerologi-
cal interpretation of the Javanese calendrical system; if it is a death or a birth,
the event itself determines the timing. The day is spent in preparing the food.
The women do this: for a small feast only those of the household itself, for a
large one a wider range of kin ties may be drawn upon. The ceremony itself
is all male. The women remain mburi (behind—i.e., in the kitchen), but they
inevitably peek through the bamboo walls at the men, who, squatted on floor
mats ngarepan (in front—i.e., in the main living room) perform the actual
ritual, eating the food the women have prepared.
     The men invited are all close neighbors, since to a slametan one invites all
those who live in the immediate area around one’s own house. The basis of
within a short distance from one’s house in any direction must be invited and
selection is entirely territorial: relative or not, friend or not, anyone who lives
must come. They are called together by a messenger of the host (most often
one of his children) only five or ten minutes before the slametan is to begin,
and they must drop everything and come immediately. Despite this apparently
haphazard procedure, almost everyone turns up, because during the period
just after sunset almost everyone in Modjokuto is at home, people are usually
aware—although no one may have actually said anything about it—that a
slametan is about to be given a good while before it actually occurs and so
expect the messenger, and the Javanese has a kind of punctuate sense of time
which makes it easy for him to shift sharply from one kind of activity to an­
other with very little transition.
     Upon arrival each guest takes a place on the floor mats, squatting in the
formal Javanese sitting posture called sila (with legs folded inward and
crossed in front of the body and with the trunk ramrod stiff). The room slowly
fills with the odor of the burning incense, and there is a little subdued small
talk as people drift in and seat themselves (there is no special order) in a
large circle around the food, which has already been placed in the center.
When all have arrived and the circle is complete, the ceremony begins.
     The host opens the ceremony with a speech in very formal high-Javanese.
First, he expresses his profound gratitude for his neighbors’ attendance. He
regards them, he says, as witnesses to the purity and the nature of his in­
tentions and to the fact that he is holding the required rite in order to realize
these excellent intentions, and he hopes they will share in any benefit the
ceremony brings. Second, he states these intentions: he presents the specific
reason for the slametan—his daughter is seven months pregnant, it is the
The Slametan Communal Feast as a Core Ritual                                 »13«
Prophet’s birthday, or whatever. Next, he gives the general reason for the
rite. This is always the same: to secure for himself, his family, and his guests
that peculiarly negative state of bodily and mental equanimity the Javanese
call slamet, from which the ritual takes its name. To this end he petitions the
spirits of the village, young and old, male and female. Lastly he begs pardon
for any errors he may have made in his speech or anything he may have said
which disturbed anyone, and for the inadequacy of the food he is serving.
Through the whole speech he speaks in an even, rhythmic, mechanical cadence
and at each pause the audience responds with a solemn “inggih”—“yes.”
     When the host has completed the udjub, as this formal introductory speed
is called, he asks someone present to give the Arabic chant-prayer. Actually,
most of those assembled do not know how to chant, but the host always makes
certain that someone who does is present. On a special occasion he may even
invite the modin, the official village religious specialist, to give the prayer, but
usually he will just invite a friend who he knows has attended a religious
school for a period and can chant short Arabic prayers (whose meaning, how­
ever, he is almost never able to understand). Fragments from the Koran,
most often the Alfatékah, the short prayer which precedes the Koran proper,
are usually used, although some people may know special prayers. The prayer
leader recites the prayer or Koranic passage while the other guests sit with
their palms turned upward toward the sky and their faces lifted as though
awaiting a gift from God; or, alternatively, they stare down into their palms
and may even bury their faces in them. At each pause in the leader’s chant
they utter “amin” (amen), and when he is finished they rub the palms of their
hands on their faces as though they were attempting to wake themselves from
a sleep. For his trouble the prayer leader receives a small token payment
 called the wadjib.
     The preliminaries completed, the singsong cadence of the Arabic chant
having been balanced against the regular, mechanical rhythms of the Javanese
 speech, the serving of the food begins. Each participant (except the host, who
 does not eat) receives a cup of tea and a banana-leaf dish into which is put
 a sample of each sort of food from the center of the floor. The fare is much
better than average: usually there are several lands of meat, chicken, or fish,
 plus variously colored or molded rice or rice porridge, each variety with a
 meaning which the participants may or may not remember. (In giving the
 udjub the host often tells what each food means as part of his declaration of
 intentions.) The food is not served by the host but by one or two of the guests,
 who hop into the middle of the circle and fill the various dishes. When every­
 one has his filled dish, the host bids them eat. They scoop the rice and meat
 up with their fingers, eating hurriedly and quietly—for it is believed to be bad
 luck to talk while eating. After about a half-dozen scoopfuls or about five
 minutes, they one by one stop eating, and when all have stopped they ask
 permission to “follow my own will” (nuwun sakersa) and, receiving it, depart
 for home, crouching so as not to tower over the seated host, about ten or fifteen
 minutes after they have come. Most of their food remains uneaten. It is taken
 home, wrapped in the banana-leaf dishes, to be eaten in the privacy of their
»14«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
houses in company with their wives and children. With their departure, the
slametan ends.



                     T h e M eaning of the Slametan

this , then, is the basic core ritual in that part of Modjokuto society in which
the abangan world-view is most prominent. On some occasions, beginning a
journey, for example, it may comprise the entire ceremony; on others, such
as a wedding, it may be so brief and covered over by other and more elaborate
kinds of ritual and ceremonial behavior that if you do not watch closely you
will miss it altogether; and on yet others—death, for example—the exigencies
of the situation may demand that whole parts be dropped out. Since all, or
nearly all, abangan ceremonies are, nevertheless, in one sense variations on
this underlying ritual theme, an understanding of the meaning of the slametan
to those who give them brings with it an understanding of much of the abangan
world-view and provides a key to the interpretation of their more complex
ceremonies.
     Why do Javanese hold slametans? When I asked this question of an old
bricklayer, he gave two reasons: “When you give a slametan, nobody feels
any different from anyone else and so they don’t want to split up. Also a
slametan protects you against the spirits, so they will not upset you.” This
tendency to state the implications of social behavior in psychological terms,
according to its ultimate effect on the individual’s emotional equilibrium, and
to state those implications negatively, is characteristic. At a slametan everyone
is treated the same. The result is that no one feels different from anyone else,
no one feels lower than anyone else, and so no one has a wish to split off
from the other person. Also, after you have given a slametan the local spirits
will not bother you, will not make you feel ill, unhappy, or confused. The goals
are negative and psychological—absence of aggressive feeling toward others,
absence of emotional disturbance. The wished-for state is slamet, which the
Javanese defines with the phrase “gak ana apa-apa”— “there isn’t anything,”
or, more aptly, “nothing is going to happen (to anyone).”
     But since something might happen, and almost inevitably does, the aban­
gan, aware of this, personifies the possibility of unforeseen bad fortune in
terms of spirit beliefs and attempts to deal with the spirits by means of the
slametan. In Java, said one of my informants with the usual Javanese sense
for cultural relativism, the spirits are unusually disturbing: “I don’t know
how it is in America, but here they are always upsetting one.” The reason for
 this, no doubt, is that there are more of them in Java—all around the
house (especially the toilet), at every unusual point in the landscape, around
 cemeteries, at old Hindu ruins; and the woods are full of them. Thus
 the incense and the aroma of the food at the slametan are considered as food
 for the spirits in order to pacify them so they will not disturb the living. As a
 Javanese put it:
The Sîameîan Communal Feast as a Core Ritual                                     *15«
  At a slametan all kinds of invisible beings come and sit with us and they also
  eat the food. That is why the food and not the prayer is the heart of the slamet­
  an. The spirit eats the aroma of the food. It’s like this banana. I smell it but it
  doesn’t disappear. That is why the food is left for us after the spirit has already
  eaten it.*
    * This passage and others similarly employed without source reference throughout the
text are transcriptions from the author’s field notes.
Chapter 2                                            Spirit Beliefs




A young carpenter, rather more systematic about such things than Javanese
generally are, told me that there were three main kinds of spirits: memedi
(literally, frighteners), lelembut (literally, ethereal ones), and tujul.
     Memedis merely upset people or scare them, but they do not usually do
serious damage. Male memedis are called gendruwo and female ones wéwé
(married to the gendruwos, they are always seen carrying small children on
their hips in shawls, just like human mothers). Memedis are usually en­
countered at night in especially dark or lonely places. Often they will take
the form of parents or other relatives, dead or alive— sometimes, even, of
one’s own children. The carpenter remembered that a few years ago there
was a little boy lost in the neighborhood. They looked high and low for him
for a whole week. When they finally found him he was hiding under the back
of the house and was too frightened to talk because he had seen a gendruwo
which had taken the form of his father. Evidently his “father” had been sitting
up in the top of a tree and had urinated on the boy. Actually, said the car­
penter, he need not have been so frightened; these spirits are largely harmless
and merely like to scare you.
     Lelembuts, in contrast to memedis, can make one ill or drive one crazy.
The lelembuts enter the individual’s body, and if one is not treated by a native
Javanese curer (called a dukun) one will die. Western doctors can’t do any­
thing for madness or sickness caused by lelembuts; only dukuns can. A dukun
can often tell where lelembuts have gone into the body and pull them out by
massaging just that place—for example, the foot, or the arm, or the small of
the back. Since lelembuts are not visible at all, they do not assume the ap­
pearance of relatives, but they are very dangerous to human beings.
     Lastly, the tujuls are spirit children, “children who are not human beings.”
The carpenter pointed to two three-year-old children standing there listening
to our conversation and said: “Tujuls look just like these kids, only they
                                       16
Spirit Beliefs                                                             »17«
aren’t human but are spirit children.” They don’t upset and frighten people or
make them sick; quite the contrary, they are very much liked by human be­
ings, for they help them become rich. If one wants to communicate with them,
he must fast and meditate and then after a while he will be able to see them
and to employ them for his own uses. If one wants to get rich, he sends them
out to steal money. They make themselves invisible and travel great distances
in a short time and so have no difficulty finding money for one.
     Another kind of tujul is called a mentèk. These are also small children,
and they wear no clothes; some people say they are the tujuls’ cousins. Men­
teks live in the rice fields. “Suppose,” said the carpenter, “you and I have rice
fields. I have a mentèk, which I got through fasting and meditation. I send
him to take the grains out of your rice and put them in mine. Then later when
the harvest comes your stalks are empty and mine are full and doubly fat.*
Of course, this is not a nice thing to do. Later, after I died, I would have to
face God and be punished for this. But while you’re living it’s nice to have a
tujul of your own.”
     There is no doctrine in these matters. The carpenter’s views are his own,
and, although they are roughly typical, the details about spirits vary from indi­
vidual to individual. There is much discussion and dispute about the spirit
world, and, while there is general agreement on the reality and importance of
supernatural beings (called, as a class, bangsci alus), each individual seems to
have some ideas of his own as to their exact nature and some personal experi­
ences to prove it. Abangan spirit beliefs in Modjokuto are not part of a consist­
ent, systematic, and integrated scheme, but are rather a set of concrete,
specific, rather sharply defined discrete images—unconnected visual metaphors
giving form to vague and otherwise incomprehensible experiences.



                       Memedis: Frightening Spirits
Memedis are the most easily understandable of Javanese spirits for Western­
ers, because they are almost exactly equivalent to our “spooks.” In fact, some
show signs of having been borrowed from European sources: the djrangkong,
who is a man “with his flesh off,” i.e., a skeleton; or the wedon, a spiritual
being covered with a white sheet like our ghosts. The memedi who kept adding
salt to an informant’s food for three months, the disembodied pair of hands
at which the same man threw a plate of hot peppers, and the ghost whose
shadow remained on the wall even after the light had been turned off may also
owe something to our cultural tradition. But others have a distinctly Indonesian
flavor: the panaspati, whose head is where his genitals should be and who
walks on his hands, breathing fire; the djims, the more Islamic spirits who
pray five times a day, wear prayer robes, and chant in Arabic; the pisatjis
 (“wanderers”), small children without parents or fixed abode who are con-
   * Properly speaking, mentèk is the name of a rice disease.
  »18«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF     JAVA
  sequently always on the lookout for human beings to live in; the uwils, who
  are only rarely encountered nowadays but who are said to be former Buddhist
  soldiers; the séîan gundul (“bald devils”), who have all their hair shaved off
  except for a kutjung, the specially cut “topknot” that small boys used to wear
  in the old days, a custom now almost wholly abandoned.
        One of the best-defined and generally agreed upon variety of spirits is the
  sundel bolong—“prostitute with a hole in her.” A sundel bolong is a beautiful
  naked woman, but her loveliness is marred by the fact that she has a large hole
  through the middle of her back. She has long black hair which hangs down
  over her buttocks and so conceals the hole. Opinions seem to differ as to
  whether or not she is attractive to men. Some say that when a man sees her he
  is immediately frightened and runs away. Others say that on the contrary she
  is very attractive and usually asks the man to go off with her, an offer very
  difficult to reject. If he goes, however, she castrates him.
        Gendruwos, the commonest type of memedi, are generally more playful
  than harmful and enjoy playing practical jokes on people, such as prodding
  women in the buttocks (especially when they are praying), removing a per­
  son’s clothes from the house and throwing them into the river, tossing rocks
  onto the roof all through the night, jumping out big and black from behind a
4 tree near the cemetery, and so forth. When Pak Paidin fell off the bridge on
  which he was working, he knew a gendruwo had pushed him, for after he
  landed in the water the spirit pinned his arms behind him and spoke to him
   (in classical literary Javanese; gendruwos always speak archaically, said
   Paidin), asking solicitously if he was all right. Evidently the spirit had no evil
   intentions.
        But gendruwos, fun-loving as they may be, are not always harmless. Often
   they will appear in the form of a parent, grandfather, child, or sibling and
   say, “Hey, come along with me.” If one obeys, he will then become invisible.
   Then the real relatives, missing the victim and suspecting what has happened,
   will go about beating on hoes, sicldes, pots, and so forth, making as much
   noise as they can. The gendruwo, upset by all this racket, will then offer the
   victim some food. If he eats it, he will remain invisible; if he refuses it, he
   will become visible again and his relatives will be able to find him. One
   day, in the neighborhood across the street from my house, a boy was missing
   and it was thought he had been snatched by a gendruwo, and so the people
   went around making a terrible racket. It turned out finally, however, that he
   had hitched a ride into a nearby town and had not been spiritually kidnapped at
   all.
        Sometimes the gendruwos will take even more serious liberties. They will
    adopt the form of a woman’s husband and sleep with her, she being none
   the wiser. Then there will be children of these unions who will be monsters.
   There was one in Modjokuto— a large, black, and curiously misshapen child
   who lived to be sixteen and then died. All in all, gendruwos, despite their
   generally pleasant dispositions, are not to be trifled with, and one should not
    even talk about them—although everyone does—for they may overhear and
    become annoyed. No one, child or adult, in the household with which my
Spirit Beliefs                                                                          »19«
wife and I lived would dare go to the toilet alone after sundown for fear of
gendruwos.



                        Lelembuts: Possessing Spirits
what the carpenter called lelembuts (but others might as easily claim are
gendruwos, sétans, demits, or djims), the kind of spirits which enter and
possess one, are a rather more serious affair, for an encounter with them may
end in sickness, insanity, or death. The kind of complex difficulties one can get
into in dealing with this sort of spirit is exemplified by an experience of the
family with whom I boarded. A few years before I arrived, they attempted
to chop down a clump of bamboos in the back yard of their house. They were
aware that some lelembuts lived in the bamboos, but Pak Ardjo, the head
of the household, sprinkled some salt on them the night before and recited
a short spell, hoping that would take care of the matter. The men hired to
cut the trees were forewarned and extremely careful, but, unknown to them,
one of the trees fell on an invisible earthenware pot owned by one of the spirits
and broke it. Some of the spirits who were living there and who were santris
 (Moslems) had a big prayer house to say their prayers in; and the earthenware
pot was one of those large pots the santris use to wash their feet and hands
in before they pray.* The breaking of their pot made the santri spirits very
angry, and they gave one of the workmen a crack on the back of the head. He
felt the blow and immediately went home, but by the time he arrived there
he was crazy, raving on and on in a meaningless manner. That night he
had a dream in which he met the village spirit of a nearby village who told
him that a group of young men were coming after him, but, if he ducked
through the legs of the village spirit toward the north, the young men, who
were really the lelembuts, going south, would miss him. He did, and they did,
and the next day he was well.
    Javanese theory of possession is rather highly developed. Lelembuts, say
some, always enter the body from underneath through the feet. (That is why
people wash their feet before praying in the mosque, one man told me. It is
also why it is better to heat one’s feet over the stove before visiting a woman
with a newborn child, because infants are particularly liable to a kind of
spirit seizure called sawanen.) Others, probably the larger group, hold that
    * This ascription of religious and social differentiation to the spirits is not atypical.
One informant, discussing djims, said: “There are two kinds: the Islamic, who live in the
mosques and ianggars (prayer houses), and the non-Islamic, who live just anywhere. A
djim will enter the body of a person if it should happen the body of that person is empty.
Emptiness isn’t caused by the djim, it’s just sort of an accident. For instance, if a person is
startled, confused, mixed up, and doesn’t know where he is, he becomes empty and the
djim can enter him easily. If an abangan person is entered by an Islamic djim, he can then
chant even though before he couldn’t. But abangan djims don’t enter santris; they don’t
dare. . . . There are many Islamic djims in Mecca, and some hadjis (pilgrims to the
Holy City) bring them back with them to help them get rich. This is why hadjis are the
richest people in the whole world.”
»20«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
 spirits always enter through the head. That is why a baby’s fontanel must be
 kept covered with a mixture of onions, hot peppers, and mashed coconut
 (the “hot” food “startles” the spirit, who is thus frightened off), and why
people who are feeling slightly indisposed rub lime on their foreheads.
     A mere faint, lasting less than ten minutes, is not usually considered to
be a possession. A rub on the face with a sarong of the victim’s mother will
usually suffice to bring the victim around. For seizures lasting longer, one
elderly man, a hospital worker and my best informant on these matters,
classified the varieties of possession into six types. Others might list fifteen,
or, more likely, lump them all into one complex and ill-defined category.
     His first type was kesurupan, which is derived from a root which means
“to come in,” “to enter (something),” but also has the secondary meaning
 “sunset.” This, perhaps, reflects the belief that the period during which the
sun is setting is an especially dangerous one so far as the spirits are concerned,
for, like the Javanese themselves, the spirits are all out wandering about and
visiting their friends at this time and one is likely to run into one in the street.
 (But twelve noon and twelve midnight are unusually dangerous times too.)
Kesurupan is the common or garden variety of possession and accounts for the
great majority of cases. A dukun (curer) is called (or, failing that, an old
man, such as the informant himself, who knows about these matters) and
addresses the stricken one: “What is your name? Where is your home? Why
have you come here? What do you want?” These questions are addressed to
the inhabiting spirit, who answers through the mouth of the possessed: “My
name is Kijaji Bendok. My home is on the bridge in front of the market. I
came here to eat and drink.” The spirit involved here is a santri, because kijaji
is the title given to Koran scholars and teachers, men comparable to the Mid-
Eastern ulama. But the lelembut could as likely be an abangan, in which case
he might be called Sapu Djagad (sweeper of the world), or a prijaji, with a
name like Radèn Baku Sentot, radèn being a Javanese court title. These are all
well-known lelembut names. Having heard the spirit, the dukun will reply: “I
will give you something to eat and drink, but when you are finished eating and
drinking you must quickly go home again.” According to Javanese ideas, said
the informant, the lelembuts drink liquor, rice wine usually, and eat incense.
When he is through, the spirit will say out of his victim’s mouth: “All right,
I’ll go home now.” Then the victim will shake three times or so rather violently,
will go suddenly weak, and faint. When he recovers, he will remember nothing
of what has gone on.
     The second type, kampir-kampiran, means literally “to take a flying visit
to someone,” “to come from a long distance and stop in briefly at a friend’s
while on the way somewhere else.” Thus kampir-kampiran as a possession
is the same as kesurupan except that the spirit is not from a local bridge or
bamboo clump but is, say, a spirit from the Indian Ocean on his way to a
large volcano to the east of Modjokuto who just happened to bump into the
victim on the street. Kampel-kampelan is also similar except that the victim is
not so obviously sick. He walks around and behaves more or less as usual, but
acts rather oddly at times. For example, if Parto (the informant) comes back
Spirit Beliefs                                                             »21«
from the Hindu ruins just to the north of Modjokuto and begins to hit his
little boy, something he never otherwise does, his wife will say to him. “You
must have been entered by a spirit at the ruins.” This kind of possession is
mild, and usually a good bath will cure it.
     Sétanan is like kampel-kampelan except more serious. One is still walking
around and not severely ill, but it takes a dukiin to get the spirit out of him.
The dukiin will discover where one got the sétcin and tell him to make certain
kinds of offerings in order to be rid of it. The offering (ulih-ulih or sadjèn)
usually consists of flowers, incense, perhaps certain kinds of leaves. The sétcin
eats this and leaves his victims in peace. Kedjiman is the same except that,
whereas the sétans are Javanese and abangan, djims are Arabs and santri.
These can stay a very long time. The man who has them is not sick, but is
odd and behaves curiously. For example, he may eat an extraordinary lot,
or, on the contrary, go very long without eating. His senses may be abnormally
sharp and he may think a lot, often with greater cleverness than usual.
     Kemomong, the last type, is a kind of voluntary devil’s pact. A man,
usually someone who does not believe in God, becomes friends with a sétan
—such as the one on the market bridge mentioned above—and the sétan
enters him, a voluntary partnership on both sides. The man then becomes half
crazy but may develop certain powers, say of curing, which he evidently feels
are worth the cost; or he may merely do it for the experience of it, much as
Brataséna, the shadow-play hero, once died on purpose merely because he
had never been dead and wanted to see what it felt like.



                         Tujuls: Familiar Spirits
Tujuls are another matter. Although some people say they can be gotten just
by fasting and meditation, and others argue that you need not do even that
(“It all depends on the tujul; if he wants to help you he will, if he doesn’t he
won’t, no matter what you do”), most people think one has to make a kind
of devil’s pact to get a tujul to do one’s bidding. The three people in the town
of Modjokuto most universally held to be in possession of a tujul—a wealthy
butcher, a very nouveau riche woman textile trader who prospered rather
suddenly during the Japanese occupation, and an old-line hadji businessman
who had been quite rich in the years before the war but who had not prospered
since—were all said to have made such a pact. Each of them journeyed to
various Hindu ruins lying in a great circle around Modjokuto, one in each
of the directions: Borobodur to the west, Penataran to the south, Bongkeng
to the east, and the grave of Sunan Giri, a Javanese culture hero, near Gresik
to the north. At each of these ruins they swore an oath that if the spirit would
give them a tujul they would deliver a magically killed human sacrifice for the
spirit of the ruins each year—either a close relative or a friend. Later, it was
generally agreed, these sorcery-practicing tujul-owners would have a very slow
»22«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
and difficult death: their breath would come shorter and shorter, they would
have continued pain and a prolonged high fever, and would have a tortuously
slow time leaving the world.
     Dying by inches is perhaps a small enough price to pay, because once one
has a tujul the money flows in. The tujuls are able to steal with no chance
of detection; and all one needs do for them in return is to give them a place
to sleep and to put out for them each evening a little rice mush, which, since
they are children (they are said to skip and hop in little circles when walking,
as tiny children will), is their natural food. In town the tujuls steal money—
the butcher’s tujul was vigorously accused (out of his hearing, of course) of
stealing money from the women traders in the small market in our neighbor­
hood at least once during my stay, but in the villages they are more likely to
steal rice. One quite common rice thief of this sort is called gebleg because,
though it is in the form of a chicken, it shuffles its feet heavily when it walks
 (making the sound bleg-bleg-bleg). It stuffs the rice up under its wings and
walks back to its owner; then it flaps its wings, and the rice falls out into the
owner’s granary.
     People who are accused of having tujuls fit quite easily into a single social
type. They are always rich, often having become so quite suddenly, and,
usually but not always, they are misers; they wear old clothes, bathe in the
river with the poverty-stricken coolies, and eat corn and cassava—a poor
man’s dish—rather than rice, while all the time (it is said) their house is full
of gold bars. Also, they often seem to be deviant socially. They talk loudly,
are aggressive, lack manners, are sloppy dressers, and have a quite un-
Javanese habit of blurting out to people just what is on their minds. The
woman trader is of this sort. Before the war, said an informant (male), she
was calm and withdrawn like Javanese women usually, but then all of a sud­
den she got rich, and now she is like a wild animal.
     One of the most famous tujul owners in the Modjokuto area is an old
hadji who lives in a village a few miles to the east of town. The richest man
out that way, he is also the most miserly. He acquired his tujuls through the
usual pact—promising to deliver four dead people to the spirits each year. He
seeks his victims everywhere; he even looked for them in Mecca. The odd
thing is that, although he has been doing this for years, it was only discovered
in 1951 by another man—something of a dealer in the occult himself—who
developed countermagic against the hadji. He gathered together thirty-three
 students and taught them special magical techniques for defeating tujuls. One
Friday midnight the students attacked the tujuls of the hadji, but the latter
called in reinforcements from among the spirits at the various ruins. The at­
 tacking students wore black spectacles in order to see the spirits and used
 flashlights as weapons, for where there is light there can be no spirits of any
kind. The tujuls threw a tjakra (a magical ring-shaped weapon, used by
Krishna in the Mahabharata) at the students but did not kill them, and, al­
 though the struggle was hard, the four victims were not taken. Now, it is said,
every Friday midnight this struggle continues. People who see the students
fighting think that they are mad because they strike the empty air. The first
Spirit Beliefs                                                                      »23«
battle took place in the hadji’s front yard, but now the war seems to move
about from place to place.



                              Demits: Place Spirits
there are numerous versions of the Javanese creation myth, Babad Tanah
Djawi* In the one related to me by a shadow-play puppeteer in the village
just to the north of Modjokuto the story opens with Semar, the wonderfuUy
comic and wise shadow-play clown and the greatest of Javanese culture heroes,
speaking with a powerful Hindu-Moslem priest, the first of Java’s long line
of colonizers. The priest asks Semar: “Tell me the story of Java in the times
before there were any men.” Semar replies that in those days the whole island
was covered with primeval forest except for the small patch of rice fields he
himself cultivated at the foot of Mount Merbabu (a volcano in Central Java),
where he lived peacefully tilling the soil for ten thousand years. “What are
you?” asked the startled priest. “Are you a man? Your age is tremendous!
I never knew a man ten thousand years old before! It is not possible! You
can’t be a man. Even the Prophet Adam only lived one thousand years! What
kind of being are you? Confess the truth!”
    “In truth,” says Semar, “I am not a man, I am the guardian spirit—the
danjang—of Java. I am the oldest spirit of Java, and I am the king and an­
cestor of all spirits, and through them of all men. But,” he continues in a
changed tone, “I have also a question to ask you. Why are you ruining my
country? Why have you come here and driven my children and grandchildren
out? The spirits, overcome by your greater spiritual power and religious learn­
ing, are slowly being forced to flee into the craters of the volcanoes or to the
depths of the Southern Sea. Why are you doing this?” And the priest replies:
“I have been ordered by the king of Rome [‘An Arab country west of India,’
explained the puppeteer] to fill this island with human beings. I am to clear the
forest for rice-fields, to set up villages, and to settle twenty thousand families
here as colonists. This is the will of my king, and you cannot stop it. But those
of the spirits who will protect us may continue to live in Java; I will tell
you what you must do.” He then proceeds to outline the entire prospective
history of Java down to modem times and describes Semar’s own role in the
process, which is to be a spiritual advisor and magical supporter of all the
kings and princes to come—that is, to continue to be Java’s chief danjang.
    Thus, in this version at least, what the Javanese have in Babad Tanah
Djawi (“the clearing of Java” ) is not so much a creation myth as what might
be called a colonization myth, which, considering Java’s history of successive
“invasions” of Hindus, Moslems, and Europeans, is not surprising. To
    * There is extant a written semi-historical legend entitled Babad Tanah Djawi com­
posed at the beginning of the seventeenth century in the court of the Mataram kingdom
of Central Java, evidently to legitimize Mataram’s ruling dynasty. A myth of the same
name is still recounted orally in the countryside, but the versions of it are not always in
very close concordance with the written Babad Tanah Djawi.
»24«                                             T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
mbabad is to clear a tract of wilderness and turn it into a village complete with
surrounding rice fields, to create a small island of human settlement amid a
great sea of forest-dwelling spirits, although nowadays it is also used for the
general preparation (plowing, raking, and so on) of a rice field which one
must do at the beginning of the rice-growing cycle each year. The picture the
myth presents is one of an incoming flow of migrants pushing back the harmful
spirits into the mountains, uncultivated wild places, and the Indian Ocean as
they move from the north coast to the south, all the while adopting some of the
more helpful ones as protectors of themselves and their new settlements.
     The usual name for a spirit with a fixed abode who may support the wishes
of men is demit, although here again people are not consistent but tend to use
such words as demit, danjcmg, ielembut, and séton in both a wide and narrow
sense, to indicate spirits in general and to indicate certain fairly definite sub-
types of them in particular. Demits in the narrow sense live in holy places
called pundèns,* which may be marked by a small Hindu ruin (perhaps one
little broken statue), a large banyan tree, an old grave, a nearly hidden spring,
or some such topographical peculiarity.
     There are a number of such pundèns in the Modjokuto area at various
oversized or misshapen trees or at the various Hindu temple ruins scattered
around, but by far the most famous, most often worshipped, and reputedly
the most powerful is one in the dead center of the town of Modjokuto, at the
edge of the public square (alun-alun). His name is mBah Buda, literally
“Grandfather Buddha,” hut the “Buddha” does not refer to Gautama, but
merely to the fact that the shrine where he lives is marked with a Hindu-
Buddhist relic.
     The shrine, enclosed by a solid white fence, lies at the foot of a massive
banyan tree and consists of a small foot-high stone statue of Ganesha, the
Hindu elephant-god of wisdom; and there is a story that goes with it. A long
time ago, “in the Buddhist time,” the Sultan of Solo, the great court city of
Central Java, was warring with the King of Madura. The Sultan of Solo was
winning, and he pursued the fleeing Madurese king north and east toward the
latter’s homeland. En route he stopped at Modjokuto, then still an unsettled
forest lying between the two kingdoms, to rest his troops. Thus the town which
is here called Modjokuto got both its name—for its actual name is said to
derive from an Old-Javanese word meaning “resting place”—and its shrine—
for the king left the Ganesha to mark the place under the great banyan tree
where he rested. Whatever its origin, however, the Ganesha is now certainly oc­
cupied by a demit. Once when it was taken to Bragang, some fifteen miles
away, it returned under its own power. On another occasion a Dutch con­
troleur (the lowest-ranking European official in the colonial bureaucracy)
stationed in Modjokuto who kicked the Ganesha—evidently to show his dis­
dain for the devices of the heathen—died within a week of a broken neck, and
within the year his whole family followed him to the grave.
    * Strictly speaking, a panden is anything toward which one offers reverence for pundi,
the root, means to praise or offer reverence. Thus a magical dagger or a grave of a hero
may be a panden. Some of the pandeas in the Modjokuto area were such (mythical)
burial places of heroes from the Hindu-Javanese times.
Spirit Beliefs                                                               »25«
     If one wants mBah Buda to do something for him, he must go to the shrine
—though some say one can do this part at home—and beg pardon and for­
giveness from the demit and promise to give a slametan in the demit’s honor
if his request is fulfilled. What is crucial for success is to want one’s wish
badly enough, to want it with an unmovable and single mind and think of
nothing else until it is granted. One petitioner compared it to crying for some­
thing as a child does: “You don’t cry outside, but inside, within your heart;
you have to want it so much that you’ll die if you don’t get it; and if you do
want it badly enough and keep at it long enough you will most certainly get
it.” What one usually wants is restored health either for oneself or close
relatives, or perhaps to find a lost object or to insure someone’s safety on a
long trip. There is a difference of opinion as to whether one can wish for such
things as success at cards, a new gong for one’s gamelan orchestra, or the love
of another man’s wife, some people holding that mBah Buda responds only
to “serious” requests; but it is clear that people ask for some rather unexalted
blessings on occasion:
  In connection with this [a discussion of divorce] Sutinah [the informant] told
  me about a time when she gave a slametan to mBah Buda when her older
  sister was still married to her second husband, and she said to the sister: “If
  you get a divorce and there isn’t too much trouble connected with it and
  everything is smooth and easy, then I’ll give a slametan to mBah Buda.”
  Later, after the divorce, she gave the slametan and sent some of it [the food]
  to her sister too, with a note saying, this is the slametan for you-know-what.

     The slametan one gives the demit after one has gained his wish (should
one forget to do so, a black snake with white arrow marks on his back will
crawl between one’s legs and remind him) should be given on a special day—
the day on which Friday of the Western seven-day week coincides with Legi
of the Javanese five-day market week, a coincidence which occurs every
thirty-five days.
     The slametan is a simple one of rice, a little chicken or fish, soybean-cake,
and so on, plus some flowers. One can either take it to the shrine oneself or
send a child with it, and most people do the latter. At the shrine the child gives
the food to the caretaker, telling him what the offering is for—what the “in­
tention” is. The caretaker takes the food, burns incense, and spreads the
flowers on the Ganesha’s head. Next he gathers up some of the old flowers
others have brought and makes them up into a little packet which he gives to
the child. This is taken home and mixed with water, and the person who gave
the slametan either drinks it or uses it as a salve for purposes of general wel­
fare or over-all slamet. People who find it awkward to cook up the rice can
buy the flowers in the market for an Indonesian quarter and give one rupiah to
the caretaker for the rice. The food is given out to the poor who crowd around
the shrine waiting for it (anyone who is “brave” enough to ask for it, the care­
taker said), but every time I watched this ritual it seemed that the caretaker,
admittedly not very well-off himself, got the lion’s share of the food, which
was considerable. On a good day I have seen over fifty people, some of them
from twenty miles away, giving a slametan to mBah Buda.
»26«                                             T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A

                        Danjangs: Guardian Spirits
Danjang is commonly but another name for demit (jang is a Javanese root
meaning “spirit” ). Like demits, danjangs live in special places called pundèns;
like demits, they respond to people’s pleas for help and receive vowed slame-
tans in return; and like demits, they never harm people but seek only to pro­
tect them. Unlike demits, however, some danjangs are considered to be spirits
of actual historic figures now deceased: the founders of the village to which
they are attached, the men who were the first to mbabad (i.e., clear) the land.
Each village usually has one major danjang.* This danjang désa, when still
a man, came to the village when it was but wilderness, cleared it, and dis­
tributed the land to his followers, family, and friends, becoming the first
village headman (lurah). When he died he was buried, usually near the
center of the village, and his grave thereupon became a pundèn, and he con­
tinues to watch over his village’s welfare. (Sometimes, however, there is no
specific grave for the founding danjang.) Certain people may still regard them­
selves as his descendants, and he is said to determine magically who shall be
village chief by controlling the movements of a special kind of political spirit
called a pulung (most people say he actually is the pulung) :
  He said that there was a kind of “spiritual stuff” called a pidung which, visi­
  ble and shaped like a moon, descends on the chosen candidate for village
  chief. Only village chiefs and the king of the entire country have pulungs
  (the latter’s being much larger), which shows that the position of a lurah
  is more important than that of a bupati or wedono [heads of a regency and a
  district, respectively]. When one lurah dies or goes out of office, his pulung
  leaves him and searches for the new lurah. (It sometimes momentarily goes
  abroad and is visible while he is in office when something special is up or the
  village is in danger.) The candidates often sit in the village square, and the
  pulung hovers over them choosing the one that is most pure. Lurah candi­
  dates sometimes give a slametan at the danjang’s grave in order to attract the
  pulung. There is one pulung for every village. It stays with the lurah until
  he dies or no longer acts nobly. In the latter case it leaves him, his village
  becomes side, famished, disorderly; people will no longer obey the chief. Soon
  he is forced to resign, and the man to whom the pulung has gone becomes the
  lurah. I asked him what had happened to the pulung that used to go to the
  king, and he said he thought it had gone to Djakarta and that Bung Karno
  [the President of the Republic] had the king’s pulung now.
    The area over which the danjang désa has power is called the humaran.
Kumara (or kemara) means a voice out of the blue, a voice coming out of
nothing, as when two weeks after a famous dukun has died one will suddenly
    * Sometimes the danjang is considered to be merely a vague protective spirit, resident
in a larger tree or some other natural phenomenon, who was a guardian of the area
before human beings arrived, and is distinguished from the founder of the village,
who is called the tjikal-bakal. Usually, however, the two are merged and the term
danjang désa (“village danjang") is used to refer to a single founder-guardian spirit.
There may, however, be secondary danjangs (or demits) in the village besides the main
one.
Spirit Beliefs                                                              »27«
hear his voice without any visible source for it. Thus the humaran includes
all the space above the village from which one could hear the sound of a
human voice speaking on the ground. In addition, the four corners of the
village are sometimes held to be occupied by protective spirits, also often
called danjang and conceived of as spirit sons of the main danjang, who finds
his permanent home in the center of the village.
     In the town of Modjokuto itself, the danjang désa is a thief, Mating
Kandari, buried in the old cemetery to the east of the center of town. But, in
line with the general decadence of village political structure in the urban
setting, he does not play a very important role in the minds of most towns­
men. Only a few older, lower-class people seem to know much about him, and
then only that he gained his control over the town area through trickery, de­
ceit, and traffic with evil spirits.
     In the villages, interest in the danjang désa is greater. For example, in
Sumbersari, the village immediately to the north of Modjokuto, the name of
the danjang is mBah Nur Wakit. Nur Wakit came to Sumbersari from the
west, from Djogjakarta in Central Java. The King of Bragang, who was then
ruling the area (in the story; actually the last King of Bragang had died three
hundred years before Sumbersari was founded), granted him the uncleared
land. He placed his wife in the dead center of the area he had been granted,
protected her only by a thin fence of banana leaves, and instructed her that no
matter what occurred she was not to move a muscle but to sit unmoved where
he had placed her. He then ran around the entire village to determine its
borders. A great typhoon blew up and the rain came in torrents; all the trees
fell down and the land was cleared without anyone’s lifting an axe. Nur
Wakit’s wife, seated immobile while trees fell all about her, was unharmed.
     Nur Wakit, in addition to being the first lurah, was also a kijaji, an
Islamic religious scholar and teacher. After a while his teaching duties grew
so great that he turned the job of lurah over to his son, but when the latter
 drafted some of Nur Wakit’s students to work his own land for him, Nur
 Wakit cursed him blind. Although by birth Nur Waldt was a radèn mas—
 that is, a noble—he did not like to mix with prijajis; he thought them too
proud and haughty, which is why he went out to the countryside to live
 among the common people. Like most ardent santris, he disapproved of the
 gamelan (the Javanese percussion orchestra) and the wajang (the shadow-
 play) , and during the time he was lurah, gamelans were unable to produce any
 sound in Sumbersari. Even today a man who holds a wajang is likely to fall
 sick or grow poor as a result. Almost all the lurahs in Sumbersari have been
 santris, the villagers say (just as in town they were reputed to have all been
 thieves), and those few who have been abangans.have lasted only a year or
 two. That these considerations are not merely theoretical in the minds of
 people today can be seen from the following note from an abangan informant:
  Just two months ago there was [a special ceremony for an only child at which
  a wajang is traditionally given] in Tempel [a village]. . . . There wasn’t any
  wajang because wajangs aren’t allowed in Tempel because the danjang is a
  santri; so instead they had a kentrung [another kind of entertainment in which
  a man recites stories]. . . . If you have a wajang in Tempel you will get
»28«                                             T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
   poor; that is what happened to her father-in-law . . . and to a man named
   Pak Setro, who had wajangs in spite of the prohibition.*
    Nur Wakit finally died in 1889 and was buried in the center of the village,
at the very spot on which his wife had waited while he cleared the land and
where he had later built his religious school. Like any good danjang, however,
he still guards his village. Every so often he emerges from his grave, taking the
form of a pure white tiger, in order to warn the village of an impending epi­
demic, flood, or other disaster. At these times, one may glimpse him just for a
moment, digging like a cat with his front paws at the crossroads. He never
attacks anyone, for his purpose is to warn the inhabitants of the approaching
trouble; as soon as he is certain he has been seen, he disappears. He digs
briefly at each crossroads to make certain someone sees him, and then he goes
to the home of the lurah—perhaps in a dream—and tells him what kind of
magic to make in order to protect the village against the threatened disaster.
Satisfied that his village is safe, he returns to his grave.




                     The M eaning of Spirit Beliefs

Bangsa alus, memedi, gendruwo, lelembut, sétan, djim, tujul, demit, danjang
—this flood of bald children, white tigers, and foot-shuffiing chickens—pro­
vide for those who believe in their existence a set of ready-made answers to
the questions posed by puzzling experiences, symbolic pictographs of the
imagination within whose framework even the anomalous seems inevitable.
Has Older Sister Suwami just recovered from a week of splitting headaches? It
is because when she squatted down on the toilet there was a lelembut already
seated there—in his anger and chagrin he slapped her across the eyes. Has
Hadji Abdullah, having lost a brother and a wife within the year, now sud­
denly gotten rich? The combination of circumstances strongly suggests a
tujul. The spirit world is the social world symbolically transformed: prijaji
spirits lord it over abangan ones, Chinese spirits open stores and exploit the
natives, and santri spirits spend their time in praying and thinking up ways
to make things difficult for unbelievers.
    But, despite the confusions, contradictions, and discontinuities of abangan
spirit beliefs, they present also a wider and more general meaning than the
isolated explanations of unhealing wounds, psychological fugues, and im­
probable bad luck might lead one to expect. They depict the triumph of cul­
ture over nature, human and nonhuman. As Javanese culture advances and
the heavy tropical forest turns into rice fields and house lands, the spirits re­
treat to the remaining woods, the volcano cones, and the Indian Ocean (where
Lara Kidul, the Queen of the South Sea and perhaps Java’s most powerful
    * In a neighboring village west of Modjokuto the danjang is an abangan who was
particularly fond of drinking gin and smoking opium. In that village a wajang brings good
luck, and Arabic music, a favorite santri amusement, brings misfortune.
Spirit Beliefs                                                                    »29«
single leîembut,* waits to carry off to the depths of the ocean anyone who is
foolhardy enough to wear green near her home). Similarly, as an individual
becomes more civilized in the Javanese pattern, he is less likely to be empty,
confused, and disoriented, and thus prey to be entered by a spirit:
  Parto said that people who are easy for sétans and other such to enter are
  people who do not believe in God, who never fast, and who don’t have any
  order in their lives; for the souls of these people are said to be empty and
  thus easy for the sétans to enter. People with a very strong belief in God and
  who “know order” are not easily entered by sétans, demits, and other such
  threats to individual well-being.
    In this context the siametan represents a reassertion and reinforcement of
the general cultural order and its power to hold back the forces of disorder.
The siametan concentrates, organizes, and summarizes the general abangan
ideas of order, their “design for living.” In a subdued dramatic form, it states
the values that animate traditional Javanese peasant culture: the mutual
adjustment of interdependent wills, the self-restraint of emotional expression,
and the careful regulation of outward behavior. And it is at just those points
in Javanese life when the need for the statement of these values is greatest,
when the spirits and the nonhuman disorder they represent are most threaten­
ing, that the siametan tends to occur.
   * In the areas along the southern seacoast of Java there is a highly developed cult of
Lara Kidul, but in the Modjokuto area her importance is only marginal.
Chapter 3                            The Slametan Cycles




Slametans fall into four main types: (1) those centering around the
crises of life—birth, circumcision, marriage, and death; (2) those associated
with the Moslem ceremonial calendar—the birth of the Prophet, the ending
of the Fast, the Day of Sacrifice, and the like; (3) that concerned with the
social integration of the village, the bersih désa (literally: “the cleansing of
the village”— i.e., of evil spirits); and (4) those intermittent slametans held
at irregular intervals and depending upon unusual occurrences—departing
for a long trip, changing one’s place of residence, taking a new personal name,
illness, sorcery, and so forth.
     Before considering these several types in detail, some mention must be
made of two factors common to all: first, the underlying principle of timing
slametans and, second, their economic significance.



         Pètungan: The Javanese Num erological System
birth slametans are fixed in time by the accident of birth, and death slametans
by the accident of death; but the Javanese remove both these events from the
realm of chance by ascribing them to the will of God, which fixes precisely
the span of each man’s life. When Brataséna, the wajang hero, appears in
heaven after having died on purpose in the story mentioned earlier, B atara
Guru, king of all the gods, admonishes him for his presumptuousness in dying
before the time divinely set for him and sends him packing back into the
world of men. Circumcision and marriage ceremonies—as well as residence
changes and the like—would seem necessarily to be set by the will of men,
but here too the purely adventitious is avoided and a wider ontological order
invoked by means of a system of numerological divination called pètungan
or “counting.”
                                       30
The Slametan Cycles                                                         »31«
    At the base of this often quite involved system lies one of the most funda­
mental Javanese metaphysical concepts: tjotjog. To tjotjog means to fit, as a
key does in a lock, as an efficacious medicine does a disease, as a solution does
an arithmetic problem, as a man does to the woman he married (if he doesn’t,
they get divorced). If your opinion agrees with mine, we tjotjog; if the clothes
I wear are proper for my class standing, they tjotjog; if the meaning of my
name fits my character (and if it brings me good luck), it is said to be tjotjog.
Tasty food, comfortable surroundings, gratifying outcomes are all tjotjog. In
the broadest and most abstract sense two separate items tjotjog when their
coincidence forms an aesthetic pattern. It implies a contrapuntal view of the
universe in which what is important is what natural relationship the separate
elements—space, time, and human motivation—have to one another, how
they must be arranged in order to strike a chord and avoid a dissonance.
    As in harmony, the ultimately correct relations are fixed, determinate, and
knowable, and so religion, like harmony, is ultimately a science, no matter
how much of an art its actual practice may be. The pétungan system provides
a way of stating these relationships and thus of tuning one’s own actions to
them, of avoiding the kind of disharmony with the general order of nature
which can only bring misfortune.
    Suppose one wishes to change his residence. He can’t just up and move;
he must first take into account two important variables: the direction in which
he will be moving and the day on which he wishes to move. The direction is
usually one of the cardinal directions, for Javanese villages and towns tend
to be laid out, as are the individual houses, streets, and rice fields within them
(except on mountain sides where it is not possible), more or less in alignment
with the major compass points. Space is square, and one moves through it
rectangularly: people tell you to move your chair a little to the west or to
pass the peppers to the man on your east. After two hours on a bus winding
along a mountain road, I was requested to exit by the north door. Javanese
dread to be mixed up about directions, and a person confused or dizzy or
slightly off is said to be someone who does not know where north is.
    Time, on the other hand, is, as has been mentioned, pulsative: a given
period of time is a result of the coincidence of days in the five- and seven-
day cycles, and, in the more elaborate pétungan systems, of these days with
one of the thirty seven-day wukuh weeks, one of the twelve Moslem lunar
months, and one of the eight windu years. In moving, then, one tjotjogs the
direction of movement with numbers attached to the days.
  I then asked Ardjo [my landlord] how he had decided what day would be a
  good one for us to move in on. He said each day has a number (neptu) :
  Monday 4, Sunday 5, Tuesday 3, Wednesday 7, Thursday 8, Friday 6, Satur­
  day 9; Legi 5, Paing 9, Pon 7, Wagê 4, Kliwon 8. You add these. Thus we
  came on Saptu-Wagé, which is 9 for Saturday, plus 4 for Wagé, giving 13.
  Then, whether this number is good is dependent upon the direction in which
  you are moving. We were moving south to north, so it was all right. He finds
  out which numbers are good for which directions by consulting records in­
  herited from his parents. He said he had “half memorized” them but still
  always checked, for if he made a mistake the troubles which followed would
»32«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  be his fault. He said that moving is the thing of very first importance for the
  Javanese, “number one.” Not so for the Dutch, though— they don’t believe
  in it. When Ardjo’s father was transferred here from Tebing (he was, like
  Ardjo, a railroad worker), his Dutch superior was transferred too. Ardjo’s
  father figured out the correct day to move but the Dutch boss, being haughty,
  felt it would be beneath his dignity to go on the same day as his Javanese in­
  ferior and so waited for two more days. Ardjo’s father told him that that was
  a bad day to go south and something terrible would happen to him, but the
  Dutchman said that was just “empty talk,” and then six months after he
  moved he died.
    For the more reflective of the prijajis these number systems for the days
are empirical descriptions of the ultimate order of nature. They are said to
have come out of the inner consciousness of some famous mystic and to have
been handed down generation to generation, often secretly, from teacher to
chosen pupil. But for the abangans they tend to be explained once more in
terms of a spirit, the so-called naga dina or “snake of the day.”* Someone
moving the wrong way on the wrong day is said to be either bitten by the
snake of the day or eaten by him.
    There are also snakes of the week, month, and year. For example, here
is a chart of the directions permitted by the naga wulan, the snake of the
Moslem lunar months :
                              North: Sawal
                                     Sela
                                     Besar

             West: Redjeb                              East: Sura
                   Ruwah                                     Sapar
                   Pasa                                      Mulud

                              South: Bakdamulud
                                     Djumadilawal
                                     Djumadilakir
Thus, in Sawal, Sela, and Besar, one should move north or go on an im­
portant trip in that direction; in Redjeb, Ruwah, and Pasa one should go west;
and so on. One uses naga wulan for more serious occasions—a long trip, say,
to Djakarta or Surabaja—while naga dina are mostly used for movements
within the town. Naga taun, the snake of the year, is concerned with really
momentous journeys, such as trips outside Java.
    The naga dina are naturally the least powerful and can sometimes be de­
ceived. For example, if one wishes to go south on the wrong day for it, he
can start off north, throwing the naga off his trail, turn west and then south,
circling his destination and finally coming in, apparently correctly, northward.
Few people would venture this for the months, however, and even with the
     * Here too, however, excessively literal interpretations are to be avoided. When I
asked an old woman who had told me that I had fallen sick because I had entered Modjo-
kuto originally on the wrong day and so had been “eaten by the snake of the day,” what
such a snake looked like and how one came into contact with them, she said: “Don’t be
silly—you can’t see Wednesday, can you?”
The Slametan Cycles                                                        »33«
days it is risky, for the snake may see through your tricks. The father of one
of my informants finally died after having been desperately ill with tuberculosis
for several years, and the informant attributed his death to his having moved
west on the wrong day even though the evasion method had been applied and
he had started off to the east. When I protested that his father had been nearly
moribund for over a year, he said, “Sure, but he was sick for three years and
he didn’t die; we moved house and immediately he died.”
    A rather more complicated system in use by some people in Modjokuto
employs a diagram such as this:




Here we have a somewhat more general system, in that it can tell one whether
anything he intends to do is likely to be a good idea or not. First one figures
the number of the day on which he is doing the divination—e.g., in the system
quoted earlier, by far the most widespread in Modjokuto, Saptu-Wagé was
13. So he takes 13 com kernels and drops them one by one on each day in
order (beginning with Monday). When he has run out of all 13, he picks up
all the kernels lying on the day on which he has just dropped the last kernel
and continues until he comes to rest on another day, and so forth. Eventually
he will land with a final kernel on a day on which no kernels remain. This day
is the one on which it would be the most unwise to carry out the contemplated
action, while the day on which the greatest number of kernels lies when the
process has been completed is the most propitious one. Another system merely
lists the months and gives the days and dates which are propitious and those
which are not: in Sawal, Friday is a good day for almost anything, and the
second of the month is too; on the ninth and twentieth one is better off sitting
at home. One man I knew had a chart with days, months, and wukuh weeks
all interlaced with various other variables to produce a quite refined predictive
instrument.
     Systems of this complexity are usually the property of a specialist; the
average person will usually go to a dukun when he wishes to divine something.
Before the war, it is claimed, this was even truer than now. Such systems are
said to have been very secret then, handed down from teacher to pupil with
much care; it is only lately that they have been diffused among the common
people. I rather doubt this, but the possession of a pétungan system somewhat
different from those of one’s neighbors and accounted superior to them even
today gives one an edge over others in the business of living, and one’s private
system is often guarded with great care. Such people, who tend often to be
curers as well, are consulted about all kinds of personal problems and for just
 a general prognosis:
»34«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  Pak Tjipto (a dukun, one of the best-known curers in Modjokuto) asked me
  when I was bora (the days; he was not interested in the month or year), and
  so I said Rebo-Pon and (my wife) Djumuwat-Legi and that we were married
  on Sapîu-Wagê. Well, he said, Rebo is 7, Pon is 7, and that makes 14. Djumu-
  wat is 6, Legi 5, which makes 11. Eleven plus 14 is 25. Sapin is 9. Wage 4
  or 13. Thirteen and 25 are 38. Subtract 3 times 10 or 30 and you get 8. Sub­
  tract 3 more for 5 and then 3 more giving 2. This is good. If you get 1 or 0
  it is not good and people fight and often get divorced.............He said Djumu­
  wat-Legi, my wife’s birthday, was better than mine, Rebo-Pon, so I should
  follow her decisions and not she mine. If I did things “according to my own
  will,” I would certainly go wrong, and she should be the head in the family.
    Pétungan systems are used to decide in which direction to enter a house
when one wishes to rob it without being discovered, to pick the side of a cock­
ring on which to sit in order to win all one’s bets, to predict whether one will
succeed or not in trade on a given day, to choose the correct medicine for a
disease, to analyze someone’s character, to determine the proper day for
circumcisions and weddings (usually down to the very hour at which the
ceremony ought to occur), and to decide whether a prospective marriage is
likely to work out. For this last, the birthday of the bride and groom are added
up, almost always by a dukun, to see if they tjotjog; if they do not, the wedding
does not occur, at least in traditional circles where this belief is still quite
strong. In some cases there may be a conflict when the bride’s and groom’s
families or their dukuns use different systems, and I know of such a case in
which the wedding—after months of argument—did not take place; but
usually this sort of problem is avoided by deferment to the system employed
by the bride’s family. Also, people are not above using pétungan as a way out
of a difficult situation, as in the case of the woman who told a suitor for her
daughter’s hand whom she found unacceptable generally that his date was
not tjotjog when in fact it was.
    I know of at least one case in which a couple were finally allowed to marry
over the protests of their parents despite incompatible birthdates; and some
people just marry and hope for the best, blaming whatever misfortune occurs
on die lack of fit. In general, however, even fairly urbanized families often still
hold firmly to the system—as can be seen in the following case, where the
problem was one of the timing of the wedding ceremony rather than incom­
patible birthdates:
  Rahman told me about his cousin, Mutallip, who was supposed to get married
  to a girl in Bragang (a small city not far from Modjokuto) last week. He has
  known this girl for years, and they were school friends, and they have been
  engaged for nearly three years. The girl already works somewhere, and they
  have been waiting for Mutallip to get some steady job in Djakarta, where he
  now lives. . . . He finally found one as a secretary of a former cabinet
  minister, and this made it possible for him to get married. The date was set
  by the father-in-law and everything was made ready. The day of the wedding,
  last Saturday, came and the bridegroom didn’t arrive from Djakarta until late
  in the day. He said after he arrived that he had been going from person to
  person in Djakarta, the cabinet minister included, to borrow money for his
  fare here. This excuse was taken as reasonable by his aunt, Bu Merto. But
The Slametan Cycles                                                             »35«
  the trouble was that the wedding was set for 11:00 a.m . at the latest and he
  arrived at 11:15. The father-in-law said that it was too late, the propitious
  moment had passed, and any wedding after that time would not be right.
  Mutallip and his father, Pak Rijadi, seemed to think the fifteen minutes or
  half-hour weren’t very important, but the father-in-law was steadfast. Mutal­
  lip didn’t talk to the father-in-law directly, but just to his father and fiancée.
  He was quite angry and said that unless they were married this week he would
  not have the money to come all the way from Djakarta again for a long time,
  probably a year. This meant marry now or wait a year. The father-in-law
  didn’t give in, and Mutallip went back to Djakarta.




                             Costs of Slametans

the giving of slametans, of course, costs money, but it is difficult to make
an estimate of how much, not only because people do not keep records of
such expenditures but also because figures giving amounts of money in a
foreign currency are often quite meaningless or misleading even if one knows
the exchange rate. This is true not merely because the official rate (about 11.3
rupiahs to the dollar in Indonesia) may be unrealistic, but also because even
the free rate (about 30 to 1 in 1953) reflects the differences not between the
buying power of the two currencies as the average man perceives them but
between the wealth of the two countries taken as a whole. Thus, no matter
how enlightening it may be for the analysis of world income distribution,, to
take the 30 to 1 ratio and say that a man who in Indonesia makes 600 rupiahs
a month is comparable to a man making $20 a month in the United States is
sociologically preposterous, for the 600-rupiah man is actually moderately well
off so far as standard of living within the Javanese context is concerned.
     To estimate the economic significance of their religious celebrations from
the point of view of the Javanese themselves, in order to giye a valid notion to
the Western reader of the actual sums of Javanese wealth involved, demands
what might be called a comparative phenomenology of currency. One must
find a divisor for Indonesian currency which gives a result which reflects, even
if only very roughly, some realistic notion of what rupiah notations of wealth
mean in terms of buying experience, social status, and relative well-being as
we are familiar with them—a divisor which translates Indonesian economic
perceptions into American ones, insofar as that is at all possible.
     In attempting to find such a divisor it must not be forgotten that the dis­
tribution of available wealth within the two countries among the various social
groups and classes is quite remarkably different: many fewer people are
 “moderately well-off” there than here. Moreover, there is a great difference
 in the over-all total of available wealth, with the result that, for example, be­
 cause of the lack of large-scale domestic industrial production, many goods
 accessible to even relatively poor Americans—automobiles, for example—
 are very much less accessible to even fairly well-off Indonesians.
»36«                                                 T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
    In this context, then, I think, mainly on the basis of a common-sense com­
parison of my own experiences in the United States and in Modjokuto, that
a divisor of three is a realistic one. Thus the man who earns 600 rupiahs can
be compared to a man who earns $200 here in general terms of the view both
he himself and others around him hold of his economic and social position;
and a soft drink that sells for 30 cents in Indonesia could probably be had
for a dime in the United States. Therefore, when I say a fairly simple slametan
in Modjokuto will cost about 30 rupiahs, it would be highly incorrect to con­
clude that this is comparable in any phenomenological sense to an expenditure
of one dollar in the United States; ten dollars would give more of the feel
of the thing.
     Preliminaries completed, the following gives some figures on the cost of
different slcimetans actually given while I was in Modjokuto (figures marked
with an astèrisk are estimates) :

                                 Typo of Slametan                                       Cost {Rp)

  "D ream " shmetan (urban laborer; asIt wasthe end of the month, norice included)          3
  Megengan (policeman)                                                                      5
  Name-changing                                                                            15
  Pasaran for baby (policeman)                                                             20
  Moving                                                                                   30
  Megengan                                                                                 40
  Malemon                                                                                  75
  Moving                                                                                   90
  Maloman (policeman)                                                                     100*
  Tlngkeban (a wholly rural peasant; includes two goats at Rp 160; the return from
       buwufis was Rp 250)                                                                 600*
  Wedding (urban laborer; buwufis totaled Rp 1,000*)                                      700*
  Funeral (mediumly well-off town family)                                                1,345*
  Wedding (railroad conductor)                                                           1,500*
  Circumcision (urban laborer)                                                           1,500*
  Wedding (very well-to-do) (The fa/uban— in which the participants contribute money
       before each turn with the dancer and the gin glass— at this wedding brought in
       Rp 1,475. In addition there were many expensive gifts from both Indonesians—
       one group of 36 officials gave a present worthRp 700— and Chinese)                5,000


   In the case of the funeral in the list above, which cost an estimated Rp
1,345, an itemization of the expenses is available. The expenditure for the
funeral proper were as follows (Rp) :

  Coins given out to mourners                                                       40
  Muslin winding sheet                                                              40
  Grave marker (bought ready-made from a Chinese; this would never be done in a
       village)                                                                     45
  Rental of litter                                                                   5
  Planks (the wood was bought)                                                      30
  Flowers                                                                           15
  Food (in addition to that brought by the guests)                                  60*
  Cigarettes for guests (this is an item in all sfamefans)                          45
  TOTAL for the funeral proper                                                  Rp 280*
The Slametan Cycles                                                        »37«
In sequel to the funeral, these expenses (in Rp) were incurred:

 Seven days of chanting at prayer house                                   35
 Third-day slamotan                                                      100
 Seventh-day stameian                                                    130
 Fortieth-day slamotan (about 40 people in attendance)                   200 *


This was as far as the informant had reached in the cycle of death slametans.
The addition to the expenses itemized above of extrapolated estimates of Rp
150 for the first- and second-year slametans and Rp 300 for the thousandth-
day slametan gives an estimated total expenditure, for the entire series of cere­
monies, of Rp 1,345.
Chapter 4                            The Slametan Cycles:
                                                    Birth


J avanese rites of passage describe an arc running from the fussy, detailed
little gestures surrounding birth to the large, often rather elaborate feasts and
entertainments accompanying circumcision and marriage to the muted, emo­
tionally constricted rituals of death. In all, the slametan provides the skeleton;
what varies is the intensity, mood, and complexity of the special symbolism
of the occasion. The rites emphasize both the continuity and the underlying
identity of all aspects of life and the special transitions and phases through
which it passes.



                                 T ingkeban
A round birth four major slametans and a variable number of minor ones
cluster. The major ones are given at seven months of pregnancy ( tingkeban;
this one is only held when the child is the first for either the mother or the
father or both), at birth itself ( babaran or brokokan), five days after birth
(pasaran), and seven months after birth (pilonan). Other slametans may or
may not be given at three months in the first pregnancy (telonan), the first
month after birth (selapanan), and one year after (taim an). Some people
hold slametans each month after birth for a year or two sporadically into
the adulthood of the child, but this practice is widely variable and such
slametans are generally small and unimportant ones.
    The timing, it should be noted, is not by Western thirty-day months but
by the Javanese month of thirty-five days. The Javanese combine their own
five-day market week (Legi, Paing, Pon, Wage, Kliw on) with the Western-
Moslem seven-day week (Minggu, Senén, Selasa, Rebo, Rem is, Djumuwat,
S etu ). They originally had a seven-day week of their own as well as various
others, and the present one is merely a case of Islamic names replacing native
ones. As seven times five is thirty-five, there are thirty-five possible separate
days (Minggu-Legi . . . Senèn-Paing . . . Djumuwat-Legi, Setu-Paing . . .
Setu-K liw on) , and this cycle forms the “month.” Actually, however, these
                                        38
The Slametan Cycles: Birth                                                       »39«
“months” are not fixed and absolute units as ours are but merely the length
of time between any one singled-out day and its next occurrence thirty-five
days later.
    If one asks a Javanese when he was born, he always knows: Setu-Paing,
for example. The difficulty is that he almost never knows the month or year,
and he doesn’t care. If he is born on Djumuwat-Legi, then his selapanan or
“one-month birthday” is Djumuwat-Legi the next time it comes around. His
seven-month birthday (pitonan) will fall on the seventh Djumuwat-Legi after
the one on which he was born. Javanese calendrical time is pulsative, not
spatial like ours.* When the cogs of the calendar click together in a certain
combination, it is time for a certain ceremony to be held, a journey to be
begun, or a medicine to be taken. It is perhaps in part a result of this that
Javanese life seems to fluctuate between what might be called full and empty
time: moments, hours, or days of busy, crowded, intense activity alternate
with periods in which people seem to do nothing much at all but wait fon
something to happen to them.
    Except in those comparatively few cases where a three-month pregnancy
slametan has been given or where a woman who has already had a child has
married a man who has not, the tingkeban represents the introduction of the
Javanese woman into motherhood. Because of the relative indefiniteness of
the time of conception, the tingkeban is not held on a fixed day corresponding
to that on which the pregnancy began, but always on the closest Saturday to
the beginning of the seventh month of pregnancy insofar as that can be esti­
mated.
    It is held at the home of the mother-to-be’s mother, and a special slametan
is prepared with the following major elements, which I give with a few of their
meanings, along with another warning that it is never possible to get com­
plete agreement among informants on all these things:
     (1) A dish of rice for each guest with white rice on the top, yellow under­
  neath. The white rice symbolizes purity, the yellow love. This should be served
  in a banana-leaf basket held together with a steel needle (kings and nobles are
  said to have used gold ones in the “old days”) so that the child will be strong
  and sharp of mind.
     (2) Rice mixed with grated coconut and a whole stuffed chicken. This
  is intended both to honor the Prophet Muhammad and to secure slamet for
  all the participants in the feast and for the unborn child. Usually there is in­
  cluded here an offering to Dewi Pertimah (literally: “The Hindu Goddess,
  Fatimah”—i.e., Muhammad’s daughter with a Hindu title!) of two bananas
  joined at the base.
     (3) Seven small pyramids of white rice mainly symbolizing the seven
  months of pregnancy, but often various other “intentions” are added, such as
  to honor the seven days of the week, the seven layers of heaven, and the like.
     (4) Eight (sometimes nine) round balls of rice shaped with the fist to
  symbolize the eight (or nine) Walis—the legendary bringers of Islam to
  Indonesia—and particularly to honor Sunan Kalidjaga, the most famous and
    * The Western calendar is, of course, used by the larger businesses and the agencies
of the Indonesian government.
»40«                                           T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  most powerful of the walis, who is usually credited with founding the shadow
  play, the slametan, and abangan religion in general.
     (5) A large rice pyramid, called the “strong” pyramid because it is made
  of sticky glutinous rice, the intent of which is to make the child strong and
  to honor the danjang of the village.
     (6) Some food plants which grow below the ground (such as cassava)
  and some which grow hanging above (such as fruits), the first to symbolize
  the earth and the latter the sky, each of which is conceived as having seven
  levels.
     (7) Three kinds of rice mush: plain white, red (made so by adding coco­
  nut sugar), and a combination of the two: white around the outside and red
  in the center of the dish. The white represents the “water” of the mother,
  the red the “water” of the father, and their mixture (called bubur sengkala
  — literally, “misfortune porridge”) is considered especially efficacious for
  preventing the entrance of harmful spirits of any kind.
     (8) Rudjak legi, a very spicy concoction of various fruits, peppers, spices,
  and sugar. This is the most important so far as the iingkeban is concerned,
  and the most distinctive; most of the other elements occur in other slametans,
  but rudjak occurs only here. It is said that if the rudjak tastes “hot” or “spicy”
  to the prospective mother she will have a girl, but if it tastes flat to her she
  will have a boy.

     These are only a few of the major elements of the tingkeban and of the
interpretations that go with them. A learned abangan informant, especially
an older one, could list half a hundred slametan foods, each with a special
method of preparation, a special symbolic meaning, and intended for a spe­
cial recipient. What is immediately striking even in these few examples,
however, is the rich mixture of Islamic, Hindu-Buddhist, and native spirits,
deities, and culture heroes into one grand syncretism. Hindu goddesses rub
elbows with Islamic prophets and both of these with local danjangs; and
there is little sign that any of them are surprised at the others’ presence.
    In the half-hour udjub (introductory speech) to one tingkeban which I
attended, an old man of about seventy-five dedicated food and good inten­
tions to the Prophets Adam and Eve, to the Prophet Muhammad, his wife,
his children, and his Companions; to the danjang of the village and to his
children standing guard at the four corners of the village; to the twin guardian
spirits of the man involved in the ceremony, which came (as do those of every
Javanese) originally from the remains of his navel cord and from the amniotic
fluid of his mother and which follow him around the rest of his life; to
the five senses (seeing, hearing, feeling, smelling, and talking) and the four
directions; to the ancestors of everyone present; to Nini Tawek, the angel
who guards the Javanese kitchen and to whom the women give a small
offering before every slametan; to God under both his Javanese and Arabic
names (Pangéran and Allah) ; to the spirits living in the rafters of the house;
to some spirit blacksmiths pounding out magical daggers (kris) and spears
(tumbak) in a nearby volcano crater; to the animals that crawl along like
snails and the animals which run along like ants (so they would stay out
of the food) ; to “mother earth,” not further defined; to Sunan Kalidjaga and
the other walis; to Baginda Hijas and Baginda Chilir, guardians of the land
The Slameian Cycles: Birth                                                           »41«
and the water respectively; and to the as yet unborn child fasting and medi­
tating in his mother’s womb. And then he closed with the Moslem Confession
of Faith: “There is no god but God, and Muhammad is His Prophet!”
     A shorter and perhaps more typical udjub, at least within the town where
people are satisfied with a briefer treatment, was dictated to me by an
informant in the usual exalted Javanese employed for this purpose:
  My brothers, now that all of you whom I have invited, young and old, have
  arrived, I will speak, giving the intentions of my son Mertowirjo. This married
  couple wishes, with all respect, on this day of the seven-day week and of the
  five-day week, Setu-Paing, to seek well-being (slamet), and deeply wishes and
  begs that they may not be harmed by anything and that nothing will happen
  to them and that no hindrances at all will occur. Therefore I offer praise to
  the danjang who founded this village, who cleared it from the forest and who
  guards it day and night. May he give us well-being and may he protect us from
  all dangers. My first intention is to dedicate the coconut rice and the whole
  chicken as food for the Prophet Muhammad and his wife, children, and Com­
  panions Abu Bakar, Umar, Usman, and Ali. For this reason they are asked to
  dine with us and are asked to give forgiveness, and we hope that this tingkeban
  will bring well-being to the as yet unborn child from this seventh month in
  the womb until it is born. The round balls of rice I give in honor of Sunan
  Kalidjaga and eight walis. I hope that we shall all be given pardon and well­
  being and that we shall be safe from all dangers, and that the as yet unborn
  child from this seventh month in the womb until it is born will have well-being.
  The seven pyramids of rice I give in honor to the seven days of the week, the
  five market days, the thirty weeks (wuhuh; one wukuh has seven days), the
  twelve months, and the eight win du (eight named years make up a winda
  cycle and are sometimes each called a windu as well). May this Setu-Paing
  bring us all well-being. And in order to aid the realization of my intentions
  I give honor to the Prophet Hijas, who guards the earth, and the Sultan Chilir,
  who guards the water. May the water in which this married couple later will
  be bathed protect them from all dangers and hindrances, and may the dirt
  which will be washed off them cause them no harm, and may nothing happen
  to them. The dish of white and yellow rice is in honor of the seven months the
  child has already passed in the womb.* May he have well-being until his
  birth. The white rice porridge is from the mother, the red rice porridge is
  from the father—may they insure the child’s well-being until his birth. The
  red and white rice porridge, may it protect us against all the misfortunes which
  have already fallen upon us and all those which have not yet fallen upon us.
   May those which have not yet fallen be prevented from doing so by Allah, and
  may those which have already fallen be blown away on the wind. If I have
  omitted anything, if my speech has had faults in it, if there has been anything
  that has disturbed anyone’s emotions, I beg pardon from you, my brothers,
  old and young.
    In the tingkeban, as in all slametans, in addition to the food itself, the
joint offering to both the spirits and one’s neighbors, there is a special offering
for the spirits taken in their totality: the sadjèn. More or less constant in its
    * Actually it is only six. People say that the ceremony is given at the beginning of the
seventh month rather than at the end so that the excitement will not be so likely to
cause a miscarriage.
»42«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
composition, the sadjèn appears in nearly all Javanese ceremonies and often
appears by itself without a ceremony. Peasants often put sadjèns at one comer
of the rice field when plowing, planting, transplanting, weeding, or harvesting.
Someone who has, say, dreamed of a dead person will, if he feels the event
not serious enough for a slametan, put a sadjèn out on the crossroads. And
many Modjolcuto abangans still follow the ancient custom of putting them
out in various room comers and doorways around the house each Thursday
evening, which by Javanese reckoning is part of Friday since sunset marks
the beginning of a new day. The sadjèn, the meaning of whose separate items
is largely lost, is—along with the spell—the simplest and most elemental of
Javanese religious acts and as such finds a place in almost every aspect of
their daily life.
     In a tingkeban given in a village about fifteen miles from Modjokuto the
rather elaborate sadjèn was composed of the following items:
  a miniature hair comb
  another, finer-type comb
  a tiny box fashioned from cardboard
  a model mirror, made from a fragment of glass pasted onto some newspaper
  a paper of pins
  some traditionally woven Javanese thread
  a wooden shuttle used in weaving (this is special to the tingkeban)
  a tiny water jug of Mid-Eastern type
  various types of flowers, spices, and medicinal herbs from the garden (ten
     kinds)
  a tiny piece of incense
  a mixture of betel nut
  a plug of tobacco
  18.5 cents (this should be in old coins, but these are rarely available now)
  a little rice
  an egg (also special to the tingkeban)
All this was placed in a large banana-leaf basket lined with bananas and put
to one side of where the slametan guests sat.
    When the slametan part of the tingkeban is completed, the sadjèn is
presented to the dukun baji (midwife), who conducts the ceremony which
follows and who, traditionally, finally aids in the birth itself. Nowadays,
however, the dukun baji who officiates at the tingkeban is not always the
one who conducts the birth, and even those people who later have their babies
in a hospital sometimes give a tingkeban with a dukun baji. This pattern is
quite general: for a shadow play a sadjèn is prepared and given to the
puppeteer; at the marriage the dukun mantèn (marriage specialist) receives
it; and at the ceremony initiating the harvest the dukun wiwit (literally,
“opening specialist”) gets it. At the tingkeban the dukun mantèn who origi­
nally officiated at the couple’s wedding may preside rather than the prospective
dukun baji; one of my informants claimed to have had both at his tingkeban.
     When the introductory speech is completed, the donga (Arabic prayer)
given, and the food tasted and wrapped up for carrying home, the ceremony
for the tingkeban proper begins. A tub of water strewn with flower petals is
T h e Slametan Cycles: Birth                                                »43«
prepared, the water taken, theoretically, from seven different springs. It is
said that it is in such a bath that gods and goddesses always bathe, and so
the married couple are momentarily viewed as divine, and scoopfuls of this
water are poured over them by the dukun, who chants a spell (djapa) :
  In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!
  My intention is to bathe this husband and wife,
  I tingkeb them with water from seven springs.
  May all their descendants have well-being from this day forward.
  This is necessary because of Allah (may He be exalted!).
  The creation of Allah.
     The Javanese string from the sadjèn is then produced, the woman tying
it loosely about her waist. The man takes a Javanese dagger (/cm), lifts
it high above his head to honor it, and then cuts loose the string, coming
up from below and inside it, so as to cut it toward himself. The kris is then
stored away. In a tingkeban I saw, a kris belonging to the wife’s mother’s
ancestors was used, and it was said that the kris had no other modem use
except in tingkebans.
    While the man is accomplishing this task, the dukun chants another djapa:
  In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!
  My intention is to cut open a young unopened leaf [i.e., the string, sometimes
     an actual leaf is used],
  But I really am not cutting open a leaf—
  I am cutting open the way for the baby to emerge.
  I limit you [the baby] to nine months
  Of meditation in your mother’s womb.
  Come out easy, go in easy,
  Easy, easy, by the will of Allah.
     Next the weaving shuttle is dropped by the dukun inside the woman’s
sarong. It is caught at the bottom by the husband’s mother in a shawl of
the type in which Javanese babies are carried about on their mother’s hip,
and she carries it off as though it were a real child. The mother of the
husband will joke, speaking to the cradled shuttle, saying, "Oh, my grandson,”
while the mother of the woman will say, "Oh, my granddaughter.” The first
is supposed inevitably to desire a boy, the second a girl descendant. Two
green coconuts on which have been drawn Djanaka and Sumbadra, the male
shadow-play hero and his wife, who the Javanese say are the two most
beautiful people who ever lived, are placed in front of the husband. He takes
one slash at each of them with a large knife. If both split, it means there will
be a very easy birth, no trouble at all. If only one splits, then the unsplit one
tells the sex of the child (a male if Djanaka, etc.). If neither splits, then
the birth will be difficult and may not come off well at all. Various other
gestures, such as dropping an egg down through the woman’s sarong, throw­
ing a water jug out the door (both of them breaking), and the like are often
added to symbolize an easy birth.
     Now the woman engages in a clothes-changing routine. She puts on one
sarong after another, pulling out the previous one from underneath. Each
»44«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF       JAVA
time the crowd cries out amid much hilarity, “Oh no, that is not proper,” until
she reaches the seventh and last one, the so-called toh watu. A toh watu,
properly speaking, is a mark on a stone which cannot be erased. As a sarong,
a toh watu is a special type made of heavy cotton which will not fade and
thus symbolizes the lasting relationship between the mother and the child
throughout life, their life-long inseparability. The efficacy of a mother’s
sarong for bringing a person out of a faint has already been mentioned, but
the symbolization of mother-child relations in terms of the mother’s clothing
is even more general.
  The old lady said that wherever I went I should always take one or two
  pieces of my mother’s clothing with me. This would keep me slamet. She
  said that if I was upset or dizzy and I laid my head on my mother’s pillow I
  would recover. She said all this was because when I was an embryo I medi­
  tated in my mother’s cave for nine months. She said this was just like regular
  religious meditation. The foetus doesn’t eat or sleep, just meditates and learns
  about spiritual things. Later, when the child is instructed in spiritual things,
  one always reminds him of this: “You were nine months in my cave,” and so
  forth. That is why, said the old woman, a person can never talk back to his
  mother (he may to his father, a very little bit), because he meditated in her,
  and why I should have a couple of pieces of my mother’s clothes with me
  whenever I travel if I wanted to be sure and be slamet.
A similar belief is connected with a girl’s first menses. The sarong she is
wearing when she first menstruates is never washed or worn again, but kept.
Later, if the girl has a sick child, she wraps him in this sarong and he will
get well, this being held to be more effective treatment than one can get from
either a dukun or a Western-trained doctor.
     The tingkeban ritual finally closes with the wife, assisted by the husband,
selling rudjak legi, a kind of spicy-sweet fruit juice, to all those present for
a token payment. No one I talked to seemed to remember what the meaning
of this act was, although some said that the mother would use the money
collected to buy medicine for the baby.* In general, conscious awareness of
the meaning of the various elements in abangan rituals varies rather widely
from person to person; and while some people are much interested in religious
detail and love to discuss it, others merely do what they are told to do by
those who “know,” caring little about the ultimate significance of what they
are doing.
     To have a child without a tingkeban is said to ngebokné him, i.e., make
a carabao out of him, and to say this about someone’s child is a serious in­
sult, insinuating that the child’s parents are mere animals and “don’t know
human order.” Nevertheless, sometimes if a woman has lost three or four
children in childbirth or before, her husband may take an oath, “Jèn kowé
meteng manèh, tak-kebokné” (“If you get pregnant again, I will treat the
child as a carabao” ), and says he will hold no tingkeban, and no other birth
slametans either. This is a rather serious thing to do, for not only does it
leave one unprotected against the spirits but it also leaves one open for later
    * No other preparation for the baby’s arrival, such as making clothes or cradles,
etc., are approved of; this is “presupposing God” and brings misfortune.
The Slametan Cycles: Birth                                                »45«
criticism if the child grows up intractable, as it would be likely to do in
such a case. But a man in our neighborhood whose wife was ill during
pregnancy swore thus and all came off well.



                                   Babaran
ju st before the birth, some people have a small slametan with just the
household members attending, the main feature of which is a dish of rice
meal with a peeled banana in the middle of it to symbolize an easy birth,
but this slametan is as often ignored as given, even by fairly strict abangans.
In any case, when the labor pains begin, the dukun baji is called and im­
mediately upon arrival puts out a sadjèn by the mother’s bed and another
in the toilet (because the spirits in the toilet do not like the smell of the
blood associated with birth). Then she rolls out a sleeping mat on the floor,
sits the mother on it, and begins to massage her, chanting a spell for her well­
being:
  In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!
  My intention is to roll out a sleeping mat
  And set a loosely woven basket on it [i.e., the mother].
  Grandfather Spirit of Modjokuto, Grandmother Spirit of Modjokuto!
  Open the door to heaven,
  Close the door to hell.
  The devils and other evil spirits, may they go away.
  The male ancestor spirits say that nothing will happen,
  The female ancestor spirits say that nothing will happen.
  Wherever you wander, you may be safe,
  May you be safe from dangers both from above and from below,
  Wherever you wander or go, little mother,
  Who are about to bear a child.
    After the child has been bom, the dukun employs the traditional bamboo
knife (welad) to cut the umbilical cord.
  In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!
  The bamboo knife
  Which I am about to use to cut the skin and flesh,
  The skin of the newborn baby.
  “Your inlaid metal decorations are what?” [she questions the knife]
  “It is metal with magical power!” [the knife replies]
  May you [the baby] feel no pain, may it be usual,
  Usual by the will of Allah
  Be cool, be cool—hit by my white saliva,
  May the white blood [of the child] gather with the white blood,
  May the black blood gather with the black blood,
  The red blood with the red blood.
  May the flesh [of the umbilical cord] close up,
»46«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  May the veins narrow and the skin grow together,
  Grow together by the will of God.
  May the bones join with the bones,
  The flesh with the flesh,
  The skin with the skin,
  The blood in the bones with the blood in the bones,
  The veins with the veins.
  May the flesh close up, the veins narrow, the skin grow together,
  The blood coagulate, -ate, -ate, by the will of Allah.
She then rubs kunir (tumeric), the Javanese all-purpose herb, onto the wound
and ties the cord.
     The baby is washed, and then the mother; and there are spells for both
of these performances too. The umbilical cord and afterbirth are wrapped in
white muslin, put into a jug, salted, and buried outside the house, in front
if the child is a boy, in back if it is a girl, although some people bury both
in front, the boy to the left of the door, the girl to the right. A little wicker
fence is erected around the spot or a broken earthware pot is inverted over
it to keep dogs or other animals from digging it up, and a small candle is
kept burning over it for thirty-five days in order to prevent evil spirits from
disturbing it.
  In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!
  Father Earth, Mother Earth,
  I am about to leave in your care the birthcord of the baby.
  Thus the baby itself I leave behind [i.e., I don’t bury it],
  Only the umbilical cord do I leave in your care.
  Don’t bother the baby,
  This is necessary because of Allah.
  If you do bother him, you will be punished by God.
  Cast away the childhood illnesses from the baby,
  This too is necessary because of Allah.
  Birthcord, thus I leave you in someone else’s care.
  Little baby, don’t oppose your father,
  Or you will be punished by Allah.
    The burying of the umbilical cord is a serious matter. One woman blamed
the death of her child, in convulsion after forty days of life, on the fact that
the dukun did not put enough salt in the umbilical cord when she buried it,
and so it “came up” and the child died. The cord and afterbirth, coming as
it does after the birth of the child, is considered to be his spirit younger
brother, while the amniotic fluid which precedes him (it is thrown out up into
the air) is considered to be his spirit older brother. For the first thirty-five
days they remain near the child and protect him against illness, the first
under the ground, the other in the sky. Afterwards they may wander, but
they remain one’s guardian spirits. It takes, however, extended mental con­
centration, fasting and wakefulness—what the Javanese call tapa—to get into
contact with them. Sometimes the bamboo knife and the kunir herb medicine
are considered spirit brothers and protectors too, giving each person four,
but this is less common.
Th q Slametan Cycles: Birth                                                      »47«
     Lastly, the dukun places the baby on a low table and slaps the table three
times to startle the baby so that he will be accustomed to such surprises and
less likely to be severely startled later in life and thus less easily made ill, for
such sudden upset is one of the main causes of sickness in both the child
and the adult. At the same time, the dukun introduces the child into the
life of men:
  In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!
  My intention is to startle the baby,
  Born from the womb of his mother.
  “Little baby” [she addresses him], “what gifts have you brought?”
  “Body and breath” [he answers], “health,
  And a fixed religious duty [i.e., Islam].”
  There is no god but God, and Muhammad is His Prophet!
  Jaallah, Jaallah, Jaallah.
    She then strikes the table three times with the flat of her hand and recites
in Arabic the Moslem Confession of Faith:
  I declare truly that there is no god but God,
  And I declare truly that Muhammad is His Prophet.
    That evening a small slametan, called babaran, is held, marked by the
presence of a whole chicken egg, because before one is bom he is an egg.
With this the complex of spells and rituals immediately around birth is
completed.



                                     Pasaran
five days after the first slametan for the new-bom baby is held, a somewhat
larger one, the pasaran, takes place, at which, among other things, the child
is named. The father, theoretically, has the final say on the child’s name,
and he usually gives the name to the child in the udjub speech at the slametan.
 (He may, however, honor his own father and father-in-law by allowing them to
perform this act.) To a large extent names are determined by the social
category into which the family falls.
  Parto talked about naming: There are three types of names one uses, de­
  pending on what group one is in: village names, noble or prijaji names, and
  santri names. Village boys are sometimes just named after the day on which
  they are born, for example, Senèn or Paing. Or they have simple names such
  as Sidin or Sirin. Girls have the same names, only in the feminine form:
  Sidinah. Boys of very high prijajis usually have either Djoko- or Barn-
  bang- in front of their names, and girls will have Endang-. Like Djokosen-
  tono; Sent osa means strong. Or Bambang Suwarno. Of for a girl, Endang
  Suwami. For santris the first name is often Muhammad or Abdul. Like Mu­
  hammad Taha, Abdul Mutallip. For girls, Sitti: Sitti Aminah. . . . I asked him
  what if village people used prijaji names, and he said no one would because
  people would laugh at them and they would feel ashamed. Even a name like
  Sasro wouldn’t be used; it would be shifted to Sastro for a lower prijaji, that is,
»48«                                          THE R E L I G I O N OF J AVA
  “one who works in an office but doesn’t have a title.” The village people
  wouldn’t even dare this, but would use Setro; instead of Sastrodihardjo they
  would be Setrodiredjo. He said that among the village people the names may
  be spelled (and pronounced) differently according to whether a man is a santri
  or not. An abangan would call his child Kalil, a santri Cholil; the abangan
  Katidjah, the santri Chotizah. Sometimes the village Christians will use the
  names of the Christian prophets, Daniel, Musa, etc. But high Christians, like
  those around Modjokuto, will use prijaji names.
      As Javanese change their names rather readily—after a severe illness,
at marriage, after returning from the pilgrimage to Mecca, on getting a new
job, on the birth of their child—any social mobility or shifts of allegiance
are easily adjusted for. Perhaps the most common single name for young
ab a n g a n boys in Java is Slamet, often as a result of a childhood illness during
which the name was changed as a curative measure. These categories do
not hold absolutely, but they are clear enough in the minds of the people
so that when I mentioned a high official I knew whose name was Paidjan (a
definitely abangan name), the man to whom I was speaking (a sa n tri ) said,
“W a h , this is indeed a new era—before the revolution you would never have
found a p rija ji with a name like Paidjan; he would have changed it.” Most
still do.
      Strictly speaking, the timing of the pasa ra n depends upon when the stub
of the baby’s umbilical cord falls off. If it is not off by the fifth day, the
pasaran should be postponed to the sixth day or even the seventh. This
rarely occurs, however, and I never encountered a p a sa ra n held on other
than the fifth day. In the old days people used to bring in santris to chant
from eight o’clock until midnight each night after birth until the cord fell
off, but this is rarely practiced now, if at all—certainly never in town. An­
other old practice which has disappeared, at least in the Modjokuto area,
is the singing of long Javanese poems at the pasaran; now people play
cards instead. Evidently this poem-singing used to occur at other sla m eta n s
too in the years before the war, but one never hears it now.
      The food at the pasaran is nearly the same as that of the tin g keb a n , minus
the ru d ja k legi , and with the addition of various little between-meal snacks
from the market (fish chips, popcorn, candied rice, etc.). These rather taste­
less tidbits on which the Javanese seem forever to be nibbling are called
dja d ja n, and they seem to turn up almost everywhere one Javanese sits down
to chat with another. If a friend drops in casually off the street—as is the
custom—they are served; at weddings, official government banquets, and
political meetings they are served; and they are what are sold in all the
dozens of little coffee shops that are scattered around town where each
day hundreds of people sit and talk about nothing very much for hours
 on end. Thus djadjan is a natural symbol of the kind of social interaction
the Javanese love best; a stiffly correct and mechanically polite formality
on the one hand (most marked among the p rija jis), and a kind of mildly in­
tense haphazard hubbub on the other (most marked among the a b a n g a n s ).
That it is the latter meaning that is intended in the pasa ra n is clear, for the
 dja d ja n must be bought in the market itself, not in a store or along the
The Slametan Cycles: Birth                                                       »49«
wayside. It is hoped, people say, that the child will grow up liking the
crowds, the helter-skelter, and the constant buzz of joking conversation the
Javanese call ram é, which finds its prime exemplification in the market.
     Many of the magical practices traditionally associated with the pasaran
are still carried out. A thread, again woven in the traditional manner (though
it is available now in the stores), is strung all around the house just under
the eaves to keep out evil spirits. At each of the four corners are put pointed
pineapple leaves and a plant with tendrils for a similar purpose. Two of
these corners are painted black with ashes and two white with a kind of chalk.
Then one takes an old, ruined broom and puts various hot spices and peppers
on the bristles; this is called the túm bale séw u (“a thousand spears” ). Next
a draw-board from a loom is painted in alternate black and white stripes with
ashes and chalk. These are put under the mother’s bed,* along with the sa d jèn
with various foods, such as betel nut, which the spirits like. A spirit who
then tries to enter the house will first be held back by the string. If he gets
by that he will be confused by the black and white corners and get stuck
on the pointed pineapple leaves or caught in the tendrils. If this doesn’t stop
him, the thousand spears will stab him or the loom-board will crush him. If
he survives even this, he will probably eat the sa d jèn and go away satisfied;
if not, the limits of human ingenuity have been reached and one can only
hope. Thirty-five days after birth all these things are taken down and
there is another sla m eta n , the selapanan, with roughly the same food as on
the fifth day, but without the djadjan from the market.



                                      Pitonan
fewer and fewer people seem to be holding the three-month sla m eta n , and
if they do, it is a small affair.** But the seven-month sla m e ta n —or p ito n a n —
is still rather widely given, although it is beginning to become somewhat less
important.
     The major food here is a kind of rice-meal pudding called djenang, which
is set out in seven colors. It is colored nowadays with dye bought in the
stores, but traditionally with various herbs. Also there is a large rice pyramid
with seven small pyramids around it and a large plate of mixed vegetables
with seven small ones around it, besides the usual array of rice balls, three
kinds of mush, and the like. Here, as in the tin g keb a n , however, the cere­
mony rather overshadows the sla m e ta n proper.
    * The mother is almost certainly up and around by five days; one tries to get up as
quickly as possible after childbirth so the blood will flow as rapidly as possible.
    ** For small slametans it is quite common to have only three or four people in and
to send the rest of the food around to the neighbors’ houses wrapped in the traditional
banana-leaf baskets—a pattern called tondjokan (or berkat). Even when a slametan feast
is of normal size, however, tondjokan baskets may be sent in addition to honor more dis­
tant neighbors or friends. For example, as a symbol of respect, a railroad worker who is
having a pasaran may send a tondjokan to his boss.



  \
»50«                                           T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
      Directed by the midwife, as are all postnatal ceremonies, the rite begins
with the waking of the baby at cockcrow or around four in the morning
and his being placed in the nest of a chicken along with the chicken—a cock
for a boy, a hen for a girl. This chicken is later carefully protected and never
killed and eaten, for the longer it lives the longer the child’s life will probably
be. The child is then presented with a shallow bamboo basket in which have
been placed yellow-colored rice and some coins. If he throws this rice and
money around, as he usually does, it means he will later in his life be a
spendthrift; if he does not, then he will be thrifty. Then the baby is allowed
for the first time in his life to put his feet on the ground and, having come
down to earth, he is handed a severed chicken’s foot to remind him that he,
like the lowly chicken, will have to scratch for his food throughout the whole
of his life.
      Following this the sla m eta n proper is held. In contrast to almost all
other sla m eta n s, the p ito n a n must be held in the morning before twelve noon.
When this has been completed, the child is washed in a tub of flower water.
Leading up to the tub is a ladder (or banana-tree trunk) with seven rungs
in it, and on each rung is placed a bowl of rice porridge, the first one colored
red, the second white, the third red, and so on, the red again symbolizing the
father, the white the mother. The child steps on each of these in turn until
he reaches the tub, inevitably squalling, and is bathed by the d itk u n . Little
snips of hair are cut by each guest from the baby’s head and thrown on
the ground with some money, which is used for medicine for him. This
whole gesture is usually omitted now that children no longer grow the topknot,
k u tjim g , for its purpose was to initiate that process.
      After the bath, the baby is powdered with yellow powder, is dressed in
brand new clothes, draped with flowers, and sits down to a miniature sla m eta n
to which a number of neighboring children between the ages of about four
and six are invited. This kind of play sla m eta n —called a p a n tja k a n (literally,
“newcomer”)—serves as a kind of initiation for the child into traditional
Javanese religious practices, his first introduction to a rite he will perform
many many times more before he dies. The child is then presented a tray
on which has been placed a number of symbolic objects indicating occupations
or character traits: pencil (teacher or clerk—clever); rice (peasant—indus­
trious); money (trader—rich); mirror (actor—vanity); knife (soldier—
brave). The child’s future occupation and character are then predicted on
the basis of which two items he takes from the tray, although people with
wishes for class advancement are not above directing him toward the pencil.
      For the mother, too, the p ito n a n is not without meaning, for she is
 released from the postnatal taboos which hem her in for the first seven months
 after birth: sleeping sitting up with her back propped against a board; bathing
 in the early afternoon (i.e., before sunset) in a special tub set up in the
 kitchen (the regular bath being infested with spirits) ; applying regular herb
 salves and ointments several times a day; and numerous food taboos, many of
 which begin before birth. For most families the p ito n a n completes the
 sla m eta n cycle focused on birth, although some give another small one at
 twelve months.
Chapter $                     The Slametan Cycles:
