Chapter 10                           Santri versus Ahanaan




                    Islam: A General Introduction

I slam is a religion of ethical prophecy. Muhammad’s break with tradition
was sharp and clear, and his message, or the message of God revealed to
him, was essentially one of rationalization and simplification. Where there had
been many gods, he preached one; where there had been extensive harems, he
preached a four-wife polygamy; where there had been a bottomless self-in­
dulgence, he preached a moderate asceticism, forbidding drinking and gam­
bling. He rejected rich symbolism, simplified ritual, proclaimed the universality
of his message, and urged a holy war to spread it among the unbelievers.
Although Muhammad saw himself as but a vessel for the word of God, the
directions of his religious interests were not transcendental but this-worldly.
His reaction to the world of men as he found it was not a radical rejection,
a turning away into mysticism with disgust and despair, but a direct attempt
at active mastery of it. “From the beginning of his career as a preacher,” the
British Islamic historian H. A. R. Gibb has written, “his outlook and his
judgment of persons and events were dominated by his conceptions of God’s
government and purposes in the world of men.”*
    Prophecy, however, is a fleeting thing, for much of its immediacy departs
with the prophet. Succeeding generations have read the message Muhammad
brought mostly as it has been translated by those who come after him. His
followers live now not so much in the brilliant glare of religious innovation
as in the half-light of doctrinal orthodoxy, for, as with Christianity, a great
swarm of learned doctors—the ‘Ulama (“the knowing”)— surrounded the
original core of Islam and covered it with a great honeycombed construction
of doctrine and law, of exegesis and codification.
    The core of Islam rests in the Koran and the Hadith, the Koran being
   * H. A. R. Gibb, Mohammedanism (London, 1949), p. 24.
                                       121
» 122 «                                     T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
the collection of the words of Allah spoken by Muhammad during the years
610-622 A.D., and the Hadith collections of short narratives (each called a
hadith) told by people who knew the Prophet personally during his lifetime
and which, handed down through the ages, describe some act or saying of
the Prophet which is to be taken as a guide.
    Taking the Koran and the Hadith as given, the lUiama piled on top of
them the Shari'a—the Moslem law, a complex codification of legislation
covering almost every field of social life, but particularly emphasizing the
domestic. The law has been for Moslems, as Jewish law has been for the Jews,
a substitute for the formal church organization they have never been able or
willing to erect. Without priests and without popes, the lUlama, a class of
experts professionally occupied with the interpretation of the Koran and the
Hadith, became the heart and soul of Moslem orthodoxy. The lawyer who is
at the same time a teacher has set the form and determined much of the con­
tent of Islam.
    The multiple legal interpretations of the Koran and the Hadith finally
crystallized into four orthodox schools, all considered equally valid and sacred.
After the second and third Islamic centuries, no further extension of the Law
was permitted; the “gate of itjihad” (individual interpretation of the Koran and
Hadith) swung shut, and henceforth no scholar, however eminent, could
qualify as an authoritative lawmaker. The body of orthodox Islam (called
Sunnite Islam after the Arabic sunna, “custom” ), made up of the contents of
the Koran, the Hadith, and the Shari ‘a, has been fixed since the tenth century
A.D.
    Islam means “surrender.” The world-famous Moslem confession of faith—
“There is no god but God and Muhammad is his Prophet”—repeated over
and over again by one-seventh of the world’s population, states the terms of
this surrender. The Confession is the rock bottom of Islam, for anyone who
repeats and believes this phrase is a Moslem; and in the nation of equal be­
lievers that is Islam no one has the right to call anyone else’s faith into ques­
tion.
    Allah, this single God, is Almighty, Self-sustained, and Inscrutable. He
decides all according to His Will, which is Incalculable save as He from time
to time makes that Will known to mankind through a series of prophets sent
to the different races of man. Altogether, twenty-eight prophets are mentioned
in the Koran, including Adam, Moses, Jesus (whose divinity is denied), and
John the Baptist. All these prophets, as well as others not mentioned (e.g.,
Buddha), are legitimate, bringing the genuine word of God, and Muhammad
is but the special prophet of the Arabs. Nevertheless, there has been an evolu­
tion in prophecy toward the final and perfect revelation of Muhammad, the
last and Seal of the prophets. All the prophets are but men, including Mu­
hammad; they have no knowledge of die supernatural beyond that revealed
to them, no miraculous powers. They have all brought a similar message:
“Come ye unto God or be damned.”
    To avoid an adverse decision on Judgment Day, five ritual acts—the so-
called Five Pillars—are obligatory for each believer. The first is the Con­
fession of Faith. The second is the prayers. The prayers are said five times a
Santri versus Abangan                                                      »123«
day: at daybreak, at noon, in the mid-afternoon, after sunset, and in the
early evening. They consist of the recitation of a few set Arabic phrases, two
to four prostrations toward Mecca, and a few other ritual incantations. The
noon prayer on Friday is preferably to be performed in a mosque with at
least thirty-nine other Moslems and with a leader to set the pace. Ablution
before prayers—a washing of the hands, face, and ankles at least, with sand
if no water is available—is strictly enjoined.
    Fasting, the third pillar, is prescribed in the month of Ramadan, the
ninth month of the lunar year, with complete abstinence from food or drink
in the hours of daylight, from the time you can tell a black thread from a
white one until you again cannot. The pilgrimage to Mecca (the hajj) is pre­
scribed at least once in a lifetime for those who have sufficient wealth to ac­
complish it (for those who have not, it is forbidden), in the twelfth lunar
month Dhu'l-Hijja. The fifth pillar is the zcikah, the religious tax, the proceeds
of which are to go to the poor, the needy, debtors, stranded travelers, new con­
verts, religious students having no means of support, and to prosecute the
Holy War. Alms suited to the individual purse and given at irregular times to
the needy of one’s own choosing are also required.
    This is the essential substance of Islam, perhaps as simple and easily
marketable a religious package as has ever been prepared for export. Lacking a
formal church organization by means of which they could enforce orthodoxy,
the learned doctors of Islam have of necessity a gradualist position: first the
Confession, then the Pillars, later the piety, and after that the learning and
the Law. This is the course Islam has taken in Java, where over 90 per cent of
the population has confessed to being Sunnites of the Shafïite law school for
four centuries, but where only recently has a large minority of the population
come to understand very clearly what it was they were confessing and to make
any serious attempt to carry out the commands of God upon which their
religion is based.
    That serious attempt is the result of a shift in attitude which has not en­
deared the minority to those of their compatriots for whom the syncretic Islam
of Sunan Kalidjaga—the culture-hero, who, after suitable meditation ajid
ascetic practice, is represented to have introduced the shadow play, the per­
cussion orchestra, the slametan, and the Koran and the Pillars into Indonesia*
—is still the ideal. It is this minority, these “true Moslems,” as they call them­
selves, or “Javanese Arabs,” as their enemies call them, to whom the term
santri (originally applied only to religious students) is given.



              The Development of Islam in Indonesia
SNOUCK H U RG RO N JE,  Holland’s great Islamic scholar, wrote of Indonesian
Islam as he found it in 1892:
    * Sometimes the non-Islamic elements of this complex—the shadow play and so
forth—are said to have been invented by the pre-Islamic culture-hero, Radèn Pandji.
»124«                                                                  T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
   To follow up the image of the five pillars (of Islam), we might say that the
   pointed roof of the building of Islam is still mainly supported by the central
   pillar, the confession that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is the
   messenger of Allah, but that this pillar is surrounded with a medley of orna­
   mental work quite unsuited to it which is a profanation of its lofty simplicity.
   And in regard to the other four, the corner pillars, it might be observed that
   some of these have suffered decay in the long lapse of time, while other new
   pillars, which according to the orthodox teaching are unworthy to be sup­
   ports of the holy building have been planted beside the original five and have
   to a considerable extent robbed them of their functions.*

     Hurgronje was referring specifically to Acheh in northern Sumatra, but his
simile would have applied even more aptly to Java, where the pillars were
scarcely visible among the buttresses. Aside from a conviction that they were
Moslems and that to be a Moslem was in general a good thing, Hurgronje
found among the inhabitants of tropical Indonesia little of the desert-dried
Near Eastern monotheism he had (perhaps) known in Mecca, where he^had
lived, a Christian disguised as a Moslem pilgrim. Indonesians, he said, “render
in a purely formal manner due homage to the institutions ordained of Allah,
which are everywhere as sincerely received in theory as they are ill-observed
in practice”;** and a generation of scholars echoed him—in despair if they
were Islamologists, in triumph if they were ethnologists dedicated to pre­
serving native customs in their pristine beauty.
     But Hurgronje was writing at the end of one era and the beginning of a
new one. Twenty years after he wrote, Muhammadijah, a vigorously modernist
Islamic society, was founded in Djokjakarta, the very center and climax of
Hindu-Javanese culture, heralding what the Javanese call “the time of the or­
ganizations” and announcing the final arrival on the Indonesian social scene of
the self-conscious Moslem, the man not only fond of his religion in theory but
also committed to it in practice. The appearance of such a man was not as
sudden an occurrence as it looked to some, surprised by signs of life in a re­
ligion they had long accounted lacking in either internal dynamism or in basic
appeal to what they took to be “the Indonesian soul.” Hurgronje, wiser than
most and knowing that changes in the sphere of Islamic life and doctrine were
taking place even in his time, warned his readers that these changes were so
gradual that “although they take place before our eyes they are hidden from
those who do not make a careful study of the subject.”!
     Islam came to Indonesia from India, brought by merchants. Its Mid-
       * C . S n o u c k H u r g r o n je , The Achehnese (L e y d e n , 1 9 0 6 ), p . 3 1 3 .
       ** Ibid. H e a ls o n o te d t h a t “ T h e [in d ig e n o u s c u sto m s ] w h ic h c o n tro l th e liv e s o f
th e B e d a w in s o f A r a b ia , th e E g y p tia n s , th e S y ria n s, o r th e T u r k s , a re f o r th e m o s t p a r t
different f r o m th o s e o f th e J a v a n e s e , M a la y s a n d A c h e h n e s e , b u t th e r e la tio n o f th e s e
[c u sto m s] to th e la w o f Is la m , a n d th e te n a c ity w ith w h ic h th e y m a in ta in th e m se lv e s
in d e sp ite o f t h a t la w , is e v e ry w h e re th e sa m e . T h e c u s to m a r y la w o f th e A r a b s a n d
. . . o f th e T u r k s d iffe r f r o m th e w r itte n a n d u n w r itte n [ c u s to m a ry la w ] o f o u r I n d o ­
n e s ia n s , b u t th e y a r e e q u a lly f a r re m o v e d f r o m th e re v e a le d la w , a lth o u g h th e y a r e
e q u a lly lo u d in th e ir r e c o g n itio n o f th e d iv in e o rig in o f th e l a t t e r ” ( p . 2 8 0 ) .
       I Ibid.
Santri versus Abangan                                                    »125«
Eastern sense for the external conditions of life having been blunted and
turned inward by Indian mysticism, it provided but a minimal contrast to the
mélange of Hinduism, Buddhism, and animism which had held the Indo­
nesians enthralled for almost fifteen centuries. Although it spread—peacefully
for the most part—through almost all of Indonesia in a space of three hundred
years and completely dominated Java except for a few pagan pockets by the
end of the sixteenth century, Indonesian Islam, cut off from its centers of
orthodoxy at Mecca and Cairo, vegetated, another meandering tropical growth
on an already overcrowded religious landscape. Buddhist mystic practices got
Arabic names, Hindu Radjas suffered a change of title to become Moslem
Sultans, and the common people called some of their wood spirits jinns; but
little else changed.
     Toward the middle of the nineteenth century the isolation of Indonesian
Islam from its Mid-Eastern fountainhead began to break down. From the
Hadhramaut, that barren ground of Moslem medievalism at the southern tip
of the Arabian peninsula, came Arab traders in ever increasing numbers to
settle in Indonesia and transmit their fine sense for orthodoxy to the local
merchants with whom they dealt. And, with the growth of sea travel, Indo­
nesians began to go on the pilgrimage to Mecca in such numbers that by the
time Hurgronje lived there in the 1880’s the Indonesian colony was the largest
and most active in the entire city. “Here,” he wrote, “lies the heart of the
religious life of the East-Indian archipelago, and the numberless arteries
pump thence fresh blood in ever accelerating tempo to the entire body of the
Moslem populace in Indonesia.” *
     At the other end of these arteries, in Java, were rural Koranic schools in
which the returning pilgrim taught, if not the content of Islam (for the most
part neither he nor his peasant students could understand any Arabic, although
they could chant it well enough), at least a sense for the austerity of its form
and for the fact that it was different in spirit from the polytheistic mysticism
to which the Javanese had been so long accustomed. Around these schools
and around the mosques attached to them, a space for orthodoxy was cleared;
and those who lived in this clearing—the santris—began to see themselves as
minority representatives of the true faith in the great forest of ignorance and
superstition, protectors of the Divine Law against the pagan crudities of
traditionalized custom.
     But even in this context the drift toward orthodoxy was slow. Up until
about the second decade of this century the various Koranic schools located
around the countryside remained independent, mutually antagonistic, mys­
tically tinged religious brotherhoods in which a certain compromise was
reached with the religious beliefs of the abangans on the one hand and the
fears of the colonial government of an organized and socially conscious Islam
on the other. It was in the towns, where continued contact with Hadhramaut
Arabs, a developing merchant ethic, the growth of nationalism, and modernist
influences from the Islamic reform movements of Egypt and India combined
   * C. Snouck Hurgronje, Mekka in the Nineteenth Century (London, 1931), p. 291.
»126«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
to produce a greater militancy among the explicitly Moslem, that Islam be­
came a living faith in Indonesia.*
     With the founding of Muhammadijah by a returned pilgrim in 1912, and
the birth of its political counterpart Sarekat Islam (“The Islamic Union” ) in
the same year, the awakened sense for orthodoxy spread beyond the towns
to the villages. Conservative organizations arose to combat what they took
to be dangerous departures from the more medieval Islamic doctrines in the
programs of the modernist groups, but, details apart, the recognition that
there was at last a true Islamic congregation in Indonesia—a genuine wnmat,
as Moslems call the community of true believers—was finally inescapable.
Even those who had ignored Hurgronje’s warning to make a close study of the
subject could now see that Indonesian Islam had changed and that in almost
every village and town in Java there was a group, often living in a separate
neighborhood, commonly made up of petty traders and richer peasants, to
whom Islam was no longer another mystic science among many but a unique,
exclusivist, universalist religion demanding total surrender to a distant God
 and dedicated to an eternal struggle against the unbeliever.
     Modjokuto, having been founded in the latter half of the nineteenth cen­
tury, has a history lying almost entirely within this period in which a self-con­
 scious Moslem community crystallized out from the more general abangan
background. The great majority of its prewar trading class and much of its
peasant population having been drawn through migration from the heavily Is­
 lamic areas of northern Java—Demak, Kudus, Gresik—where the Moslem tra­
 dition brought by the earliest traders never wholly died out, Modjokuto has
 experienced each phase of reform and counter-reform within the Islamic com­
 munity in Indonesia during this century until today perhaps a third of the
 population—as a rough estimate—are saniris. Grouped into their own neigh­
 borhoods (less so now than before the war, but still noticeably clustered),
 their own political parties, and their own social organizations, and following
 their own ritual patterns, this group represents a genuine variant of Modjokuto
 culture.



            Santri versus Abangan: General Differences
comparing the abangan and santri variants of the Modjokuto religious pat­
tern, two very striking general differences, other than their differential evalu-
    * Actually, a more orthodox version of the Moslem creed has been characteristic
of the peoples of the north coastal areas and of the small urban Javanese trading classes
scattered throughout the larger and smaller towns all over Java since the conversion of
the island to Islam in the fifteenth century. In these groups, where the mercantile
tradition has also remained stronger, Islam has been rather less diluted with mystical
and animistic elements than it was either in the great inland courts, such as those
at Djokjakarta and Surakarta, or in the rice-plain peasant villages of the Solo and
Brantas rivers, where syncretism was, and is, very strong. Thus the recent growth of
Moslem orthodoxy in Java is, in part, a strengthening and widening of this persistent
minority tradition, not a wholly novel development.
Santri versus Abangan                                                        »127«
ation of Islamic orthodoxy, are immediately apparent. In the first place,
abangans are fairly indifferent to doctrine but fascinated with ritual detail, while
among the santris the concern with doctrine almost entirely overshadows the
already attenuated ritualistic aspects of Islam.
    An abangan knows when to give a siametan and what the major foods
should be—porridge for a birth, pancakes for a death. He may have some
ideas as to what various elements in it symbolize (and as often he may not,
saying that one has porridge because one always has porridge on such an oc­
casion), but he will be little upset if someone else gives a different interpreta­
tion. He is tolerant about religious beliefs; he says, “Many are the ways.” If
one performs the correct passage rituals, one is not an animal; if one gives the
slametans in the Fast, one is not an infidel; and if one sends a tray off to the
“cleansing of the village,” one is not a subversive— and that is enough. If
one doesn’t believe in spirits or if one thinks God lives in the sun, that’s one’s
own affair.
     For the santri the basic rituals are also important—particularly the
prayers, the conscientious performance of which is taken by santris and non-
santris alike to be the distinguishing mark of a true santri—but little thought
is given to them; they are simple enough in any case. What concerns the
santris is Islamic doctrine, and most especially the moral and social interpreta­
tion of it. They seem especially interested, particularly the urban “modernist”
santris) in apologetics: the defense of Islam as a superior ethical code for
modern man, as a workable social doctrine for modern society, and as a
fertile source of values for modem culture. In the countryside die doctrinal
aspect is less marked; there the santri ethic remains somewhat closer to the
abangan. But even in the countryside a santri differs from an abangan not only
in his self-declared religious superiority to the latter, but also in his realization,
if only vague, that in Islam the main religious issues are doctrinal; and in any
case the rural santri follows an urban leadership. For the santri the dimen­
sions have shifted. It is not the knowledge of ritual detail or spiritual discipline
which is important, but the application of Islamic doctrine to life. The kinds
of santris vaiy from those whose difference from their abangan neighbors
seems to lie entirely in their insistence that they are true Moslems, while their
neighbors are not, to those whose commitment to Islam dominates almost
all of their life. But, for all, a concern for dogma has to some extent replaced a
 concern for ritual.
     One result of this difference of emphasis is that the curiously detached
unemotional relativism that abangans evince toward their own religious
customs, an attitude not entirely unlike that of the dilettante ethnologist col­
lecting quaint customs among the heathen, tends to be replaced among the
santris by a strong emphasis on the necessity for unreserved belief and faith
in the absolute truth of Islam and by marked intolerance for Javanese beliefs
 and practices they take to be heterodox.I
   I talked to Abdul Manan from the village (some distance away from Modjo-
   kuto) where we stayed for a while a few months back. . . . Asked him about
   pundèns (spirit shrines) there, and he said there is one there with the same
»128«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  name as the one here— mBah Buda—just down the street from his place.
  People give slametans there just as here, in order to fulfill a vow that they
  would do so if cured and so on. He said he as a good Moslem doesn’t be­
  lieve in it, and said he proved this one dark night by taking the statue of a man
  that was there and carrying it off to the mosque and breaking it into pieces.
  Nothing happened, he said, which proves it was just a statue. He said there is
  a statue of an ox there now and people still go on holding slametans there as
  usual, but only those who are too stupid to know any better.
     The second obvious way in which the abangan and santri religious vari­
ants differ from one another is in the matter of their social organization. For
the abangan the basic social unit to which nearly all ritual refers is the house­
hold—a man, his wife, and his children. It is the household which gives
the slametan, and it is the heads of other households who come to attend
it and then carry home part of the food to the other members of their
families. Even the bersih désa, the “cleansing of the village” ceremony, the
closest thing to a public or super-household ritual that one can find within
the abangan system, is but little more than a compound of separate slametan
contributions from each of the village’s households rather than a ritual of
the village as a whole; it is food from separate kitchens brought together,
rather than food from a common kitchen divided up. Aside from coming
with their food, there is little that the participants are called upon to do, and
the kind of large-scale religious ritual carried out by special clubs, fra­
ternities, and associations one finds in, say, Melanesia, parts of Africa, or
among the American Pueblos is quite foreign to the Javanese tradition.
With the exception of Permai, a latter-day development indeed and largely
politically inspired at that, there is nothing in abangan religious life which
could even in the remotest sense be called a church or a religious organiza­
tion, and there are no temples either. The Javanese peasant, who has
so often been held to be a featureless cipher swallowed up in his social whole,
actually holds himself rather aloof from it, keeping his thoughts to himself
and willing to give others only what tradition assures him they are going to
give back to him; and his religion shows it. There is no organic religious com­
munity, strictly speaking, among the abangans: in contemporary Modjokuto
at least, there is only a set of separate households geared into one another like
so many windowless monads, their harmony preordained by their common
adherence to a single tradition.
     For the santri, the sense of community—of ummat—is primary. Islam
is seen as a set of concentric social circles, wider and wider communities—
Modjokuto, Java, Indonesia, the whole of the Islamic world—spreading away
from the individual santri where he stands: a great society of equal believers
constantly repeating the name of the Prophet, going through the prayers,
chanting the Koran.
  Usman (a local Koran teacher, speaking to about twenty mostly illiterate
  peasants in a small, heavily santri village near Modjokuto on the occasion of
  the Prophet’s birthday) gave as usual a series of unrelated commentaries on
  hadiths and Koranic passages. He started by saying, “The world is round, is
  it not, my brothers? You’ve seen it on the Nahdatul Ulama (one of the two
Santri versus Abangan                                                            »129«
  major Moslem political parties) flag haven’t you, and it is round, isn’t it? Thus
  it is different times in different places, so that if it is evening prayer here, per­
  haps it is already morning prayer in Mecca, and further west in Cairo or
  Morocco it is already perhaps noon prayer, and there are all gradations in
  between, in Djokjakarta, in Djakarta, in Pakistan. There are three hundred
  million Moslems, my brothers, so that every minute of every day someone is
  saying Muhammad ar-Rasulullah (Muhammad, the Prophet of God), some­
  one is saying it around this round globe. And this has been going on, my
  brothers, for 1,344 years. No one’s name has been spoken so often as that of
  the Prophet, is it not true? If there is someone whose name has been spoken
  more often I would like to know who he is! We here in Sidomuljo, in a tiny
  village out in the corner of the countryside, are only a part of a great ummat
  Islam; in Modjokuto, in Djakarta, in Mecca, all over the world right now as
  we chant our prayers, Moslems just like us are chanting theirs.”
    Before the power and majesty of God all men are as nothing, and in their
nihility they are equal. Cut off by an absolute gulf from direct experience of
God and so restricted to the books of prophets, and especially to the Koran
and the Hadith, for their knowledge of Him, mankind—a part now, the whole
of it later—has bound itself into a legal community, defined by its adherence
to a set of objective laws based upon the revelations God has seen fit to com­
municate to man. There are no priests, because no man is any closer to God
or of any greater intrinsic religious worth than any other; but the law must be
communicated, interpreted, and administered, and so there are teachers,
judges, and officials, and schools, courts, and religious bureaucracies. It is the
adherence to an objective, deductive, abstract law that defines a Moslem and
defines the Moslem community; and, although in Java, as I imagine elsewhere,
the greater flexibility of the inductive, relativistic, pragmatic customary law
tends to be in practice more attractive to santris as well as abangans than the
rigid beauties of the Koranic law, the sense for a concrete community regu­
lated by an objective system of law is quite real in santri minds.
  We got on to Islam and he went over the usual business about the importance
  of the law as a compass, as a way of choosing between right and wrong. Ad­
  mittedly, some people who don’t know the law are good, but they don’t have
  a sure guide and they may go wrong. Only those who have the Koranic law
  really can find their way safely through life to the afterlife. He read me a
  Koranic passage saying that the true Moslem is willing to labor and to sac­
  rifice his money, his property, and all his personal resources for the good of
  society, to build mosques, schools, and so forth; and he said that this social
  conscience is obligatory to Moslems. It is like making a suit of clothes, he
  said. To make clothes that fit and won’t fall apart the tailor needs to make
  measurements. For life, individual and social, we need measurements too, and
  there are in the Koran and the law.
    This concern with the community means that, despite their tremendous
interest in doctrine, Modjokuto Moslems never see their religion as a mere
set of beliefs, as a kind of abstract philosophy, or even as a general system of
values to which as individuals they are committed. Instead, they always con­
ceive of it as institutionalized in some social group: the santris in their neigh­
borhood, or all those they consider such in the Modjokuto area, or all Indo-
»130«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
nesian Moslems, or “the Islamic world.” When they speak of Islam, there is
almost always in the back of their minds a social organization of some sort in
which the Islamic creed is the defining element. It may be a charitable or­
ganization, a woman’s club, the village mosque committee, a religious school,
the local office of the religious bureaucracy, or their political party at either
the local, regional, or national level.
    These two distinguishing features of the santri religious pattern—a concern
for doctrine and apology and for social organization—crosscut one another
to produce the internal structure of the Moslem community in Modjokuto. On
the doctrinal level there is only one major distinction of importance, rather
less marked now than it was in the years before the war: that between the
“modern” (modéren) and the conservative or “old-fashioned” (kolot) vari­
ants of the creed. From 1912 almost until the war the conflict between those
Indonesian Moslems who had been influenced by modernist Islamic reform
movements originating in Cairo, Mecca, and, to a far lesser extent, in parts
of India, and those who reacted against this influence, was indeed a sharp
and bitter one. Today, this once entirely religious conflict has been transformed
in part into a political one as the leaders of both groups have come to accept
a general and watered-down version of modernism and have shifted their
interest more and more towards the ever intriguing question of how they are
going to get into power. But the old division still remains. Although many
of the leaders of the “old-fashioned” group have abandoned the extreme re­
actionary position, many of the rank-and-file members have not; and the
general distinction between modem santris, who accept the twentieth century
with enthusiasm and see its complexities as but a challenge to be dealt with,
and those who are at best resigned to it and its pitfalls for the pious, is still of
fundamental importance within the Modjokuto ummat.
     On the organizational side, Islam in Modjokuto is focused around four
major social institutions: the Moslem political parties and their associated
social and charitable organizations; the religious school system; that division
of the central-government bureaucracy—largely under the Ministry of Re­
ligion—which is concerned with the administration of the Moslem law, the
preservation of mosques, and other similar duties; and the more informal land
of congregational organization which focuses around the village mosque and
the neighborhood prayerhouse. These four institutional structures interweave
with one another and with the modéren and kolot ideological patterns to pro­
vide a complex framework for almost all the Moslem religious behavior which
 takes place in Modjokuto.
Chapter 11                         The Development of
                                    Islam in Modjokuto




T he modjokuto area was opened up to settlement around the middle of the
nineteenth century. It was originally populated, in the main, from four regions
of Java: the so-called Mataram area of Central Java, which includes the court
kingdoms of Djokjakarta and Surakarta; the Brantas river valley running
north of Modjokuto to Surabaja (Kertosono, Modjoagung, Modjokerto, and
Krian) ; the Kediri plain, spreading out fanwise south of that city to Blitar,
Tulungagung, and Trenggalek; and the north coast of Java—Gresik, Rem-
bang, Kudus, Demak, and the Java Sea islands of Bawean and Madura.
Migration patterns are, as always, a matter of statistics, but most of Modjo-
kuto’s earliest prijajis (as well as many of its abangans) seem to have come
originally from Mataram; a large part of its abangan population from the
next two areas, the Brantas and Kediri plains; and the bulk of the older santri
population, with one notable exception, originally from the north coast re­
gions.
    The first wave of migration from the north coast area consisted of peasants,
in part uprooted by the social disorganization, economic distress, and govern­
mental repression following upon the Java War of 1825-1830 and upon the
imposition of the forced-crop “Cultivation System” (Cultuurstelsel) by the
colonial government in 1830. A party of twenty or so families from the Kudus
and Demak countryside settled in a village in the district to the immediate
north of Modjokuto in about 1860, and a decade or so later moved on en
masse, one half of them founding a village in the northeast section of the
Modjokuto subdistrict, the other half opening another just to the northwest of
the town. (These two villages are still renowned in the Modjokuto area for
being about 100 per cent santri, for providing an unusual number of prominent
Moslem political leaders, and for containing the most fertile and best irrigated
land for miles around.) Other rural migrants from Kudus and Demak, some
relatives and some not, followed and settled both among these pioneers and at
various other points within the subdistrict—usually, but not always, somewhat
segregated from the abangan settlers who were drifting in at the same time.
                                      131
»132«                                            T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
   There was, then, about 1900, among the peasantry living on the land
around the town of Modjokuto (which itself was little more than a government
outpost plus about a half-dozen Chinese stores and a small privately-run mar­
ket, a solid core of displaced north coasters who, having come from an area in
which the Islamic aspects of the Javanese religious syncretism had from the
beginning been taken rather more seriously than elsewhere, were to form the
body of both the Islamic reform movement and the conservative reaction to it
when these developed in Modjokuto.
     But this is only half the story. About 1910 there began to come into the
town of Modjokuto itself, also from the north coast, a group of itinerant
Javanese traders in cigarettes, cheap cloth, dried fish, leather goods, and
small hardware, men not from the countryside but from the urban trade
centers such as Kudus, Gresik, and Lamongan. They were representatives
of a petty merchandising tradition stretching back to the sixteenth century
when Indian and Malay traders, sailing eastward out of Malacca, first propa­
gated Islam in these northern cities. In the beginning, the attachment of these
wandering traders to Modjokuto was minimal; their homes were still to the
north. On the road they aped the business methods, the style of life, and the
religious customs of the Arabs, who provided them the model for their
fly-by-night marginal trading and next to whom they lived, closeted ghetto­
like in the crowded all-santri barrios which surround the mosque in any Java­
nese city or town and which are everywhere referred to as the kauman. “We
dressed in rags, ate one meal a day of rice and corn with no trimmings, and
walked for miles peddling our stuff,” one old santri trader reminisced. “We
weren’t liked much,” he added wryly, “but we all got rich.”
     As time passed and transportation improved, more and more of these
peripatetic traders settled permanently in Modjokuto and made only periodic
trips to the northern commercial centers where they had been bom. They
formed tight little in-groups, residentially segregated as to place of origin, so
that neighborhoods in Modjokuto still bear names such as Kudus neighbor­
hood, Gresik neighborhood, and Madura neighborhood; Bawean people, the
richest group, lived in the Kauman with the Arabs. In large part their trade
was likewise specialized according to place of origin: Kudus men sold ciga­
rettes, Gresik men fish, Bawean men cloth, Madurese small hardware. Stimu­
lated by the boom, crushed by the depression, this group of small busi­
nessmen and their descendants were the second element which went into the
making of an ummat in Modjokuto.
     The third element, much smaller in numbers but of perhaps even more
crucial significance, consisted of a single bilaterally extended family—what
Modjokuto people call “the penghulu family.” Penghulu was the title given
before the war by the Dutch government to the highest-ranking mosque offi­
cial—a somewhat marginal officer in the colonial bureaucracy— at the regency,
district, or subdistrict level, who was responsible for the administration of mar­
riage and divorce regulations and for giving advice to those who requested it
on other aspects of the Moslem law, such as inheritance.* As in the case of
     * Since the war this strictly religious part of the bureaucracy has been expanded,
and the man fulfilling the penghulu''s functions at the subdistrict level is now called the
tiaib.
The Development of Islam in Modjokuto                                     »133«
village headships, high regional administrative posts, and the like, the job of
penghulu tended after a time to become semihereditary in an informal sort
of way and, in addition, the penghulu families within a single regency tended
to intermarry. In Modjokuto the job of penghulu and nearly all the mosque
posts under his jurisdiction, of which there were usually five or six, were in the
hands of a single family from the time such offices were first established in the
town; and this family was related by marriage to the penghulu families of
practically every other town in the regency, the informal head of this vague
Idn-group being the chief penghulu in the regency capital.
     Although this family too can trace its ultimate origins back to Demak,
its proximate origins so far as Modjokuto is concerned lie in Modjoagung, a
town in the Brantas valley, from whence around the turn of the century one
Muhammad Cholifah was moved into Modjokuto by the Dutch and installed
as its penghulu. He and his descendants monopolized all the government reli­
gious posts thereafter, until the postwar period, when political party considera­
tions led to their displacement. Rich (they owned the entire eastern half of the
kautnan; Hadji Hanawi, the richest of the traveling traders, a Bawean native,
owned the western half), rather well educated (the last Modjokuto penghulu
in this line was the only non-prijaji Javanese ever to be allowed to attend the
elementary school for Dutch children that existed in Modjokuto during the
colonial period), and politically powerful throughout the whole region, this
family was the top of the social heap within the Modjokuto nmmat in the
years before the war, and as such it provided one of the main arenas within
which the modernist-conservative battle was fought out.
     These three groups—the santri peasants living in the villages, the petty
traders settling into the town, and the penghulu family, a kind of santri
aristocracy if that is not a contradiction in terms—were the fixed points
around which the Modjokuto ummat crystallized. It was, in large part, a
bourgeois ummat because the peasant santris tended to be richer than their
abangan opposite numbers; because the penghulu family, although exalted,
could never quite manage, being santris after all, full prijaji status; and be­
cause, of course, the traders represented the best effort of the Javanese to wrest
at least a portion of the interurban distributive trade from the hands of the
Chinese, an effort still largely unsuccessful. In one sense, it has been the slow
growing together of this incipient yeomanry on the one hand and this em-
byronic middle class on the other, in great part under the leadership of the
penghulu group, which has provided the content of the reform and counter­
reform movements in Modjokuto Islam. It has been the social differences be­
tween these groups which have caused the conflicts, and it has been their re­
ligious commonalities which have resolved them, insofar as they have been
resolved at all.



                The Rise of Modernism : 1910-1940
on the rural side, the crucial institutions of Islam were the pilgrimage and the
school. A man worked hard, saved his money and, if a dishonest ticket broker
»134«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF       JAVA
didn’t swindle him out of it, went to Mecca. In Mecca he studied with a
teacher if he was serious, and took in the sights if he was not; but in either
case, when he returned he was considered a scholar and a world traveler, and
as often as not he set up a Koran school, called a pondok (sometimes also
called pesantrèn from the original meaning of santri—“religious student” ), in
which the students, young men from six to twenty-five years of age, spent part
of every day chanting the Koran and part of it working in the hadji’s* fields
to support themselves. In the early part of this century there were at one time
nearly a dozen such pondoks of respectable size around Modjokuto, to several
of which were attached cloth-dyeing factories or industries producing cigarettes
by hand in which the students also worked. The economic advantages of a
religious ethic emphasizing thrift, hard work, and individual effort, plus a
form of education which tended to make for a more rational organization of
labor than did the traditional exchange-work customs of the abangans, have
made the term hadji synonymous with “rich man” in the Modjokuto area.
     In any case, there grew up around Modjokuto a number of these religious
schools, still largely concerned with a simple chanting of the Koran, to the
meaning of which they had no access, each school separate and independent,
a kind of small religion of its own under its own teacher and as often as not
antagonistic to all other schools in the area. But by 1915 the influence of de­
velopments on the national scene began to be felt in the town of Modjokuto,
where a group of traders, schoolteachers, and, at first, government officials,
all led by a generally unconventional and fiery kijaji** whose pondok lay
just outside of town, opened a local chapter of Sarekat Islam, the mass
Islamic party which had been founded in Central Java just three years before.
     This kijaji, who was also a hadji—and so was called Kijaji Hadji Nazir—
was destined to play the leading role at each stage in the developments that
followed, to be the leading proponent of and apologist for Islamic modern­
ism, and to be identified with it as no other person in Modjokuto. He was
respected and idolized by those who agreed with him, hated and despised by
those who did not. It is interesting, then, to note that the description of his
character I received from all who knew him, whether they liked him or not,
was as atypical in terms of Javanese values as it is possible to be.
  I asked him (a vaguely modernist santri youth, now studying under Nazir’s
  son) whether he remembered Kijaji Nazir, and he said yes, he certainly did,
  and that Nazir was a very hard (keras) character—sort of like Hadji Zakir
  (one of Nazir’s chief followers, an old trader still living in Modjokuto), only
  of course with much more brains. Nazir had the courage to argue with anyone,
  anywhere, even with people more clever than he, bigger and more famous
  kijajis known all over Java. He didn’t care; he just plowed right into them.
  If Nazir was angry he would just show it, even on a train with people around
  or in public. (All this was said with depreciation by Umar, the informant, my
  impression being that the general opinion was that Nazir was not very “polite”
    * Hadji is the title given to a returned pilgrim. Thus a man named Abdul will be
called Hadji Abdul after he comes back from Mecca. Actually, he will often change his
name entirely and be called, say, Hadji Hasjim.
    ** A teacher in a pondok and any Islamic scholar in general is called a kijaji. The
kijajis in Indonesia are roughly comparable to the Mid-Eastern ‘ulama.
The Development of Islam in Modjokuto                                           »135«
  or “genteel”; he not only told his betters off, but he did it directly and showed
  his feelings in public—all basic sins for the Javanese.) He fought with other
  local leaders almost all the time and was very outspoken—particularly with
  the kijaji in Tebuireng (the leader of the conservative movement for all of
  Java, and probably the most famous and respected kijaji on the island), and in
  general people didn’t like him. He also worked terribly hard and was very
  punctual. If one was late to a class he would get very angry. If it was raining
  and he had a scheduled appointment or class, he would come plowing through
  the rain just as usual, no matter how far; and if one stayed home because of
  the rain his wrath knew no bounds. (For just about every other Javanese, not
  only is punctuality not a virtue but the idea of keeping an appointment when
  it is raining would appear absurd; the only man who ever kept an appointment
  with me when it was raining during the whole time I was in Java was Hadji
  Zakir, Nazir’s follower.) He always had to speak his mind directly; and it
  is said that the heart attack that killed him was caused by the fact that in
  the Japanese time he was not able to speak out and he bottled it all up inside
  him and it ruptured his heart.
     Nazir, bom in Modjokuto in 1886, was a direct descendant of the first
wave of Kudus immigrants and the son of an old-time kajaji who ran a
pondok near the town with over a hundred students. His outline autobiog­
raphy, written for some official purpose during the Japanese occupation,
states that he began to chant the Koran regularly at home when he was seven
and that by the time he was eleven he was living, studying, and working in
a pondok some fifty miles away.* At the age of thirteen he was in Mecca—his
first of two pilgrimages—with his older brother, where, according to the
autobiography, he studied with six different kijajis from as many different
regions of Java (Djepara, Banjumas, Djombang, Kediri, Kudus, and Patjitan)
and, “pressured by an indomitable will,” he also got training in the Latin al­
phabet, mathematics, and “general studies,” all of which were no part of the
traditional Moslem education of that time.
     After four years in Mecca he was back in Java, where he traveled to study
at pondoks in Madura, Kediri, Sidohardjo, and Surakarta, until eleven years
later he entered the “people’s movement” Sarekat Islam (SI). His history
after this consists of the story of one organization after another, one governing
board after another, one national conference after another.
     In 1921 he was in the thick of the Si-Red vs. Si-White struggle within the
party, then grown to two million on the national scene (and a claimed three
thousand in Modjokuto), in which the Communists only narrowly failed in
their effort to take over the party and managed to cripple it in the attempt. In
1924 he set up an organization to protect hadjis against swindle by dishonest
ticket brokers and the like, for which purpose he went to Mecca a second
time in 1926 just after the Wahhabi Ibn Saud ejected Sharif Husein. In 1933
he left the party because of a personal difference with the leadership and
joined another, but in a few years he \Vas back again. And so it went until,
    i|! As abangans with dukiins, so santris with pondoks seem to prefer distant ones
to nearer ones, the reason given in this latter case being that it strengthens the self-
reliance of the boy to be away from home, and that it is less distracting and easier to
concentrate when one studies at a distance from one’s relatives.
» 136 «                                      T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
during the first two years of the Japanese occupation, he seemed to “rest”
for the first time in his life—although he admits that he went every Friday to
the Modjokuto mosque “to give advice to those who pray there and to en­
courage them to work ever harder for their ideals.” But, as the Japanese
policy of favoring the santri group against the rest of the population became
more evident, he accepted a job in the puppet government, at which point the
autobiography ends.
    After a year or so he died—perhaps, as my informant suggested, because
he was not allowed to express his mind freely. In his intense organizational
activity, in his interest in “general studies,” in his social consciousness and his
concern at the same time for fundamental religious learning, in his eventual
deception and manipulation by the Japanese, and in his death in 1944 just as
the new free Indonesia was about to come into being, Nazir and his career
typify in almost every detail the course and character of the modernist ref­
ormation, such as it was, in Javanese Islam.
    Along with Nazir in the original Sarekat Islam were Modjokuto’s richest
prijaji landholder (he was also a government meat inspector), a few railroad
workers, about a half-dozen tradesmen from the town, one or two other un­
important kijajis, and a few government schoolteachers. At this time SI, as
the only really mass political party in Java, drew members from among the
socially conscious and nationalistically inclined in all groups. Communist labor
agitators, aristocratic political idealists, and middle-class realists out to forge
political weapons with which to curb Chinese competition rubbed elbows in
the same movement.
    This harmony ended in the 1921 struggle in which the Communist ele­
ment, having prepared the ground by capturing several labor unions and by
attacking Si’s leader, H. O. S. Tjokroaminoto, as dishonest, attempted to turn
SI into a thoroughgoing Marxist organization. In practically every chapter of
the party there occurred a split between the “White,” or anti-Communist,
faction and the “Red,” a pro-Communist, faction. In Modjokuto, too, this oc­
curred, where Nazir led the White group and a railroad employee named
Karman (now a Communist Party chief in the next town north of Modjokuto)
led the Reds. After a tremendous struggle, leading at times to fistfights on the
floor of the convention, H. Agus Salim, later to be the first foreign minister
of the Republic of Indonesia and at that time one of Indonesia’s leading
modernist, succeeded in pushing through a resolution expelling the Communist
group from the central organization of the party. But the damage was done.
The government employees and teachers, ever timid in the face of anything
involving genuine militancy, fled the movement; and many of the no-nonsense
traders, convinced that the party was wasting their valuable time by involving
them in a network of purposeless intrigue, quit in disgust. Karman, the Com­
munist leader, attempted to wrest control of the branch from Nazir, offering
one of the latter’s lieutenants a sizable bribe to desert him, but he failed. When
it was all over, SI in Modjokuto was down to a hard core of thirty members.
    But the core was hard now, at any rate. It was pure santri, and it had
added the vigorous anti-Communism which continues to animate much of
Islamic politics today. The faithful few managed to raise among themselves
The Development of Islam in Modjokuto                                     »137«
1,000 rupiahs (which would be about 10,000 today) with which to buy a
plot of land in the Modjokuto kauman just to the rear of the mosque, on which
they erected the first modem-style religious school, a madrasah, in the
Modjokuto area. A madrasah, in contrast to a pondok, is a school in which
part of the time is spent in religious studies and part in general studies. It
represents an attempt to modernize the traditional Moslem educational sys­
tem, to combine the best of two worlds—that of the government schools,
which were organized and which taught along Western lines, and that of
the Koran-chanting pondoks. This compromise, seemingly so moderate,
aroused a storm of protest from the old-fashioned religious scholars in
the area, who forbade their followers to have anything to do with this in­
fidel institution. Aside from children of SI members, only children of a
few of the more flexible urban santris and all of the Arab children attended;
and the school soon got the name it still bears in the minds of most towns­
people—“the Arab school.”
     Nazir’s popularity with the conservative faction was not enhanced when
shortly after he founded his school he began the first Moslem boy scout
movement in the area, instituted evening courses in Islam in the Modjokuto
mosque for women, and began to demand that the Friday sermon in the
mosque (chotbah), then but an extended Arabic chant on the part of the
prayer leader, be translated into Javanese. But the action that sealed his dam­
nation in kolot eyes was his institution of circulating religious propaganda
meetings in the villages around Modjokuto, in which he and his followers
preached an internal mission to the peasant ummat and took as their guide one
of the most controversial authors in the history of modem Islam, the Egyptian
reformer Muhammed Abduh.
     Abduh, who died in 1905, taught at Al-Azhar, the great orthodox Moslem
university in Cairo, and although, as Gibb has said, “in relation to the tra­
ditional orthodox structure he was no innovator,”* he attempted to renovate
the structure somewhat by insisting that corrupting influences and practices,
 such as saint-worship and the cult of holy men, be purified from Islam; that
Moslem education be reformed to allow the teaching of modem sciences,
geography, and the history and religion of Europe; and that greater attention
be given to the holy books of Islam, the Koran and the Hadith, and less to
 the secondary elaborations erected on top of them. A true puritan, he preached
modernization and increased adherence to fundamentals at one and the
 same time, demanding an Islam that was at once more like that Muhammad
 preached and practiced and more adequate to the conditions of modem life.
 Neither the strictness of his doctrine nor the seeming radicalism of it was
 attractive to those committed to a less aggressive Islam.
  He (a santri taxi driver) went, after he got out of the SI madrasah in the
  kauman, to Nazir’s pondok (which the latter had taken over from his father),
  which he said had seventy people there (mostly from West Java, he being one
  of the very few from around here') chanting both morning and late afternoon.
  It had both “general studies” and religion. He said Abduh was used but that he
  thought him too strict, too much Hell involved. The least little thing and one
   * H. A. R. Gibb, op. cit., p. 176.
»138«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  went to Hell. He said that Abduh was very controversial and most people
  thought him too strict. He said that the old books one usually read in pondoks
  were not so hard. One sin did not send one to Hell, and they were more pa­
  tient with people whose Islam was not yet complete and pure. For example,
  Abduh had just a small number of dedicated and very “pure” followers, very
  strong religious believers, and would have nothing to do with people whose
  Islam was not perfect but excluded them from the fold, while the earlier classi­
  cal authors took people step by step and were quite willing to have “impure”
  and “imperfect” followers. He said there was much violent opposition to
  Nazir in those days. All the kijajis in the area were after him, and it got pretty
  hot and heavy for a while.

     But the political aspects of Nazir’s party interfered with the religious,
particularly after the Dutch, frightened by Communist outbreaks in West
Java and Sumatra in 1926, began to put pressure on all non-cooperating
political parties and officially forbade government officials to belong to
them. (In Modjokuto, Karman, the Si-Red leader, and some of his followers
were arrested and exiled to New Guinea.) In such a context even attendance
at one of Nazir’s meetings seemed to most people to be perilously close to
sedition, and as a result he was isolated.
     In 1931 a branch of Muhammadijah, the Islamic social-welfare organiza­
tion also centered in Djokjakarta, was founded in Modjokuto. Dedicated
not only to the preaching of Abduh’s doctrines but also to the practicing
of them, this society was, however, concerned entirely with religious prob­
lems to the exclusion of political ones, and it pledged cooperation with the
colonial government. The combination of political conservatism with re­
ligious radicalism appealed to the more educated among the government-
employed penghulu family and to the Arabs, for whom Indonesian national­
ism had no appeal in any case; and so it was a coalition of members of these
two groups, plus a local school inspector and a recently arrived santri mer­
chant, which began Muhammadijah in Modjokuto. Although Nazir, re­
strained by his loyalty to Sarekat Islam and political non-cooperation, never
joined Muhammadijah, he supported it informally, and many of his relatives
and followers were prime movers in it from the beginning.
     Muhammadijah built another modem-type school with only one third
rather than one half of the time devoted to religious studies, and these
taught in Javanese rather than Arabic. They began their own Boy Scouts,
erected an orphanage, started a soccer team, set up a woman’s auxiliary
as well as one for young girls, and introduced evening prayer meetings at
which sermons on social and religious matters were given, sometimes by
lecturers imported from their large city chapters in Djokjakarta, Solo, and
Surabaja. They distributed books carrying the modernist message; initiated
such reforms as holding mass prayer meetings in the public square rather
than in the mosque on Rijaja (the end-of-Fast holiday) and on the Prophet’s
birthday; and they not only translated the Friday sermon but the Koran as
well.
     Even more annoying to the rigidly orthodox, they argued for a more
flexible use of all four lawbooks in deciding cases rather than a reliance on
The Development of Islam in Modjokuto                                         »139«
the Shafi‘ite alone. They criticized the giving of slametans as wasteful extrava­
gance better applied to good works; attacked abangan ritual around death,
arguing that Islam allowed only three practices at a funeral: washing, wrap­
ping, and burying the corpse; and declared certain traditional santri prac­
tices, such as chanting a spell before doing one’s prayers to “calm” the
heart, to be heterodox. They announced that those still engaged in what
they in their unholy ignorance called Islamic mystical practices were certain
to end in Hell, and argued that the pondok system of education with its
reliance on secondary interpretations and its blind chanting of non-under-
stood verses was a medieval anachronism. In sum, they said, “We must go
back to the Koran and the Hadith; these are the ‘Light of the Prophecy.’ ”
  He (an Indonesian-born Arab, the first secretary and one of the prime movers
  in Muhammadijah in its earliest days) said there were five people who began
  Muhammadijah here in town: Mudjito, the school inspector; Rachmat Mus-
  salam, another Arab, now no longer in Modjokuto; Hadji Ustaz, the store-
  owner; Achmad Muchlas from the penghulu family, later to be penghulu him­
  self; and Hadji Kasim, another trader. When they first started, the opposition
  to the organization was intense, particularly from the kijajis. The kolot Mos­
  lems thought Muhammadijah was a new religion which was not really Islam
  but a false doctrine. He said that after he and the other Muhammadijah people
  went around speaking in the various villages trying to convince the people,
  the tension lessened, but it still exists. He said the main content in the sermons
  was the social application of Islam: the teachings of the Koran and the Hadith
  relative to village cooperation, morality in village life, and the like, in con­
  trast to the kolot chanting and the reservation of reading of the Koran only
  for very old men who couldn’t understand it anyway. What they were trying
  to do was to bring the Koran down to earth.

    Thus the battle shifted onto entirely religious ground; but, as the transcript
from my notes shows, the evasion of political problems, did nothing to soften
the reaction of the conservatives. In fact, by concentrating its fire upon just
those aspects of santri practice which seemed most crucially to define
orthodoxy to the kijajis and their followers (Muhammadijah paid little at­
tention to abangans directly; their reform was directed internally to the
ummat itself), the reliance of the Shafi‘ite law and the old-fashioned Koranic
school, Muhammadijah exacerbated the conflict tremendously. Tension rose
to the point where conservative Moslems would not go to the same mosque
with the Muhammadijah members, where even opening a book by Abduh was
held to be a mortal sin which would lead to blindness, and where an informant
of mine who had founded the only village branch of Muhammadijah in the
Modjokuto area (it soon failed; the organization was and is an almost wholly
urban phenomenon in Modjokuto) found that none of his old-line friends
would speak a word to him for over two years and would cross to the other
side of the road when they saw him coming. The conservatives also organized,
forming a local chapter of Nahdatul Ulama (abbreviated NU), the Indonesia­
wide organization of conservative religious scholars and their followers
which had its central headquarters about thirty miles from Modjokuto in
what was, under the late Kijaji Hasjim Ashary, perhaps the most famous
»140«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
 (as well as one of the largest, having several thousand students at one time)
pondok in all Java.
     NU actually got started in Modjokuto in 1926, a few years before Mu-
hammadijah appeared. Stimulated both by the nearness of the central head­
quarters and by Nazir’s vigorous modernist missionizing, the organization,
dedicated to “awakening” rural religious teachers to the threat posed to
their way of life by Islamic reformism, drew its original leaders from the
leading Icijajis in the area plus a few town tradesmen who left Nazir’s SI
because of its modernist turn. Its combination of political adaptablity with
religious conservatism, thus avoiding both horns of Nazir’s dilemma, had
an immediate appeal; and the organization grew to about 15,000 people (a
rough estimate by its prewar leader) by 1940, while Muhammadijah re­
mained very small, never having a membership much over forty people. De­
spite the discrepancy in numbers, however, the two organizations were about
an even match, Muhammadijah making up for what it lacked in size by a
much tighter organization and a far more aggressive spirit. The intensity of
the argument grew, splitting both the urban and rural communities (al­
though the latter was predominantly conservative) and leading finally to
a serious split within the penghulu family itself and a succession crisis in
the government religious bureaucracy.
     The second naib (i.e., penghulu) of Modjokuto, the one who held office
the longest and who is regarded as the family’s most important recent an­
cestor, was a polygynist with three wives. By the second he had only one
child, but by the first and third he had five apiece. As the first wife was
about a generation older than the third, the children of the first were, in
general, also a generation or a half-generation older than the children of
the third. When this man died in 1919, he was succeeded in office, according
to the unwritten rule, by his eldest living son (i.e., a child of his first wife).
Since this son, whose name was Kasman, was, like all the other male members
in the senior wing of the family, a convinced conservative, he used his
office to advance the conservative cause, in which effort he was strenuously
opposed by the younger wing of the family, the children of the third wife,
all of them modernists and members of Muhammadijah. Kasman not only
favored the conservative party in every way in which he was able but he
also slowly managed to remove the Muhammadijah members of the family—■
evidently through intra-family maneuvering, the details of which it is
impossible to reconstruct—from the religious office staff. Thus developed a
war of generations within the penghulu family, an ideological split between
half-brothers, that at times grew extremely heated.
  Bisri (a son of one of the old naib’s sons by the younger wife) said that when
  his father (now dead) was a young man he was very active in organizations.
  His spirit was very strong. He was a pioneer of Muhammadijah, and every
  day he had fights with Kasman about this. At that time Kasman, his half-
  brother, was naib in Modjokuto and senior member of the family, and was op­
  posed by the younger half-brothers and -sisters, including Bisri’s father. Once
  Bisri’s father arranged for a chotbah (sermon) in the mosque to be translated
  into Javanese after it had been presented in Arabic, although he knew Kasman
The Development of Islam in Modjokuto                                          »141«
  was very much opposed to this. When Kasman found out about it, he and
  Bisri’s father had a great fight about it, and Bisri’s father left home and went to
  a pondok to live.
    Upon the death of Kasman this struggle came to a head when the
modernist wing of the family succeeded in convincing the chief penghulu
in the regency—to whom, as I have said, the Modjokuto family was related
by marriage—to appoint (i.e., recommend to the regent for appointment) as
naib, not the son of Kasman as would be the normal practice, but instead one
of his younger half-brothers, the intellectual leader of the modernist wing and
a Muhammadijah founder, using as a transparent excuse the fact that Kas-
man’s son was somewhat ailing. The outcry at this was tremendous; and it
not only brought the split within the penghulu family out into the open (the
new naib's own mother, an unbeliever in newfangled ways, did not approve of
his taking the job) but also divided almost the whole ummat, particularly
within the town, into two camps. Letters were written to the Indonesian press,
petitions were carried to the regency capital, accusations were hurled in
both directions, and threats of various kinds were made—but the new
naib remained in office. With his installation the high-water mark of the
modèren-kolot conflict was reached, the permanency of Muhammadijah on
the local scene was assured, and, since some of the more unbending reaction­
aries were beginning to age and die, a process of reconciliation began.
    The process of reconciliation consisted, on the conservative side, of their
slow acceptance of modernist innovations in organization (of which the very
founding of Nahdatul Ulama in 1925 had been the first example) and, on
the modernist side, of the abandonment of any intensive attempt to force
reform interpretations of religious detail upon the ummat. NU began to
build schools with at least half of the curriculum secular (or to give a
few non-religious classes within the pondoks); to hold prayer meetings of
their own; to set up women’s auxiliaries, start boy scouts, and the like.
    In this sense the modernists won. But in another, perhaps more funda­
mental sense, they did not, for they lost or gave up their zeal for Islamic
reform just at the point—so it seems to an outsider—when it was beginning to
come to some interesting conclusions. Abduh was pushed aside as too radical
for everyday use, serious attempts to rethink Islamic problems were aban­
doned as unlikely to lead to solutions which could gain acceptance in any
case, and discussion of details of religious belief and practice was avoided
as leading only to useless arguments. “Never discuss different interpretations
of Islam,” the leader of the modernist political party in Modjokuto told a
group of Islamic youth at a meeting I attended in 1954. “It only leads to
broken friendships.”
    The reasons for this compromise were many. The depression hurt the
budding middle class of santri businessmen, who were modernism’s main
support and source of élan, perhaps as much as any other group, wiping
out many, driving others to the larger cities, and talcing much of the heart
and all of the optimism out of the rest. In the countryside, the kijajis and
their peasant followers began to come more into contact with the modern
»142«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
world as new means of communication and transportation multiplied, while
at the same time some of their younger sons moved into town to be traders
and some of their daughters married into the urban santri group, bringing
the two groups closer together. (There has been, however, only one marriage
between an NU and a Muhammadijah person in the town of Modjokuto; and
that occurred during the revolution, people saying that anything could happen
then but that it probably wouldn’t be permitted now by the families involved.)
Also, as the situation stabilized, the greater intensity of the Muhammadijah
being matched by the greater numbers of NU, a kind of natural social
balance was reached in which compromise more or less occurred of itself.
    Other reasons for the rapprochement might include the fact that an
atmosphere of intense controversy is foreign and acutely uncomfortable to
the Javanese, who tend to prefer adjustment to argument and indirection to
open conflict, and the fact that Islamic scholars in the Moslem universities
of the Middle East failed to take the next intellectual and doctrinal steps
beyond Abduh’s pioneering effort, leaving Indonesian modernists with a
late-nineteenth-century reform doctrine that seemed irrelevant in a world
full of labor unions, large plantations, and falling commodity prices. But
perhaps the greatest impetus for the new compromise was the re-entrance
of politics onto the scene. As the possibilities for a successful nationalist
movement became more apparent, the quest for national self-determination
began to occupy the minds and engulf the hearts of the Indonesian elite,
leaving precious little time for reflection upon the ultimate contexts of
human behavior.



                  The Japanese Period : 1942-1945

the Japanese, who for reasons of their own undertook to simplify Indonesian
domestic politics, aided the cause of modèren-kolot reconciliation by forcing
all politicized santris into a single organization, ultimately called Masjumi
(Council of Indonesian Moslem Organizations), and by carrying out a policy
of systematic favoritism toward the santri element of the population in an
attempt to woo them to Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere ideology.
Several of Modjokuto’s Moslem leaders, both from Muhammadijah and from
Nahdatul Ulama, were taken to Djakarta to be instructed in the Japanese
view of world politics and domestic order and returned to Modjokuto to
spread the new tiieories among their neighbors.
  Bisri said that during the Japanese period both Jahja (at present chairman of
  Muhammadijah in Modjokuto) and Achmad Muchlas (the naib who tri­
  umphed over the conservatives in the case mentioned earlier) were among
  those who were sent to Djakarta to study as part of the Japanese attempt to
  win over santris. Evidently the attempt wasn’t entirely without success, accord­
  ing to Bisri, because later both Jahja and Muchlas voluntarily joined in Bra-
  gang the Barisan Djibaku (“Human Bomb Corps”) which was organized to
The Development of Islam in Modjokuto                                         »143«
  provide a kamikaze defense against the Americans if they should invade Java.
  Bisri said he doubted that these men would actually have become kamikazes
  had the time for it arrived, but they were quite anti-American in those days
  and pro-Japanese, which he attributed to the lack of political experience on
  the Moslems’ part. He said the Japanese went out of their way never to pres­
  sure Islam, and Moslems felt no opposition between their beliefs and those of
  the Japanese. He said that the men invited to Djakarta in addition to the two
  Muhammadijah men were mostly kijajis. The children, such as he, were also
  filled with Japanese propaganda, which took very well, even with him, but
  they really didn’t know any better. He said school children voluntarily shaved
  their heads to be more like the Japanese and wore Japanese-type hats on their
  own initiative. He said that every morning they had to bow to Japan in school.
  Asked whether this didn’t conflict with Islam, he said no, it was regarded as
  not being a religious act; there were long discussions at the time whereby it
  was distinguished from Islamic praying by the slight differences in position
  and the like. He said the Japanese were careful never to attack Islam.
     Moslem leaders of both factions held many of the most important posts
in the Japanese-sponsored organizations in Modjokuto. In both Modjokuto
and several nearby villages they headed the relief organization for the as­
sistance of people whose sons had been carried off to forced labor in Siam
or elsewhere;* and they were appointed to special bureaucratic posts duplicat­
ing existing jobs, the duties of which seem to have been concerned mainly
with spying on the prijajis who held the actual posts. They also toured the
villages, spreading Japanese propaganda much as, a few years before, they
had spread Islamic propaganda, but now their message displayed a greater
uniformity.
     Despite these efforts, the deception, especially after the Japanese had been
around a year or two and the Javanese could see what “co-prosperity”
amounted to, was probably not more than skin deep with most of the santri
mass, who saw their leaders’ peregrinations in a humorous light and, having
a peasant’s sense for the realities of human motivation, attributed to these
leaders purposes rather more materialistic than ideological:
  They (three young santris) said Hadji Zakir (Nazir’s lieutenant; Nazir him­
  self, along with another of his chief aides, was at the time serving on the pup­
  pet “Regional Governing Council” at Regency Headquarters) was one of
  those sent to Djakarta as a kijaji and a “religious expert” to get a course in
  propaganda and then to be sent here to go around to the villages. (This man,
  an illiterate, was in no sense a kijaji, but he was a vigorous santri and middle-
  rank Moslem political leader in Modjokuto.) They said the Japanese even
  gave him a special uniform, and that in general the Japanese “raised up” the
  santris as against the rest of the population and favored them, trying to use
   them, evidently with good success, as agents of their policy. They were taken
  to Djakarta to be instructed or sent to Bragang (as volunteers) to be kami­
  kazes, where they studied how to be “unafraid to die” for a month and were
    * The suffering being what it was, the shortages being what they were, and the
Japanese having complete control over all categories of consumption goods, many
of which were released through this organization, this position was a rather powerful
one, and several times I heard the occupants of these posts referred to as the “little
dictators" of the Japanese time.
» 144«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  given clothes and extra food. Talkah (one of my informants) thought it just
  rather funny; and this evidently is what most people thought at the time,
  perhaps even those who went and participated, because no one thought these
  people were “unafraid to die,” and they didn’t prove that they were, later in
  the revolution. It was a quick way to get permits—e.g., to buy and sell stuff or
  to travel, which were the real currency during the Japanese occupation and
  were the crucial things to have if one wanted to get ahead economically; and
  the Japanese paid off in permits. When I asked about Haslim (a prewar NU
  leader, still active), they said that he didn’t go to Djakarta but did circulate in
  the villages for the Japanese. They said that the Japanese time was a very
  hard time; people ate leaves and had almost no clothes— but it was very
  funny, too. In response to my question, they agreed that the Japanese policy
  of favoring the Moslems as against other people was evident at the time.
  There was much discussion then of how Islam fitted in with Japanese orders.
     It was the other aspect of Japanese policy, the fusion of the various op­
posing santri social and political groups into one “party,” Masjumi, which had
the greatest long-run effect on the ummat. Masjumi was led on the national
level by Wachid Hasjim, son of the kijaji who founded Nahdatul Ulama and
his father’s successor as the organization’s head, and by Hadji Mansoer, the
prewar Muhammadijah leader.
     For the first time, all the old Sarekat Islam stalwarts (it was by now
called PSII—Partai Sarekat Islam Indonesia), the NU conservatives, and
the Muhammadijah modernists were in a single party. True, the “party”
was so controlled by the Japanese authorities as to have little independence of
action, but, as in so many areas of national life, the Indonesians were able
to learn the techniques involved and forget the content rather quickly. As in
newspaper publishing, where they learned the methods of effective layout and
production while writing the most primitive kind of propaganda, and in ad­
ministration, where, in genuinely responsible bureaucratic posts for almost the
first time, they learned much about the day-to-day governing of men even
though they were operating under a policy more repressive and less concerned
with Indonesian welfare than any the Dutch had ever devised, so in political
organization they took the form and left the content, learned the techniques
of machine politics and forgot their fascist lessons as soon as the Japanese
were out of sight. After the heightened solidarity of the revolutionary period
passed, a period in which Masjumi played a major role, this new-found unity
was in part lost; but the effect of the enforced cooperation had left the various
groups both less antagonistic one to the other and more skilled at (as well as
infatuated with) political agitation, organization, and intrigue.



           The Republican Period: 1945 to the Present
IN Modjokuto the unitary Masjumi was led by representatives of each of the
groups—-Sarekat Islam, Muhammadijah, and Nahdatul Ulama—with Muham­
madijah, having the greatest number of intellectuals, rather dominant. When
The Development of Islam in Modjokuto                                         » 145 «

the Republic of Indonesia was proclaimed on the 17th of August, 1945, two
military organizations were incorporated into the party structure. The first,
Hizbullah, a guerilla batallion of young men, grew out of a similarly named
organization formed by the Japanese to give training in military drill to young
Moslems. In Modjokuto (like Masjumi itself, Hizbullah was Indonesia-wide
but, also like Masjumi, it had little effective central organization) this group
was led by the present head of Muhammadijah—the same man who a year
or so before was going to Djakarta, for propaganda training and studying to
be a kamikaze. The second military group was the Sabilillah, a kind of home
guard made up of older men and led, now that Nazir was dead, by Hadji
Zakir, the old SI man, which in fact never got around to doing much of any­
thing.
     Modjokuto was in Republican territory until the second Dutch “aggres­
sion,” when it fell to colonial troops, many of the town’s finest buildings being
destroyed by the scorched-earth tactics of the retreating Indonesians. Most
Masjumi leaders retired to secret military headquarters in one or the other of
the two villages where the first Kudus migration had ended, the most heavily
santri villages in the area. Evidently these rather obvious locations were not
apparent to the Dutch (although eventually four of the top leaders were cap­
tured by the Dutch near Bragang and imprisoned), for these leaders were able
for several months to direct sporadic attacks against the Dutch quartered in the
town—attacks which evidently were, except as harassments, rather ineffective
but in which several young Moslems were killed.
     At length, world public opinion, the diplomatic skill of their leaders, and
their own remarkable courage brought Indonesians freedom; and Masjumi
was transformed from a semi-military revolutionary association to a genuine
all-Indonesia political party within a parliamentary context.
     In the new atmosphere of freedom, the unity imposed by the Japanese
and necessitated by the revolution soon evaporated. Sarekat Islam, now PSII,
dissatisfied, among other things, with Muhammadijah dominance within the
party, was the first to leave Masjumi. (In Modjokuto, Muhammadijah domina­
tion had grown quite noticeable. The Chairman, Vice Chairman, Secretary,
and four of seven members of the Governing Council were Muhammadijah
people.) A short while later Nahdatul Ulama left for similar reasons and as
a result of a conflict with Muhammadijah over who was going to hold the
Ministry of Religion. (These decisions to leave Masjumi were, of course, taken
by the central governing boards of the parties in Djakarta.) Thus for the first
 time NU became a genuine political party rather than merely a social organiza­
 tion.
     In Modjokuto, but not necessarily elsewhere in Java, where different
 histories have resulted in different patterns, all this splitting off left the leader­
 ship of Masjumi largely in Muhammadijah hands, although almost all of the
 rank-and-file members around the countryside are not members of Muham­
 madijah. Although the departure of NU and to a much lesser extent that of
 PSII (which is a very small though rather activist party, having in Modjokuto
 only about forty members) weakened Masjumi considerably, it is still the
 largest Moslem party in Indonesia and thus the second-generation descendants
» 146 «                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
of the original modernists now find themselves at the head of a mass organiza­
tion, a feat their “fathers” were never able to accomplish in the years before
the war. In part this is a result of their moderation in matters of purely re­
ligious concern; the rural santris are not nearly so suspicious of their orthodoxy
as they once were. In part it is an unintended consequence of the formation
of the unitary Masjumi in the days of the Japanese and its front-rank role
in the revolution. Many people who had never before participated in any
Moslem organization were drawn into Masjumi during this period; and these
recruits remained loyal to the new party when those who had been NU or SI
members before the war withdrew.
      In short, the complex history just traced produced in the Modjokuto of
 1953-1954 an ummat with one minor and two major political parties, plus
a modernist-inspired social and charitable organization more or less attached,
informally but rather firmly, to one of the parties. There is Partai Sarekat
Islam Indonesia (PSII), now rather unimportant, made up of a few surviving
warhorses of the original Sarekat Islam, a few of their sons and nephews, and
a few new recruits. There is Nahdatul Ulama, now both a social organization
and a political party joined into one rather poorly organized whole. There is
Masjumi, a mass political party, only slightly better organized, led by the
same people who lead Muhammadijah. And there is Muhammadijah itself,
 still running its schools (it now has half a dozen), its orphanages, and its
boy scouts, and still, despite NU criticism, holding prayers in the town square
on the Prophet’s birthday. It also still has its small but extremely energetic
 and well-organized membership of about forty people willing to make genuine
 sacrifices for the organization. But most of its zeal for modernist reform of
 Islamic religious doctrine has largely evaporated.
  When I asked him (the son of Hadji Nazir, the SI founder, who now runs his
  father’s pondok and is the only important Masjumi leader in Modjokuto who
  is not also a member of Muhammadijah) where the influence for his father’s
  political activity had come from, he said from Tjokroaminoto and Agus
  Salim, whom Nazir evidently knew quite well, from books, and evidently to a
  degree from Arabs. . . . When I started talking about Abduh, he said that
  his big influence was in Muhammadijah, which drew the greatest fire from the
  kolot, who called the Muhammadijah people Wahhabis (a fundamentalist
  Islamic movement in the Middle East, beginning in the nineteenth century and
  extending, to a degree, into the twentieth), a very scornful term here. Muham­
  madijah was much more ideologically modern before the war than it is now,
  he said. When I said that it seemed to me no one cared much about Abduh
  and his friends any more, he said, “No, not even the Muhammadijah people
  talk about him any more; everyone is just interested in politics. It seems as
  though all the old religious problems that exercised everyone before the war
  are not thought of any more.” He said that, although before the war NU
  people would not pray in the same mosque with Muhammadijah people, the
  conflict has mostly receded into the background, and in religious matters each
  person now does as he wishes. Muhammadijah has mostly forgotten the
  ideological problems; and at any rate, even if individual Muhammadijah
  people still hold these modernist positions, they aren’t interested in proselytiz­
  ing others any more. There are still traces of differences, but they are much
The Development of Islam in Modjokuto                                     »147
 lessened. NU people tell people that Masjumi is Muhammadijah-dominated,
 he said. “Isn’t it?” I asked. He said, “Well, somewhat, maybe;” but pointed to
 himself. The NU people, he agreed, have pretty much accepted the organiza­
 tional reforms of the Muhammadijah people such as schools and orphanages
 and don’t care about religious ideologies any more either. “Everyone is inter­
 ested in politics,” he said again; and when I asked why, he said, “They figure
 if they win in politics they will have no trouble with religion later on.”
Chapter 12                  Conservative versus
                                       Modern:
                    The Ideological Background



A lthough the progress of the reform movement has been halted, at least
temporarily, the results of the first phase can be plainly seen in Modjokuto.
The conservatives have adopted some of the outward trappings of the modern­
ists; the modernists have become less intense about conservative practices they
consider unworthy of Islam. But the doctrinal differences between the two
groups persist, and a certain degree of antagonism continues to be manifested
concerning them. With the re-emergence of the separate parties since the
revolution, the ummat has been stabilized, roughly in the form it had reached
by the time the Japanese came, embracing a modernism most of the original
goals of which have either been accomplished or laid aside as impossible of
achievement and a conservatism which is to a great extent old wine in new
bottles. Each is somewhat hostile to the other, and they more or less divide
up the Islamic community between them. Three transcripts from my notes
will convey a sense of the situation in doctrinal terms:
  (1) He (the secretary of Muhammadijah) said that Muhammadijah is the
  organization in Indonesia which has the most buildings, does the most work,
  and so on. He said they have polyclinics in many big towns and lots of or­
  phanages, schools, and the like as here in Modjokuto. He said there are only
  forty members in Modjokuto but that they are very close to each other, work
  well together, and thus have much better results than other groups. He said
  most people do not want to enter Muhammadijah because they know they
  would have to contribute time, money, and work. The main difference be­
  tween NU and Muhammadijah is that the latter is modéren and the former
  koiot; Muhammadijah wants to unite East and West, NU wants just the East.
  NU has many, many members, but not much in the way of results. It shows
  no progress and is poorly organized.
  (2) He (prewar head, now vice chairman of Nahdatul Ulama) said NU is
  a koiot organization; that all the leaders are koiot—lots of kijajis particularly;
  and that he himself is koiot. Asked whether NU people liked to be called
                                         148
Conservative versus Modern : The Ideological Background » 149 «
  kolot, he said, “Yes, of course they do.” I asked him just what he meant by
  kolot. He said, “Well, for example, we like slametans, we like the old ways,
  like wearing wooden sandals and sarongs. We stick to the ways of our parents
  and grandparents. . . . ” I asked him if only the old and village people were
  kolot (because he had mentioned that he was old and that there were lots of
  old men and village people in NU). How about young townsmen like Rivai
  (secretary of NU)? Was he kolot too? He said, “Yes, it is the heart that is
  important. A man like Rivai has an old heart; he is old-fashioned inside. All
  NU people are that way.” He mentioned the present Minister of Religion,
  who is an NU man, and said that even though he dresses in a tie, coat, and
  long pants, his heart is kolot; down deep he is an old-fashioned man.
  (3) He (a watchmaker and rank-and-file member of both Masjumi and
  Muhammadijah) went on to list the various intellectuals with academic titles
  in Masjumi—Dr. Sukiman, Mr.* Rum, Mr. Jusuf Wibisono, Dr. A. R. Hani-
  fah (all leaders of Masjumi at the national level)—and compared this situa­
  tion favorably with that of NU, which had only kijajis and such, and really
  no educated men. He said that NU was more interested in religion than
  Masjumi, and Masjumi more in politics. The NU leaders were undoubtedly
  deep enough in religion, he said, but they didn’t know anything about leading
  a country.
    The contrast, then, between the modernists and conservatives remains, if
muted. People still almost inevitably distinguish between the two approaches,
choose one and denigrate the other. What is the content of the doctrines in­
volved? How does the modéren interpretation of Islam differ from the kolot?
Five pairs of oppositions fairly well sum up the situation;
  (1) The kolot group tends to emphasize a relationship to God in which the
  reception of blessings as acts of His Grace and in reward for one’s moral
  uprightness and a sense of the individual career as being entirely fated by His
  Will are the main features. The modéren group tends to emphasize a relation­
  ship to God in which hard work and self-determination are emphasized.
  (2) The kolot group tends to hold to a “totalistic” concept of the role of
  religion in life, in which all aspects of human endeavor tend to take on a re­
  ligious significance and the boundaries between the religious and the secular
  tend to be blurred. The modéren group tends to hold a narrowed notion of
  religion in which only certain well-defined aspects of life are sacralized and
  in which the boundary between the sacred and the secular tends to be fairly
  sharp.
  (3) The kolot group tends to be less concerned (but still concerned) with the
  purity of their Islam and more willing to allow non-Islamic rites at least a
  minor place within the religious sphere. The modéren group tends to insist
  upon an Islam purified of any foreign religious matter.

  (4) The kolot group tends to emphasize the immediately consummatory as­
  pects of religion, to emphasize religious experience. The modéren group
   * Mr. (abbreviation of meester) is a Dutch academic title used by holders of a
master’s degree in law.
»150«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  tends to emphasize the instrumental aspects of religion, to be concerned
  with religious behavior.

  (5) The kolot group tends to justify practice by custom and by detailed
  scholastic learning in traditional religious commentaries. The modéren group
  tends to justify it upon the basis of its pragmatic value in contemporary life
  and by general reference to the Koran and the Hadith interpreted loosely.




                  1. Fate versus Self-Determination
modernists most      often sneer at conservative beliefs as “grave and gift”
(kuburan lan gandjaran) religion, by which they mean that it is largely con­
cerned with life after death and the gaining of blessings from God.
  Both Dullah from Masjumi and Aziz from PSII complained after the NU
  public meeting at the mosque . . . of NÜ ’s exclusive concern with religion
  and with the afterlife. Dullah said, “This isn’t fitting; you have to deal with
  the situation now”; and Aziz said, “All they are interested in is kuburan and
  gandjaran. The village people just love this. They love to hear about how they
  are going to recéive blessings for their goodness and about life beyond the
  grave. This is the old-time religion, and still very popular.” He too, however,
  doesn’t like it. He thinks NU is out of touch with reality.
    The kolot message is eternally the same: if you will be good, pious, moral
people, God will probably reward you with good health, riches, and happiness
and, in any case, on Judgment Day He will take you up with Him into heaven.
Combined with a belief in the determinátion of all things by the Will of God,
this tends to produce a reliance upon one’s moral superiority as the instrument
for gaining one’s goals rather than action, particularly where action is likely
to lead to sticky situations. A man who orders bricks from a brickmaker and
pays for them but never gets them resigns himself by saying that it is God’s
Will and that, anyway, later he, the swindled, will get the gandjaran that was
intended for the brickmaker.
    The usual image which is employed (by modernists and conservatives
alike) as a symbol of the determination of man’s actions by God’s Will is that
of the shadow-play puppeteer with his puppets. As the puppeteer manipulates
his puppets, so God manipulates men; and as the puppets go into the box at
the close of the performance, so men go into the grave at the close of their
performance. But although modernists and conservatives both have a lively
sense of divine determinism, the manner in which they interpret this doctrine
—takdir—varies in its emphasis.
  Then I asked him (a young modernist) about takdir, and he said that he
  believed everything was takdir and that man’s fate was wholly in God’s hands.
  “Well,” I said, “why do anything then? Why did the Indonesians bother with
  the revolution if everything is up to God?” He said, very strenuously, that
  we are commanded in the Koran to work and strive, to better ourselves. At
  my objection that this seemed in conflict with takdir he said that he sup­
Conservative versus Modern : The Ideological Background                      » 151 «
  posed that this wish to work and strive is determined by takdir too. But he
  was somewhat perplexed and asked me what Western thinkers thought on
  the subject; and I reassured him they were not much ahead of him on the
  problem. He said that it is partly a matter of emphasis. Some people, par­
  ticularly the older, more kolot people, emphasize the takdir part of the thing
  and ascribe everything to that while others, younger people like himself, while
  still believing in takdir, also believe that effort makes a difference. For ex­
  ample, he has often argued with his grandmother on just these very lines.
  His grandmother will say, for instance, of a relative who is very poor, “Oh,
  it is just takdir, just fate.” He will reply, “No, they are just lazy; they don’t
  work hard enough.” He said they never agree on this sort of problem.
    The difference, then, between the kolot and modéren positions on the prob­
lem of free will is, in the first place, one of the extent to which the doctrine of
determination is invoked to explain actual behavior and, in the second place,
of the amount of stress put on the Koranic command to work as against that
put upon the power of God to determine the details of individual behavior.
In the kolot view, not otÛy is takdir invoked more readily to condone, or at
least to explain, moral, biological, or economic failure, but also the balance
between the command to work and the sense for takdir seems more nearly
even. The result is a view of things in which human effort can as a matter of
fact really do little or nothing in altering individual destiny, but in which it
is necessary to work-patiently, whether one gets anywhere that way or not/'a
patient and peaceful servant of one’s divine Master following out the com­
mands He has issued, neither complaining nor questioning.
  He (an NU leader) said, “If you believe there is a God and that all things
  are ordained by God you will be at peace and you won’t get angry. People
  who believe this are very difficult to upset because they know everything is the
  work of God. . . . ” I asked him if this was takdir, and he said, “Yes. It is
  the realization of this that makes you peaceful. You don’t worry about being
  sick or dying because you know all that is in the hands of God.” “Then why
  work?” I asked. He said that the Koran commands one to work. “Everyone
  has to work; it is sinful not to. It doesn’t matter whether you are successful or
  not; you have to keep on hoeing in your fields even if you never get anywhere
  and just1stay poor. Whether you succeed or not is in the hands of God;
  what you, have to do is obey the command to work.”
    In the modernist view, however, takdir tends to get narrowed to apply
only to those occurrences clearly outside any possibility of human control;
and the degree to which one responds to the command to work is held to be
the main determinant in one’s fortunes.
  I asked him (a young Masjumi man) about takdir. He said that in his opinion
  everyone is takdir exactly the same. God does not takdir some people rich
  and some poor, but everybody is takdir with an even chance. Thus those
  who are poor are poor mainly because they are lazy or stupid or sinful; for
  example, they gamble. Those who are rich are rich because they work hard
  and are clever. He said that if, for example, he was well-off, it was not God’s
  Will but a result of his own efforts, and anyone could do the same if only he
  would try hard enough. He said that it is important, however, to give thanks
»152«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  to God for one’s good fortune. When I asked him if sickness was takdir, he
  said that there were two kinds: illnesses due to dirt, malaria, for example, and
  those which are not and are thus not one’s own fault. “The same is true
  with accidents,” he said, unprompted. “If you leave here and walk out in
  the middle of the street without looking where you are going and you get hit
  by a truck, that is not takdir, it is your own fault. But if the accident was
  completely beyond your own control, that is takdir.”

     There are various other compromises and solutions between these two
extremes, such as the view that God determines us generally into one of two
groups, rich or poor, but that within these effort can make a difference; but
in general people tend to lean to one pole or the other: that man should be a
pious, patient, steady worker in the service of God and he will receive his
blessings, most likely in this life, certainly in the next, or that man should
strive for what he wishes, thank God when he gets it, but not employ the
doctrine of divine determination as an excuse for his failures.



               2. Totalistic versus Narrowed Religion
the varying range over which the doctrine of takdir is applied is in itself
an example of the second opposition: the totalistic versus the narrowed view
of the scope of religion. The greater percentage of secular studies in modernist
schools, the emphasis on non-religious groupings such as peasant associations,
labor unions, boy scouts, and sport clubs by the modernists, and the generally
much less obviously religious atmosphere in which the modernist groups
operate point to the same thing. When a modernist opens a meeting, say the
kolot, all he does is shout Bismillah! (“In the name of God!” ) and then
plunges into a discussion of the budget, returning to Islam only to shout
AihamduliUah! (“Thanks be to God!” ) as the meeting ends. This, says the
kolot critic wryly, makes the organization Islamic.
     The issue here, it need be understood, is not a difference of point of view
concerning the importance of religion in relation to the rest of life. For both
groups Islamic doctrine is considered to be the fundamental basis for human
action in all of its aspects; there is no simple rendering unto Caesar. In that
sense, all santris are totalistic—in contrast to abangans and prijajis, for whom
religion is only one part of life with its own specific patterns and purposes
and more or less equal in prestige with other parts which, in turn, do not need
to be justified in any explicitly religious terms. But for the santris this latter
is just what is involved: how is the secular life to be justified in terms of the
religious? While the conservatives have a tendency to regard Islam as pro­
viding adequate and explicit directions in all fields of human endeavor from
the domestic to the political, the modernists display a greater willingness to
allow secular institutions to operate largely independently of a constant
harassment by details of religious doctrine as long as their basic relationship
to that doctrine is such that there is no obvious reason to condemn them.
Conservative versus Modern : The Ideological Background                        » 153 «
  I talked with Radjat (an NU member) a while. He discussed the difference
  between NU and Masjumi and said that their aims were identical but their
  methods different. For example, both Masjumi and NU want a state based on
  Islam; but Masjumi argues that people must make the secular state perfect
  first, or at least some of its leaders, and that they can declare it Islamic later,
  while NU says Islam first, and that will make the state perfect.* Also, the
  leadership of NU in contrast to Masjumi is made up of kijajis and pondok
  people, people who have in many cases never been to school at all, while
  Masjumi leaders are mostly educated people. Also, NU puts more emphasis
  on religion and less on secular affairs; Masjumi emphasizes the secular more
  than the religious. They are both Moslem, however; it is just a matter of
  stress.
    The tendency for the religious to widen out to engulf the secular, to
regard everything as having religious significance, was even stronger in the
years before the war, when wearing Western clothes was considered by some
conservative leaders to be an infidel practice, the story being told that at one
NU conference before the war a famous kijaji insisted (unsuccessfully, it must
be admitted) that other delegates refrain from wearing neckties. This sort of
thing occurs rather seldom now, but it is still not always possible to predict
what an old-fashioned santri is going to consider anti-Islamic. Movies, playing
cards even without gambling, and gym shorts for girls have raised orthodox
hackles during the past few years.



                   3. Syncretic versus Puristic Islam

despite their seeming greater religiosity, the conservatives are somewhat more
flexible about both abangan rituals on the one hand and prijaji mysticism on
the other. Their flexibility does not, paradoxically, indicate a greater tolerance;
if anything, the conservatives are more likely directly to attack “infidel” prac­
tices by non-santris than are the modernists, who worry more about heterodoxy
within the ummat than outside of it. Rather, it is a slightly broader view as to
what may be considered Islamic or, if not actually Islamic, at least harmless
enough to be legitimately practiced by a “true” Moslem without damaging his
religious status. Mysticism can be lent orthodoxy by adopting the rules of one
    * In other words, Masjumi is willing to work in the present secular republic and
feels no necessity for the immediate declaration of an Islamic theocracy, which many
Masjumi members privately consider would raise more problems than it would settle.
NU, although forced to work under the present secular state, there being no alternative
but to rebel (as right-wing Moslems seeking an Islamic state have indeed done in West
Java, in South Celebes, and sporadically in North Sumatra), feels that the theocracy
should be declared immediately, whereupon reform of the government will follow as
a natural consequence of the mere application of the superior political and legal
theories of Islam. The Masjumi view just given is not official party doctrine, for
neither party would dare come out against an immediate imposition of an Islamic
state; it is, however, an accurate summary of the view actually held by the leaders of
the party in Modjokuto.
»154«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
of the Sufi brotherhoods (i.e., “orthodox” Islamic mystic sects); and if the
spirits petitioned at a slametan are called djins and if the Koran chant be some­
what extended, then these little feasts are at worst pleasant gatherings of
neighbors, age-old customs of only minor religious significance which it would
be a shame to give up.
    So, among the kolot, the traditional round of slametans goes on only some­
what simplified for economy’s sake and with the Islamic elements accentuated
at the expense of the non-lslamic; but among the modéren, slametans often
disappear almost completely. A modernist santri wedding will often consist
entirely of the ceremony at the naib's office, the meeting (the bride most often
dressed in a white Western gown to accentuate the secularity of this part of
the ceremony), an Islamic sermon addressed to the couple by an older male
relative, and a reception. At death a good modernist may merely buy a half-
dozen new benches for his group’s school and dedicate them to the memory
of the deceased. Pregnancy and birth slametans tend to be either ignored com­
pletely—sometimes on the pretext that they are dangerous to the health of
the mother—or extremely simplified. A modernist informant of mine simply
killed a small goat for a feast about two weeks after his wife gave birth.
Calendrical slametans are commonly not given at all because they are con­
sidered “Buddhist,” the Islamic holidays being celebrated by prayers in the
public square and by gifts to the poor. This passage from a poem composed
in the early days of Muhammadijah in Modjokuto gives pretty well the
modernist attitude to abangan religion:
            Many people are thrown in,
            Who die, and then are thrown into the flaming fire.
            Such is the fate of careless thinkers,
            Who guide their behavior by guess.
            The Lord God does not ever forgive
            The sins of idolators, even after death.
            One must pray only to one God!
            Those who pray to wood and stone,
            Who burn incense to ask forgiveness,
            Who place magical bundles here and there to call spirits—
            Indeed, they shall live in continuous misery!
   As for mysticism, in any form, it is even more of an anathema to the
moderen.
  Chalifa said that members of the modernist movement, such as himself,
  thought these people (we were discussing a nearby Moslem mystic brother­
  hood) were wrong, and that they thought people like him were wrong. He
  said that they were kolot, knew nothing about the science of Islam, and
  were not interested in helping others. They would go there (to the brother­
  hood’s pondok) for a month at a time, leaving their families behind un­
  guarded and uncared for, and were interested only in their own spiritual
  welfare. He said that he and people like him, whose minds were already
  opened, who knew the true Islam, should teach it to those who did not. He said
  also that the kolot mystics don’t really know much about this world. A good
  Moslem, he said, must know both this world and the religious life, and not
Conservative versus M odem : The Ideological Background                    »155«
  just one or the other. He read to me something he had written in Arabic in
  his composition book which said that those people who stumble around mum­
  bling the Confession of Faith over and over again are like dead men who can
  move, like ambulant corpses just waiting to finally die and trying to assure
  themselves of God’s favor but not caring about anyone else.




      4. Religious Experience versus Religious Behavior

the kolot side of the fourth opposition, the tendency to emphasize the im­
mediately consummately aspects of religion, is well enough indicated in the
concern with “blessings,” with “inner peace,” and the relative tolerance to­
wards abangan ritual and towards mysticism which have already been dis­
cussed. Similarly, the modéren side of the equation appears in the emphasis on
hard work and religious purity and the concern for social progress which I
have ascribed to them. But perhaps the clearest indication of the two groups’
differing choice of horns in this particular dilemma is to be seen in their con­
trasting attitudes toward art.
    The modéren view is well summed up by this transcript from my notes on
a conversation with a twenty-year Muhammadijah veteran:
  Among other things we discussed shadow-plays. He said that he thought that
  every person ought to see a shadow-play at least once but not more than
  that. He said the reason people ought to see it once is that it pictures how
  the world is. The puppeteer moves the puppets around, and it is just like God
  and His people. If it were not for God, people could not walk or talk.
  God is the puppeteer of the world. But once is enough to comprehend this;
  it is of no use to see it again. But Zaini (the informant’s wife) said that she
  had never seen a shadow-play; and when I asked why, she said that good
  santris don’t like shadow-plays because they are “just pleasure” and of no
  use. Zaini said Islam teaches that we should not waste our time in frivolous
  pursuits. Her husband then said that iijd is geld (Dutch for “Time is money” ),
  and that when I came we should always talk about important things, not
  just engage in small talk.

    Just about the only art, aside from chanting, which they do not regard as
an art form (and the criticize the extended chants of the kolot as being “of no
use” also), of which the modernists approve, is moral stories for children.
Such stories, emphasizing the virtues of honesty, thrift, hard work, and clean­
liness, are evidently frequently related in santri households and form an im­
portant part of the religious education of the child. But other forms of art
appear conspicuously lacking among the modernists. Rather, there seems to
be something of an emphasis on sports, most particularly soccer and bad­
minton, which are justified, not in terms of the enjoyment they bring, but on
the basis of their body-building and health-preserving functions.
    On the other hand, the conservatives, who also have little interest in
shadow-plays and court dancing, have managed to build up, largely around
»156«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
the pondok system, a fairly lively art adapted from the Arabs which contrasts
both with the restrained formality of prijaji art and the puritan aesthetics of the
modernists. Three art forms are involved: terbcmgan, a special type of
elaborated chanting, originally from Persia, in which small drums are beaten
and a history of the Prophet Muhammad is chanted, alternate sections in
rhymed prose and in poetry (i.e., with a fixed beat and line length) ; gambusan,
a Middle-Eastem-type orchestra, consisting of stringed instruments (the
gambus proper; evidently derived from the Hadhramaut) and various-sized
drums (also called terbang), to the music of which all-male Arabic dances
are danced and secular Arabic songs sung; and, third, a set of strength tests,
flesh mortifications, and native “wrestling” exhibitions centering around the
famous Indonesian fighting dance, the pentjak.
    The terbangan is usually held in the mosque, most commonly on the
Prophet’s birthday or other Moslem holidays, and lasts for about two hours.
Shorter ones are sometimes held on Friday eves (i.e., Thursday nights) and
at santri circumcisions and marriages. Modernists tend not only to look down
on these celebrations as old-fashioned but also to regard the performance of
them in the mosque as sacrilegious.
  I asked Dullah and Hadji Muchtar, the Muhammadijah man who works in
  the naib’s office, about the terbangan I heard was to be given in the mosque
  on August 17th (Indonesia’s Independence Day; this was evidently the first
  time this religious art form had been employed on a secular holiday) ; Muchtar
  laughed ironically and said, “Oh, we are having a hot time in the mosque
  from morning to night these days.” Dullah said that it was just a play for
  ignorant village people and was sponsored by NU. For Muhammadijah this
  kind of thing was absolutely forbidden. The mosque was for praying only
  and that was all, but the NU people were very orthodox (!) and didn’t under­
  stand. He said Muhammadijah had tried to prevent it, but evidently was un­
  successful.
    As for the gambusan, it occurs also at circumcisions and marriages and
at “graduation” ceremonies in pondoks. It may in fact be held just for the
joy of it, with no special occasion; and there were three or four gambits
orchestras in town made up of young santris who used to get together once
a week at the home of one of the members to have a kind of jam session.
Often, but not always, associated with the music is the singing of catchy Arabic
songs (the meanings of which, except in general terms, the singers do not
know) and lively Arabic dances, most of them comic, which often include
female impersonations. The whole effect, with drum-beating, rhythmic hand­
clapping, shouting, and all the skipping back and forth in helter-skelter fash­
ion, provides such a sharp contrast to the usual Javanese formality that it is
considered by most people to be rather animalistic and uncivilized. “It is like
Africa in Indonesia,” one young modernist said disapprovingly.
    Pentjak, the fighting dance, is not strictly speaking a wholly santri art
or one exclusively practiced by santris; nor did it originally have any con­
nection with Islam. But for various reasons it has come to be mainly associated
with pondok culture. Since Sumatra and the other larger “outer islands” of
Indonesia have, in general, tended to have a stronger Islamic tradition than
Conservative versus Modern : The Ideological Background                    » 157«
Java and a much weaker Hindu-Buddhist tradition, the pentjak, which was
 always strong there, tended to get associated with Moslem culture. Also, the
generally energetic character of the pentjak fits better with the pseudo-Arabic
culture of the pondoks than it does with the more restrained culture of the non-
santris; and the kind of encapsulated all male— even somewhat homosexual—
hairshirt youth society that pondoks represent is likely to find art forms empha­
sizing physical strength, agility, and endurance attractive. (One santri who had
been at the central NU pondok said that the kijaji there encouraged pentjak so
that the students would not wish to play such sports as soccer, which might
take them out of the pondok sphere and into contact with secular life). In any
case, almost all of the skillful pentjak performers around Modjokuto are kolot
santris who have spent long periods in pondoks; and about the only place one
still sees pentjak, a dying art (it had a brief renaissance under the Japanese,
who stimulated it in line with their pro-Moslem and military preparedness pro­
gram—and perhaps because it seemed to them much like their judo), is at
“graduation” ceremonies at pondoks.
     Pentjak is a half-dance, half-fight in which aggressive acts are initiated and
developed but not consummated. The two participants strike viciously at one
another with their hands and feet, sometimes even wielding knives, but with­
draw their blows at what seems like the last possible moment so they do not
land. They throw one another to the floor, the victim cooperating in exact
rhythm with the attacker; they leap around into formal poses, turning sharply
toward and away from one another. All the while the drums beat, the audience
shouts. It is a pantomime struggle just on the verge of the actual, and, some­
what as in a bullfight, the beauty and the excitement come from the thinness of
the line between art and life. Two fight; one, tired or consistently out-maneu­
vered, withdraws; and another combatant leaps out from the audience. After
five or ten minutes there is another unspoken decision, one of these two re­
tires, and a new challenger faces the victor. This can go on for hours, ten or a
dozen young men participating, the mock combat seeming always about to
break into actual struggle and open aggression as the antagonists shout and
grimace at one another; but it never does.
     But pentjak is not just an art form. It is at the same time a practical system
of self-defense which can be used without the aesthetic restraint when neces­
sary, and a form of spiritual training. Many stories of actual pentjak feats in
battle are told, and a man near me who beat off a huge knife-wielding thief
one night was said to have been able to do so because he was a pentjak expert.
In the old-time pondoks, it is said, there used to be people whose spiritual
discipline through pentjak was so great that they could knock people down
without touching them in a pentjak struggle; and a pentjak exhibition is stil'
today half viewed as a struggle between two wills, so that a good pentjak man
causes others to withdraw through his superior spiritual strength as well as
his physical agility—these being, in fact, but reverse aspects of each other.
     Associated with pentjak exhibitions is usually a series of strength tests
and flesh mortifications. At a pondok “graduation” I attended, young men
rolled in thorns, lifted weights, dropped heavy bricks on one another, and
climbed slippery poles. It is said that they sometimes lacerate themselves with
»158«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
glass and walk on fire, but I have not seen either. The purpose is again a
dual one of physical fitness and spiritual discipline, a Idnd of mystical sport.
In sum: the terbangcin, the gambusan, and the pentjalc combine to define a
quite variant subcultural art style by means of which the austere simplicities of
Islam are modified for those for whom religion needs to be more than faith
and works and to whom time is more than money.



                    5.    Custom and Scholasticism
                 versus Pragmatism and Rationalism
finally , there is the opposition between the Icolot reliance on custom and de­
tailed scholastic learning and the modéren group’s tendency to take general
oughts from the Koran and justify them pragmatically. The strongly Icljafi
leadership of NU means that the scholastic tradition is extremely entrenched
there.
  We talked on about NU and Muhammadijah. He (a young modernist) said
  that NU has all the kijajis; in Modjokuto, Muhammadijah does not have one
  religious expert, one Icijaji. He said that the reason NU is stronger (i.e., has
  more members) is that it has a fixed religious line. Most NU positions on
  religious problems are decided by the big kijajis, and the others fall in line.
  Muhammadijah has none of this. Each man just about decides for himself
  on the basis of his own interpretation of the Koran. He said that Dullah (a
  Muhammadijah leader) holds that if one misses a prayer one does not nec­
  essarily have to repeat it later; but Pak Ali (Chairman of Masjumi and Vice
  Chairman of Muhammadijah) doesn’t agree with this position—an example
  of the conflict that exists even within the organization.
    The greater reliance on scholastic learning and on custom is not self-
contradictory as it might seem, for what often happens is that kijajis find for
themselves interpretations of the law which will allow them and their followers
to practice the customs which they are wont to practice on traditional grounds.
The modernists, on the other hand, tend to reject traditional Moslem customs
which they feel are not in keeping with the true spirit of Islam—such as the
symbolic acts surrounding death, or the short “calming” spell said before a
prayer—and to be somewhat unimpressed by what they consider sophistic
arguments for such customs by the learned. Thus a modernist scholar pointed
out at a Masjumi meeting that peoplè often use hadiths rather unfairly. For
example, he said, there are three hadiths concerning women, one of which puts
them higher than men, one of which puts them lower, and one which says
they are equal, and that by quoting any one of these one could make a case
for almost any position. One must get the spirit of the Hadith in general, all
the quotations on this point, he said. As for arguments from secondary re­
ligious commentaries, modernists tend merely to say that it is best to stick
to the Koran and Hadiths and not be oversubtle.
     For the customs they do accept as “fitting” with the Koran and the Hadith,
Conservative versus Modern : The Ideological Background                   » 15 9 «
modernists tend almost inevitably to add pragmatic rationalizations. Thus the
prayers are justified as being good exercise and healthful (The early morning
prayer is said to get one out of bed early in the morning so that one can get
right to work and not laze around in bed), circumcision as preventing genital
infections, the Pilgrimage as broadening one as travel always does. Western
spiritualist writers are quoted in “scientific” support of the existence of the
supernatural, prohibition of pork is justified by references to trichinosis, and
Western medicine is said to have established that fasting prevents stomach
cancer. But the most insistent theme is that Islamic doctrine presages almost
all later thought, social or scientific, and thus is extremely functional in a
modem context. The Koran is claimed to contain all the necessary rules for
modern hygiene and much of modern medicine; adequate astronomy, chemis­
try, and physics are also claimed to have been included in the Holy Book.
One speaker explained the Prophet’s speedy journey to Palestine at the time
of the Mi’radj as being explicable by the fact that he had the secret of atomic
power centuries before it was discovered in the West.
    It is especially in the realm of social doctrine that the claim for modernity
and for the continuing usefulness of Islamic doctrine and law is put most
strongly.
  His (a modernist speaker at a meeting in the mosque on the Prophet’s
  birthday) second point was that many times one hears people say that the
  Islamic law may be all right, but it doesn’t fit with the modem world; it
  can’t be made operative in the situation today. . . . He then gave several
  examples to show that Islamic law was not only as up to date as Western law
   (he took French law as the quintessence of Western law and made his
  comparisons with that) but actually preceded it. Take the matter of the
  notion that all men are equal. This came to the Western world at the end of
  the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth centuries with the French
  Revolution and the Declaration of the Rights of Man. Before that, society
  was sharply divided into aristocrats and commoners. But in the Islamic law
  this principle is stated (he quoted it), in the Hadith it is stated (he quoted
  it), and in the Koran it is stated (he quoted it). Second example: women’s
  rights are equal to those of men. This again is in the law, the Hadith, and
  the Koran; and he quoted them. Thus in both these cases—the equality of
  men and the equality of men and women—the Islamic law was centuries
  ahead of the West and fits in with modern ideas. This proves, he said, that
  the Koran is the Word of God.




      Conservative and Modern Islam and the Traditional
                 Javanese Religious Outlook
these , then, are the dimensions along which doctrinal distinctions within the
Modjokuto ummat tend to arrange themselves: a “fated” life versus a “self-de­
termined” one; a “totalistic” view of religion versus a “narrowed” one; a
more “syncretic” Islam versus a “pure” one; an interest in “religious ex­
» 160 «                                     T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
perience” versus an emphasis on “the instrumental aspects of religion”; the
justification of practice by “custom” and “scholastic learning” versus justifica­
tion by the “spirit of the Koran and the Hadith” in general and “prag­
matically.”
     It is no accident that the kolot side of these equations appears in each
case to place them very near to the kind of world view I have already de­
scribed as abangan. The extreme kolot santri, despite the fact that he is often
called “orthodox,” is not actually the most Islamic of Javanese Moslems but
the least. It is he who has made the minimum shift from the traditional re­
ligious system in which “animistic,” Hindu-Buddhist, and Islamic elements
found a stable balance toward the situation where Islam and the world view
associated with it have been fully taken up into the self, have been internalized
in the individual psyche so that they actually control behavior rather than
merely putting a gloss on it to hide the values which are really determining
individual action.
     It is very hard, given his tradition and his social structure, for a Javanese
to be a “real Moslem”—to accept fully at the deepest emotional levels a re­
ligion which, in the words of H. A. R. Gibb, “set[s] the terms of a new ex­
periment in human religion, an experiment in pure monotheism, unsupported
by any of the symbolism or other forms of appeal to the emotions of the com­
mon man, which had remained embedded in the earlier monotheistic re­
ligions.”* The otherness, awfulness, and majesty of God, the intense moralism,
the rigorous concern with doctrine, and the intolerant exclusivism which are
so much a part of Islam are very foreign to the traditional outlook of the
Javanese. Even the modernists, supported as they are in their effort by some
marked changes in the forms of social organization, succeed only part of the
time in actually organizing their behavior in these terms—but then most
Christians are pagans much of the time.
     It would be a mistake to draw from this the conclusion—and it has often
been drawn—that Islam is really of no importance in Javanese life and that
the difference between abangan and santri is merely one of terms and protesta­
tions. For, even among the most kolot of santris, there has been a crucial shift
when a man, propelled by class, occupation, geography, or family history, or,
who knows, by an inner psychological need for a different sort of religion from
that which his culture offers him, becomes a santri. He starts a process of
genuine religious conversion which, if it cannot be completed in him, may
well be in his children. Even the minimal santri has adopted, however vague
and ill-understood they may be, several principles which, given time and in­
creased social-structural support, may end in a totally different orientation
toward the world: the idea of a distant and powerful God who is concerned
with the moral worth of the individual believer; the idea that secular be­
havior must somehow be justified in terms of religious doctrine; and the idea
that among the proposed paths to religious understanding, one is correct
 and all the others are wrong.
     Nor can one simply say that the kolot-to-modèren scale measures the
 degree to which these principles have taken hold in the essentially abangan
   * H. A. R. Gibb, Mohammedanism (London, 1949), p. 70.
Conservative versus Modern : The Ideological Background                » 161 «
mentality of the Javanese. Rather, they represent two alternate ways in which
these principles can in part be realized in a still mainly non-Moslem social
context. The modernist emphasizes the way of radical disassociation from that
context and the purification of doctrine within a small group of religious
leaders; the conservative tries to work out a halfway covenant with the
reigning tradition which will both make his own transition easier and lessen
the tension between himself and his neighbors who do not agree with him. It
is well to remember, however, that not everyone is so consistent as to choose
the same side of each of my oppositions nor is everyone so vigorous as clearly
to choose one or the other side in any one of them. There is much indistinct­
ness, ambivalence, and flaccidity of belief; and what one finds is a continuum
from the koiot to the modéren along which people fall, many of them at
neither extreme but somewhere in between. Tendencies are only tendencies
after all, even if, as here, they are quite striking ones; and when one comes
to consider the manner in which these variations in Islamic religious doctrine
are institutionalized in Modjokuto, the social form they take, and the social
context in which they exist, the picture gets not clearer but fuzzier.
Chapter 13                     Patterns of Internal
                          Organization
                            O
                                       of the Santri
                                       Community



T here are two main santri political parties in Modjokuto, Masjumi and
Nahdatul Ulama (NU) ; one minor one, Partai Sarekat Islam Indonesia (PSII) ;
and one social organization concerned with education and various charitable
activities which claims to be nonpolitical but which is in fact indissolubly
linked with Masjumi, Muhammadijah. Most generally, Masjumi-Muham-
madijah is said by almost everyone to be “progressive” or “modernist,” and
NU is said to be “conservative” and “old-fashioned.” (PSII, in Modjokuto,
is usually grouped with the modernist sector.)
    It would be simple if one could merely accept this common stereotype
and identify modéren ideology with Masjumi and kolot with NU; but un­
fortunately the situation is much more complex than this. The relationships be­
tween cultural patterns—beliefs, values, and expressive symbols—and the
set of social structures in which they are embedded is only rarely one to one,
because the general problems of human living to which the cultural, most
especially religious, patterns are a response are not the same as the specific
social exigencies to which the social structures are a response. Thus in Modjo­
kuto the problems inherent in organizing a mass ummat containing old and
young, male and female, peasant and trader, educated and illiterate so that
the values it holds should have an effect upon the wider society make it
nearly impossible that ideological standpoints and political party membership
would have any simple relationship. Politics make strange bedfellows in Java
as elsewhere.
    Taking the Modjokuto ummat as a whole, almost everyone in it belongs
either to Masjumi or to Nahdatul Ulama, or at least considers himself a fol­
lower of one or the other. In contrast to both abangans and prijajis there are
almost no politically neutral santris. In comparison with American attitudes the
political party plays a much less functionally specific role in the life of Modjo­
kuto santri than the Republican and Democratic parties play for most middle-
class urban Americans. As in certain rural areas in our Midwest and South
                                       162
Patterns of Internal Organization of the Santri Community                 » 163 «
and, until recently at any rate, among certain depressed ethnic groups in our
cities, political parties for the Javanese santri are not merely loose conglomer­
ates of people with similar voting habits. Rather, they are social, fraternal,
recreational, and religious organizations within which kinship, economic, and
ideological ties coalesce to press a community of people into the support of a
single set of social values which are not just concerned with the proper exercise
of political power but condition behavior in many different areas of life. To join
a Moslem political party is to commit oneself to one or another of the variant
interpretations of Islamic social doctrine.
     Insofar as the preceding paragraphs are contradictory, their resolution
is this: In addition to the fact that the “public reputations” of the two parties,
one for conservatism, the other for modernism, tend to bring the conservatives
into one and the modernists into the other, other social considerations tend
to bring about the reverse. In general, in both parties, the young, the educated,
the urban, and the weakly religious tend to be more modem. The coalescence
of kinship, economic, and ideological ties in either party is inexact, distorted
both by accident—so that the modern-minded son of a kolot kijaji may end
up an NU leader out of opportunity rather than out of conviction—and by
design—so that a modernist may enter NU simply because he thinks he can
get a more powerful position there due to the lack of educated leaders. Even
geography makes a difference. Certain villages tend to be mainly Masjumi,
others mainly NU; and the modern-minded man in an NU village will have to
decide for himself whether ideological or neighborhood ties shall predominate.
     What this means is that a man who is old, rural, uneducated, and deeply
pious is very likely to be strongly kolot and very likely to be in NU; a man
who is young, urban, and educated (he may or may not be deeply religious)
is quite probably in Masjumi; but the loyalties of people in whom these at­
tributes are mixed, such as old, uneducated urbanites, are less easy to predict.
When we consider that there are also pressures—such as kinship ties, geo­
graphical considerations, and desire for personal power—which may act to
make an individual go against the grain, we see that things are not so clearly
marked off as the simple fact that even the most backward santri peasant
knows NU to be “conservative” and Masjumi “progressive” and that he con­
siders himself an adherent of one or the other would lead one to believe.



                     Political-Religious Leadership

the various pressures and counter-pressures find, as one would expect, their
greatest intensity among the elite of each party. Among the rank and file,
conservatism or modernism is likely to be mainly a vague preference on the
part of an individual, and he is called tjondong (“sympathetic” ) to one or the
other parties, a kind of fellow traveler not altogether clear what the issues are
but feeling that one group or the other “fits” (tjotjog) better with how he
feels about things. But among the leadership, prejudices are more articulate,
»164«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
and so each party has a dual problem; to balance things off among the elite
so that a consensus can be found as to just how “conservative” the conserva­
tive party is going to be and how “modernist” the modernist; and, second, to
attract and hold the masses to their leadership in these terms.
     In Modjokuto the leadership conflict is cast in different terms for each
party. In NU the conflict is between the younger, more educated, urbanized
leaders the party needs in order to operate effectively in the political arena,
men whose modernism is often nearly as strong as that of the leaders in
Masjumi, and the older, rural kijajis, who are more likely to wish to keep
NU on its traditionally kolot course. The governing board of NU in Modjokuto
consists of two groups. There are three or four old-line hobt men of about
sixty years of age whose main task is to communicate both with the rank and
file and with the countryside kijajis who are their spiritual preceptors and to
convince both of these that the party has not fallen into sinful hands. And
there are three or four young men whose job is to chart the party’s course in
the local political struggle, to give it some semblance of effective organization,
and to transmit orders from the central leadership.
     Thus while the local leader of the party can say that NU is a very, very
conservative party indeed and that its main motto is “Be careful,” and can
argue that Muhammadijah is much too incautious in religious matters, the
secretary of the organization, a young man, can deliver a speech to me that
would not sound out of place in the depths of Muhammadijah councils.
  He started talking about Islamic education. He said he thought the main
  reason for the moral crisis now raging in Indonesia was the tremendous in­
  adequacies and the primitiveness of religious education in Indonesia in the
  Dutch time. He said that the kijajis would just chant the Koran and the
  students just memorize the words. This sounded fine, he said, but none of
  them know what was in the Koran or what Islam was all about; they weren’t
  really Moslems. The old method of education also led to indifference to re­
  ligion or later to anti-religious feelings on the part of students when they
  realized they had been wasting their time. He said the situation was improved
  some now, but still pretty bad.
    As the following of NU is predominantly hobt, if not always as outspoken
about it as the kijajis, the younger leaders seem constantly engaged in an
effort to drag an unwilling party along the road to greater modernity.
   I went to an NU meeting last night. There were about thirty people present,
   most of them older men, many of them quite old. Muksim (an old NU leader,
   one of the founders of NU in Modjokuto) ran the thing. He started the
   meeting off with an Arabic sentence and went on about the value of Islam,
   particularly stressing its importance for men about his age, saying “When you
   die, die Islam.” The first speaker (a somewhat younger leader) launched into
   an attack on the lassitude of NU people. He said that if NU wants an Islamic
   state they must turn out for the meetings and learn about general things, not
   just religion, and that they must develop their organization. He said that
   Moslems in Indonesia comprise 90 per cent of the population* but don’t
    * I.e., confessed Moslems; santris always claim everyone but Christians, Balinese,
and outright pagans as Moslems, though many of those they so claim are in fact
bitterly anti-inn tri.
Patterns of Internal Organization of the Santri Community                   » 165 «
  have nearly their proper power because they just sit back and don’t come
  to the meetings. (A number of people slept through this speech, and a few
  slept through almost all of them.) At any rate, his speech turned out to be
  a plea for the ummat to become more active; and he especially decried the
  showing at the meeting. . . . Muksim then called in Rais, the secretary of
  NU, who came in from outside the door where he had been waiting. He
  spoke fifteen minutes, his speech being entirely an exhortation for the rank and
  file to be more active in NU. He kept saying over and over again that both the
  leaders and “those who are led” have to participate. He said that they should
  go out and urge their friends to come, that only 30 people coming when NU
  was so large was an unhappy state of affairs, and that NU had social re­
  sponsibilities to meet and couldn’t just pay attention to religion. Muksim then
  talked a while about the comforts of religion to the aged and made his point
  about dying Islam again. . . . In general NU people (this was the first
  meeting I attended) here seem much older than Muhammadijah people, and
  interest in directly religious questions is somewhat more evident. (Two
  strictly religious speeches are omitted from the above account.) Most of
  the younger NU people were not there. Others like Rais just came in, made
  a speech, and left. Some people wore traditional dress; one man had a full
  beard; and three or four were very old indeed, using canes to walk. Muksim
  seems more in touch with people than the rest, and I suppose that is why
  he was in charge.

     The older audience and the religious emphasis of that meeting are partly
attributable to the fact that it was a meeting for religious propaganda rather
than business. But the almost desperate tone with which the younger leaders
tried to get the NU rank and file to leave off kolot concerns and take a some­
what more modern attitude was typical.
     Within the Masjumi leadership the issue is somewhat different. In the
first place, all but one of the major Masjumi leaders in Modjokuto are
Muhammadijah members and thus strict modernists, and the seventh, the
son of H. Nazir, the modernist pioneer, is generally sympathetic to modernism.
The issue is not so much between modernism and conservatism as between
what one might call a “secularist” approach to modernism and a “pious” ap­
proach. By definition, no santri can be a secularist; and I have already em­
phasized the fact that modernists are concerned with a “pure” Islam. Never­
theless, people come at modernism from two angles.
     First, there is the deeply pious Moslem whose feelings for the traditions of
Islam are as deep as those of any conservative but who, being well-educated,
has a painful awareness of the inadequacy of Islam in its full medieval form
for modem life. The interest of this sort of man (for example, Nazir’s son,
learned in several languages, his scholarship in the Koran and Hadith re­
nowned throughout the whole area among modernists and conservatives alike)
in modernism is in producing an Islam of which he will not have to feel
ashamed in any particular when faced with other modernized creeds such as
Christianity, but which will still be Islam and will still fulfill his strong re­
ligious needs. The second type of man to whom modernism appeals is one
whose main interests are in the secular world but who also feels a need for
some religjous context for his behavior. He wants a religion which will not
»166«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
continually hamper his activity in modem secular life, which will leave him
free to pursue his interests there, but which will still allow him to be a good
Moslem and allow him to justify his life in terms of the Koran. The present
chairman of Muhammadijah in Modjokuto is such a man. He is more in­
terested in political activity and social work than in religious learning, but he
is most certainly not a secularist.
    As both Unitarians and Lutherans find a place in Christian reform, so both
these types tend to get attracted to Islamic reform; and it is the contrast be­
tween the two which one sees in Masjumi-Muhammadijah councils.
  We talked about Usman (Nazir’s son). He (the informant was a young
  Muhammadijah man) said Usman is the most intellectual of the speakers on
  religious subjects around here; he always get his material out of books like
  a true scholar. Pak Mul, who does most of the Muhammadijah talking on
  religious topics, is more down to earth and just takes his examples from every­
  day life. When I asked him who the Muhammadijah people look to for
  leadership, he said, “Ali (Chairman of Masjumi; Vice Chairman of Mu­
  hammadijah) and Mul do most of the talking on religious subjects along
  with Hadji Muchtar, who works in the naib’s office, Dullah (a Muham­
  madijah leader), H. Ustaz (one of the founders of Muhammadijah and one
  of its main sources of financial support in Modjokuto), and Iskak (Chairman
  of Muhammadijah) don’t know very much about religion and you rarely hear
  them talk about it.”
    The kind of conflict that typically occurs in such a situation is exemplified
in the following report, written by another member of our research team, of a
Muhammadijah school committee meeting, in which roughly the same people
participated as are mentioned in the above note and lined up in respect to a
problem just about as one would predict:
  They discussed the separation of the various school classes into boys and girls,
  deciding finally not to do so but to continue with the present co-educational
  classes. The argument for separation was all religious, Iskak said, while the
  arguments against it and the difficulties were all practical. Opposed to the
  separation were Dullah, H. Ustaz, and Iskak; the supporters were led by H.
  Muchtar and Mul. One of the practical difficulties was that, since there were
  more boys than girls, there would be an imbalance. Also, said Iskak, there
  would be an educational danger, for there would be less competition and thus
  less good results educationally. He said that it is better for the boys to have
  the girls present so that they will have to behave above a certain minimum,
  whereas if they were alone they would be more difficult to handle—an
  argument on the ideological rather than the practical level which tends to
  deny the original rationale for separation. Then they discussed whether
  the religious injunction was absolute or only advisory and decided that it was
  absolute but only insofar as it was possible of realization.
    Also, because of this dual appeal of modernism, Muhammadijah draws
for its membership not only upon those who have grown up in a santri back­
ground which they now feel needs to be adjusted to changed conditions but
also upon those people who grow up in a non-santri environment and decide
upon becoming adults that a reformed Islam is attractive to them. There is a
Patterns of Internal Organization of the Santri Community                 » 167 «
tendency on the part of both these lands of people, moreover, to want to
disassociate themselves from traditional village santris.
  I went in the evening to see Rachmad (head of the Muhammadijah high
  school). I asked him whether his parents had been santris and he said no.
  He never knew about Islam until he went to work for Muhammadijah. He
  was born and educated in Djember and went to a place near there where the
  Muhammadijah school was in bad shape, with only a handful of students
  and no teachers left, and he was asked whether he wanted to teach there.
  He thought that he would teach only for the experience, but he got more
  and more involved in it until finally he became a member of Muhammadijah
  and a santri. He was rather uncomfortable with this last term; he said that he
  wasn’t a santri like regular village santris. He then explained: “With Muham­
  madijah people you can not tell they are santris just by looking at them as
  you can other santris. For example, I look just like anyone else, any other
  teacher. And Zuhari (a young Kudus-descended religious teacher in the
  Muhammadijah high school; from a strong santri background and rather
  learned in religion for a young man but quite modernist), for example, is
  very learned in religion, but you would never know it to look at him. He looks
  just like a modern young man.”
     In short, among the NU leadership the conflict is between the need to
appease a kolot following and still meet the demands a modern political party
must meet in order to compete effectively; among the Muhammadijah-
Masjumi leadership the conflict is between the desire to modernize Islam and
the necessity to make sure that this does not lead to secularism. So, in a sense,
the problems in the two elites are parallel: how to interpret Islam so that it
can at the same time be both religiously satisfying and socially adequate. The
difference lies in the fact that the danger in the first is that social adequacy
will be sacrificed to religious satisfaction and the party will lose its political
effectiveness, and in the second the danger is that religious validity may be
sacrificed to social efficiency, depriving the party of its basis of mass support.
It is in this sense that NU may be called “conservative” and Masjumi-Muham-
madijah “modern.”



                       Political-Religious Activity
the fact that NU is in danger of being swallowed by its rank and file and
Masjumi of losing its rank and file points to the fact that the crucially difficult
problem of organization the two parties face is how to relate the fairly well-
organized central structure to the more or less inchoate peasant mass upon
which they rely for support. Like the central government bureaucracy, after
which they and most other Indonesian political parties are modeled, NU and
Masjumi are both built down from the top rather than up from the bottom;
and, as in the government bureaucracy, the central organization of the party,
in which roles are at least somewhat well defined and allocated (much, much
less so in the parties than in the civil bureaucracy), ends at the subdistrict
»168«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
level. That is, the legitimized lines of political hierarchy go no lower down
than towns the size of Modjokuto. In the bureaucracy the most important
link in the entire set-up is that between the subdistrict officer, as the lowest
appointive official in the bureaucracy, and the village chief, elected by his
compatriots. Similarly, in party organization the crucial link is between the
town-centered party governing board, made up of a group of highly inter­
married urbanites forming a very tight unit of their own, and the various local
chapters of the party in each village, which, for the most part, have very
little internal organization of any sort.
     The governing board of either party, resident in the town of Modjokuto
 (the main major exception being Nazir’s son, who is on the Masjumi govern­
ing board and resides in a village at the edge of town), keeps in touch with
the mass of its following, resident in the seventeen villages surrounding it, in
several different ways. Contact is made through holding regular business
meetings between the governing board as a group and the leaders of each
village chapter about every month or two, at which party strategy is planned,
largely by the governing board, but at least within the hearing of the local
leaders.
      Individual members of the governing board circulate through the villages
speaking at local chapter meetings on political topics of national concern.
Regular weekly “prayer-meetings” (separate ones for each sex) are held
at which religious specialists from each party, but not necessarily from the
governing board, speak on Islam, most usually on its social application and its
ethical content. In some villages these “prayer-meetings” (called pengaosan,
which strictly means “a reading of the Koran” ; but little Koran-reading, except
for five minutes or so at the beginning, gets done now) are joint NU and
Masjumi affairs and therefore more or less nonpartisan, each member being
 responsible for a small sermon on a religious topic in his turn. Even where
 separate pengaosans are held for each party, I have known speakers from the
 other party to be invited.
      Another important method which the town-centered governing boards use
 in communicating to the rural rank and file is the mass meeting at which im­
 portant speakers from higher up in the party hierarchy combine with local
 leaders from Modjokuto to give talks on social and political problems. These
 meetings are usually held in Modjokuto. (NU sometimes holds them in the
 villages themselves, but the central location of the town and the peasant view
 of it as an economic, governmental, and educational center make it more
 suitable for such “big events.” ) They are held at either the mosque or the
 “town hall” and usually scheduled on or near the big Moslem holidays: Idul
 Fitri, Maulud, and others. Great tides of people swamp the roads to town
 on such occasions, pouring in from villages as far as two hours away. From
 about eight in the evening until one in the morning they sit, lie, and stand in
 disordered profusion on the grass fronting the meeting place, patiently listen­
 ing to parly harangues. Then they ebb home again, much as they flooded in.
      An example of the first sort of meeting, one in which the party governing
 board decides party policy in the presence of all the local leaders in the area,
 is one held in a village in the Modjokuto area by Masjumi under the chairman­
Patterns of Internal Organization of the Santri Community                  » 169«
ship of Usman, H. Nazir’s son, at which were present almost all the members
of the governing board and almost all the village leaders. Usman began by giv­
ing a report of his recent trip through other parts of East Java, comparing
organizational problems in Masjumi in these areas with similar problems
faced in the Modjokuto area, outlining solutions tried elsewhere, new ideas,
and so on. He also discussed struggles between Masjumi and the Communists
in those areas, for both NU and Masjumi are deeply concerned with the
“Communist problem,” and in some parts of Java open clashes between
Moslems and Communists have occurred.
    The secretary of the party then outlined in great detail all the political
problems which were currently most talked about in Djakarta, the national
capital, discussing Masjumi’s position on each one and rationalizing it. He
discussed problems of the nationalization of oil fields, political struggles within
the army, the importing of foreign capital, the organization of the coming
general election, the opening of an embassy in the Soviet Union, the fiscal
policy of the government, and the proper relation of the Indonesian parliament
to the cabinet and the presidency. Following this, the chairman of Muham-
madijah, who is also Vice Chairman of Masjumi, discussed ways and means
of organization for the coming general election in the Modjokuto area, dis­
cussing ward organization, metihods of financing the campaign, and canvassing
techniques, and reviewing the distribution of party strength over the country­
side. An NU meeting of the same type would be less impressive because Mas­
jumi contains a greater number of skillful politicians, but either would es­
tablish the fact that modern politics have come to the Indonesian countryside.
     Pengaosans, on the other hand, are more concerned with general religious
and social doctrine, rather than with specific political problems. Here is a
much condensed note on a meeting which lasted about four hours:
  After he opened the NU pengaosan, Muksim called on a young man to read
  the Koran. Muskim then said something about the importance of coming to
  pengaosan, even for an old man such as himself who could be said to be
  just about finished. He had gotten a letter, he said, from an NU man who
  usually comes to the pengaosan almost every week, an old man who now had
  fallen sick and asked the NU membership to pray for his recovery. Achmad
   (a young kijaji from a nearby district) spoke next. He urged people to come to
  pengaosan, ridiculing people who just sit and pray and don’t do anything else.
  He also ridiculed people who come to pengaosan and fall asleep, who don’t
  participate in organizational life but just think about the next world. He said
  that one must adjust Islam to the modem world without losing its essence. He
   criticized people who didn’t dress neatly, whose hair was uncombed, and whose
   clothes were disarranged—and he put his hat on sideways in mockery. He
   said that the Prophet not only prayed but prayed and acted. His speech,
   which went on for over two hours, was one comic routine after another,
   each with a moral point. He walked about stiffly to indicate intellectual in­
   flexibility. He imitated a man hearing a bicycle bell and turning his head
   suddenly to see what was coming and then dodging elaborately to one side—
   to show that the various senses cooperate one with another: ears hear first,
   then eyes see, and so on. He imitated fat people and said, “If you eat too
   much your stomach gets big, your arms get big, but—Thanks be to God!—
»170«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF       JAVA
  your ears stay the same size.” He made plays on words, mocked the civil serv­
  ants (prijaji) who think they are better than everyone else (flouncing self-im-
  portantly around the platform), and ridiculed people who worship stones and
  wood. All of this chatter was strung together like daisies on a chain. His speech
  went nowhere and had no organization, but it was marvellously well done. The
  meeting was a kind of religious vaudeville in which moral maxims were
  dramatized in pantomime. It was also a kind of rally, with speakers exhorting
  the listeners in the most general terms to rouse up and do something—come to
  pengaosan. But the speakers didn’t offer them anything concrete to do.

     On the other hand, at a Masjumi pengaosan the revivalist atmosphere
might be somewhat lessened and one might even get a kind of scientific
rationale for religion—as in the speech the head of Muhammadijah made at
the women’s pengaosan of his organization, in which he tried to connect Islam
np with modern psychological theory. But the general pattern is similar in
either case. Pengaosans, because they occur weekly and because they are
very popular, are important elements in the social and religious life of both
the rural and urban ummat and are more comparable in some ways to our
church services than is the Friday prayer.
     The other type of village meeting, in which a single member of the town
governing board attends a local chapter meeting, is more sporadic. The town
member, particularly in the Masjumi case, will usually review the national
political situation in detail as the secretary did at the strategy meeting, and a
local leader will handle the religious sermon. Leaders of the women’s sections
of the parties also attend rural women’s meetings in a similar capacity, and
sometimes flying squads of four or five urbanites will speak at an extraordinary
meeting in a village on political or religious topics or both. The mass meetings
in town are, however, usually entirely political and often quite demagogic,
although this is a general pattern not confined to the santri parties. Leaders
fairly high up on the party hierarchy may speak at such meetings on occasion,
and once during my stay Modjokuto people, rural and urban, flocked to the
regency capital 15 miles away by the thousands to hear Masjumi’s most
fiery national leaders speak.



                   Political-Religious Organization

when one comes to describe the efforts of NU and Masjumi to differentiate
their structure within the villages—to form semi-independent youth groups,
peasant organizations, and labor unions attached to the party, the contrasting
nature of the tasks facing the elite of each party are even more obvious. Or­
ganizations of young girls are so fiercely resisted by rural religious leaders that
they exist only in strictly modernist circles within the town. Boy scout organi­
zations, which had a certain popularity before the war, are said to be weaker
now. In the villages the kijajis are still at best ambivalent to them; in the towns
all but the younger children think that boy scouts are somewhat beneath their
Patterns of Internal Organization of the Santri Community                  » 171 «
dignity. As a result both Ansor, the NU scouts, and Hizbul Wathon, the Mu-
hammadijah scouts (PSII scouts are called SIAP), although they are still
quite active, holding campouts, jamborees, and the like, are not so strong as
the leaders would prefer them to be.
  I asked Mul, who is head of Hizbul Wathon, the Muhammadijah scouts,
  about them. He said that the structure of Islamic and non-Islamic scouts
  (there is a large secular scout organization in town too) is the same but
  the basis is different according to whether religious teaching is included or
  not. He said the aim of scouting is healthy bodies and good character. He
  said that there are no dues involved, but I gathered that the boys are ex­
  pected to get a uniform. He said that the scouts are not very popular; parents
  who don’t understand don’t want their boys to enter, and many boys, es­
  pecially older ones, don’t want to. Since in the villages the boys are expected
  to work in the rice fields, most scouts are from the towns. He said that the
  reason for lack of general interest in scouting is ignorance.
     As for the peasant associations and labor unions, the lack of success is
even more marked, and none has been able to gain much momentum in the
Modjokuto area. The reasons for failure seem different for each party. For
NU, the failure has been almost total. Although there are plans on paper,
particularly for a peasant organization, and although many of the more
modernist leaders of NU are painfully aware of the need for such organiza­
tions, nothing has been done. (“All the argument about doctrine doesn’t mean
a thing,” one such leader told me; “the party that first sets up an organization
that really does something for the peasant will win any general election
easily.” ) The reason seems to be not only a shortage of effective leaders to
carry out such projects but also the traditional Koran teachers with their
double influence on the party—politically as advisors to its leadership and
religiously as preceptors to its rank and file. They are at best indifferent and
at worst hostile to the penetration of the party’s secular forms of organization
into the villages where their own power is based.
     Masjumi’s situation is quite different. In the first place, they have a more
adequately equipped technical leadership. Secondly, they have made much
more hopeful attempts at peasant and labor organization than in NU. For
Masjumi, the problem seems to be that there is a marked tendency on the
part of the highly organized urban leadership of the party to over-centralize
such organizations as are formed, with the result that they become detached
from the rural context.I
  I asked him (a Masjumi village leader) if STII (Sarekat Tani Islam Indonesia,
  the Masjumi peasant organization) was doing anything in the village, for I
  had heard from the STII head in Modjokuto that he, Abdul, was head of it
  in Banjuurip (the village). Abdul said, “Nothing is going on at all, nothing.
  Next time you see Mahmud (the Modjokuto STII leader) ask him for
  me why he doesn’t pay any attention to the villages.” Abdul was quite bitter
  and was evidently serious about my saying something to Mahmud in order to
  communicate his feeling to the governing board. He said that they only pay
  attention to the rice factory STII owns, and that there is no leadership at
  all provided for the villages. He said that the main problem was poor leader-
»172«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  ship. When Rusman (leader of STII just after the revolution, when the
  spirit of the times carried this sort of organization along better than it does
  now) was running it there was lots of work in the villages around Modjokuto.
  For example, in Banjuurip they had co-operative rice fields owned by STII
  and worked by members. Now it has all been sold off to individuals and
  STII doesn’t really exist except in name.

     STII in Modjokuto is an instructive example. Originally the organization
was concerned with providing storage places for rice for the peasant so that
he could avoid price fluctuations and with lending him capital for various
small-scale agricultural enterprises. This program led in turn to the founding
of a large mechanized rice mill by Rusman, the leader named above, under
STII auspices, ostensibly to provide cheap milling for the farmers and to
build up the capital of the organization. In time, however, the rice mill ab­
sorbed more and more of the energies of the technical leadership of the or­
ganization until the local units of STII were neglected and died out. Now STII
more or less amounts to the rice mill (they also still own a little sugar land
near the mill), which is evidently well-run and profitable but which is by and
large indistinguishable in the eyes of the Masjumi peasants from any other
privately owned rice mill. In any case, the organization in and around Modjo­
kuto is at the moment quiescent.
     Labor organization is an even more difficult problem, for there is the
added difficulty that, since estate workers and town laborers, among whom
such an organization would be expected to take effect, are heavily abangan
and leftist, a Moslem labor organization, santris being mainly “middle-
class” and politically to the right, has some of the same problems a labor
union sponsored by the Republican Party in the United States would have.
SBII (Sarekat Buruh Islam Indonesia), Masjumi’s labor union, is active in
areas near Modjokuto, but in Modjokuto itself it is nonexistent.
     There is one union, Sarekat Buruh Indonesia (SBI), unaffiliated with any
other in Indonesia, which, although it has no formal connection with Masjumi,
is led by a Masjumi intellectual. A kind of “Moslem front organization,”
designed to ease the antagonism of many laborers to Islam in general and
Masjumi in particular, SBI is a product of such a unique set of circumstances
and so disconnected from all other aspects of Masjumi endeavor in Modjokuto
 that it need not be further described here except to note that its success seems
 somewhat due to its very segregation from the centralizing tendencies present
 in the rest of the leadership. (Its leader is the only member in the Modjokuto
 area of Achmadijah, the very extreme modernist movement which is regarded
 by Masjumi and NU people alike as “outside the bounds of Islam.” )
     The best example of the centralizing tendencies of Masjumi leadership
 is Muhammadijah, the socio-charitable association the members of which
 completely dominate that leadership. Muhammadijah is perhaps the most
 effective private organization from a technical point of view in all of Modjo­
 kuto. In contrast with many private groups in Indonesia, it does not merely
 spout doctrine and plan programs but gets a remarkable amount accomplished;
 and from a social point of view it is perhaps the most self-contained, consist-
Patterns of Internal Organization of the Santri Community                  » 17 3 «
ing for all intents and purposes of thirteen individuals. (The total membership
is thirty-seven, but the other fourteen are largely passive.)
  Next was the problem of getting the people of Muhammadijah into a working
  group. (Iskak, chairman of the Modjokuto branch, was addressing a regional
  conference of Muhammadijah in a nearby town.) He said that almost all
  the people who were active in Muhammadijah were the Governing Board;
  there wasn’t any rank and file. Strictly speaking, this is not so, but I gather
  that he meant there are just two kinds of members in Modjokuto: the totally
  active and the totally passive ones, and that he didn’t think the latter were
  of much importance. He said there were only forty members altogether any­
  way. Muhammadijah in Modjokuto, he said, did little active seeking of
  members and wasn’t at all interested in increasing its size. What counted was
  to get people who would give their all. Then he gave several examples of
  how Modjokuto wove its active members into a solid group. He said that
  they had savings societies for both the Governing Board and the teachers
  in the school which were specifically designed to bring people together.
    Muhammadijah activities are of two main types: charitable and educa­
tional, each under a special standing committee. Included under the former in
Modjokuto’s are the organization’s orphanage, the distribution of meat to
the poor on Idul Adha, the “Day of Sacrifice,” and its organization of the
obligatory poor-offering, the zakat-fitrah, due on the end-of-Fast holiday,
Idul Fitri. Included in the educational activities are a nursery school for pre­
school children (taught by the wife of the head of Muhammadijah), a religious
school for young girls, a six-grade elementary school, a three-grade junior high
school, and a three-grade teachers’ school for people who intend to teach in
elementary schools.
    The orphanage, which is run full-time by a member of Muhammadijah,
has sixty children and a staff of six, including a janitor, a cook, and a laun­
dress, in addition to the head, his wife, and a secretary. Children are admitted
upon the recommendation of Muhammadijah members or village chiefs, with
preference being given those who have neither parents nor other relatives to
care for them. At present the orphanage is financed in part by Muhammadijah
 (contributions being countable as zakat for those who give them) and in part
by a subsidy of Rp 2.10 per child per month from the government. The
Muhammadijah contribution is about one-fourth that of the government but
is supplemented by special drives from time to time, as in the case of the
collection of two tons of rice from the villages in 1952 in order to buy new
mattresses for the children’s beds. The children, who are of both sexes, range
in age from six to sixteen and are housed in a large well-kept building in the
center of town and educated in the Muhammadijah schools. They also learn
to pray and to chant the Koran and get general religious training, all of them
being members of the Muhammadijah youth organization.
    The meat distribution on Idul Adha is to commemorate Abraham’s
sacrifice and is timed to coincide with a similar sacrifice of sheep and goats
by the hadjis collected near Mecca, for this is the holiday which marks the
high-point of the pilgrimage. Various members and friends of Muhammadijah
contribute money (or, if rich, an actual ox or goat) with which oxen and
»174«                                           T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
goats are bought for the sacrifice. Tickets are distributed to poor families both
by Muhammadijah members, who receive suggestions from people outside
the organization, and by village chiefs. Each ticket entitles the family to a
package of about one kilogram of meat. On Idul Adha in 1953 one ox and
five goats were sacrificed and about 250 packages of meat were distributed.
Most poor people are too ashamed to come themselves but send their children
over to the orphanage. Theoretically, this meat distribution should occur in
all the villages, but around Modjokuto only Muhammadijah seems to have the
energy and ability to organize it.*
     The zakat-fitrah, however, is collected in many of the villages by the var­
ious organizations. Muhammadijah, NU, and PSII collected it in the town;
NU and Masjumi collect it in each of the villages in which there is a strong
santri group. Until Muhammadijah appeared upon the scene in 1931, the
zakat-fitrah either went uncollected or was collected by the kijajis, modins,
and other religious figures; and it is said that it did not always get to the
people for whom it was intended.
     Here, as elsewhere, the Muhammadijah effort was to provide a model of
correct and orthodox Islamic practices which the rest of the ummat, sunk
in ignorance, could copy, a function they still perform within Masjumi.
  Later on in the evening when Nur, the son of the Masjumi leader in Sumber-
  sari (a nearby village), came up (to where Muhammadijah was gathered
  the night before Idul Fitri distributing the zakat) to get some advice on
  dividing the zakat, he happened to mention that it had not yet been divided
  up. Rachmad (head of the Muhammadijah high school) angrily said that if
  it wasn’t divided before morning those who were dividing it were the ones
  who would have committed a sin. It had to be done before morning prayer;
  that was the law and one couldn’t do it just any old way. He, Nur, would
  have to answer to God for it later, and he should be sure it was done right.
  Nur backed off, saying that it wasn’t really he who was in charge of dividing
  it up but his father, and that every year something goes wrong. Ali (Chair­
  man of Masjumi, Vice Chairman of Muhammadijah) supported Rachmad,
  and Nur began to look rather woebegone and just mumbled that village people
  didn’t ever know how to do things right, and every year it went wrong no
  matter how hard they tried. Then Rachmad softened a little and said that
  Nur should tell his father that next year he should come up to Modjokuto
  to Muhammadijah headquarters and get assistance and learn how to do the
  zakat correctly.
    The zakat-fitrah is set at two and one-half kilograms of rice for each
person. Thus a family which has six members will have to give 15 kilograms.**
(Strictly, one may not give money, but the organizations keep rice on hand to
sell to people who wish to contribute money for convenience’ sake.) The
zakat proper, the general religious tax set at 2.5 per cent of accumulated
wealth, which can be paid at any time during the year, is much less sys­
tematically collected. Muhammadijah bases much of its collection appeal to
    * In 1954 NU began distributing meat on Idul Adha for the first time.
    ** Since these various Moslem taxes have, of course, no civil standing in Indonesia,
they are purely voluntary.
Patterns of Internal Organization of the Santri Community                  » 175 «
the ummat on the grounds that contribution to the organization fulfills the
zcikat requirement at least in part. Kijajis have traditionally relied on the
zakat from their villages to help support their pondoks; and nowadays political
parties are beginning to regard the part of the zakat that is supposed to be
contributed to the “Holy War” (in Java traditionally taken to mean the
building of mosques, etc.) as legitimately employed to help finance their
political campaigns. In any case, the payment of the zakat in its full form is
sporadic at best around Modjokuto.
     Charitable efforts aside, it is their school system which is the Muham-
madijah pride and joy. Policy is made for the schools by a special education
committee which includes almost all the major leaders of the organization. It
is financed through contributions from the organization, through tuition fees
 (which are, however, quite low), and through underpaying the teachers
rather markedly. As a result, the perennial problem the education committee
faces is to get adequate teachers and hold them; and most of the struggles
which go within the organization result from the differing interests of the
 teacher group among the membership, whose interest is in raising both
 standards and their salaries, and the trader group,* which is interested in
 making ends meet.
     This conflict has been the dynamic force within Muhammadijah since its
founding in Modjokuto. Since the original founders of the organization were
 for the most part traders, and teachers had to be imported from Djokjakarta
 and other large Muhammadijah centers (or local youths sent off there to
 study), there was always a native group and a “foreign” teacher group. As
 time passed, however, some of the teachers became more and more integrated
 into the local community; and today the leader of Masjumi and vice-chairman
 of Muhammadijah is a former teacher in the Muhammadijah high school who
 was originally imported from Djokjakarta, and the vice-chairman of Masjumi
 and chairman of Muhammadijah is a local Kudus-descended boy who was
 sent off to Muhammadijah schools in Djokjakarta to study. The traders still
 remain active, however, and the mediation between these two groups is still
 the main concern of the school committee.



     Conservative versus Modern: A Balanced Opposition
to sum up the over-all social organization of the santri community in
Modjokuto, Masjumi-Muhammadijah on the one hand and Nahdatul Ulama
on the other hand are the determinants of the main axis along which the
Modjokuto ummat is subdivided. Almost without exception, every santri
considers himself a “follower” of one or the other of these two groups and
considers that the first important thing to learn about a stranger is whether
    * With only five exceptions, all the members of Muhammadijah are either traders
or school teachers; and most of the school teachers are teachers in the Muhammadijah
schools. Not all teachers in the Muhammadijah schools, however, are members of the
organization.
»176«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
he is a santri at all, and, having ascertained that, whether he is “sympathetic”
to Masjumi or NU.
    The relation between the two groups being only somewhat hostile, the
sense of differences only rarely gets intense enough to blot out the sense of
commonality of religious belief throughout the whole ummat, a sense
strengthened by the nearly universal animosity borne toward santris by non-
santris. It seems that what one has here is a kind of implicit moiety organiza­
tion based on religious commitment rather than kinship, in which a lesser
hostility between two relatively balanced halves of a community acts, para­
doxically, as a kind of integrated force to hold the group together in the face
of rather more serious external threats to its unity. Thus one finds a kind of
fluctuation in perception of the situation by the people involved, in which
assertions of unity and solidarity of the entire ummat alternate with vigorous
emphasis on the differences between its two halves.
    The following note on a conversation with a PSII leader may be compared
in this connection with earlier notes in which the differences between the
various groups were emphasized:
  I went to see Atmilan again and asked him what the differences between PSII
  and other groups like Masjumi and NU were. He said there weren’t any at
  all; they were all based on Islam. He said that it was all just a matter of
  roads and was just a result of different people in different parties. That is,
  some people were in one party because they followed certain leaders, but
  there were no differences in policy at all; they were all part of ummat Islam.
  I said that many people told me that there were differences. He replied that
  what they told me wasn’t true. Some say NU is kolot, Muhammadijah
  modéren, PSII leftist, Masjumi rightist, but his opinion was that there was
  no difference. He said that it was all a matter of steering the automobile;
  many wanted to steer, so there had to be many parties. A kind of prima
  donna theory of Indonesian politics.
     There is much to be said for such a theory, particularly in explaining
otherwise unpredictable behavior on the part of certain power-hungry mem­
bers of the elite; but it does little toward explaining the penetration of the two
parties deep into the masses and the ever-increasing role they play in the
non-political aspects of life among both leaders and followers. As time goes
on, die political parties seem to be becoming more and more important as
bases of village and town social organization among the santris, replacing the
old geographical ties with ideological ones (a tendency present but rather
less apparent among abangans or prijajis). Nahdatul Ulama, the purpose of
which from the beginning, one leader informed me, was “to wake up the
sleeping kijajis,” attempting to enclose the traditional religious social forms
focusing around the pondoks within a modern political party structure with
a minimum alteration of such forms; Masjumi-Muhammadijah, trying to re­
place the old forms by providing town-manufactured models of new possi­
bilities: these are the basic social reference groups for the Modjokuto santri.
