Chapter 2 0                                                   Mysticism




O u r d is c u s s io n of the prijajis proceeds from the outer man to the inner man.
Having considered their etiquette, language, and art, we turn now to
mysticism, the distinctly religious aspect of their life.
     In Modjokuto, mysticism is practiced both individually and in sects. The
sects are small, voluntary religious groups, usually loosely connected—but
very loosely indeed—to other chapters of the same sect in other towns and to
a central headquarters in one of the larger cities, usually the court centers.
They meet, rotating among the members’ houses in most cases, weekly or
monthly, to discuss and meditate. In theory, one can meditate and study
one’s inner life as well by oneself as with others, but to do so in a group is
considered preferable because individual meditation smacks too much of a
hermit-like isolation from daily life of which most people disapprove, it is
easier to carry on such activities regularly and undisturbed if one belongs to
a group than if one attempts to carry them out at home, and, in a sect, the
more advanced people can help and train the less advanced. Nevertheless, some
people, most notably a few of the highest prijajis who feel that the sects are
not alus enough for them, meditate and study alone or, informally, with one
or two close friends.
     There are five sects of importance in Modjokuto: Budi Setia (nearly
impossible to translate, but, roughly, meaning “Faithful in the Rational Search
for Understanding” ), Kawruh Bedja (“Knowledge of True Good Fortune” ),
Sumarah (“To Surrender [to God’s Will]”), Ilmu Sedjati (“True Science” ),
and Kawruh Kasunjatan (“Knowledge of the Highest Reality” ). Only
the first three are mainly prijaji in membership, the third and fifth having a
large abangan admixture; but even the latter are based on the teachings of
high prijaji gurus (teachers) in the court centers and are modeled after the
more elevated sects. Although the sects are independent of one another and
teach somewhat different doctrines (sometimes kept jealously secret from one
another), they share a basically similar philosophical mysticism and as such
                                         309
»310«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
form an interrelated structural outlet for prijaji religious beliefs and practices.
     In essence, mysticism in Java is applied metaphysics, a set of practical
rules for the enrichment of man’s spiritual life, based upon an underlying in­
tellectual analysis of experience. Although different individuals and different
sects have somewhat different positions and draw somewhat different con­
clusions from the same analysis, none questions the basic premises of the
analysis. As in, for instance, the Western dualistic tradition from Descartes
to Kant, the basic metaphysical presuppositions are common to all. What
differs, and much less so in Java than in the Western tradition, is the ways
in which these presuppositions are arranged and explicated to account for
actual experience. This being so, it is advisable to inspect the content of
Javanese mystic metaphysics before going more deeply into its institutionaliza­
tion, the social forms it takes, in Modjokuto.
     In order to provide a framework in which the otherwise rather involved
and confusing material I have to present may be seen and ordered, I should
like first to state my own summary formulation of this system and then attempt
to show how my postulates appear in the formulations of my informants them­
selves. That there are no more than the postulates which I have set forth, or
that this is the most satisfactory presentation of prijaji thought which could be
constructed, I have no wish to argue. What follows is merely an outline state­
ment of some of the more important notions about how the world “really” is
which, I think, are shared by most Modjokuto mystics.




                        The Theory of Mysticism

i would set down my summary in the form of eight postulates, as follows:
  1. In the everyday life of man, “good” feelings and “bad” feelings,
  “happiness” and “unhappiness,” are inherently and indissolubly interdepend­
  ent. No one can be happy all the time or unhappy all the time, but must
  vary continually between these two states from day to day, from hour to
  hour, from minute to minute. This variation is the same for all emotions—
  love, hate, fear, and so on. Further, the main aim in life is not to maximize
  the positive emotions and minimize the negative ones, that is, the “pursuit
  of happiness,” which is, in the nature of the case, impossible, a maximization
  of one implying a maximization of the other. Instead, the aim is to minimize
  the passions altogether so far as possible, to mute them in order to perceive
  the truer “feelings” which lie behind them. The aim is tentrem ing manah,
  “peace (quiet, tranquility) in the heart (the seat of the emotions).”
  2. “Underneath” or “behind” these coarser human feelings there is a pure
  basic feeling-meaning, rasa, which is at once the individual’s true self
  (aku) and a manifestation of God (Gusli, Allah) within the individual.
  The basic religious truth for a prijaji mystic lies in the equation: rasa =
  aku = Gusti.
Mysticism                                                                  »311
 3. The religious aim of man should be to “know” or “feel” this ultimate
 rasa in himself. Such an achievement brings spiritual power, a power which
 may be used either for good or for evil in earthly pursuits. There is rather
 little thought about other-worldly rewards; insofar as such a thing is possible,
 this is a “this-worldly” mysticism.
 4. In order to achieve such “knowledge” of ultimate rasa, one must have a
 purity of will, must concentrate one’s inner life entirely upon this single
 aim, intensifying and focusing all one’s spiritual resources on a tiny point—
 much as one focuses the sun’s rays through a burning glass in order to bring
 their maximum heat to bear on one spot. The main means of achieving
 such a purity of will and such a concentration of inner effort are: first, the
 blunting of the individual’s instinctive life, a “rising above” everyday physi­
 ological needs; and, second, a disciplined withdrawal from mundane
 concerns for more or less extended periods of time and concentration upon
 inward things. Most important among the instinctual disciplines are fasting,
 staying awake, and sexual abstention. The temporary withdrawal of attention
 from the mundane world is called semèdi or, in its most intensive form,
 almost never practiced now, tapa, and consists of sitting absolutely still
 and emptying one’s inner-life, so far as possible, of all mundane content.
 5. In addition to the spiritual disciplines and meditation, the empirical study
 of human emotional life, a metaphysical psychology, also leads to an under­
 standing and experience of rasa. Such a study amounts to a phenomenological
 analysis of experience and is considered the “theory” corresponding to the
 “practice” of fasting and other observances. One range of variation of the
 several mystic sects—at least in Modjokuto—seems to be along this con­
 tinuum: according to the amount of weight they give instinctual control and
 meditation on the one hand and reflection and analysis on the other; but
 none wholly neglects either, for they support and strengthen one another.
 6. As people vary both in their ability to carry out the spiritual disciplines
 (and no one is really as good at it today as people were in the past)—
 in the length of time they are able to fast, stay awake, and meditate—
 and in their ability to carry out a systematic analysis of inner experience (or
 to understand an analysis a famous guru has carried out), it is possible to
 rank individuals according to their spiritual abilities and achievements, a
 ranking which gives rise to the guru-murid (teacher-pupil) system in which
 an advanced teacher instructs a less advanced pupil and is himself a pupil
 of a more advanced teacher.
 7. At the ultimate level of experience and existence, all people are one and
 the same and there is no individuality, for rasa, aku, and Gusti are “eternal
 objects,” the same in all people. Although at the level of everyday experience
 individuals and nationalities may be said to have different selves and different
 feelings (although even here there is an important element of commonality),
 at base they are all the same. The combination of this notion with the idea
 of a hierarchy based on spiritual achievement gives rise to an ethic urging
 an ever-increasing inclusiveness of fellow-feeling for others, starting with
 one’s own family and proceeding through one’s neighborhood, village, district,
 and country to the whole world (only a few saints—Gandhi, Jesus, Muhammad
 —are supposed to have attained such universal sympathy), and a feudal-
»312«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
  organic view of social organization in which individuals and groups have
  a place in society corresponding to their presumed spiritual abilities.
  8. Since the aim of all men should be to experience rasa, religious systems,
  beliefs and practices are only means to that end and are good only insofar
  as they bring it about. This leads to a relativistic view of such systems in
  which it is held that some systems are good for some people and others
  good for others and all have some good in them for someone. An absolute
  tolerance is thus enjoined, if not always completely practiced.



                  1. The Inner Connection between
                      Happiness and Unhappiness

in the abangan section I quoted a young man whose wife had recently died
and who emphasized the necessity of keeping one’s emotions flattened out,
of avoiding wide swings of feeling. He argued that the way to do this was to
realize that each person always has periods of happiness and periods of un­
happiness. In discussing the prijajis I have quoted a Modjokuto poet on the
same point. This theme appears again and again in interviews with members
of all the sects.
  He said that his science (which he had learned from guras and from books)
  also taught that one cannot be happy all the time—there must be some
  unhappiness as well. “For example,” he said, “when you were just married,
  you felt that everything was good now and that you would never have any
  more unhappiness. But you did. A man builds a big factory and says to
  himself, ‘Now I am happy, I have what I want’; but then another, poorer
  man builds a little factory, and the first man begins to fear that the little
  man’s factory may grow and eclipse his own and is unhappy again. My science
  teaches me to avoid such strong feelings—not to be envious, jealous, or
  greedy.”
    It sometimes seems that what the prijajis most fear is strong feeling, for
this implies severe frustration and either the freeing of carefully inhibited ag­
gression or the initiation of an intense depression. Gela, which means “dis­
appointed,” and kagèt, which means “startled,” are two of the feeling states
most to be avoided, for the one depresses and the other disorganizes. They are
in fact different forms of one and the same thing, gela being normal, that is,
not entirely unexpected, frustrated, and kagèt being sudden, unforeseen
frustration. One might hypothesize a typical psychological sequence something
like this: (1) Aggression may not be directly expressed. (2) Therefore, one in
part represses it and in part dissimulates it through the various etiquette forms.
 (3) Severe frustration, either in the gela or kagèt form, thus puts the individual
in an impossible dilemma of either expressing his suddenly accentuated ag­
gressive feelings, which reaction tends to occur in the more severe kagèt
Mysticism                                                                       »313«
situation,* or of turning the aroused hate inward against the self, bringing
depression, more common in the gela situation and among prijajis, whose
stimulus-weakening and stimulus-regularizing defenses against startle are
better.** (4) In order to avoid this dilemma one tries to calm one’s emotions
entirely, to put oneself beyond both disappointment and surprise.
     Whether or not this admittedly speculative sequence is actual and typical—
and I think there is some evidence that it is—it is certain that the effort of the
mystical schools is primarily to still the continual emotional fluctuation of
every-day life and reach a state of “peace in the heart,” a theory worked out
(or espoused) in explicit detail by the more sophisticated—for example, as
expressed by a Modjokuto guru of Kawruh Bedja:
   “What is the nature of feelings in life?” he asked rhetorically. “From birth
   until death only happiness, unhappiness, happiness, unhappiness, in unending
   alternation. Up and down, happy and unhappy—you can’t be either one all
   the time. If a man asks why it is that all there is to life is happiness and
   unhappiness, the answer is that happiness results from the fulfillment of
   your wishes, unhappiness from their non-fulfillment; and every day there is
   both fulfillment and frustration, and you can’t get away from this.” I asked:
   “Can’t you avoid wishing for things?” He said, “No, not completely. The
   will is an inseparable part of life and to give it up altogether is to give up life.
   People often forget this basic necessity for happiness and unhappiness to be
   inwardly connected. If they are happy for a little while, they think they will
   be happy always; and if they are unhappy for a while, they despair.” I asked
   if this was bad; and he said, “Well, it isn’t evil exactly, but it means that
   the person doesn’t understand. It is better to understand. For example:
   You lose 100 rupiah and you are very unhappy, and you are walking along
   the road feeling awful, and I come along and you feel happy to see me.
   We chat a minute, and you are glad to talk with me because you haven’t
   seen me for a while; and then we part and you become unhappy again,
   thinking about your lost 100.” He said that often people don’t remember these
   small happinesses in the middle of unhappinesses and thus don’t get the
   proper perspective on life. . . . In any case, feelings are not certain—
   one moment one is happy, the next sad; these are connected with one another,
   necessary implications of one another. This is the difference between bedja
   (“good fortune,” “the feeling, sensation, experience of good fortune”) and
   its opposite, tjilaka (“ill fortune”). Bedja means that one has order and
   peace within—not happiness, not unhappiness—just peace. Tjilaka means
   that one has uncomfortable feelings, disordered and coarse ones, whether
   they are happy ones or unhappy ones. Thus bedja is better than happiness,
   because it does not carry the implication of later unhappiness. Bedja is a rasa,
   but it is higher than everyday rasa and different in essence from them. . . .
   As an example of the difference between these two states, he said: “Suppose
   you lose something. Now a man who doesn’t know ‘science,’ who is unen­
   lightened, will get angry, disappointed, and generally depressed and upset
    * Four separate thieves who were caught in the act of thievery were lynched on
the spot during the time I was in Modjokuto; a chauffeur in a nearby town was
beaten to death by an aroused citizenry when he stopped after having nearly hit a
small girl; and all these events were explained—and excused—by a reference to kagèt—
“the people were startled.”
    ** All the above lynchings were by village people and were attributed by the prijajis
in town to the kasar characters of the peasants.
»314«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  within. However, the man who knows will be peaceful.” I questioned how
  this was possible if one lost something very important, say an heirloom which
  had been in one’s family for a long time. He replied: “Well, you would
  just say, ‘Yes, so it’s lost, it’s lost’; or you would reflect and say ‘Such
  an object is losable; it is not eternal. Some day it had to be destroyed any­
  way, so why get upset about it?’ Suppose you break my cup. Since it is
  valuable, I start to feel angry, but I am advised by my science to remain cool,
  and so I do. It is hard to believe that this is possible until you do it.”
  But he added that he couldn’t always do it himself.



             2. The Fundamental Religious Equation
if the emotions can be stilled—through various means to which we shall come
presently—then “behind” or “underneath” or “within” them one may come
face to face with ultimate reality, the reflection of God in the self; a process our
poet compares to the cracking open of a coconut:
       There is another metaphor which applies:
       If, for example, you wish to make coconut oil—
       The shell of the coconut may be likened to outward forms of religious
          discipline,
       And the white meat of the coconut
       May be likened to the inward forms of religious discipline,
       While the oil of the coconut is the truth.
       Thus the action
       Of breaking open the coconut
       Is the method by which can be extracted
       The oil which lies within.
     Most commonly, the central part of one’s inner life, the place wherein
God resides in the individual, is called the “heart” (manah). Sometimes this
is identified with a special organ, for example, the liver, or with the heart
itself. (Some who are more superstitious will not say the word for “heart” as
an organ—djantung—because that is where God is in the individual and to
do so might anger Him and bring bad luck.) But generally it is just considered
to be the core of the human individual, the deep center of his being. Thus the
“heart” in this sense is a kind of spiritual location, the place in the depths of
the individual where both his true self and the ultimate rasa, which is God, can
be found.
     A sect member (a storekeeper by trade) drew the following picture of the
situation as he saw it:
Mysticism                                                                     »315«
     This, he said, is a picture of man. The outer, solid line represents man as
a thing, as a body. People, first of all, are things, just like other things: rocks,
chairs, tables, light-bulbs. Like such things they can be ruined. If one breaks a
light-bulb it is ruined forever, and if one breaks a person he also is ruined. This
is the same for everyone, and anyone who understands this will not want to
hurt anyone else or see anyone in trouble. The second, broken line represents
the five senses: seeing, hearing, smelling, talking, and feeling. At this point
in just about every one of these catechisms, the informant pinches one and
asks if it hurts, and when one says yes it does, he pinches himself and says that
it hurts him too, which shows that people have the same sensations, rasa—
another reason why one should not want to hurt anyone. The dotted line rep­
resents the conscious will, wish as perceived. (“I will drink this water” as a
reflective thought was the example given, a conscious intention.) The inner
solid circle represents the source of such wishes, the unconscious origin of
desires. Wishes, he said, begin unperceived in the inner circle and proceed to
the outer, where they are felt.
     But we must judge such wishes and intentions, and the question is, what is
it that judges?
   “Kula (‘I,’ ‘me,’ high Javanese for aku ),” I answered. He laughed and said,
   “Where is ‘kula7 That’s what the last solid circle represents, the essence
   of the self. Fixed and unchanging, it is always good, and it is that which
   judges and directs our will, or ought to. It cannot be wrong.” He then went
   into a discourse on the difference between sensed objects and conceptualized
   ones. “What is 4 X 4? It is 16. If you say 15, you know it is wrong. How
   do you know? Because of your inner self. But if you see, say, a match, what is
   it that sees it? Your eyes; close your eyes and you can’t see it. Or a voice, you
   hear with your ears; if you’re deaf you can’t hear it. But 4 X 4 is 16 inside;
   you don’t have to see or hear it. Also, another difference between sensed and
   conceived objects is that if you ruin a sense object there is a trace. Burn the
   match and you have a burnt match; a corpse is left when a man dies. But after
   you’ve stopped thinking about 4 x 4 = 16 there is nothing left, no trace.
   Some people get far away from their real self, their aku, and in such a case
   their intelligence just aids in their doing evil. (He gave the atomic scientists
   as an example). . . . At any rate the real self, the aku, the inner solid circle
   on the chart is the part of the self that is the best. It is not old or young, male
   or female; and it is not fanatic like the Moslems. Also, it is very hard to get
   to. You have to semèdi, meditate. . . .”
     Separating out the true self from the false self, the ultimate rasa from
everyday feelings, the eternal within man from the batin in general, is itself a
difficult task. The members of Budi Setia spent three meetings in a row dis­
cussing just which feelings could be asserted to come from the swara ing asepi
—“the voice in the quiet.” The problem seemed to be whether such premoni­
tions as a feeling that one is going to have an auto accident or that one’s child
off in Djakarta has fallen ill could be said to come from the swara ing asepi,
which, everyone agreed, was not so much a voice as a feeling and could only
be reached by meditation; and whether the voice of conscience is always from
this ultimate source or just from the batin generally, the latter being suggested
by the fact that some people’s consciences actually lead them astray.
» 316 «                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
    It was finally decided that there were three things which are easily con­
fused: (1) swam ing asepi, known only through meditation, which is the
“voice” of God in the individual, the manifestation of God in the depths of
the person’s inner life, and therefore his ultimate “benchmark” which cannot
be wrong; (2) “hunches” and “emotional predictions” of accident or good
fortune, which can come to the person anytime, with or without meditation,
even sometimes in dreams; and (3) the voice of conscience, which is more
or less constant but which is identical with the “voice” of God, the swam ing
asepi, only in the truly alus man, the man who has gained contact with his real
self through meditation.
    This kind of phenomenological analysis is an inward-looking but never­
theless empirical attempt to sort out the contingent and the permanent, the
human and the divine, within the batin. A quite complex analysis was given
by the guru of Kawruh Bedja:
   “The soul (djiwa: ‘soul’ is an unfortunate translation, although I can think
  of nothing better; for, as the analysis makes clear, this djiwa is quite unlike
  our ‘soul,’ being rather the perceived self, the ‘me’ as against the ‘I’),” he
  said, “is a thing, an object, but it is invisible. Although you feel it, it has
  rasa. Your name is Cliff, and (closing his eyes) you feel (rasa) Cliff.
  This is called feeling your name.” I said that I didn’t understand this. He
  said: “Suppose you come here in the dark. No one can see anything and you
  say, ‘May I come in?’ ‘Who is it?’ I reply. ‘Me,’ you say. ‘Me who?’ I say.
  ‘Me, Cliff,’ you say. Thus you feel ‘Cliff’; this is your soul. Now, that which
  feels Cliff, which feels the ‘feeling of Cliff,’ is aku, ‘I.’ Aku is not the feeling
  ‘Cliff’—the soul is that; but the feeling aku is the feeling which feels the feel­
  ing ‘Cliff.’ It is the feeling which knows. It is not the soul which knows, it is
  what is known; aku is what knows. Aku is an eternal object, it can never be de­
  stroyed; and some say it is God, so that God is both in the sky and in the
  individual. But Bedja, dealing only with actually perceived things, takes no
  position and just says aku is an eternal object.” (In a later interview,
  however, the guru said that he and everyone else really thought that aku
  and God were the same, and that the former was only the latter manifested
  in the individual. The reason he didn’t teach it was that it only confused
  people, especially at the beginning, and such confusion could be quite harmful
  and upsetting. Therefore it was better to stick to simple, perceivable things.)
    In Ilmu Sedjati, this identification of the “I” in man with God is even
more direct, for this semi-secret mystic cult (sometimes called Islam Sedjati,
“True Islam,” which infuriates the santris) patterns itself upon the form of
Islam and has in place of the Islamic Confession of Faith (“I believe there is
no God but Allah, and Muhammad is His Prophet” ) a Confession: “I believe
God is in myself and my breath is His representative (Prophet).” The whole
confession is rather long and complicated, with secret, “hidden” secondary
meanings for all the major words; and a whole set of yoga-like disciplines
concerned with breath regulation is built upon it. As one member explained :
  Ilmu Sedjati is based on a understanding of God and of life. . . . It says that
  God is in your own body, which means not that the individual is God but
  that one must look into one’s self in order to find and understand God. It goes
  on to say that God is manifest in your breath, not so much that He is the
Mysticism                                                                 »317«
  breath but that He is what makes the breathing—i.e., you constantly feel
  yourself breathing and then you refer to what it is that makes this breathing
  “go” and the answer is God, which is within you.
Thus in Ilmu Sedjati one meditates while regulating his breath (always a part
of meditation since meditation involves a severe regulation of one’s physical
as well as psychological processes) and hears in his own breathing the mystical
word which is the secret core of the “science,” u (inhale), rip (exhale), urip
meaning “life.” Over and over again one breathes with perfect regularity and
feels the ultimate meaning, u, rip, u, rip. . . . A similar discipline in Ilmu
ICasunjatan leads to a different word but with roughly the same import: hu
(inhale), Allah (exhale), hu Allah, hu Allah. . . . Thus the true self, the
ultimate inward feeling, and God are one and the same, an idea the modern
santris, at least, realize is diametrically opposed to their own basic tenets.

  I told him (a Muhammadijah member) in a lapse of caution that I had
  been to a Budi Setia meeting. He asked if I knew what Budi Setia was, and I
  said no. He said that these people thought that God and man were one,
  in contrast to Islam which teaches that God is God and man is man, that
  the Lord is the Lord and the servant the servant. I asked: “But aren’t these
  men Moslems?” He replied: “They say they are, but they don’t carry it out.
  They don’t follow the Koran, and in fact have no book at all but merely follow
  their own ideas. There are many people like this in Indonesia, who say they
   are Moslems but really follow ‘Javanese science.’ ”



         3. The Search for Ultimate Enlightenment and
                       “This-Worldly” Mysticism

t h e knowledge of the ultimate rasa is the end of mystical endeavor and should
be the religious aim of all men. Often this act of comprehension is considered
to have two main stages: neng, literally “quiet,” “stillness,” referring to the
calming of the emotions; and then ning—“clearness of insight,” the intuition
which follows upon the stillness and which may be, although it is usually de­
scribed as having “no content at all, a completely empty batin'' quite an emo­
tional experience.
  Sudjoko (a Budi Setia member, speaking during one of their weekly
  meetings) then said that he was uncertain of all these things. Most of the
  time one can’t really feel the real self, but only now and then; most of the
  time one feels the individual, selfish, false self. But sometimes, in fleeting
  moments or in meditation, one feels the real self and feels a rush of power.
  “Adah /” he said passionately at this point. (Aduh is an exclamation of deep
  emotion or pain.) He described a number of situations not altogether clear
  to me showing the difference between the false and true self; and he
  described the meeting of the real self as a tremendous emotional ex­
  perience. . . .
»318«                                      T H E R E L I G I O N OF    JAVA
    As one might expect, both from the emphasis on the rush of emotion and
power in the mystical experience and from mysticism elsewhere, the experi­
ence is often described in sexual terms, for example in these three consecutive
stanzas from the long poem I have been quoting:
     Day and night do not leave off from praying,
     The result of your great effort will be a mystical experience.
     In other words, the light of God will be revealed to you,
      It will be felt in your heart.
     That is to say, the heart is one with the soul,
     That strange inner hindrance.
     And you shall see it,
     Opened and clear.
     Clearly, such a result
     Cannot be compared to anything else.
    All this comes only as a blessing of God,
    And it cannot be explained
    Clearly and simply.
    If you wish to know about it
    You must know it by having experienced it
    And then you will truly know it.
    It is as the proverb says: a young boy and a young girl
    Cannot really know the pleasures of sex
    If they have not experienced them.
     After you have actually carried out
     Coitus, then you truly understand it.
     And also you don’t wish to talk about it,
     To discuss your sexual experiences with others.
     It is the same with mystical experiences;
     Those who have already been able to come directly in touch with God
     See mystically this supernatural power.
     My child: memorize this!
    These stanzas bring together a number of themes. First, they accent the
empirical nature of Javanese mysticism: the final appeal is always to (emo­
tional) experience which carries its own meaning. God, forms of worship,
and views of the nature of man, are always validated on these grounds—
never on grounds of logic or essential rationality (as in Thomistic Chris­
tianity), never on pure belief (as in Islam and Tertullian Christianity), never
in terms of social consequences (for these can be good or bad—even though
Javanese mystics are much concerned with the social consequences of their
beliefs), but always on the quality of experience which is self-validating and
empirical, no matter how much it might point beyond itself to non-empirical
grounds.
    The sexual metaphor is the natural one in this context, particularly since
many Javanese, alus ones especially, regard it as almost indecent to talk about
their real feelings with others. (Sudjoko, the informant above, was the only
person I ever heard describe the mystical experience with any vividness. Other
people were vague or embarrassed to talk about it.)
Mysticism                                                                      »319«
 Earlier he (a high-school teacher) said that he thought the first class (in
  the high-school) would be best for psychological tests because the students
 at that age are still open a little emotionally. Javanese are very closed up
 emotionally, he said, and never want anyone else to know what they are
 really feeling, what is in their hearts. Although by the second and third high-
 school grades this condition is pretty well established, the first-graders are
 still somewhat expressive. When I asked him why they didn’t like others to
 know what they are feeling, he said that he didn’t know; that they were just
  ashamed to do so. . . . Another informant said that one can tell, some­
 times, a man’s wishes and inner feelings from his face, from how he looks.
 Most Javanese, he said, want to hide this. They don’t want to show what they
 want down deep, and so they mask the face—hold it stifle so that their inner
 feelings and wishes are not visible to others.
     In any case, mystical experience brings an access of power which can be
used in this world. Sometimes the use is semi-magical, such as in curing, fore­
telling the future, or gaining wealth.* Boys semèdi before school examinations
in order to pass with high marks; girls who want husbands sometimes fast
and meditate for them; and even some politicians are held to meditate for a
higher office. During the period of the right-wing Moslem rebellion in Acheh,
in Sumatra, when many Modjokuto people thought “the crazy times” of the
Revolution might be returning, Budi Setia (which opened every meeting with
a report on the week’s national and international news by one of the members)
meditated so that the country would be safe, stable, and peaceful.
  Hardjo then said that Budi Setia was . . . just concerned with the science
  of the inner life and with asking God for order and peace. Advancement in
  spiritual things is what is important. . . . He said that he had seen from
  the newspapers that many groups such as Budi Setia were springing up
  around the country; they were on the increase everywhere. Wasisto then said
  that he also had noted the springing up of new “inner life” groups. He said
  that he thought that the reason was that things in Indonesia were getting not
  more peaceful but less so; that all the upset gave rise to attempts to calm
  it through such groups as Budi Setia. He said that we must ask God that this
  upset stop quickly and secondly that nothing bad happen here in this area.
  Hardjo said that the effort was to bring peace and order in the world. Wirjo
  said that meditation was the most important thing in this: one’s heart
  must be peaceful. . . . Peace depends upon the inner state of individual
  people; peace in the world follows upon this, but the first peace is in the
  inner self. But it is not just for oneself. One must carry out one’s duties in
  life, and in doing so with an inner peace one spreads peace socially. There
  are those too who think that peace cannot be reached in this world, but for­
  tunately they are wrong. . . . Modern life is lacking in peace—so much so
  that many people argue that one can’t find peace anymore in this world
  because nowadays people can’t stop—a moment here, a moment there—
     * Both Budi Setia and Sumarah meditate en masse when one of their members is
ill in order to cure him; and Sumarah claims that one crippled boy—who is still a
member and still partly crippled and supports their story—was made capable of walking
through their semèdi efforts. Kawruh Kasunjatan is considered often to make its partici­
pants capable of acting as dukuns; and it is led by one of the better known dukuns in
the area.
»320«                                           T H E R E L I G I O N OF        JAVA
  but are always on the run. But nobody can effect our advancement toward
  real peace but ourselves. If the Javanese join in this mad modern rush, they
  will lose the way of old which their ancestors pursued to peace. The problem
  is really how people can live peacefully in this world. . . .
    Heaven and hell are here and now within one, several sect people told
me; and one of the strongest criticisms they have of the Moslems is the latter’s
emphasis on the afterlife, which seems to them foolish. Although certain in­
dividuals hold to a reincarnation theory, one in which individuals are in­
carnated higher or lower according to the ethical quality of their behavior while
alive, there is little concern for a complete escape from the process as in
India; and Nirvana, as a permanent state of bliss, is not very meaningful to
most people. More often the incarnation theory is used mainly to buttress the
ranking system and the organic theory of society much as it is used in India,
although quite a bit more casually, and then only in the more intellectual
prijaji circles. Individuals and groups are held to be at the level appropriate
to their spiritual ability, like children graded in school. (“Light souls, those of
people who ‘know,’ naturally rise,” one prijaji informant said, counting him­
self among the knowers. “Dark, heavy souls, those of people who don’t ‘know,’
naturally sink.” ) In any case, mystical practice is considered to be a means
not of turning away from life but toward it.*
  The heart of the “science” evidently is a reinterpretation of the five
  pillars of Islam. . . . They interpret these five pillars quite differently from
  the Islamic meaning used by the santris. He (guru of the Ilmu Sedjati group)
  said that santri Islam is for the future, for the afterlife, but Ilmu Sedjati
  is for the here and now, for securing well-being in this life. If no heaven
  now, no heaven later, he said. He said that the science teaches one how to
  recognize God. He said that this teaching is secret and that one must be
  a pupil to be allowed to hear it. If one did, and they told one that this is
  where God is, one would say, “Oh yes, I see; it is so obvious.” He also
  said that they teach that the source of man’s troubles is in himself, and
  teach one to recognize, face, and deal with this and unify oneself and find
  peace. . . .
    The power gained from mystical experience can be used for good or evil.
Besides giving one the ability to cure, it gives the ability to make people ill;
the detachment one gets through meditation can make one a more efficient
evil-doer as well as a “defender of society.” (A Budi Setia member suggested
in one meeting that Indonesian society in general was so unstable because not
only good people but also the bandits were getting more disciplined spiritually;
thus the situation instead of getting more orderly got progressively less so.)
The members of one sect, despite their professed tolerance, usually accuse
the adherents of the other sects of being mainly concerned with getting rich
or gaining political power rather than with using their mystical knowledge for
the good of society as their own sect does.
    This dualism runs through the whole of the mystical philosophy. If one
    * Not typically, at any rate. I have one contra-indicative case, a quite high prijaji
who argued with me for a withdrawal from the world, but he is almost universally
dispraised for his attitude.
Mysticism                                                                    »321«
meditates on the south side of a certain nearby mountain, one will gain the
power to do good; if one meditates on the north side one will gain the power to
do evil. People do not like to admit that they fast a good deal or semèdi too
much for fear others will think they wish to do evil. Sometimes the increased
ability to do evil is held to arise not from true mystical experience but from a
false one in which the individual is actually “far away” from his true, good self
although he thinks he is close to it; but more commonly people simply accept
the fact that spiritual discipline leads to insight into the self which in turn leads
to power which may then be used for various purposes. Further, the power
itself is most often viewed ambivalently, for it is possible to have too much,
to get in over one’s head, and, failing to build up one’s spiritual constitution
step by step, be overwhelmed by the power one gets.
  We talked some about “Javanese Science,” which he (a young school teacher)
  said is different from Islam. He said that it is “strength in the inner life,”
  and that there are people who have science and can kill other people.
  He said that this power, as well as curing power, comes through fasting; and
  that the reason one’s bat in gets strong from fasting is that when one fasts
  one gets very hungry and thinks a lot about God, and then God gives one
  the power. People who are not strong enough to take this often go mad
  because the science is too much for them and they think too much about such
  things; the veins in their heads snap and they go crazy. Sometimes they
  go crazy because they have this science and it forbids them to do something
  —e.g., strike someone, or lie to someone, but they lose their temper and hit
  someone and then they go mad because they have broken the rule. One must
  be strong to deal with Javanese science. . . .
    As spiritual “strength” is correlated with social status, lower-class people
are well advised not to try too much along such lines. In any case, one must
proceed cautiously. (One of the leaders of Sumarah went into a fit during a
meditation session, and it took two or three men to hold him down. The col­
lapse was interpreted as the result of his having overreached himself in
mystical exercise.) An incontinence of mystic practice can easily destroy the
individual totally.
  He (another informant) said that amuk (a temporary but very violent
  psychosis in which the individual runs about attacking and killing innocent
  bystanders isn’t caused by jealousy or poverty, as common insanity
  often is, but by “science,” by religion. . . . A person gets to thinking about
  religion, and he can’t figure some things out. He gets to worrying about
  where God is: is he under the ground, is he in the sky, what does he look like,
  is he red, is he black, is he big, is he little, how does he order people to do
  things? People who are stupid, who have no religion, don’t go amuk.



                           4. Mystical Discipline
in order to accomplish the mystical state, one must ngèsti. Ngèsti means to
unify all the powers of the individual and direct them toward a single end, to
»322«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
concentrate one’s psychological and physical faculties toward one narrow goal.
It stands for a land of intense mental quest, a search for understanding which
is supported by an irresistible will and a fusion into one simple whole of the
different forces within the individual. The senses, the mind, the emotions, even,
so far as is possible, the physical processes of the body—all are brought into
a single unity and focused toward a single end.*
  He (a high prijaji adherent of a sect which had no chapter in Modjokuto at
  the moment and. who therefore studied by himself) said that his “science”
  argued that there were four parts to the individual: the body, the will, the
  soul, and feeling, the last including the senses and emotions. All these must
  be unified, made as one, in an effort called ngèsti. Ngèsti means to con­
  centrate all these four parts, including the five senses, and to close up the
  nine holes in the body (two ears, two eyes, two nostrils, mouth, anus, and
  urethra) and really concentrate so that one senses nothing. He said that
  the first thing one must put in order and unify is the body, next the will,
  then the soul, by which he meant the inner emotional life, and finally one will
  reach rasa. . . . One must ngèsti every evening so that one will feel cool
  and peaceful.
     The reason that one must ngèsti every night—or at least at regular inter­
vals—is that it is a practiced skill. Javanese often compare it to sport. One
must train and actually perform it quite frequently to be any good at it; and if
one stops doing it for a while one gets rusty and must get into shape again be­
fore one can regain his old skill. Thus one guru said that he used to be a good
curer by means of meditation when younger, but stopped doing it during the
Japanese period and lost his skill and never has gotten back to being as good as
he once was. Moreover, like sport, there is a large element of natural ability in­
volved in it. Sect meetings, in fact, are usually called latihan, which means
“practice sessions,” “exercises”; and breath control, concentration of the
senses, emptying of the mind, are all rehearsed for at least part of each meet­
ing. In one of the sects, Kawruh Kasunjatan, people stare at a lighted lamp for
long periods in order to ngèsti; in others they gaze at a single point, stand up
and look at the floor in front of them, or just close their eyes and withdraw
into themselves.
     Often ngèsti is phrased in slightly different terms as nuwun, which means
to ask or beg for something. The notion here is that one must ask God for
insight with such a concentration of energy, beg with such a single-minded
intensity, that one will reach Him despite the deterring elements of mundane
feeling and sensation which obscure Him from one’s view or one from His.
This formulation is based on the dual idea that the way to get things from
 (higher-status) people is to ask them for it and that if one wants something
badly enough the people whom one is importuning cannot possibly refuse.
They will feel too sympathetic to resist one’s demands; but if they do resist
them, it can only be because one has not pleaded his case intensely enough.
    * Thus the name of the most famous professional wajang wong troupe in Java is
Ngèsti Pendawa, which, as the Pendawa are usually held to represent the five senses,
has the mystical meaning of concentrating and unifying the self in an effort after
ultimate meaning.
Mysticism                                                                     »323«
In daily life this leads to a situation whereby lower-status people get things
out of higher-status ones by such petitioning and the higher ones protect them­
selves from being too easily exploited by the formalities of the etiquette system
and the attendant “shame” lower-status people feel in dealing with higher-
status people. In dealing with God, this pattern is most common in situations
where people want specific material blessings—as, for example, in the mBah
Buda ritual petitioning mentioned earlier, which was compared to “crying
for something” as a child does to its parents. But even in purely mystical
quests one often hears the formulation that what one must do is to want to
know God so badly, to beg him with such importunity, that He in His infinite
mercy will reveal Himself.
    Whether ngèsti, the concentration of all one’s powers toward a single end,
is phrased as an intense quest or as a pleading supplication,* it is tremendously
facilitated by instinctual disciplines and, in fact, cannot really be very suc­
cessful in their absence. Of these instinctual disciplines, by far the most im­
portant are fasting and staying awake; for one of the most widespread beliefs in
the culture is that asceticism in matters of food and rest leads to spiritual
strength and intensity.
  In the evening I saw Samidjan, the carpenter, in the coffee-shop. . . .
  We talked about eating, and he said that many Javanese eat only a banana
  a day and survive; many need very little food. The same is true of sleep. He
  sleeps about six hours a day, and some people sleep only four or five hours.
  (This, incidently, is not entirely an ideal pattern. I never ceased to be
  amazed at how little people seemed to sleep in Java, and how deeply they
  slept when they did sleep.) He said that Javanese believe that if one does
  not eat much or sleep much but concentrates on God and works hard one can
  be rich. In fact, one can achieve anything by this fasting method—but one
  can’t just fast, meditate, and then go to sleep. One must also go out and
  work for what one wants. He said that it is because the fasting makes the
  power of the mind stronger that one can get things this way. When I asked
  him why many people who fast this way still don’t get rich, he said that it
  is usually because they are not of a single will. One must, he said, have
  just one idea: fast, meditate on God, and work—and have all this to one aim,
  to get rich. But often a man will not have just one aim; he will wish other
  things. For example, a man will fast to be rich, but inside he will also want to
  be handsome. This is what prevents him from being successful.
    This is an abangan, not a prijaji, formulation. The belief in the relationship
between instinctual deprivation and spiritual power is—with a partial excep­
tion among the santris, who hold that the purpose of fasting is to feel how it
is to be hungry like the poor, to show one’s subservience to God, and to
toughen one for whatever trials life may bring—almost universal. When asked
to complete the sentence “A man who doesn’t eat much . . .              about one
hundred and fifty high-school students in the prijaji-run private high school in
town gave (in addition to a number of, from our point of view, more
    * It is also sometimes put in terms of a surrender, a humble prostration before the
power of God, a submission of one’s will to His, a formulation important in Sumarah,
the very name of which conveys this meaning.
»324«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
“expectable” responses such as        . . he would get thin,”          . . he gets
sick,”     . he will lack vitamin B” ) such replies as these:
  . . . that is very good.
   . . . is a man whose religious discipline is very great.
  . . . his health will be good.
  . . . is disciplined religiously.
  . . . is a man who will be an expert in meditation.
   . . . will be clever.
  . . . will usually also stay awake all night.
  . . . will have a clear mind.
   . . . will do good actions.
   . . . quickly rich.
   . . . that is called religious discipline in order that one’s ideals may be
  reached.
   . . . must be clever.
  . . . pleasant.
   . . . yes, he will be strong.
One would probably not find any such answers in a million tests in the United
States.
    Similarly, to the reverse question, “A man who eats too much . . . ,” in
addition to such answers as “. . . he’ll get fat” or “. . . he’ll fall sick,” we
got such replies as:
  . . . will not be able to think easily.
  . . . will become stupid.
  . . . will be unable to think.
  . . . his actions will not be good.
  . . . will not be intelligent.
  . . . his mind will be bound, he will be unable to think.
  . . . must be stupid.
    Many Javanese, abangan and prijaji, still fast on Mondays and Thursdays
from dawn to dusk. To stay awake all night, particularly on holidays or special
occasions, helps one stay young and leads to a long life. By far the most com­
mon Islamic practice to which the non-scintris are faithful is the Fast, because,
as one prijaji puts it, “despite the fact that it is Islamic, it is an excellent ex­
ercise both for the body and the spirit.” And old men complain about the
growing laxity of the younger generation in these matters:
  He went on to talk about experts in fasting and people who meditate a long
  time. He said that this is the way to become clever quickly; one can know
  everything this way. He told the two children there (about eight and ten
  years old) that they should fast on Monday and Thursday; that it had to be
  on those two days. He said that fasting was the real way to power, the only
  way to real knowledge; that if one fasted and God received it—which wasn’t
  necessarily certain—he would ask: “What is your wish?” and one would
  get what one wanted. He said scornfully that these days no one fasts any
  more as people used to. For example, the children were always eating some­
  thing, always nibbling on tidbits. He warned that, since when one doesn’t eat
  it makes for a purer soul, many children die now because they eat too much.
Mysticism                                                                   »325«
  Old people knew that fasting was the best thing for one and the way to riches
  and knowledge, but now they don’t do it as much as they used to. He said
  that men make money but God makes men. We should not be too interested
  in wealth, but realize that such things as fasting are what is good. He
  asked the children again if they would start fasting on Monday and Thursday,
  but they were non-committal.
   This again is an abangan formulation, but on this point the prijajis are at
one with them.
  Djojo said that people say there is much advancement today—in the schools
  they learn mathematics, physics, and they are very clever; but he thinks that
  in the heart and soul they are not so good as the people in the old days. In
  the old days people lived to be much older, 100 years, and didn’t lose
  their teeth or their eyesight in old age. . . . His wife added that this was
  because formerly people could fast for days, or go without sleep for days,
  and not be any the worse for it, but now if they miss one meal they catch
  a cold! Djojo agreed and said that in the old days people were calm and
  wouldn’t, for example, drink coffee or tea until it was cold. He said that
  nowadays people are not so strong in the soul as formerly even if they are
  cleverer in the mind; before, they could be vegetarians, but now if there is not
  meat with every meal they are upset.
     In sum, in order to come into contact with God one must concentrate one’s
entire powers toward that end and deny so far as possible one’s needs to eat,
drink, and sleep (also one’s sexual needs, but, with their usual reticence on
such topics, the Javanese do not emphasize this particularly or care to talk
about it much). Such activity is called either semèdi or tapa, depending mainly
on its intensity. Semèdi really means meditation, with or without much in­
stinctual discipline, but as practiced in Modjokuto it is often accompanied by
some cutting-down of the amount of food eaten and the hours of sleep. No one
really practices tapa now. In fact, insofar as it involves more or less impossible
feats of self-denial, it never has been practiced—although, as we have seen,
it is ascribed to various mythological heroes such as the wajang characters. In
tapa one places oneself in some wild place—in the deep woods or on top of
a mountain— and goes into an extended trance, neither eating nor sleeping—
just meditating. The result of this is tremendous magical and spiritual power
and a heightened ability to get what one wants in this world.
     In this, as in so many things, Sunan Kalidjaga, the great mythological cul­
ture hero, who not only was one of the founders of Islam but who invented
the wajang, the gamelan, the slametan, and almost all the other religious
pusaka (heirlooms) the Javanese have, provides the model. Kalidjaga was the
son of a high government official. As a young man he was a thief, a gambler,
a profligate, and a general no-good. One day there came to his father’s town
another of the founders of Islam in Java, Sunan Bonang, an Arab. Sunan
Bonang wore beautiful clothes and expensive jewelry, and the head of his
walking-stick was of solid gold. He walked down the street where Kalidjaga
(who was then called Radèn Sa’id) was holding up people and robbing them;
and he was stopped by Kalidjaga, who demanded his jewels and his cane on
penalty of his life. Bonang merely laughed and said: “Why, these jewels are
»326«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF     JAVA
as nothing; look about you!” And Kalidjaga looked about him and saw that
Bonang had turned all the trees to gold hung with jewels; and he was startled
and realized that the things of this world were as nothing next to the power of
Sunan Bonang. Kalidjaga begged Bonang to teach him the secret of his science.
Bonang said, “All right, but it is very difficult and dangerous. Do you have the
courage?” And Kalidjaga said: “I am brave to the death.” So Sunan Bonang
said: “If you are brave, then wait for me here by the side of the river until
I return.” Kalidjaga waited, doing tapa. For many years Bonang did not re­
turn, but Kalidjaga continued unmoved in one place, tapa-ing. Trees grew up
around him, sirens came to tempt him, demons to frighten him, but he did
not move. Finally, Bonang returned and discovered that Kalidjaga (whom he
now presented with this name: kali, “river”; djaga, “guard”) was now in fact
more powerful than he, Bonang, because of his long period of tapa. After this
Kalidjaga never robbed or gambled again but went about spreading Islam—•
the abangan version—throughout the country-side.
    Tapa is, then, a kind of suspended animation, a continuing mystical ex­
perience. The baby is said to tapa in the womb, “trying to become a person,”
and the womb imagery is in general quite conscious. At a circumcision cere­
mony the mother will often step across the recumbent child three times so
that he will be reminded of the time of his tapa in her womb and so remember
the source of his strength. But the imagery, too, is often that of death.
           He who has need of knowledge about the inner life
           Cannot be hindered,
           But must be helped in his search.
           He will be continually reading books and asking questions
           Of those who are learned.
           He will always be feeling
           About the perfectness of death.
           Sometimes he will travel around
           Meditating quietly in wild places,
           Searching for a message from God.
    In the less spiritually heroic present, such extremes of religious asceticism
are but unpracticed ideals, and most mystics are content with sumèdi: medita­
tion, anywhere from twenty minutes to several hours in length, for which one
prepares by a certain amount of fasting, staying awake, and sexual abstinence.
But the principle is the same: absolute and intense concentration upon a single
aim, that of emptying the batin of mundane content in order to come into con­
tact with the representative of the divine within one. And the result is the
same, if less spectacular: an increased spiritual strength which allows one to
pursue one’s aims in this world with a fixed and unchanging will instead of
being pulled here and there by distracting elements. Tranquilly undisturbed
by the surprises of a contingent reality, inwardly peaceful and stable in a world
of flux, the man who has gained the true knowledge of what lies within him
proceeds steadily on his way, master of his own desires. If he sets out to go
north, he goes north, not east, south, or west—and he does not stop in at a
coffee-shop on the way.
Mysticism                                                                   »327«

                      5. Metaphysical Psychology
in addition to embracing the spiritual disciplines and meditation, the empirical
study of emotional life is seen as a means to the understanding and experience
of God within the self. Thus Kawruh Bedja works out the phenomenological
analysis of the self, already quoted; Budi Setia argues about the different
kinds of “voices in the quiet,” also already quoted; and Ilmu Sedjati bases a
very complicated system indeed on the analysis of the four basic “drives” in
Javanese metaphysical psychology: amarah—aggression, lust for power; supiah
—greed, desire for property; mutmainah—the passion for tranquility, desire
for inner peace; aluamah—hunger, desire for food and drink.
    Around these four drives and their correct regulation there is constructed
an extremely complicated metaphysical and ethical system in which each of the
drives is tied to various aspects of reality: the sun, moon, earth, and stars; four
kinds of spirits; the objects concerned in the birth process—the bamboo
knife, birthcord, afterbirth, and navel-healing medicine; four kinds of cor­
related illnesses (e.g., too much greed makes you feverish); the four elements
which make up the physical world—earth, fire, water, and wind; four religious
groups in Javanese society (Moslems, Mystics, Christians, and “Intellectuals”
—the last meaning “free thinkers” ); four kinds of black magic; four political
parties—Moslem, Nationalist, Communist, and Socialist; and so forth and so
on. The whole system is diagramed in a spectacularly complicated chart with
lines running in all directions between the various interrelated elements. This
kind of arbitrary speculation, based always on inner perceptions as the basic
data from which the theory departs, is endemic among prijajis. Almost every
prijaji has some fantastically elaborated scheme, that of his sect if he is a
member of one, which explains, usually with the help of spectacular diagrams,
all aspects of experience and ties all outer reality to inner feeling. The only
adherent of Ilmu Ngèsti I found in Modjokuto described his system as follows:
  According to this science there are four basic elements represented by
  four symbols: fire, standing for the will; earth, standing for the mother;
  water, for the blood; and wind, for the breath or life. Four other aspects of
  life are coordinated with this: the seed or sperm, the womb, birth, and
  death. There are thus four basic requirements for the individual: he must
  examine carefully and know the order in the sperm; he must examine carefully
  and know the order in the embryo; in life; death. Thus, all this amounts to
  finding order in each stage of one’s life: as a sperm, as an embryo, as a living
  human being, and as a corpse. . . .
    This reasoning goes on, as do all the other systems, at great length; but
perhaps this excerpt is enough to demonstrate why the Javanese refer to this
sort of thing as the “theory” corresponding to the “practice” of fasting, medi­
tating, and other observances. There is some difference of opinion on whether
the theory or the practice is more-important: Budi Setia and Kawruh Bedja
emphasize the speculative aspects of mysticism, arguing that intellectual under­
standing is as important as spiritual discipline, if not more so. Kawruh
Kasunjatan and Sumarah (the leaders of which criticize Budi Setia rather
»328«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
severely for its “intellectualism” ) emphasize meditation and emotional ex­
perience. Ilmu Sedjati stresses both about equally. All, however, include both
speculation and meditation, and regard the “theory” and the “practice” as
mutually self-supporting.
  Another young man spoke on theosophy. He said that he had studied it
  seriously before the war but thought that since the war it had gotten too
  theoretical. He said that theosophy was theory, but Javanese science was
  the carrying out of it, the meditation. He thought that one needed both the
  intellectual theory and the concrete practice. Now these things have to be
  justified in terms of Western science instead of the old terms they used
  before the war: for example, the theory of the circulation of the blood.



          6. The Teacher {Guru )-Student {Murid.) Pattern
since ,  whether “true knowledge” is accomplished mainly by means of
spiritual discipline or philosophical speculation or by an even balance of both,
people vary considerably in their abilities along these lines, there is a kind of
natural ranking of individuals according to their presumed or proven capacity
for mystical achievement.
    Sumarah, for example, has a four-rank system for its members. First are
the younger people, twelve to twenty years in age, who meditate by them­
selves separate from the rest of the membership (but under the leadership of
the guru of the sect) so that they will not disrupt the concentration of their
betters. It is held that if one is meditating and someone else in the same room
is not, or is not meditating so deeply, it will disturb one. Second, there are the
older regular members of no special spiritual qualifications. Third is a group
of advanced mystics (about a half-dozen in Modjokuto out of a total member­
ship of about forty) who are nominated by the local branch, their names being
sent to the headquarters in Djokjakarta, where the governing board of the
sect meditates upon them and, without any information about the people the
names symbolize, comes to a “feeling” decision about whether they should
be “promoted” or not. And, fourth, there is the highest rank, of which only
the guru, a pawn-shop employee, is a member in Modjokuto, chosen in a
similar fashion—except that, presumably, the meditation of the governing
board is deeper. In all the sects there is some such ranking as this, although
not necessarily so formalized as in Sumarah. At the least, there is always the
idea that some of the members are more advanced than others and that one
of the purposes of sect organization is to enable the more advanced mystics to
help the less advanced. The common image is that of the school where the
student in the first grade, even though he may have the potentiality to equal,
after much time and long study, the achievement of the sixth-grader, is for the
moment at least far below the latter in capacity and accomplishment.
    Groups of people as such also vary in their abilities along these lines,
peasants, for example, being notoriously poor at meditation when compared
with prijajis. Women are usually inferior to men in such matters.
Mysticism                                                                 »329«
  When I asked if women in the neighborhood study much with gurus, she
  said no, it wouldn’t be of very much use. Because women have to say
  what is on their minds, they can’t be patient (sabar) and accept things
  (trima) the way one must if a guru teaches one. The other day she had
  a fever and Pak Sardi (the guru of Ilmu Sedjati) came in and told her
  that it was because she was greedy. . . . She does what she can about being
  patient, but she’s a woman and can only go so far.
    Some women do fairly well, in fact; and all the sects are coeducational, the
women usually sitting in among the men, in sharp contrast to both abangan
and, especially, santri religious practices. In Budi Setia women contribute
their opinions fairly freely, if less freely than men, and are usually listened to
respectfully. In Sumarah some of the second-highest-level mystics are women.
(I have never heard of a woman guru, however, in any of the sects.) In all
the groups women are allowed to do whatever men are allowed, although the
general opinion is that mysticism is more difficult for them, given their in­
herently less peaceful nature.
    On the other hand, the old, ceteris paribus, are considered to be rather
better at mystical ascetism than the young.
  “This (a chart the informant had drawn for me) represents the ages of man
  windu by windu (a windu is eight years). When you are eight you are still a
  child and don’t think about anything. When you are sixteen you are all
  wound up about girls. When you are twenty-four you are getting married.
  At thirty-two you are involved in the things of everyday life. But by the time
  you are forty you begin to reflect about life and only then can you really
  begin to understand it, to learn this ‘science’; and as you become older you
  get wiser. Most people don’t live eight windus (i.e., 64 years) but die in
  their early forties.” The informant, who is about fifty, thinks they die
  early because they don’t turn away from life toward this philosophy, and so
  wear themselves out. He has never been sick a day. He thinks that his health
  is due to this “science,” whereby one can live to a ripe old age—more than
  eight windus, even ten or so.
    It is upon the difference in spiritual talents among various individuals and
groups, talents which are improvable but only to a point, that the guru
system rests. Rank, sex, and age combine to form a fairly even gradation of
spiritual status—a gradation that, despite some protestations that one cannot
always tell a man’s inner worth from his outer aspects, so that a beggar may
really be higher than a regent, coincides in fact remarkably well with the
gradation of political and social status generally. All the Modjokuto sects
stem from high court mystic gurus who first came upon the “science” they
teach in a fit of meditation such as is not possible to ordinary men. The guru
then taught it to disciples (murid), and those disciples taught it to still lower
disciples, and so on down the line until, in some cases, even the peasant was
reached.
    Thus there is a linked—but very loose—network of gurus and murids
spreading outward and downward from the court centers to the countryside;
a diffuse image of the power situation generally as the prijajis see it. It is
interesting, too, that many people say, I am not certain how accurately, that
»330«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
before the Revolution many of the more alus of the “sciences” now taught were
confined secretly, like the srimpi dances, to the courts and only now have
seeped out to the masses. Similar assertions are made about certain refined sys­
tems of numerical divination, certain meditation-linked curing techniques, and
so forth, with the result that, whether correctly or not, it is widely believed that
the Revolution has released to the people generally much of the mystical
power which was formerly confined to the ruling classes. Thus the (partial)
revolution in the political sphere finds its (partial) reflection in the religious.
When an old-fashioned peasant brought up in a political discussion the famous
old-Javanese prophecy that Java would be peaceful only when the Ratu Adil
—the Just King—came to rule, a more modern thinker rebuked him, saying
that, although the prophecy, coming as it did from great mystics in the past,
was true, in a democracy the people is king and so it means that Java will be
peaceful when its people are just.
    But culture does not change as rapidly as all that, and in Modjokuto the
guru system is still an important pattern. Ilmu Sedjati was founded by a
Radèn Mas (i.e., a court noble) in Madiun, a large city near Surakarta.
Kawruh Bedja was founded by and is still headed by a Djokjakarta prince.
Sumarah is led by high Djokjakarta prijajis, some of them high officials in the
Ministry of Education and Culture. Kawruh Kasunjatan was founded by a'
Radèn Mas from the Surakarta court of Mangkunegara IV (and is often merely
called Ilmu Suwana, after his name, R. M. Suwana). Budi Setia is more inde­
pendent, but, insofar as it has been influenced by the Javanese version of the
international theosophy movement, it too has been spiritually directed fröm the
court centers. Further, most of the groups spend part of each meeting reading
articles aloud from magazines published in Djokjakarta and Surakarta by the
more advanced mystics, magazines such as Dudu Kowé and Brahma Widjaja,
which have a strong influence upon those who read them:
  I went to see the dalang, and he had a copy, the latest, February 1954, of a
  "science” magazine from Djokjakarta named, Dudu Kowé, which celebrates
  Kawruh Bedja and is headed by Kangdjeng Ki Agung Surijomentaram from
  Djokjakarta. Other leaders are from Djokjakarta. Solo, Magelang, and
  Semarang (all large central Javanese cities). This magazine is passed around
  among three people and forms the basis of a discussion group of about
  twenty people who meet every month or so. The lead article was by
  Surijomentaram himself, and outlines the main principles of the science. The
  next, which was by the vice-chairman of the magazine and the “science,”
  said that everyone had an animal and a divine soul within him and should try
  to see that the divine ruled. There was politics in the magazine too, said the
  dalang happily, and he showed me an article called "Parties in Indonesia,”
  which described the form of the present Republik, the parties in it, and the
  need for them in a parliamentary state. The article declared that all the
  parties were good and acted only for the good of the people, but it went
  on to describe only one in any detail—Persatuan Indonesia Raja (the con­
  servative party of civil servants and aristocrats; there being a loose formal
  connection between this party and Kawruh Bedja, as we shall see). The
  article explained what the letters stood for and what the party stood for
Mysticism                                                                    »331«
  (the welfare of the people). It declares that the party is a good one which
  knows the value of mystical science and the like.
    The guru-murid connection is thus the structural backbone of the sects.
The sects are not so much social organizations as are the Moslem party
chapters with their governing boards, standing committees, and rank-and-file
membership. Rather, they are a set of dyadic relations between an individual
guru and his individual murid, the terms being, ultimately, relative since when
two people are studying mysticism together the higher one is more or less
automatically a guru and the lower a murid.
  When I told him (guru of Ilmu Sedjati in Modjokuto) that I was interested
  in Ilmu Sedjati, he said that I had to be a murid to learn it. I said that I just
  wanted to know the general features, and he agreed to explain them. He
  said that it was a “science,” first founded by Muhammad, passed on from
  him to Iman Sofi’i, a man who came here from Arabia, who passed it on
  to Hadji Samsuddin, who then passed it on to Radèn Prawirosudarso, the
  popularizer of it in Java, who set up the sect in Madiun in 1925 and still heads
  it. Evidently it is quite a loose structure. A man studies the “science”
  for a while with a guru and, if he wants to become a guru himself, memorizes
  the “science” well and applies for a certificate to his guru, who forwards his
  request to central headquarters. When he receives his certificate the new
  gum can branch out on his own and teach the “science” to others. They
  evidently are very sensitive about the organizational aspect of the sect
  and are forbidden to use words like “organization,” “member,” or “chair­
  man.” They use only two words: guru and murid.
    Thus, in this pure form, sect organization is almost a logical outcome of
the fact that as one moves up the scale of spiritual ability the number of people
at each level decreases more or less exponentially, so that the gurus of many
lower murids must necessarily coincide more and more in the same man. Ilmu
Sedjati’s chief guru (as well as those of the other sects) is guru to all those
who follow his teaching; and, as one moves down from him, fewer and fewer
people are under the same guru, although they are studying the same science.
In Modjokuto, the above guru is the head one for the area, but he has four
other sub-gams spotted around town, with small murid groups of their own.
Others of the sects are somewhat more highly organized, but they all rest on
the basic teacher-student dyad; and there are independent gurus in Modjokuto,
linked to no larger organization, who teach only a few of their close friends
as pupils.
  Sutimah had said that Pak Pandu, the man who drives the hospital ambulance,
  was a kind of a guru to her husband and that Pandu and her husband had
  gone to a one-night “science” meeting given by Pandu’s older brother near
  Tegowangi (a nearby village) during every Sura (the first Javanese month).
  Pak Pandu himself was rather reticent about the “science.” He said there were
  three reasons he couldn’t tell me much about it. Since his brother, who is the
  real guru of it around here, is not yet dead, he doesn’t like to teach it
  himself and so has no murids except for a few close friends. It is supposed to
  be taught in detail only in Sura. One is supposed to teach it only to close
»332«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
   friends, relatives, and people you love, and to people who are certainly
   going to use it.
     There is a continuum from individual self-advertised gurus who teach and
advise a few friends and neighbors, up through the minimal organization of
this system in a loosely structured group such as llmu Sedjati, to the tighter
organization of a sect such as Sumarah, where guru is a formalized office con­
ferred by a central governing board; but in all, the guru-murid link is the
basic building block. As a result, the teacher role gets a kind of religious con­
secration.
  He (a school teacher) said that the Javanese view was that the guru was
  not like an ordinary man but was supposed to be better than the average
  person. He opposed the term guru to the term wong (man). A guru must
  be pure—not gamble or be dissipated or behave badly, because if he does
  his murid will be badly influenced. Thus a guru is something special, almost
  like a holy man, and is set aside from the everyday behavior of men.
    The guru-murid relationship is emphasized in many ways. A man who is
a former pupil of another man always should use high Javanese to his former
teacher and receive low Javanese in return, even if the former pupil has be­
come higher in worldly status than the former teacher. This is a sharp con­
trast to the typical pattern in other relationships which I observed on several
occasions. Gurus should not accept money payment but only freely volunteered
“gifts,” which gifts are actually obligatory in the general sense upon the
murid. And the rule that gurus should behave with more circumspection than
the ordinary man actually has an at least symbolic effect in practice.
  Another time she and Pak Supeno (an llmu Sedjati guru; the informant being
  his sister-in-law) had a quarrel which actually led to their not speaking to one
  another, a quarrel Pak Supeno himself made up by coming and calling on
  her and asking her to come and help at his wedding preparation several
  times. She said that he was ashamed because, when people came asking
  for him, she often said, “Oh, we’re not speaking; I don’t know anything about
  where Pak Supeno is.” She said that it wasn’t right for a guru to be
  quarreling like that.
     As is the dukun to his patient, the guru is symbolic father to the murid. He
is often referred to as such; and when a man says “my parent” he is often talk­
ing not about his father but about his guru, who, in turn, treats him as a son.
Similarly, murids of the same guru often consider themselves “brothers,” al­
though this tie is much less stressed. Prijaji sects are composed of clustered
guru-murid relationships of this sort, different gurus sometimes being loosely
linked together in virtue of their common adherence to the teachings of the
same “higher” guru, and the religious rank of a guru being largely determined
by his class standing. Unlike the traditional abangan, for whom the basic
social unit is the family or rather the neighborhood of independent families,
and whose religious “congregation” is thus determined almost wholly by his
location in space, and also unlike the santri, who increasingly chooses his
religious primary group, his elementary ummat, on vaguely ideological
grounds, the prijaji chooses a sect or a “science” mainly because he believes
Mysticism                                                                    »333«
in its gum. He chooses him because he thinks: Here is a man who “knows,”
who is slightly higher in the social scale than I but not so high that I must
tremble with respect in his presence, and who will be, consequently, both able
and willing to teach me something.



          7. The Underlying Identity of Individuals and
            the Organic Theory of Social Organization

t h e sects, then, place emphasis on the kind of social relationship one finds
when two people occupy (relatively) adjacent rungs on the social ladder—the
father-son, teacher-pupil, leader-follower relation. It is an emphasis of which
the essential consonance with bureaucracy, particularly with the kind of
personal bureaucracy one finds in Indonesia—what the politicized Indonesians
despairingly call bapakisme, “fatherism,” when they see it in operation in the
government ministries—is fairly obvious. Similarly, the normative social
theory the sects support is congruent with the needs of a rank-conscious class
of white-collar administrators with idealistic pretensions. This theory is based
on two considerations. The first is the fact that, since the divine in each per­
son is identical, at the ultimate level of experience there is no individuality be­
cause the more advanced one is spiritually, the more one has a genuine fellow-
feeling for others, a comprehensive sympathy. The second is that, since people
(and groups of people) differ in spiritual advancement, not only does the
range of their sympathy vary but also their fitting place in society is correlated
with their presumed religious status, with the result that some people are
appropriately leaders and others followers, some properly till the soil, while
others are traders, clerks, carpenters, or school teachers, the health of society
being dependent upon the right relationships between the various groups.
     Statements of the first theme, the identity of all individuals on the ultimate
level of experience, are easily enough found, for this is one of the most con­
sistently expressed beliefs. For example:
  Sudjoko (at a Budi Setia meeting) then expanded on something in the
  text (a reading from a “science” magazine having just been completed) about
  “first person,” “second person,” “third person,” saying that they were all
  really one for a prijaji who already was alus in his feelings. “Last night
  we went to see the movie, Sampson and Delilah. My friend and I and all
  of us who went together were as one.” Harijo said that what the reading
  meant was that we were all creations of God. Wirjo said that what was
  explained in the reading was uakit" and "dèwèké,” “I” and “he.” He said
  that when he looks at three people he sees three forms or shapes, three
  people different in body and outer aspect, but in the depth of their thinking and
  feeling they are the same. He said: “Their outer form I see is different, but
  their ‘insides,’ their selves, are all the same; they are one.” He said that the
  important thing to remember is that the true self was only one for all men
  and came from God; and Wasisto then said that individuation comes only
»334«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  from “opinion” and from the existence of the individual will, but the real
  self is connected with God.
    Often this thought is put in terms of the difference between proximate and
ultimate rasa, between the everyday feeling of self, of nationality, and the
underlying feeling of unity with all, as for example in this discussion of a
passage from Dudu Kowé, the Kawruh Bedja magazine:
  The guru makes a number of points. Everyone has a feeling (rasa) of his
  own native country, and this is deep in his heart. A good example of how
  deep this goes is the Jews. For centuries they wandered, exiles from their
  own country; but the rasa remained and then finally they got their country
  back. AH men are the same at base in ultimate rasa. It is only partial rasa
  which is different—as the handshaking and etiquette of the Javanese are
  different from those of the Dutch. Also, the rasa can be very wide or nar­
  row, depending on the individual. For example, there are people in Djokjakarta
   (where the magazine is published) who are upright and polite in the Djokjakarta
  style, but their rasa is only as wide as Djokjakarta. If they go off to Solo, they
  start chasing prostitutes. Only one man ever really got above local rasa entirely
  and felt at one with all humanity: Mahatma Gandhi. (More commonly, Muham­
  mad, Jesus, and Buddha, at least, are allowed within this select circle.) He had
  no native land. Most of us do not get that far, however, and so should just try to
  be tolerant.
    Usually this is summed up in the ethical imperative that one should
spread peace in the world from the center outwards, from the self in ever-
widening circles through family, neighborhood, village, country, and world,
as ripples in a pond spread circularly away from their point of origin. One
calms one’s heart, then orders one’s family, and so on. And the reverse is true
also: if one is upset or disturbed, one naturally upsets and disturbs others.
Thus refinement of personal emotion, the quest for personal enlightenment
and peace, is at the same time a social effort, for it eases the process of rukun,
cooperation among different individuals with, in part at least, different feel­
ings. A society of perfectly alus men would be a perfect society because it
would be a perfectly polite and perfectly altruistic society, everyone feeling as
one with everyone else and as sensitive to others’ feelings as to his own.
    In the absence of the second consideration—that resting on the actual
differences in alus-ness among individuals—this kind of utopia would seem
to imply a normative social theory stressing, as did primitive Christianity, the
equality of all men when seen sub specie aeternitatis; but in the presence of
the second consideration it leads rather to an organic view of “every man in
his proper place,” a clear statement of which has been cited at the beginning
of our discussion of the prijaji, the informant being the guru, more or less, of
Budi Setia. A similar statement is part of the involved Ilmu Sedjati creed.
  He (the guru of Ilmu Sedjati) said that there were five kinds of roles in
  the society: “chief,” which may be of a family only or of the whole state,
  such as President Sukarno; “soldier”; “priest”; “common people”; and
  “teacher.” There are proper feelings appropriate to each role, and people
  thus differ in their appropriateness to fill them. Patience and a broad view
  are held to be the proper characteristics of a chief. He said that a chief leads
Mysticism                                                                    »335«
  and must deal with many different kinds of people, and so must be patient.
  “He deals with people who are red, who are green, who are white; those
  who are good and those who are bad; and what he needs in order to get
  them to do what he wants them to do is patience.” The characteristic of
  the soldier is courage, and of the priest detachment. (These two roles seem
  a resultant of Hindu caste theory and have little importance in the system
  generally; and the latter has no obvious actual referent in the society,
  there being no priests.) The characteristic of the common people is ac-
  quiesence (trima). The whole duty of the people, he said, is to obey the
  government. Decisions are taken by people high up in the government who
  are clever and educated; and the duty of the people is merely to carry them
  out. Since the common people lack experience, they must always accept
  the orders given to them by the government. The government can never be
  wrong; and the people never make important decisions. (Individuals in the
  government may be wrong, but the government itself cannot be; and
  one may never go against it even though one may disapprove of specific people
  in it.) Even in a democracy, if the people want something they have to beg
  or request the government for it. If the government doesn’t accept their
  request, that’s all there is to it. The people must sit quietly and do what the
  government tells them. Lastly, uprightness is the ideal characteristic of the
  teacher. These five characteristics and the attendant roles are the basis
  of society, but there is another major mode of division according to the
  way people get their living: whether they are peasants, workers, or clerks. . . .
      This sort of theory is common to most of the sects. In one Setia meeting
a retired pawnshop clerk said that as he saw it there were three elements in
the effort to make society peaceful: stability in the civil bureaucracy, ad­
herence to one’s ascribed duties in life, and uncomplaining acceptance of
authority. In relation to the first he pointed out that Java no longer had a
king and that the proper line of authority now descended from the president
down through the resident, regent, village chief, and so on; and he said that
this must be kept stable at all costs. As for the second, he said that we all have
work we must do according to our station and must carry it out in order to
make society peaceful. The third merely indicates that we should trima—
receive orders and decisions from above without comment and without com­
plaint— kulina meneng, to customarily keep quiet.
      Admittedly, however, this pure and elitist view is somewhat ultra-montane
even for a prijaji nowadays; and there is usually rather more of an attempt to
fit old values to new situations, for example in trying to view the major political
parties in organicist terms as necessary parts in an integrated state, each
with its own functions.
    He (the guru of Ilmu Sedjati) said that some people support the Com­
   munist party, some the Nationalist, some the Socialist, and some Masjumi
    (the Islamic party), and each person says the other is no good. But the
    Communist party is good; it is the defender of the country, the fort or
    wall of the country. The Nationalist party is good; it is for nationalism and
   for humanitarianism. The Socialists are good; they are interested in bettering
    the economy, in industrialization. And Masjumi is good; it is interested in
    government and religion. . . . They must all work together, rukun; that
    is what is important.
»336«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A

                         8. Religious Relativism
this leads into the last basic proposition I have attributed to prijaji mysticism:
universal tolerance, a relativistic view of religious beliefs and practices.
Mystics always insist, sometimes quite passionately, on their freedom from
fanaticism. They argue that the ultimate rasa is not fanatic but calm, cool, and
peaceful in feeling tone, and that no fanatic can even understand their
“science.” All religions are good, but none is good for everyone; “many are
the roads.” Perhaps the most basic conflict between the sects and santri Islam
is the universalism of the latter, a view which goes down very poorly indeed
with both prijajis and abangans. (That a prijaji means santri when he says
“fanatic” is fairly clear from the answer one often gets when one asks a
prijaji if he does the prayers or fasts in the Fast. “No, of course not,” he
says. “I’m not a fanatic!”)
     Prijajis move easily among the different sects with more or less total
unconcern (which makes the effort after secrecy of a few of them—in Modjo-
kuto, Ilmu Sedjati and Kawruh Kasunjatan—rather a mockery). One of my
best informants on these matters, now a guru in Kawruh Bedja, was at one
time or another a member of every one of the sects in Modjokuto, “sampling”
them. He even spent a few months in a pondok to see what the santri “science”
was like. (He didn’t like it, he said; they were too “fanatic” and didn’t share
his relativist view.)
     All religions, the head of Budi Setia said, are the same in that they con­
centrate on the holy power. Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Mazdaism—
all have at least a grasp on the truth. Only materialism is wrong completely.
The head of Kawruh Kasunjatan said that his religion was an international
one and would admit Christians, Moslems, Chinese, and Europeans with­
out their giving up any of their beliefs. Ilmu Sedjati attempts to include four
religions—Christianity, Islam, Theosophy, and Intellectual Free-thinking—
within its system. Sumarah claims that any fanaticism among its members
disrupts the entire meditation meeting, and that fanatics are banned from
 joining.
     This kind of relativism is also based on the idea that at the most funda­
mental level of feeling everyone is the same.
  He (a high prijaji not a sect member) said that every nationality has its own
  feeling (rasa). There is, therefore, Javanese feeling. The trouble with
  NahdatuI Ulama, for instance, he said, is that since it does not want to
  translate the Arab-Islam feeling into Javanese feeling it doesn’t mean anything
  to the Javanese. He said all these feelings have the same end-point, the
  same meaning, and that if one is a really great man, like Jesus or Muhammad
  or someone, he can rise above them, but most of us have to follow our
  own feeling and realize that others have to follow theirs. He said in con­
  clusion that all this (that he had been telling me about a special kind of
  “Javanese science”) would be hard for me to understand because it was
  Javanese feeling, but that the feeling of all people is the same underneath. All
  come from a sperm; all given birth to by their mothers; taken care of by
Mysticism                                                                    »337«
  their parents; live through sorrow and happiness; and in the end die. So
  they are all the same. Only their surface feelings are different.
     This is not to say that the ideals projected are always, or even commonly,
reached. Perhaps Shaw’s comment that the only trouble with Christianity
is that it has never been tried is applicable to religion generally; for certainly
there is much rivalry and backbiting among the various sects and a universal
intolerance on their part for Islam, often on the grounds of its intolerance.
But it is nevertheless true that the syncretistic, tolerant, relativistic outlook
toward religious belief fits well with the whole tenor of prijaji mysticism.
  Mudjono (principal of the prijaji-run high school), it turns out, is a
  member of Kawruh Bedja. He said that quite a few people around Modjokuto
  are interested in this sect, but some of them don’t really follow out its
  spirit; they just read about it and then go out and play cards, or, at the
  other extreme, take it as something to force on other people. He said that
  such imposition isn’t right; that one is supposed to follow it oneself but
  should not try to force others to do so. For example, if he, Mudjono, wants
  to sleep on the floor (because Bedja denigrates material comfort, or at
  least attachment to material comfort), that is all right; but if he makes his
  wife do it when she doesn’t want to, that is wrong. (His wife said, laughing,
  that she just couldn’t understand the “science” or really “feel” it, and that
  maybe she was too young. He replied that maybe she was just slow to
  understand but would eventually. She said, “When I am angry. I am angry;
  but Mudjono isn’t, he is patient.”) He said that he himself may have no
  interest in tea cups (pointing to those out of which we were drinking) or
  fine furniture but must provide them for others who may not agree with
  his “science.” One must be patient and just slowly feel the “science.” He
  said that he was probably the youngest person in Modjokuto interested as
  most young men were not interested in it very much. (He was about thirty.)
  He said that the essence of the “science” was to adjust to others and not want
  too much, not to have too strong desires. If one wants something and can’t
  get it, one can just retreat without worrying about it; but if one’s desires
  are too strong and one is frustrated, then one will be upset. He meditates
  now and then if the mood strikes him, but not very often or regularly. He
  said that if one gets rid of attachment to things one can cooperate (rukun)
  with others. Thus no one will be disappointed (gela); and so a wider and
  wider circle—house, neighborhood, village, world—can be unified, can rukun.
    Prijaji mysticism can, therefore, be summed up in terms of a set of
fundamental ideas. Behind the kasar feelings of everyday life lies an alus
feeling which is at once the individual’s true self and the manifestation of
God within him. One can and should experience this ultimate feeling­
meaning both by means of asceticism and meditation and through study
and speculation; and such experience leads to personal power to accomplish
one’s ends, whatever they may be, in this world. People differ in their
ability to carry out such discipline and thus differ as to their proper social rights
and duties in a well ordered society. Despite this difference, and despite the
differences in mundane feeling among individuals and among groups, at
base people are identical one with the other. Therefore, by calming one’s
own emotions one is not only initiating a process which, depending upon the
»338«                                      T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
degree to which it is successful, will spread away from oneself through family,
village, and nation to the whole world but also striving after the feeling one
shares with everyone else. Finally, because of the ultimate identity and
proximate relativity of feeling, tolerance in religious matters is the ideal;
although the means differ, the end is always the same. This, in any case, is
the creed—its realization is another matter.
Chapter 21                                   The Mystical Sects




H a v in g d e s c r i b e d the general theme, I want now briefly to outline the par­
ticular variations upon it one finds in Modjokuto, for each of the five major
sects has its own special slant on mysticism and its own peculiar mode of
social organization, and each draws on slightly different types of people for
its membership.* Part of one general religious movement, and cognizant
of the fact that they are, they nevertheless adopt noticeably different posi­
tions within it.
    Budi Setia is heavily influenced by the international theosophy movement
of Annie Besant, a somewhat Westernized (in this case Dutchified) version
of Eastern mysticism, and is as a result, the kind of high-thinking religious dis­
cussion group of like-minded an'd like-class idealists that is not entirely un­
familiar in the West. Sumarah, on the other hand, is a sharply anti-intellectual
sect which decries almost any sort of “thinking” or speculation beyond the
minimally necessary and coniines itself almost entirely to “emotional unifi­
cation” and simple meditation, its meetings being little else but collective
meditation sessions. Nevertheless, this sect is the most formally organized
and the most tightly integrated on the regional as well as the local level.
Kawruh Bedja, also rather better organized than the others, is a very intellec-
tualistic, almost but not quite agnostic sect which emphasizes the phenomeno­
logical analysis of experience, somewhat at the expense of meditation, and
is very much concerned with erecting a social-ethical system on this specula­
tive base. Ilmu Sedjati takes as its main theme a cabalistic reinterpretation
of the five pillars of Islam as well as of various other threads from Javanese
tradition; words get double (secret) meanings, arcane theories from various
sources are joined together in an elaborate scheme which clarifies all for
those who know the key to it, special practices lead to mystical experience.
Lastly, Kawruh Kasunjatan emphasizes practice to the relative exclusion of
    * Besides being called ilmu djawi, “Javanese science,” these sects as a group are often
called kedjawèn, which, roughly, means “Javanese-ism.”
                                           339
»340«                                           T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
speculative theory much as Sumarah does except that its emphasis on detailed
method is much greater and so includes both various secret and semi-secret
means of attaining mystical experience and a somewhat animistic notion of
the content of that experience.



                                     Budi Setia
             was founded during the Dutch military occupation of Modjokuto
BUDi s e t i a
in 1949, in the midst of the Revolution, under the leadership of a half-
dozen federalist civil servants,'“ including the district officer of the time, a
pensioned mantri polisi (police chief),*'“ the federalist school inspector, who
before the war had been the principal of the prijaji-run high school, the
federalist village chief for Modjokuto (now the guru of Kawruh Kasunjatan),
and an irrigation draftsman, who still heads the organization today. The
Dutch, of course, forbade all organizations on the part of the natives, but
in this case it so happened that the Dutch chief of police in charge of domestic
order was himself a theosophy enthusiast, and so when he met the pensioned
Javanese police chief, who had been a theosophist for years, he suggested
that a small group be formed to meet periodically and meditate for peace,
under his, the Dutch police chief’s general direction. Thus, during the whole
occupation period this small band of federalist officials gathered once a week
with the Dutch police chief at the police station to meditate and discuss general
religious matters, out of which grew the present Budi Setia organization.
Evidently the Javanese participants did not feel that they were giving aid
and comfort to the enemy for, as the present leader argued, “we didn’t just
meditate for the Dutch to win, but for peace generally.”
     Whatever the merits of this argument, the feeling against the federalists,
those Javanese who cooperated with the Dutch in the Revolution, has tended
to subside in Modjokuto, in line with the general remarkable inability of
Javanese to bear grudges over any length of time. (Liwat, wis liwat, they
say—“What’s past is past,” a phrase which excuses not only collaborators
with the Dutch but also forced-labor gatherers for the Japanese and pre-war
recruiters for the Dutch plantations in Sumatra.) Once in a while one hears
a negative comment from some of the old republicans about the collaborators,
but there remains only a small amount of tension between the groups as
groups; and all the federalists seem, if anything, to have raised their civil-
service status since before the war, due to the severe shortage of trained
personnel to man the bureaucracy. Today Budi Setia seems to bear no scars
of its past; and, although it still attracts the same sort of people—clerks,
pensioned civil servants, teachers, not all of them are former federalists,
and one or two in Modjokuto were active republicans.
    * I.e., civil servants collaborating with the Dutch in the administration of the areas
the returned colonialist government had occupied.
    ** A mantri polisi, however, is not properly speaking a police officer, but rather is
chief executive assistant to the Assistant District Officer.
The Mystical Sects                                                          »341«
    In Modjokuto there were about twenty-five or thirty members of Budi
Setia, all of them prijajis, for this is the “purest” of all the sects as to status.
The members ranged in age from twenty-five to seventy or so, most of them
being around fifty, I imagine, although one of the most active members, a
Taman Siswa teacher, was only twenty-five. Only about a dozen or so of the
members were regular in attendance, the others appearing at meetings only
now and then. Of the members who came frequently, all were either cleric
in the bureaucracy (mainly in the government pawnshop and the irrigation
office), or teachers, mainly in Taman Siswa, but some were from the public
schools. The group met each Thursday evening at the home of one of the
members, each member taking a turn as host, and, although there was a
loose formal organization with a chairman, secretary, and treasurer, the
meetings were conducted in a quite casual manner. Each meeting was opened
by the chairman, who usually made a short speech stating that the aim of
Budi Setia is only peace in the heart and in die world generally. This was
followed by a report on the week’s national and international news by one
of the members, after which there was much wringing of the hands over it.
  Wirjo called on Wasisto for the news, and Wasisto said: “The news this
  week is both good and bad. As for the good: First, security has improved
  somewhat in West Java (where there was in progress a right-wing Moslem
  rebellion against the government) due to the actions of the new cabinet; many
  terrorist bands arrested and guns captured. Second, the government has
  nationalized the electric works in Ambon. Third, the Foreign Minister
  of Japan is coming here to discuss war reparations. As for the bad: First,
  West New Guinea has still not been returned to Indonesia, and the Dutch
  are getting more obstinate. Second, the Achehnese rebellion (also a right-
  wing Moslem rebellion, subsequently quelled, but then at its height). Com­
  munications are ruined, trains derailed, telephone lines cut.” He reported
  that some documents had been found linking the rebellion to the West Java
  one, and that the assistant prime minister had gone there to look in on the
  situation personally. “Third,” he said, “the political struggle grows more and
  more intense. The right wing, especially Masjumi, the biggest party of all,
  wants only for the government to fall. But, let us hope, it won’t succeed. We
  should thank God that our country is running smoothly. We don’t want that
  old rasa that wasn’t comfortable (i.e., the terror of the Revolution) to
  return.” Wirjo added to Wasisto’s remarks, saying with deep seriousness that,
  with all the strikes, stealing, and revolts, things looked very bad, awful
  in fact, but seen from the point of view of the inner life, it wasn’t
  anything.

    Sometimes before the report but usually after it came the meditation peri­
od. Everyone turned his chair to the East (because that is where the sun comes
up), the lights were turned off and curtains drawn, and each person drew
into himself for about a half-hour, emptying his mind, regulating his breath,
and striving after at least a partial mystical experience. Next came a kursus,
a ‘“course,” given usually by Wirjo, more or less the guru of the group,
but sometimes by another of the members. This was a short lecture on some
subject or other by the man giving the course, followed by an extended
»342«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
discussion of it and related topics by all the members, male and female,
present. Among the wide range of subjects discussed at the ten meetings I
attended were: the difference between the true self and the false self; the
problem of reincarnation and whether it is possible actually to regress in the
ladder of existence or is non-advancement the worst that can befall you; the
nature and source of evil and the necessity for and the form of divine retri­
bution; the nature, cause, and meaning of dreams; meditation and tapa,
their aims and methods; the relationship between outer behavior and inner
feeling; individual religious effort and its relation to social action; experiential
differences between such aspects of the inner life as the imagination, the
senses, the soul, the self, the will, the conscience; the inevitable connection
between happiness and unhappiness; proofs of God’s existence and His
attributes, again in phenomenological rather than logical or simple dogmatic
form; the unity of all people at base and the ethical implications of this; the
differences between emotional and intellectual insight; the comparative values
of study and meditation in religion; the relativity of all religions. All this
discussion, which often is more a series of alternating speeches delivered to
the ceiling or the floor or out the window than a true discussion, goes on in
very formal high Javanese, the only proper language for such concerns.
     After the discussion was completed there was usually, if it was not too
late, a watjan, a reading, usually by Wirjo from either Brahma Widjaja, a
mystical magazine published in Djokjakarta, or from a commentary on the
Baghavad Gita, or, sometimes, from the theosophy magazine. After this,
 and perhaps some discussion on it, the meeting was closed.
     The relation of theosophy to Budi Setia is somewhat anomalous. There
 are theosophy “lodges” (loges), as they call their chapters, all over Java,
 the nearest to Modjokuto being in Kediri, the regency capital some fifteen
 miles away. Although when Budi Setia was originally founded four or five
 people were theosophists, of the Modjokuto group only Pak Wirjo and his
 wife were officially members of the international organization. During the
 time I attended the meetings Budi Setia became more and more a typical
 theosophy club, with Wirjo giving lectures on the “science,” complete with
 elaborate charts—in Dutch—explaining the doctrines; and he had finally
 gotten around to proposing that Budi Setia actually become a member of the
 wider organization, a theosophy loge, assuring the members that this would
 necessitate no alteration of their beliefs. This was under consideration when
 I left. It looked as though they might join, even though they seemed to dis­
 agree with some details of theosophy’s creed, mainly those denying the
 possibility of regression in reincarnation (theosophy evidently holding to
 inevitable progress through higher incarnations, or at worst no change), the
 absolute goodness of the power got from meditation which could not be used
 for evil, and the notion that there must inevitably be retribution for evil—in
 other words, with the highly optimistic view of the problem of evil the Indian-
 English creed takes. Theosophy also has other counts against it in its “West­
 ern” air, its connection with the Dutch, some of whom evidently were quite
 active in the movement, and its extreme intellectualisai.
The Mystical Sects                                                              »343«

                                     Sumarah
SUMARAH, although next to Budi Setia the most prz/a/z-dominated group, is
sharply different in character from Budi Setia, which it regards as much too
theoretical.* In the first place, the Sumarah meetings consist almost entirely of
meditation. They usually begin with a short period of absolute quiet. After a
rest, there is a somewhat longer similar period; and finally there is a very
long meditation, often over an hour in length and sometimes performed
while standing. Supposedly when one succeeds in one’s meditation one hears
God chanting, in Javanese tembang style, the various commands and pro­
hibitions that make up the Holy Book of the sect. In case there are some
who do not achieve this, the guru (a pawnshop employee) chants the book
himself as it was copied down from dictation by the founder and head guru
of Sumarah. It is in low Javanese, and the more advanced members of the
audience join in at the end of each sentence, so that the effect is something
like that of a Javanese version of an Islamic chant. Except for a twenty-
minute intermission when the guru and his assistants leave to “exercise”
the youthful members in meditation in another room, that constitutes the
entire meeting, there being no reports or discussion at Sumarah gatherings.
     Sumarah is the most highly organized of the sects. Not only does it
have four ranks—youth, regular members, advanced members, and gurus,
chosen through meditation by the central governing board in Djokjakarta—
but it has a written constitution, interchapter meetings where advanced stu­
dents of Sumarah groups from different towns gather and meditate together,
various formal divisions at both the local and national level, biannual nation­
wide congresses of the local gurus, and such declared (but as yet unrealized)
 intentions as erecting schools and helping the poor. The constitution, in
 addition to setting down rules and regulations for membership, outlining
 the formal organization of the whole sect into divisions, chapters, and sub-
 chapters (branches), and announcing the general aim of the “congregation”
 to be peace in the outside (lair) and inside (batin), also sets forth nine
 vows which summarize the group’s creed: **
  (1) The members of Sumarah congregation are convinced of the existence
  of God who has created heaven and earth and all in it, and they acknowledge
  the prophets and the Holy Books.
   (2) They vow to think of God and not to idolize themselves (the “I”—
  the lower self) and they seek truth and God and self-surrender.
   (3) They vow to try to achieve bodily health, inner peace, and a pure soul
   and to ennoble their character, words, and deeds.
    * In Modjokuto the members of Sumarah, who numbered about forty, were mostly
clerks and teachers, although there were a few tradesmen and one crippled peasant, the
latter the prized specimen of the group’s curing power. Like Budi Setia, the group met
weekly, circulating among different members’ houses.
    ** As the original text was given in Javanese, Indonesian, and English, this is not a
translation.
»344«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  (4) They vow to promote universal brotherhood founded on deep love.

  (5) They vow to widen life’s duties as citizens leading to greatness and
  nobility and to promote world peace and order.

  (6) They vow to do right, to submit to the laws of the country, and to
  respect others, not to defame others’ creeds and to try with love to make
  Sumarah clear to all, and to make clear that all religions should be united
  in their aspirations.

  (7) They vow to refrain from evil, hurting, hating, sinning, and all
  speech and action is to be unpretentious and true, and performed patiently,
  and accurately, without haste and without strain.

  (8) They vow to widen their knowledge of wordly affairs as well as the
  inner side of things.

  (9) They vow not to be fanatic but to rely on truth.
    Thus, in intention at least, Sumarah is something more than merely an
informal meditating society; it has aspirations to be a kind of “Javanese­
science” Muhammadijah—a socio-religious society based on mysticism rather
than Islam. However, its formal elaboration was far greater than its actual
organizational complexity and it was still, in reality, little more than an
informal meditating society when I saw it in operation.*



                                Kawruh Bedja
KAWRUH b e d j a has similar organizational aspirations to those of Sumarah,
but it is more loosely organized on the local level. (It held a nationwide
congress in Surabaja, which the guru and a few members of the Modjokuto
branch attended, during my stay.) In Modjokuto, at least, Kawruh Bedja,
which is largely concerned with speculation on the metaphysical bases of
perceived feelings and events, was mainly held together by its publications,
particularly its monthly magazine Dudu Kowé, published in Djokjakarta. A
man can become a Kawruh Bedja guru mainly by studying the magazine
and various other publications the group disseminates. There is a special set
of books one should study, a self-study course lasting five months—but one
may of course discuss the content with others studying it, for there is nothing
secret about it.
    The main guru of the “science” in Modjokuto was a former clerk in
both the civil bureaucracy and in Dutch sugar factories, and he had around
him a small group of older prijajis, about a half-dozen or so. He lived just
outside of town in a village and held meetings every full moon (so that
people could see their way about) to which came not only his close associates
    * Sumarah took its present form in 1950, and had been going in Modjokuto for only
a short time when I was there.
The Mystical Sects                                                         »345«
but also usually about thirty village people who lived near him and sometimes
other townsmen. At such meetings he and his “students” discussed various
topics and read articles from Dudu Kowé. In general his meetings were much
like a Budi Setia meeting except that there was no meditation.
    Kawruh Bedja members claim that they deal with nothing which is not
directly experienceable and that they try to build up their system entirely on
the basis of perceivable facts. Somewhat like Descartes, they try to put
aside all inherited belief and start from “clearly perceived ideas”—the notion
of the self, the continual alternation of happiness and unhappiness, the sex
and hunger drives. Unlike him, they do not work back to discover what
the metaphysical base for those ideas might be, but rather try to build an
ethical system directly atop them, which ethic turns out, not so surprisingly,
to be the usual prijaji one emphasizing rank, politesse, concealment, and
muting of feeling. The result is a system which is almost agnostic about ulti­
mate metaphysical issues and is a kind of universal speculative psychology.
“It is not that we do not believe in God or in spirits,” the guru said. “It is just
that we want to get as far as we can without them, and then introduce them
at the end rather than the beginning—because that way is less confusing.”
    I have already presented Kawruh Bedja’s phenomenological analysis of
the soul and the true self. As a further example of the way philosophers of
this school think I quote here the Modjokuto guru on how this is connected
with behavior in general:
  Now, to return to the point, the soul is an object which can be ruined.
  It begins with birth and ends with death, when individual experience
  ceases. The soul of man, put another way, is a result of the “notation”
  of the individual in everyday action, the funded experience of the individual.
  A man not only knows who he is. but also when and where he was bom and
  what he has done. This is all noted down. You remember, for example, when
  you played marbles as a child. Well, that is part of your soul; all experience
  becomes notation, and this is the soul. Now from this, two propositions
  follow: if the soul and the true self are dissolved in one another, as sugar
  dissolves in coffee, then the soul will be enlightened and directed by the
  true self, and the individual will act in an orderly and directed fashion.
  But if the soul and the true self are not merged, the individual will be
  directionless, unenlightened, and disturbed. The first man will be peaceful,
  the second will be upset inside. . . .




                                 Ilmu Sedjati
ILM U s e d j a t i is loosely organized in roughly the same fashion as Kawruh
Bedja, except that its content is even more systematically formulated. Each
guru (who must obtain a certificate from the head guru, usually upon the
recommendation of his own local guru) must memorize a set eighteen-
point agenda which contains the whole of what he is supposed to teach. This
“science” is so arranged as to be teachable in a single session. Thus at each
»346«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
Ilmu Sedjati meeting the eighteen points are all reviewed, almost in chant
fashion, by the guru, the murids listening quietly, and, theoretically, the
whole “science” can be learned in one evening. In actual fact, however, it
is so complicated and obscure that it requires many times of hearing it over,
memorizing it, and discussing it with the guru before one can really com­
prehend it well enough to get anything useful out of it, much less to teach it.
    The Ilmu Sedjati system, which is supposedly secret but readily enough
revealed by many people, is summarized below in my own version of the
eighteen points:

  (1) The cabalistic reinterpretation of the Confession of Faith to read
  “I believe God is in myself and my breath is His representative.” This is
  mainly done by giving words secondary meanings on a generally free-
  association basis: e.g., rasul, Prophet, is said to “really” mean rasa, “feeling.”

  (2) The reinterpretation of the other pillars: e.g., the fast means not only
  limiting one’s food and drink but also limiting one’s expression of anger and
  one’s self-seeking; the zakat means giving good advice to others as well as
  money and food; the pilgrimage is into the self.

  (3) A discussion of the “correct” or “polite” behavior toward five types
  of people: parents, parents-in-law, grandparents, kings, teachers (i.e., to
  superiors).

  (4) How to cultivate such desirable emotional states as patience, ac­
  ceptance, and detachment.

  (5) How to have fellow-feeling for others.

  (6) How to keep oneself from such “bad” behaviors as gambling, stealing,
  drinking, and frequenting prostitutes.

  (7) How to avoid such “bad” feelings as envy, selfishness, and stubbornness.

  (8) How to avoid heretical practices such as worshipping wood and stones
  and idolatry.

  (9) Tapa: how to regulate the outer life and the inner life. For the outer life
  the points covered are how to be ascetic in such things as sleep, sex, drinking,
  and eating; for the inner life there are various techniques of calming the
  emotions. (It is here evidently, that the breath-control exercises are relevant.)

  (10) Various illnesses and their causes: such as sickness in the body, las­
  situde, upsetness in the heart.

  (11) How to maintain a fixed will, not give up hope.

  (12) Parts of the body and parts of the soul (five of each).

  (13-18) Various proverbs and bits of moral advice: such as, do not dis­
  criminate against other nationalities or religions.
The Mystical Sects                                                          »347«
    As most of this is presented in involved, elliptical language, a good deal
of it depending on a play on words and on the employment of obscure,
archaic “Old Javanese” terms with which most people are not familiar, it
comes out more as a kind of chant than anything else.5,5 The system may be
taught any time someone requests it, always as a complete unit; and there
were no regular meeting times for the sect in Modjokuto, but merely sessions
every now and then (usually on Saturday evening) and a good deal of in­
formal discussion of it. The “science” may be taught individually or to a
group. Although there is no charge except Rp 2.50 to pay for the printed
“reminder chart” and the diagram, one is expected to give the guru some
sort of a gift. In terms of sheer numbers the adherents of Ilmu Sedjati are
perhaps the largest of any Modjokuto sect,** but the sect is so informally
organized that there is less feeling of solidarity among the different members
than in the other groups.




                           Kawruh Kasunjatan

IN Kawruh Kasunjatan, speculation is again rather minimized and the em­
phasis is upon practice, upon methods of concentration. The gum of the
sect was the former federalist village chief for Modjokuto, and actually
more of an abangan than a prijaji. One can trace a descending order of
status through Budi Setia, Sumarah and Kawruh Bedja, the mainly prijaji
groups, to Ilmu Sedjati and Kawruh Kasunjatan, which are more abangan.
It would even be possible to include Permai, the political-religious cult, which
is almost wholly abangan, here also as the terminal point of the continuum,
or to include Karwuh Kasunjatan under the abangan section as a non-politi-
cized comparison to Permai. The terms abangan, prijaji, and santri indicate
dimensions of cultural variation, not absolute categories; and, if one insisted
on pure types, one would have little to discuss but slametans, Muhammadijah,
and Budi Setia. The mixed cases, the great majority, one must discuss in the
place which seems strategic for displaying the exact composition of their
mixture.
    Kawruh Kasunjatan was founded in 1925 by a Surakata aristocrat, Radèn
Mas Suwana (who died in 1930), and the guru of the Modjokuto movement
claimed to have studied with the leader-founder personally and to have set
up the first chapter of the group in Modjokuto in 1927, which made it by
far the oldest of the groups in town.
    The sect met once every thirty-five days (on Minggu Legi) at the home
of the guru in Modjokuto, and a meeting lasted the entire night. Since from
eight until midnight the meeting was open to anyone, I witnessed that part.
    * There is an extremely complicated diagram which goes with it and each pupil is
given an outline “reminder” or “memory chart,” more or less like my listing above.
    ** One thousand three hundred and sixty-three people had taken the course from
the head guru in Modjokuto according to his own records.
»348«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
From midnight until dawn it was secret. Most of those who came to the
meetings were from outside of Modjokuto town, commonly from villages,
but a few prijajis, local and from other towns, are also members. People
came from as far as fifty or sixty miles away, on foot or riding bicycles, to
attend; and as many as two or three hundred usually crowded into the guru's
house to participate in the post-midnight mass meditation.
    The pre-midnight period of Kawruh Kasunjatan meetings is reserved to
the initiation of new members. The guru sits in front of his sentong tengah—
the ceremonial center bedroom, and reads the creed of the organization in
a chanting style to the new members, who, by and large, do not understand
much of it as most of it is in elaborate literary Javanese containing many
obsolete words. In any case, it is mostly made up of platitudes and general
exhortations to plain living and high thinking.
    The new members are responsible for feeding the entire company a rice-
meal around midnight and for giving some sort of a gift to the guru. For
most new members the food and gift mean a cost of twenty-five to fifty
rupiahs. After the guru has chanted the book to them, initiates stare for some
time at an oil lamp, supposedly without blinking; and then they see either
the sun, the stars, or, more rarely but more important, their “brothers” of
the umbilical cord and afterbirth. The process of meeting one’s spirit brothers
is called a “marriage.” Supposedly the techniques of breath regulation, con­
centration of the inner life, and perception of the ultimate rawt-sounds in one’s
inhaling-exhaling (hu Allah) make it possible for one to call up these “alus
brothers” to aid one in such activities as curing, in business, and love-affairs.
    Since there are various methods employed for training the members in
meditation—staring at points, different rhythms of breath regulation, and so on,
which the members call self-hypnosis, Kawruh Kasunjatan is minimally or­
ganized.* It amounts to a kind of specialized training in one set of mystic
practices which both the guru and the members agree is but one way to
achieve gnosis and useful only for those whom they “fit”—whether they
are Javanese, Chinese, or European; Christian, Moslem, or abangan. Others
are advised to try other methods.
    There is little inter-chapter organization. Once a year, on the Javanese
New Year, the first of Sura, the Modjokuto guru takes about thirty of his
followers to Lumadjang, a town in southeastern Java, to meditate all night
on the grave of the founder of the sect. Since the other gurus of Kawruh
Kasunjatan in the East Java area also do this, there is a kind of informal
convention of the more active members of the “science.” But there is no
formal meeting, just a night-long meditation. Gurus are self-appointed or
appointed by recognized gurus, such as the Modjokuto one, who was quite
famous throughout the area and who said that he intended to appoint his
son a guru in the science to succeed him.
    * It gets somewhat more organization from the fact that one cannot perform the
techniques anywhere but in the guru’s house, of at least under the guru's direction in
certain special places—e.g., the grave of the founder. One cannot perform them alone
and at home.
The Mystical Sects                                                          »3 4 9 «


          The Social Implications of the Mystical Sects

the   unorganized sects—“wild” sects, as the Dutch called them—such as
Ilmu Sedjati and Kawruh Kasunjatan are not new in Java, but the effort to
organize—to “tame”—them is.
    Ilmu Sedjati and Kawruh Kasunjatan represent the “old” form of organiza­
tion of “science” movements. (Both are pre-war in origin and existed in
Modjokuto before the war.) They are loose, largely charismatic groups bound
only by ties between a teacher and his followers. In the “new” sects, Sumarah,
Kawruh Bedja, and, to a lesser, extent, Budi Setia, all of which have
appeared, in their present form at least, only since the war, there seems to
be a tendency for the sects to take a more specific, almost denominational form.
Over against the familialistic-geographical context of abangan religion and the
congregational organization of the santris, a still only feebly organized group
of mystic sects, independent from one another but loosely tied to similar ones
in other towns, seems to be gaining strength. Whether these will crystallize
into a well-defined religious movement or remain in their present state of
moderate anarchy is difficult to say. Several such groups in Java are already
demanding that the Ministry of Religion recognize them as “official” religions,
coequal with Islam and Christianity; and we have seen how Sumarah, for one,
has tried to formalize the guru-murid relation into a more stable over-all
structure.
    Against the inherent anti-institutional and individualistic nature of mysti­
cism as a religious form are balanced the pressures of party politics, the in­
creased means of communication, and the felt need for more social applica­
tion of religious beliefs.
  After the meditation, Wirjo (the leader of Budi Setia) said that there were
  some things he had been thinking about which he wanted to present to the
  group. He said that, with the upset in West Java and now in Acheh, Budi
  Setia members must think about these things in the depths of their inner life
  in order to understand fully that such rebellions were evil. They were the
  result, he said, of egoism, of making the self the important thing, of paying
   attention to oneself and not to the general welfare. The problem that had
  been bothering him, he said, was, how could Budi Setia help make its views
  known to the masses and not just to its own adherents so this egoism could
  be opposed. “Every Thursday evening we come together here to meditate,”
  he said, “but we must all have a practical program. We need a plan whereby
  our ideas can spread to,the egoists who need them most, so that the bad social
  situation can be improved. What I want to ask, then, is, how can Budi Setia
  really have an effect on other people’s beliefs?” Sudjoko said that the problem
  seemed to be the problem of belief and politics, of spiritual aims and political
  aims, for Budi Setia. He said that it seemed to him that we must realize our
  values in our own lives first. He said that the rebellious bands were led
  by one or two leaders who had egoistic hearts. “Everybody has a leader,”
  he said. “When the leader is egoist, the society is egoist. If the leaders are
  not egoist, the society will be truly social. What we need is a social (He
  pointed out that he didn’t mean ‘socialist’) society—one in which we have so­
»350«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  cial, non-egoistic leaders. Thus what is important is that we purify ourselves,
  fellow prijajis, and then apply ourselves to our several tasks: Pak Wirjo in the
  irrigation office, Pak Tjipto in the pawnshop, myself teaching in the Taman
  Siswa school.” He then asked Wirjo what he had in mind in the way of a plan
  and asked him for an example of practical action. Wirjo said that he had no
  example or way to offer. (About a month later, however, he offered his
  proposal that Budi Setia become part of the national theosophy association.)
  He just had thought, he repeated, that the cause of all the social unrest
  in Indonesia was due to egoism, and he thought that the members ought
  to think about this seriously: how to realize their ideas, so that peace would
  be rapidly achieved.
    Perhaps one of the sharpest stimulations to organization on the prijaji
side is the progress toward organization already made by the santris. The
santris threaten the prijajis* traditional domination—as do groups, such as
Permai, representing the politicized proletariat—in politics; and it begins
to dawn on even the most individualistic of prijajis that the only effective reply
to mass organization, so far as the struggle for power goes at any rate, is
mass organization on their part.
  When I went over to Harijo’s to say goodbye to Sulastri (an in-law of
  theirs, a very highly-educated girl from Djokjakarta who happened to be
  visiting Modjokuto for a few days), she asked me if I was interested in
  religion, and I said yes. She said that the Harijos were involved in Sumarah,
  and that they were trying to formalize it, write it down in books, in order
  to turn it into a regular religion. . . . Sulastri said that for them the sect was
  a stronghold against Masjumi (i.e., the santris); that they were more or less
  non-political, but the belief had the effect and the purpose of balancing off
  the santri parties politically; and that they were Moslems all right but opposed
  to the Masjumi way of life. She emphasized that the religious organization
  on the non-santri side makes for a balance of political power against the
  strong Moslems.
    The relationship between religion and politics is not, however, always
so indirect, for Kawruh Bedja is loosely joined with the party Persatuan
Indonesia Raja to form the kind of political-religious party for prijajis and
for others willing to follow their lead which Permai represents for the more
radical abangans. Persatuan Indonesia Raja, or PIR, whose slogan (in Eng­
lish) is “The right man in the right place,” and whose major aim is usually
stated to be to “organize the society and government in a systematic manner,”
has had its ideology well summarized by George McT. Kahin:
  The PIR is to be a mass-backed party without the religious orientation of
  Masjumi and without being based on the Western political concepts of the
  PNI (the nationalist, intelligentsia-dominated party). It is to be based
  upon traditional Indonesian political and social-economic concepts partially
  modified and adapted to those of the West. The present is seen as a tran­
  sitional period between the old authoritarian society and the more Western-
  oriented Indonesian society that is yet to come. The ballot cannot alone serve
  to insure that the interests of the common people will be looked after. Not
  only will many of the common people not vote, but when they do they may
  well vote in a way that does not serve their interests. They are not in­
The Mystical Sects                                                        »351«
  dividualistic enough to look after their own interest directly and are ac­
  customed to and expect authority from above.
      The great danger is that the peasant vote will go to irresponsible dem­
  agogues who do not understand the people and are not in a position to
  represent their interests. The people need and expect guidance from above;
  this has been ingrained in them for centuries. The people themselves are not
  accustomed to pushing their own interests in a politically articulate manner
  and cannot overnight be expected to become politically responsible in­
  dividualists of the character of people living in the Western democracies.
      Some means must be found for giving real representation to the agrarian
  population. Such representation was given them in the past by the civil
  servants because of the fact that they went out to and among the people
  and learned what their interests and desires were. Somehow this virtue must
  be incorporated into the structures of Indonesian government. The leaders
  of the government must be able to know the interests of the people and must
  to a very large extent depend upon themselves, rather than upon the people,
  to ascertain what their interests are. The character of the Indonesian govern­
  ment that is to be developed must allow for “fatherly authority” from above
  to look after the needs of the peasantry.*
    In Modjokuto, Kawruh Bedja and PIR are firmly joined, and the guru
of Kawruh Bedja is a fairly active PIR political leader. The party, however,
is small, and most members of it seem also to be followers of Kawruh
Bedja; and for many people, including the guru, the distinction between the
two is not very clear.
  He said that he belonged to PIR, although most people seemed to belong
  to Masjumi. He said that PIR was more concerned with “soul science” than
  with politics; it believed that what was important was the changes which
  went on within people; and that if everyone was made “good” inside first the
  country would be good too. PIR wanted to erase the strong feeling of emnity
  between parties so that everyone would feel “good” towards everyone else
  and the political problem would be solved. There was too much hate and
  mutual recrimination between the parties now.
    The political leadership of the party, headed in Modjokuto by a young
clerk in the government office regulating the market, however, had more di­
rectly political interests, with the result that, much like a Permai meeting,
Kawruh Bedja meetings were a combination of “science” and politics:
  When Merto (the Kawruh Bedja guru) held a meeting of PIR at his house, I
  went. It was an attempt to combine PIR politics with Kawruh Bedja, and to
  found a branch of the party in the village. There were about twenty people
  altogether, most of them from the village, plus the few prijaji party leaders
  from town. Narijo (the local head of PIR) started off by announcing the
  purposes of PIR. Among the points he made in addition to general remarks
  about democracy were the following: before the war only sons of prijajis
  went to school, but now sons of peasants can go too, and this is a sign of
  democratic progress here; some people want to make a state here just for
  their own group and say that everyone else is an infidel (referring to santri
  efforts to set up an “Islamic State”), but PIR is for nationalism and doesn’t
   * Nationalism and Revolution in Indonesia (Ithaca, 1952), p. 325.
»352«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  approve of that; PIR thinks that it doesn’t matter if one is a Chinese,
  European, Christian, or santri, or has no religion at all; as long as one
  is a citizen he has equal rights. One unnamed group wants to make a special
  religious state, but PIR is against this. PIR is for social justice, but, he
  hastened to add, he didn’t mean that he thought people’s land ought to
  be split up or people’s houses divided around; not that kind of social justice.
  He also said that PIR was for having clever men do the high jobs. It wouldn’t
  be fitting for Pak Samidjan (a village man present) to become a candidate
  for district officer. For village chief, yes; but not for district officer. That
  would be out of place. (People laughed, agreeing.) High government posts
  should go to the clever. . . . When he had finished, Merto took charge,
  and the rest of the meeting was on Kawruh Bedja. . . .
     Even the intelligentsia party, Partai Nasionalis Indonesia, (PNI), al­
though not directly tied to “science” groups, has developed a kind of mystique
based on President Sukarno’s “Five Points,” Panijasila, which enters some way
or another into the doctrines of all the groups; and many sect members—
especially in Budi Setia—belong to PNI. Whether or not this incipient re­
ligious movement will further solidify is nearly impossible to tell. It depends
on what role the remains of the pre-war civil-service class come to play in the
development of an independent Indonesia, whether their descendants will
follow their values, whether they can recruit younger men to their ideology,
and so on. One suspects that, as in so much of prijaji life, and especially in
the mystic doctrines just reviewed, the characteristic theme of Pantjasila is
one of an attempt to avoid the impotence of an essentially passive attitude
toward life, of deeply engrained unwillingness to project themselves into kasar
actualities of everyday life and the struggle for political power:
  He (the principle of the prijaji school, who although he is a Kawruh Bedja
  follower, belongs to PNI, mainly because his brother-in-law heads PNI in
  Modjokuto) talked some about the failure of prijajis to participate in the
  modern nationalist movement. He said that there was a general retreat of
  “those who know” because prijajis were, first, afraid of the sentiment
  directed against one when one tried to do anything these days in the way of
  leadership, and, second, felt that the big leaders were often men of less
  learning and status than they and so did not want to associate with them,
  the result being that they withdrew and did not participate at all. . . .
  Mudjono expressed strong disapproval of all this. He said that Wito (the PNI
  head) was different in this respect anyway; he actively participated. He said
  that there were many prijajis along Pohredjo row (the heavily prijaji
  section of town) who were not brave enough to get out into the new society,
  who were withdrawn.
    If the prijajis overcome their reticence, as some show signs of doing, and
engage themselves directly in the process of social reorganization now taking
place in Indonesia, the sects, more highly developed and organized, may,
perhaps, play something of a role in sustaining their political courage.
    CONCLUSION:
       CONFLICT
AND INTEGRATION
                                                                               I




Chapter 22                    Conflict and Integration




                 Religion and Society in Modjokuto
O n t h e b a s is of a presentation of the content of the three religious variants
in Modjokuto alone, one might easily come to the conclusion that abangan,
santri, and prijaji are encapsulated “pure types,” and that Modjokuto com­
munity life consists of three sub-communities whose main relationships with
one another are geographical and perhaps economic— a “plural society” within
a plural society, so to speak. Such a notion would be totally incorrect; for the
three groups are all enclosed in the same social structure, share many common
values, and are, in any case, not nearly so definable as social entities as a
simple descriptive discussion of their religious practices would indicate. There­
fore, I wish to close this report on Modjokuto religion with a brief discussion
of the interrelationships among the three world views I have set forth within
the Modjokuto social system. Because, contrary to some theorists, religion
does not play only an integrative, socially harmonizing role in society but
also a divisive one, thus reflecting the balance between integrative and dis­
integrative forces which exist in any social system, I shall discuss both the
conflicts between the three religious types and the manner in which these
conflicts are minimized and, in fact, turned to positive social uses.
    To sum up in advance the points I wish to make, three propositions may be
set forth as broadly describing the situation as one finds it in Modjokuto:
    1. There is a great deal of antagonism between the adherents of the
various religious orientations; and this antagonism is probably increasing.
      2. Despite their differences and antagonisms, all, or nearly all, Javanese
 share many common values which tend to counteract the divisive effects
  of variant interpretations of these values. In addition, there are also various
  social mechanism which tend to. prevent value conflict from having disruptive
. effects.
                                        355
»356«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
    3.     In such terms one may point out several factors tending to exacerbate
conflict among the three groups and several tending to moderate it. Among
those exacerbating it might be included:
     (a) Intrinsic ideological conflicts resting on deep-felt dislike for the
     values of other groups.
     (b) The changing system of social stratification and increased status
     mobility which tends to enforce contact between individuals and groups
     formerly more or less socially segregated.
     (c) The sharply increased struggle for political power to fill the vacuum
     left by the departure of the Colonial Government, which tends to embue
     religious differences with political significance.
     (d) The need for scapegoats upon whom to focus tensions generated by
     a rapidly changing social system.
    Those moderating the conflict include:
     (a) The sense of a common culture, including the increasing importance
     of nationalism, which emphasizes what all Javanese (or Indonesians)
     have in common rather than their differences.
     (b) The fact that religious patterns do not become embodied in social
     forms directly, purely and simply, but in many devious ways, so that
     religious commitments and other commitments— to class, neighborhood,
     etc.—tend to balance off, and various “mixed type” individuals and
     groups arise which can play an important meditating role.
     (c) A general tolerance based on a “contextual relativism” which sees
     certain values as appropriate to context and so minimizes “missioniza-
     tion.”
     (d) The steady growth of social mechanisms for a pluralistic, non-
     syncretic form of social integration within which people of radically
     differing social outlook and basic values can, nevertheless, get along
     well enough with one another to keep society functioning.



                      Religion and Social Conflict

a n t a g o n is m among the several religious groups is easily enough documented.
The strain is clearly greatest between santris and the other two groups, but
significant tension between prijaji and abangan also exists. This general
antagonism has almost certainly increased markedly in this century, has
sharply intensified since the Revolution, and is probably still increasing. But it
is by no means an entirely new phenomenon. Since the days of the struggle
between the Central Javanese kingdom of Matar am and the north coast harbor
Conflict and Integration                                                       »357«
kingdoms (Demak, Gresik, Surabaja), at least, i.e., since the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries,* prijaji and santri have not seen eye to eye; and
the resentment of the peasantry against the more or less exploitative ruling
aristocracy and the shrewd urban-centered santri trading class is obviously
of long standing. Nevertheless, at the moment, the conflict between the
various groups is probably more intense than in the past and almost universally
felt to be so by the Javanese themselves.



                          IDEOLOGICAL CONFLICTS

the tension between abangan and prijaji is more subtly expressed than between
these two groups and the santris, where the strain finds a more explicit outlet:
  Talking of santris, Juminah (an abangan woman) told me of a taunting
  jingle tibie children shout at santri women. They just recite the first line, which
  has meaningless rhyming sounds, and keep the second, which carries the
  content, in their mind—thus not really saying out loud what they are thinking,
  although, as everyone knows the jingle, the intent is clear:

          Mendung-mendung tjap gomèk
          Kudung-kudung digawé lèmèk
          Clouds, clouds, a Chinese holiday
          A Moslem lady’s head-shawl used as something to lie on.

  The meaning is that, although they wear shawls (only santri women, and
  almost all of them, wear these shawls; they are in no way veils, however,
  but are merely draped over the top of the head) and make a great profession
  of piety, they are promiscuous.
    Here the resentment is directed, as it commonly is, against santri holier-
than-thou moralism which abangans, particularly, tend to resent. But an­
other aspect of the conflict, insofar as it is focused on ideological patterns,
santri universalism and salvationism, also draws the pragmatic, relativistic
abangan's fire:
 I talked the other evening to Mbok Min and her husband, who is a day-
  laborer in the rice fields when he finds work. They said that the santris say
  that if one doesn’t chant the Koran one will end up in hell, but they, the
  Mins, don’t believe it. As the Mins put it, heaven and hell are in the here
  and now. “If you don’t have enough to eat, if you steal and do bad things,
  if you are emotionally upset, then you have hell now.” . . . The village
  children nearby were yelling traweh (to announce the extra evening prayers
  during the Fast) and I asked the Mins innocently, what was that and they
  said, “O, it is just for santris to pray every night in the prayer-house. , . .
  The santris have ‘Arab religion’ but we don’t hold with that. What is important
    * For a review of this period, see B. Schrieke, Indonesian Sociological Studies (The
Hague and Bandung, 1955), Part I, esp. pp. 80-82.
»358«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  is not chanting and all that business but doing right, not stealing and so on.
  The santris around here are always telling us we will end up in hell if we
  don’t do just as they do.”
    In prijaji attacks, the criticism of santri hypocrisy and intolerance is
often combined with theoretical differences on patterns of belief:
  He (an independent mystic guru) said that his “science” was not religion like
  Christianity or Islam but real “science” and so not easily to be dispensed to all
  comers like religion. . . . He commented on the santris, whom he dislikes
  rather intensely, saying that people spend money to go on the pilgrimage
  which is just throwing money away. He said: “They go to pray at the holy
  place and then come back here and are very honored. But the fact is that they
  haven’t done anything to be honored for, because the real holy place is
  within the batin, the inner life. I make my pilgrimage to that. There is no
  need going off to Mecca when you can make a pilgrimage to God in your own
  inner life. Take the Mosque in Modjokuto. It can be ruined, can’t it? Or fall
  down? Well, my mosque (pointing to his chest) cannot be ruined. It is in
  my heart and it is not like a building. Nothing can happen to it. And it is in
  there that I pray and that I come in touch with God.” He said that during the
  Japanese period, when the big riots occurred in Modjokuto, in which the
  Javanese populace stripped the Chinese stores of all their goods, all his pious
  santri neighbors joined in the looting, but he didn’t. He told them not to, but
  they went ahead anyway and considered him a fool for abstaining. But now
  he still has a good job, whereas many of them have lost all they stole and are
  poor again. “That’s the way santris are,” he concluded. “Hypocrites— all of
  them.”
    From the santri side the attack is no less astringent. They accuse the
abangans of being idol-worshipers and the prijajis of failing to keep them­
selves separate from God (a mortal sin of pride) and they have a marked
tendency to consider everyone outside the fold a communist:
  While talking with Abdul (a kijaji) he said that there were a lot of “wild” re­
  ligions around now, naming some of the sects in town. He said that they were
   all communist dominated and were a mixture of communism and “Javanese
  science.” He said that he thought that the communist plan was to set up lots of
  little religions so as to generally confuse the religious situation, and then
  later they would say: “See, religion just disorganizes things; away with all
  religions!” . . . He said that he had told one man that the “native” beliefs
  of his sect really came from India, not from Java, and the man said he was
  talking like a colonialist. He told me that some time ago five communist
  youths came down from Surabaja and one of them said that when he became
  dictator all the kijajis would be done away with. Abdul said that there was
  a sect in Modjokuto called Islam Sedjati (Ilmu Sedjati)—“true Islam”—but
  it really was “false Islam.”
    On the ideological level, the differences between abangan and prijaji are
rather muted, both because of the general relativism of the two groups and
because the abangans are not much interested in dogma in any case. Many
prijaji, especially the better-educated ones, regard many abangan beliefs and
practices as “mere superstition”; and they generally regard the abangans as
over-credulous. But the prijajis seldom express open disapproval of abangan
Conflict and Integration                                                    »359«
beliefs and practices to the peasants directly. For the most part they deal
with villagers as they always have—by minimizing direct contact with them
as much as possible.
     One. exception to the non-interference policy is the prijaji attitude toward
abangan beliefs centering around childbirth and to a lesser extent, around the
role of women. Emancipated women of the prijaji group, organized into
women’s clubs, propagandize against birth practices and theories they consider
unhygienic and in favor of modern Western methods as practiced by the
trained midwives attached to the hospitals. Similarly, they express disapproval
of certain elements in the marriage ritual which symbolize the subservience
of the woman—such as the washing of the groom’s feet by the bride, certain
“degrading” art forms—such as the tajuban, and, of course, polygamy—
although this brings them into sharp conflict with the santris rather than with
the abangans. Their efforts are, in any case, half-hearted, and, although
ostensibly directed toward the peasants and town proletariat for whose
welfare they feel responsible, are actually mostly aimed at advancing the
status of women within the prijaji group itself.
    In the other direction, the abangans are likely to regard most prijaji
mystic theories as beyond their comprehension. They view prijaji religion
with much of the grudging respect with which they view prijajis and the
prijaji style-of-life generally—as undoubtedly admirable, but not necessarily
attractive.



                              CLASS CONFLICTS

the prijaji-abangan tension shows most clearly in relation to problems of
status. Prijaji often accuse “village people” of not knowing their proper place
and so disturbing the organic balance of society, of having big ideas, and of
unsuccessfully aping the prijaji style-of-life.

  I asked the prijaji wife of the Modjokuto government animal-husbandry agent
  who lived in the houses around her, and she said, “Peasants.” I said: “When
  you visit around, where do you go?” She pointed in the direction of the center
  of town and said: “Peasants aren’t very good for mixing with. . . . They say
  anything they want to— just follow their impulses of the moment. They talk
  about people; they don’t keep secrets. Prijajis won’t tell about anyone, won’t
  disclose secrets. . . . Village people nowadays dress like prijajis. Some­
  times you can’t tell the difference. They even do their hair in the prijaji way.
  . . . This first happened just about the time the Japanese came (1942-1945).
« The Japanese used a lot of village girls for nurses, and this introduced them
  to wearing dresses, nice sarongs, etc. They buy one nice set of clothes and
  don’t care if they have to wear rags when they’re around the house and don’t
  care if people see them always in the same set of clothes. Prijajis prefer to
  buy many sets of clothes, which may not be of top quality, so then they can
  change often; they feel ashamed if they are always seen in the same clothes
  . . . or village people will buy a bicycle. Nowadays many have them that
»360«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  didn’t before, and they ride their bicycle in any old clothes.” Talking about the
  comparative situation of prijajis now and in the Colonial period, I asked
  which was a better time for them; and she said that from the point of view
  of those who are not “convinced” (i.e., convinced nationalists) it was better
  before and many people complain nowadays. But those who are “convinced”
  say that these times are like war times, and one cannot expect much. She said
  that in the Dutch time the prijajis who were at the level of Police Chief and
  above wore trousers and spoke Dutch to their superiors. Her husband, as
  animal husbandry agent, was in this group. Those who were below the Police
  Chief wore sarongs and spoke Javanese, and called the District Chief etc.,
  “ndoro” (roughly: “master”).

     That the blurring of social demarcations began only in the Japanese period
is, of course, not true; but that the blurring has been progressive and is
continuing is obvious no matter at which aspect of the Modjokuto social
system one looks. Although the claims of the more Jacobinic among the
nationalists that sharp stratification contrasts have disappeared in Java, that the
prijaji values system is dead or dying, and that power in Indonesia has been
put into the hands of the masses—in other words, that the Revolution
completely cut off Indonesia from her past—are very much over-stated, it
cannot be denied that the Revolution seems if not to have begun at least to
have stimulated wide-spread changes in the hierarchical patterns of prestige
in terms of which Javanese society has been for so long integrated. The
tracing of such changes, of their bases and their implications, cannot be
carried out here; what is important to note is that such changes bring the
prijaji and abangan (as well as the santri, who, so far as status is concerned,
tends to side with the abangans against the prijaji claim to traditional privilege)
world-views into more direct opposition than they have been in the past.
     The traditional system of social stratification allowed mobility for in­
dividuals, as does every such system, but the system itself was stable and more
or less unchanging; it was, in Schumpeter’s image, like a hotel, always full
but of different people. Today the system itself is changing, not just the people
within it; and this changes the whole basis and perception of social mobility.
It is no longer a situation in which a few favored individuals (or families)
rise by a combination of luck and cunning out of the peasantry into the gentry
but one in which mobility is a normal, expectable occurrence. Now, although
the barrier between the governed and the governing (which was the major basis
of the old system) remains real enough, it is considered crossable not merely
by the extraordinarily fortunate or talented but also by anyone of normal
ability and persistence. As a result, the bettering of his station is a legitimate
and reasonable aim for a man to have, a meaningful goal toward which his
life can be directed. Further, since whole classes are moving now, even if the
individual, so to speak, stands still, his class relationships do not remain con­
stant. It is as though the floors in Schumpeter’s hotel have begun to move
and rearrange themselves. In such a situation, a sharp conflict between class-
linked value systems is inevitable as the old pattern attempts to maintain
itself in the face of the changing bases of social evaluation.
Conflict and Integration                                                   »361«
 I asked a young modernist satitri about class. He said that the main difference
 is between the prijajis and the non-prijajis. Then he drew a triangle, saying,
 with no prompting from me, “This is the whole society—with occupational
 ranks:



                                              government officials
                                              high clerks and administrators,and high
                                              teachers(i.e,h igh-school, teach ers
                                              school, etc.)
                                              petty clerks and lower teachers

                                              traders, store-owners, land-owning
                                              peasants
                                              small craftsman,petty traders, planta­
                                              tion workers
                                              landless agricultural workers,handy­
                                              men, unemployed, beggars, etc.


  He said, in response to my question, that many of the Moslems came from the
  upper trading class and that most of this “class” was Moslem. . . . He said
  that teachers used to be somewhat higher before than they are now; in the
  Dutch times a teacher in an elementary school was a really big person; but
  now less so because there are so many. He emphasized that this was not a
  class ladder, and said that a number of other factors besides occupation de­
  termined class standing. Wealth was one, he said, and was becoming much
  more important now than it used to be, so that a well-off craftsman could be
  at the same level as a trader. Who one travels with is another factor, i.e.,
  people who are socially conscious, who join organizations (political parties,
  labor unions, fraternal organizations, etc.) and mix with people are considered
  higher. He said Ali (the head of Masjumi) was a good example of this. Ali
  was not rich, he had only a fair education, and he was only a small teacher
  in the years before the war; but he mixed with the higher-up people, was
  socially conscious, joined Masjumi and Muhammadijah etc., and got along
  with bigger people so that now his class standing was much higher than
  one would expect. Education was another important factor in ranking; so was
  age. . . . As for family, this was much less important than before, for people
  looked more to the individual than to his origins now. However, it still
. counted, particularly on the prijaji vs. non-prijaji business. For example, when
  Sarta started his store in his place he was still considered higher than H.
  Arifin (a faintly wealthy santri store-owner) because he was from a prijaji
  family, and by and large he is still considered a prijaji, having lost no status
  by going into trade (he did in the eyes of some prijaji informants, however).
  . . . He repeated that he thought that the thickest line was still between
  prijajis and non-prijajis.
    The sense that the old barriers are down, that feats of mobility are
possible and extremely desirable,' appears in many of the Thematic Apper­
»362«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
ception Test protocols: for example, in this one from a twenty-year-old urban
abangan given a card showing a man ploughing and a younger woman
standing nearby, the picture being redrawn with Javanese scene and figures:
  There was a man named Pale Karta. He had one child named Suprapti. Be­
  sides this he also had a servant named Mbok Sosro. Pak Karta was a peasant
  whose home was near the mountains, and his work every day was farming. He
  wanted very much to send Suprapti to school so that she would become an
  intelligent person and of a high rank. He worked eagerly, day and night,
  sweated, so that his daughter, Suprapti, could go to school.
       After she graduated from elementary school, Suprapti went to high school
  and there Suprapti was never lax in her studies. Because their village was one
  of the more advanced ones, many of her friends were also industrious.
  Suprapti was rather popular in school in comparison with her friends, be­
  cause at home she didn’t have to work, because she was taken care of by
  the servant. Then she wanted to continue (her studies) and she thought she
  wouldn’t get married until after she carried out her wishes. After the final
  examination of the Junior High School she went on to Teachers School for
  six years. There she studied many different things concerning teaching.
  Suprapti was there long, and her many young friends tempted her (evidently
  to get married and abandon studying), but nevertheless she remained stead­
  fast in her aim to study knowledge of a high level. After she had studied three
  years in the Teachers School, her parents frequently sent her letters saying
  that the situation at home was not good, the household economy was poor,
   and that Suprapti should remember that one day she would have land of her
   own and a household of her own. Suprapti, when she heard this, was rather let
   down, disappointed. But it was her fate. After graduating from Teachers
  School, Suprapti was given a position as a teacher in a certain city, and there
  she set up a household for herself and helped the income of her parents in
   the village. After awhile Suprapti’s teaching became well-known, because
   she was very clever in language and mathematics, etc. But every year she
   had to go home, carrying things from the city which were needed by her
   parents. After about seven years Suprapti was married to a teacher who also
   taught in school, and her parents were in agreement, and they lived after that
   in harmony.
    Thus the caste or semi-caste mechanisms which in the past isolated the
abangan and prijaji value systems from one another no longer operate with
the traditional effectiveness, and a forced contact between the two world-views
occurs in which each is obligated to take the other into consideration in a
far wider range of occasions than once was necessary. It is no longer a case
of the prijaji being, from the abangan point of view, way off in the dim
distance (spatially as well as socially, for there has never been a really strong
rural gentry in Java), as awesome figures of power, wealth, and magical
strength perched at the thin-air altitudes of the social structure. Nor of the
abangans being, from the prijaji point of view, a great undifferentiated mass
of animalistic peasants least painfully dealt with through a few of their more
polished representatives as intermediaries. Now, instead, the abangan and
prijaji world-outlooks are competing to define the same social situation. There
are a great many abangans in town (and even village abangans are more
directly involved in urban life than they have ever been in the past), and
Conflict and Integration                                                    »363«
prijajis who have any grasp on present day realities know that their mainte­
nance of traditional prerogative rests on an acceptance of their values by a
wider group than that consisting entirely of noble or near-noble bureaucrats.



                           POLITICAL CONFLICTS

i n addition to intrinsic ideological conflicts and increased status mobility, the
intensified struggle for political power is a third divisive element which
exacerbates religious conflict. In a colonial regime, particularly one so con­
servative in policy toward changes in native social structure as the Dutch,
the subject people tend to be progressively cut oS from the crucial political
and economic roles in the system. Indirect rule, whether motivated by ethical
or administrative considerations, is postulated on the supposition that tradi­
tional native institutions serve native interest better than any other institutions,
particularly Western ones, are likely to do. This, in a sense, may well be true,
and proponents of such a doctrine can point to the anomic results of more
direct impact of Western forms on non-Westem peoples in other parts of the
world, say the Indian in the United States. Nevertheless, despite the theory,
what actually occurs is not the mere stabilization of native society in its pristine
forms, but, rather, as the social system “naturally” grows more complex, the
European ruling group takes over each new role of functional importance as
it appears, either filling it themselves or permitting certain others, typically
non-European immigrants, half-castes, and a few specially chosen native
aristocrats, to fill it, thus “sheltering” the native society from the effects of
change. In time, not only do the loci of all types of power shift more and more
away from native hands as the “Western” sector of the “dual” (or “plural”)
society grows in complexity and importance, but also the ruling group has
to spend more and more time merely in keeping the native society intact.
Traditional forms of life no longer exist naturally, as adaptive responses to
their environment, but must be consistently and consciously shored up by
special efforts on the part of the ruling group in the name of “native welfare.”
Keeping the nah/es native becomes a full-time job.
     When, at length, a political revolution occurs, as in Indonesia, the power
vacuum suddenly revealed as almost all posts of crucial political importance
are suddenly left vacant is tremendous and draws almost the whole of social
life into it. (For various reasons, this occurs to a much lesser degree in the
economic sectors; a fact which only magnifies the importance of the political
in the eyes of the native population.) With the well- or cynically-intended
deceptions of Colonial rule removed, the real distribution of power becomes
 apparent to all; and, with the new understanding of what the score really
is—an understanding confined in the pre-revolutionary period to a few nation­
alist intellectuals—the scramble for power becomes intense. Such heightened
political struggle naturally results in a sharpened internal conflict between
various religious groups. Religious positions become political ones—almost
without alteration.
»364«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
   Mhd Rais spoke next (Rais is one of the dozen or so most important Masjumi
   national leaders; he was speaking at a mass meeting at the Regency capital
   to which all the local Masjumi leaders went). He said that he had read some
   nasty comments about him in the PNI (the pri/a/7-dominated Nationalist party)
   press in Surabaja, but that he wasn’t angry; he only laughed, because one
   couldn’t expect politeness from the PNI. He started off on the PERMAI
   problem (a PERMAI leader had been reported in the press as saying that
   Islam was a foreign religion and Muhammad a false prophet, an event which
   was something of a cause celebre for awhile), and rose to high pitch with a
   rhetorical challenge to the cabinet: “Muslims are patient, but they won’t be
   patient forever. You had better realize that they will take only so much and
   then they will fight. You must consider that your actions may bring about the
   flow of blood, that if you allow these insults to Islam to continue we may end
   up in a civil war.” . . . Then he attacked the proposals for separation of
   Church and state, ridiculed the religio-ideological theories of PNI as empty
   of meaning, and said that the non-Islamic groups were urging marriage with­
   out going to the Naib, which would lead to a nation of bastards and Indonesia
   would become known as the bastard country. . . . The other speaker started
   off by attacking the Communists in general terms, reading off the organizations
   he held were Communist dominated, and rising to heights of sheer spleen. He
   spoke entirely at a shout, pounded the rostrum, interrupted his speech to get
   the audience to shout ALLAH HU AKBAR (God is most great) back at him,
   attacked the “half-ripe intellectuals” who were for separation of Church and
   State, and in fact attacked intellectualism in general, saying that the only thing
   one had to do was fear God and follow the Moslem law. He attacked all non-
   Islamic parties as infidel and said that Muslims who joined them were breaking
   the rules of religion. He said that the idea of a secular state was infidel; that
   Indonesia should not try to learn from Russia and America, but just base its
   country on Islamic teachings. . . .
     A few comments must be made concerning this quotation. In the first
place, comparable remarks could be quoted for each political group which
would show little difference of intensity or rationality. Secondly, speeches of
this sort are not to be taken over-literally as heralding immediate recourse
to arms and violence, for they are well within the limits of permissible political
hyperbole in present-day Indonesia. Thirdly, in each party there are, in con­
trast to foot-stompers such as the one quoted, calmer, more rational, and more
thoughtful leaders to whom such men are as inherently unattractive as our
Western political demagogues are to our more responsible leaders. Neverthe­
less, despite the qualifications, such demagogy is hardly without effect, and
the quotation does indicate both the rather intense level to which political con­
flict has come in present-day Indonesia and the manner in which it tends, in
part, to focus around ostensibly religious issues.



                         PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS

heightened status struggle, intensified political conflict, and,
                                                               although in a
more indirect form, increased economic stresses have all tended to emphasize
Conflict and Integration                                                       »365«
religious divisions in post-Revolutionary Indonesia. The connection between
such rapidly changing social structures and the accompanying heightened
feelings of anxiety and aggression and the consequent fantasy search for
scapegoats to provide a rationale for the anxiety and an outlet for the aggres­
sion is well-attested in the literature of the social sciences.
     The Dutch, and to a lesser extent Westerners generally, form natural
objects of such aggression, around whom fantasies (not all of them necessarily
unrealistic) of imperialistic exploitation can be built, but, particularly in a
town the size of Modjokuto, they are at such a distance as to be largely ab­
stract and not completely satisfying. Since the Chinese are near at hand, they
make somewhat better scapegoats; but even they can’t be blamed for every­
thing, thus, the need for local, everyday scapegoats from the Javanese com­
munity itself tends to get satisfied along religio-political lines. Fantasies (again,
aside from any judgment as to their realistic elements) of santri persecution of
non-santris if they come to power, of the suppression of Islam and the murder
of kijajis if the “Communists”—a term often applied with about the same de­
gree of accuracy as it has been recently by some of the more politically primi­
tive elements in the United States—come to power, and other similar ones tend
to account for anxiety. They also legitimize rather more open expression of
hostility than the Javanese value system and patterns of etiquette traditionally
allow. Such anxiety and aggression arise not only out of realistic social fears,
of which there are enough, but also out of the psychologically wearing process
of rapid social change.



                     Religion and Social Integration

if the divisive forces were the whole story, Javanese society would have fallen
into a war of all against all a good while ago. It is necessary now to turn to the
integrative elements in Javanese society which tend to maintain it against the
divisive elements. Among the most important of these is the sense of a common
culture. This takes two main forms: a denigration of the present in terms of the
past, especially criticism of contemporary practices by traditional standards
of judgment, a practice mainly, but not entirely, resorted to by older people;
and the growing strength of nationalism which attempts to appeal to senti­
ments of national self-respect, solidarity, and hope for a more “modern” style-
of-life in order to curb social disorganization, which is characteristic mainly,
but again not entirely, of younger people.
     A night-long political discussion in a heavily santri village some fifteen or
twenty miles from Modjokuto displayed both of these themes.
   About ten or so, the kijaji showed up and started giving speeches of one sort
   or another, and a quite interesting discussion began. . . . They started by
   lamenting the decline of traditional religious life, saying that only a few of the
   larger pondoks were still running in the old style and putting this decline down
   to laziness. The kijaji asked me about the general election in the United States
»366«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  and he said that there would be a hot time in the election here later (the elec­
  tion was then scheduled for early 1955). He talked about the Masjumi-NU
  split and said that it was too bad and then said something to the effect that he
  thought a 100 per cent Islamic state here was not possible because there were
  too many other groups; and so the Muslims should learn to get along with
  them. This statement met general agreement, one man saying that not all the
  Islamic law could be carried out in daily life; what was important was that
  Islam influence the State. There was some discussion then of Freedom (i.e., the
  post-Republican period), and the modin said that Djojobojo (a semi-legendary
  Javanese King) had predicted that when there was a Just King there would
  be good time for Islam and it would prosper. Then, surprisingly, he said that
  under the Dutch this was so—that they had just kings and Islam prospered.
  Someone said, “Well, we have a President now, and we can’t have a king
  again”; but the modin insisted that the old days were better than now because
  now party politics were tearing the country up. The kijaji agreed that the real
  differences between people in Indonesia were not those, say, between Chris­
  tians and Muslims, but between political parties, and that one can’t go back
  to the old days. He said that there were two ways that this prediction of
  Djojobojo could be read. One way was the way the modin had read it: lit­
  erally, as meaning that there would have to be a real king in the future who
  was “just” as a leader of the people, and then Islam would prosper. But an­
  other way to interpret it was that if all the people, the people as a whole,
  tried to be “just,” Islam would prosper—in a democracy the people is king,
  he said. . . . The kijaji said that this was the Islamic view; he didn’t know
  about the Christian view. One man then asked me, as the local expert on
  Christianity, I guess, if I could give them any information on this matter. I
  said that I thought that Christians would agree with the kijaji's comment that
  if the mass of the people were just, religion would be well-off, hoping that this
  was a high enough abstraction for the purposes. But the kijaji suddenly
  changed his tune and said, “Yes, but, often men have to die to achieve justice;
  blood has to be shed”; and then they launched into the Communists, saying
  that they were anti-religion, etc. . . .



   TRADITIONALISM AND THE INHERITED COMMON CULTURE

traditionalists    tend to lament the younger generation and refer to the
greater stability and single-mindedness of people in the past. They invoke
against the open expressions of discord the values for harmony and coopera­
tion, for polite suppression of feeling, and for proper behavior in terms of
status-values which still have some force for even the most “modem” of
young men. A treatment of Javanese religion in terms of its major variants,
such as I have offered, tends to obscure the common value consensus upon
which these variants are based and out of which they grow.
    All Javanese— santri, prijaji, and abangan—hold certain general truths
to be self-evident, just as behind the division into Catholic, Protestant, and
Jew, Americans cling to certain over-arching values which in many ways
make, for example, an American Catholic more similar in his world-view to
an American Protestant than, say, to a Spanish Catholic. The high concern for
Conflict and Integration                                                     »367«
status formality; the emphasis on rigid politeness and on dissimulation of
emotion and avoidance of intense external stimuli; inwardness; a view of re­
ligion as phenomenological “science” and of fasting as “applied science”; the
idea that resolution and fixity of will are one of the most important elements in
living an effective life; the conviction that people (particularly if they are
neighbors) ought to rukim, that is, cooperate and help one another (almost no
one completely avoids giving slametans), and that religious beliefs of others
ought to be viewed relativistically, as suitable for them if not for everyone—
all these are beliefs and values which appear throughout Javanese society, even
 among the santris, whose departure from them is most marked.
     In support of the last proposition I offer my notes on a speech by the head
of Muhammadijah—in theory, one of the “purer” Moslems in Modjokuto—to
Aisjijah, the women’s auxiliary of Muhammadijah, on the subject of the
 approaching general elections, a speech in which the influence of the general
prijaji-abangan “Javanism” outlook is more apparent than the Middle-Eastern
 reformist Islam element.
  He said that he was supposed to speak about the approaching General Elec­
  tion, but first he wanted to explain the intention of it. So he started out on a
  lecture on the nature of man. He said first that it was important to note that
  there was both the body and the soul, A body can’t live without a soul; if it
  is lacking there is only a corpse. “How do you know there is a soul? You feel
  it. For instance, if you are pinched, it hurts, and if you try to describe the
  hurt you can’t—it just hurts. This is the supernatural thing within you, an alus
  object.” From here he went on to draw a stick figure on the blackboard, and
  to label the head with “mind” and the body with “heart.” “The ‘heart,’” he
  said, “is what makes you feel unhappy, makes you want to do things, while the
  ‘mind’ searches out ways for you to do it. It is the ‘heart’ which feels the pinch
  of poverty and says, ‘I’ll be a market-seller and get money.’; but it is the mind
  which shows the way. Otherwise you would just keep wanting to be a market-
  seller and never do it.” Then he went into a sort of typing of the desires,
  using an Arabic classification. “First, the desire to make yourself beautiful,
  to decorate yourself, to please yourself. Second, the desire to be a leader, to
  say to others: ‘Follow me, I will show you the way.’ Third, a liking for your
  own kind, your own nationality. Fourth, courage in the face of risk of loss.
   Fifth, fear.” He didn’t say much about the first two but gave several illustra­
   tions for the third, love of one’s own kind. He said, “We all like our own
   children best, or our own cousins. Then we all like best our own organizations.
   We get invited to GERWIS (a leftist women’s organization), but we are reluc­
   tant to go; we get invited to an Aisjijah meeting, and we want to go because
   we know we will see our friends there. When we meet an Aisjijah member
   on the street we feel different about them because we know they too are
   Aisjijah. . . . We like to be with Javanese because they are alus. All have
   brownish-yellow skin, not too black, not too white, just right. If you are in
   a group of Chinese, everyone doesn’t talk much, but in a group of Javanese,
   everyone is talking happily. If you talk with a Chinese, it is as if you don’t
   ‘meet the man’; you don’t come in contact with the man. This is because he is
   from a different nationality. The fourth feeling, courage, means you have to be
   daring, be willing to take risks. If you go into business, you have to expect to
   lose as well as to make a profit. The fifth one is really not good, except as
»368«                                         THE RELIGION            OF    JAVA
  fear of God which lies behind everything, for it is dangerous to people and
  makes for loss. If I am selling in the market and I am afraid that everyone
  else is undercutting my prices, I lower mine and I lose. Actually none of these
  desires are good in themselves or bad in themselves. People may have a
  stronger concentration of one desire than of the other two. Everyone is dif­
  ferent. The desire to please the self may be weak in one person and almost
  absent in another. Some people emphasize the desire to lead, and this is neces­
  sary in order to have leaders. You can have too much of one of these too
   (and he gave the Germans and the Italians and Hitler and Mussolini as ex­
  amples of too much love of their own kind). Understanding or knowledge
  enters the eyes; then it goes to the head, the ‘mind,’ and from these to the
  ‘heart.’ This shows that understanding is not just reason but emotion.” He
  went on to talk about ideology and said that Islam meant “slamet” (well­
  being) . Thus Islam means to wish in the heart intensely so as to reach slamet.
  . . . He said: “If we want a slamet life, we must go by the Islamic Ideology,
  which is based on the Koran and the Hadith. To do this we must study and
  struggle. . . . We must struggle in three arenas: in the home, in society, and
  in politics. Politics concerns how we will be able to grasp the State. This must
  be done not by revolt but by election. Then if the State is in the hands
  of the Moslems, the fight for the slamet life can be carried on through the
  State Police, the Civil Service, the National Radio, the National newspapers
  (there are no State-owned newspapers, however), etc.; and obviously this will
  be much faster than merely struggling in the home. The changes one person
  can make in twenty years of effort in the home can be made in one year
  through politics.”
     There are many characteristically santri aspects in this—the emphasis on
“business,” the Fear of God and the Islamic State based on Koran and Hadith,
the recourse to Arabic analysis rather than Hindu-Javanese ones, the split
between “body” and “soul” rather than “inside” and “outside.” But what is
striking is how much of santri ideology gets stated here in generally Javanese
terms: the emphasis on a phenomenology of feeling, on slamet—well-being—
as an end, the relativism based on different feelings for different peoples, the
emphasis on concepts like “alus” and “heart” (ati), and the like. Islam almost
becomes another “Javanese Science.” Only “almost” of course; but the com­
mon vocabulary and the reliance on widely shared concepts, beliefs, and
values means that even if santris differ with their neighbors they are at least
able to talk intelligibly with them and to agree on some of the ground-rules of
dispute and on some of the basic truths—such as that everyone in life seeks
slamet—upon which differences of opinion may then be elaborated. The inte­
grative importance of such an underlying agreement is crucial. Santris may not
like abangans, and abangans may have their doubts about prijajis; but they
all prefer each other to Chinese or Europeans.


              NATIONALISM AND THE PROJECTION OF A
                     NEW COMMON CULTURE

the more nationalistically inclined among the Javanese (who, of course,
may be the same concrete individuals as the traditionalists in another context
Conflict and Integration                                                  »369«
or mood) also rely somewhat upon the common traditional values, for the
doctrines of nationalism are, in many ways, attempts to restate those values in
a somewhat more generalized form; but over and above this, the nationalistic
Javanese appeal to the kinds of aspirations stimulated by contact with the
world outside of Java. At nearly everyone of the almost daily meetings of one
or another of the town’s “organizations,” a term (organisasi, from the Dutch)
used to refer to the various modern-type political parties, women’s clubs, youth
groups, lending cooperatives, social and charitable organizations, labor unions,
and so on which have proliferated spectacularly since the Revolution; at each
major holiday, in addresses by local political officials; in the government news­
reels and over the government radio; in the big-city newspapers, magazines,
and the like, which are more and more read in Modjokuto—whenever and
wherever the opportunity offers—the din of the nationalist ideology is un­
remitting.
    Rather than give an example from my notes, I translate below a newspaper
report of a prospective celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
women’s movement which conveys a more vivid and precise sense of both the
tone and content of this ideology as it is repeated day after day in Modjokuto
than any summary could.



                    “One-Quarter Century Celebration”

       Surabaja, 16 May. The Committee for the Celebration of One-Quarter of
  a Century of the Unity of the Women’s Movement in Indonesia was set up on
  24 November, 1952, by the Women’s Congress of Indonesia, in order to lay
  plans for the celebration of this anniversary on 22 December, 1953.
       As already announced by this committee, the 22nd of December marks
  the passage of 25 years since the Women of Indonesia united their will in
  support of the realization of the National Struggle. On 22 December, 1928,
  for the first time the various women’s organizations of Indonesia met in one
  Indonesian-wide Congress at Djokjakarta. This Congress reflected the deep-felt
  struggle for freedom that had spread throughout the entire Indonesian society.
  In that year the youth of Indonesia had already set forth the famous revolu­
  tionary slogan:
                              One People: Indonesian
                             One Country: Indonesia
                             One Language: Indonesian
  The Women of Indonesia were also fired by this slogan, and for the first time
  there occurred a unification of the Women’s Movement.
       Thus this day, the 22nd of December, has been proclaimed The Day
  of the Women’s Awakening. Before this historic day the various women’s
  organizations were interested only in general advancement, but beginning
  December 22, 1928, the Women of Indonesia, fully conscious of their re­
  sponsibilities, merged their movement with the national struggle.
       Today, 25 years later, our country has attained its freedom. The Women’s
  struggle does not end with that. And although, perhaps, in content and form
  it is somewhat different, its aim is unchanged; it is the Glory of our Country
»370«                                        THE     RELIGION         OF   JAVA
  and People. The form and the content of the movement will continue to
  progress as Indonesian society progresses. . . . (Sitara Rakjat [Surabaja],
  May 18, 1953.)

     This sort of intensely felt but curiously abstract kind of ideological ex­
pression, with its emphasis on the unity of all groups, on struggle, and on
social morality, is in part a symbolic masking of real value conflicts within the
society, a kind of cultural protesting too much, by means of which conflicts
which threaten to upset the social equilibrium can to a degree be kept out of
conscious awareness or at least from open expression. But, in part, it is also
an attempt to work out a set of values which, while related to traditional
values and developed out of them, are less concrete and specific and so
more able to deal with the wide range of situations in which a modem society
inevitably finds itself. Thus a traditional value such as rukun is freed from its
explicit and concrete context in the siametan, in carefully specified village
“public” labor on the roads and irrigation ditches, in traditionally frozen labor-
exchange patterns in agricultural work, and becomes generalized to celebrate
cooperation in any context. In this form it serves two functions: it hides
 (to a degree) the real differences of opinion which exist, and it serves as a
basis for the development of genuinely effective patterns of cooperation more
widely applicable.
     Supported by a new, if still weak, sense of national identity, a new, but still
uneasy, sense of self-confidence, nationalism is thus becoming an important
integrating factor in the society, most especially for the elite, for the educated
youth, and the urban masses. It is, in fact for some of the more engaged, a
secular religion in the sense in which Marxism for the Soviet Union and “Free-
Enterprise” success ideology for the United States serves as such a religion
for certain elements in those populations. “ ‘Revolution’ is still a holy word in
Indonesia,” a professor at an Indonesian university told me. “It is still a holy
word in America?”



                MIXED TYPES AND MARGINAL GROUPS:
                    SOCIAL STRUCTURAL FACTORS

in addition to the sense of a common culture, whether expressed in the vo­
cabulary of traditional religion or of modern nationalism, a second factor in
preventing value differences between prijaji, santri, and abangan from having
the full effects which seem implicit in them is the fact, universal in the articu­
lation of culture and social system everywhere, that value patterns are not
institutionalized directly, purely, and without distortion but, rather, are inte­
grated into a differentiated social system in such a manner that the resultant
social structure does not mirror the cultural organization in any simple way.
    The first reason why this is true is that organizing forces arising from
religion, stratification, geography, economics, and so on do not all run in the
same direction. A high-status santri has often more in common with a prijaji
Conflict and Integration                                                  »371«
than with a low-status santri. An abangan who, confounding the probabilities,
makes good in business, is likely to find himself seeing things the santri way
to a degree, even if he can’t be bothered with praying. And for a santri, as
for all Javanese, a neighbor is a neighbor after all, even if he does bum incense
to idols.
     This cross-cutting, balance-of-forces nature of social life is what allows
several antagonistic social and cultural elements to be contained within the
same relatively balanced system. It is, in fact, the absence of such cross-cut­
ting which bodes ill for the future of a social system. One of the most important
reasons for the extreme instability of the relations between Javanese and
Chinese, for example, is just such an ominous coalescence of racial, economic,
and religious factors all going in the same direction. The chances for open
violence in such a situation are greater than in a case where the divisive aspects
of racial and religious difference and inequality of wealth do not support but
check one another.
      The general failure for cultural and social forces to coincide exactly in any
concrete society produces a type of individual one can only call “mixed,” and
whose “mixed” character lends to him a greater ability to mediate between
contrasting groups. For example, one of the first-rank leaders of NU, the
conservative Moslem party, in Modjokuto is in almost every other respect
but the political a prijaji. Before the war he was a bookkeeper, belonged to
such moderate prijaji nationalist organizations as Parindra and Budi Utomo,
 and did not pray, go to mosque, or know very much about Islam. In general he
followed the prijaji variant of Javanese religion—its mysticism, aestheticism,
 and rank-consciousness—as, despite externals, he still does. After the Revolu­
 tion it was considered certain that he would appear as a leader in PNI, the
 nationalist party successor to the type of organization to which he belonged in
 the pre-war period, but he startled the entire community by joining NU and,
for the first time in his life, by beginning to pray five times a day and to attend
 mosque.
      What was involved here was not a religious conversion; this man is still
 as strong a prijaji as he ever was. He still looks down on most santris as fanatic
 and uneducated, regards his own position as frankly anomalous, and realizes
 that he doesn’t “fit” (tjotjog) where he is. The rest of his family does not even
 make the pretense of being santri. His wife does not pray; she keeps aloof
 from NU women’s activities and continues to restrict her friendships to prijaji
 circles. We are korbans—“victims,” “sacrifices”—both the man and his wife
 say, claiming that they gave up their more “comfortable” position in the
 prijaji group to provide much-needed intellectual leadership to the ignorant and
 over-religious orthodox Moslem group, sacrificing personal happiness to con­
 tribute to the progress of the new Indonesia. Those who take a less kind view
 of this man’s behavior say that he joined NU because, being one of the few
 educated members, he would be a major leader (he is the party’s representa­
 tive on the Regency governing board), whereas in PNI, with its greater supply
  of intellectuals, he would be only second rank. The details of the matter are,
 however, unimportant. What is important is that this man serves as a link
»372«                                       THE     RELIGION        OF    JAVA

between two culturally defined groups otherwise rather antagonistic by the
simple expedient of being a member of both of them at the same time.
     There are other people of the same sort: the now-retired Sumatran doctor,
a prijaji by status but, like Sumatrans generally, a pious Moslem and so
sympathetic to the santris; the prijaji store-owner who, although he dislikes
Islam, mixes more with santris than with non-santris (his store is in the
Moslem Kauman); the abangan village clerk in an otherwise entirely santri
village administration; the santri high-official—the Bragang Bupati is an
example—who naturally tends to move in prijaji circles.
     But in addition to mixed-type individuals there are also mixed-type groups,
cultural “minorities,” members of which are able to perform similar mediating
roles. An example here is the small Protestant community in Modjokuto.
Speaking broadly, there are two main types of Protestants (Catholics in
Modjokuto are nearly all Chinese) within the town of Modjokuto: first, those
who adhere to the Dutch Reformed Church, who are mainly prijaji in social
status and style of life, many of them being or having been in the past white-
collar employees of Dutch sugar concerns, the local HVA hospital, etc.; and
second, those who adhere to the more revivalistic Protestant sects (Seventh
Day Adventist, Pentacostal, etc.), who, if they are Javanese—perhaps the
majority of the members of such sects are either Chinese or non-Javanese
Indonesians from Ambon, Flores, Sumatra, etc.— are fairly poor abangans.
The second group is of only marginal social importance in Modjokuto, but the
first serves as an important buffer between the major religious groups. Other
cultural minority groups, such as certain Chinese and the above-mentioned
non-Javanese Indonesians, serve similar functions, being, as they are, more-
or-less neutral with respect to the major Javanese religious variants.
     Groups which are products of recent social change and Western contact,
and so to an extent secularized, also tend to fall “in between” the major
religious variants. The most important of these is undoubtedly the pemuda
group, pemuda being an Indonesian word meaning “youth.” The relatively
sudden expansion of Western-type education in Indonesia in recent years has
produced a “youth-culture” whose members are marked by a deep-going rest­
lessness, a sharp ambivalence vis-à-vis traditional Javanese values, and an in­
tense nationalism. They are often relatively free of commitment to any of the
major religious systems described, a situation which leaves them both more
independent of traditional constraints and more anxious and uncertain about
how they ought to live—although rather unwilling to admit it. In Modjokuto,
the secularization of this group has proceeded less far than in larger cities such
as Djakarta and Surabaja, and most young men can still be classified as at
least vaguely santri, abangan, or prijaji. But it can hardly be denied that
pemudas, even in Modjokuto, often find much more in common with each
other, irrespective of religion, than they do with adults of their own (rather
attenuated) religious persuasion. This emergent Indonesian “youth-culture,”
made up of an intense, idealistic, and perplexed group of young men and
women who have suddenly been projected into a world they never made, is an
important cross-cutting force in present-day Modjokuto, tending to off-set
the conflict between religious views with the war between the generations.
Conflict and Integration                                                   »373«
     Another social structural circumstance militating against the simple seg­
mentation of society along religious lines is the fact that the prijaji are the
traditional leaders of the society, the time-honored holders of power. The
result is that the elites of all groups have a tendency to include at least some
prijajis, either because prijajis attracted by power-wielding possibilities have
moved into them or because their own leaders have become “pn/a/7-ized” as
their personal power has grown. Peasant leaders, for example, are rarely
peasants; most often they are lower prijajis; for, though the abangans have
the numbers to form an impressive followership, they but rarely produce from
among themselves men with the social skills to lead them, even in terms of
their own values. The Communist party, as all others, is largely led by town-
based clerks, not agrarian radicals. In the early days of the nationalist move­
ments, almost all the leaders, even of the santri groups (Tjokroaminoto, the
founder of Sarekat Islam being an example), were drawn from the civil-servant
class because the latter had a virtual monopoly on education and because they
bore the traditional trappings of authority.
     The converse proposition holds as well. As individual abangans or santris
gain in power because of their leadership of effective political groups, they tend
naturally to adopt prijaji ways, which poses something of a problem, because
in so doing they lose at least part of the specific ideological attraction which
gained them power in the first place. The problem is particularly acute among
the santris, whose values are so anti-bureaucratic, “independent,” and “equali-
tarian” in nature; for they realize that as their leaders become civil servants due
to santri political power, they become also less santri in outlook. This is not en­
tirely integrative, however, because the more “traditional” prijajis tend to
resent such parvenu power holders and, as I have already remarked, some of
the more conservative literati elements among them tend to hold aloof alto­
gether from activity in the “new'society” for this reason. In part, what is oc­
curring is a shift in traditional leadership patterns, in which lower prijajis par­
ticularly, those with more of a stomach for contact with people of all types and
emerging leaders from non-prijaji groups are forming a new elite with a cul­
ture based to a degree on the old prijaji patterns and in part on the newer
intelligentsia culture connected with nationalism, more or less cutting out the
purer literati.



        TOLERANCE AND PLURALISTIC SOCIAL INTEGRATION

the last two points making for a moderation of religious conflict—tolerance
based on “contextual relativism” and the growth of social mechanisms for a
pluralistic non-syncretic form of social integration—may be dealt with to­
gether, for they are, in part, merely two sides of the same coin. Relativistic
tolerance has been mentioned several times in this report as being charac­
teristic of non-santri religious views, but even santris adhere to it despite
the intense concern with missionization which tends to be characteristic of
»374«                                       THE RELIGION            OF   JAVA
Islam. Traders and richer peasants are seen, by all groups, as more or less
“naturally” santris, civil servants as “normally” prijaji, and poorer peasants
and town proletariat as “typically” abangan; and there is really little serious
thought in any of the groups that there is much possibility of “converting”
the others. The santris may talk much about “missionary work” (tablèg) and
rail about the heathenism of the non-santri group, but in fact almost all their
missionary work is directed inward, toward the santri group itself, being
designed to improve the doctrinal purity of those who are already committed
rather than to gain new adherents. Most santris would be appalled at the
idea of personally trying to talk a convinced prijaji or abangan into becoming
a santri. Thus the three groups tend to become socially segregated to a degree
and come to accept the de jacto, if not de jure, existence of one another. In
part, the displacement of religious conflict to the political level is based on
just this deep-going reluctance of Javanese to urge their own beliefs on
others who differ with them.
     Thus, despite protestations to the contrary, it seems as if at least some
members of each group are coming to the conclusion that a new synthesis
based on the complete triumph of their own values throughout the entire
society is not likely to occur, and that an open society is to replace a closed
one. Such views, even in a half-concealed form, are not dominant as yet;
and an American committed to a loose balance-of-interests system not only
in government but in social organization generally is especially likely to over­
emphasize them. Certainly the yearning for a new synthesis which will have
some of the psychological and social comforts of the old syncretic unifica­
tion of belief is easily to be found; it is perhaps the most widespread social
sentiment and that upon which the Dar Ul Islam Moslem rebels, the Com­
munists, and the more xenophobic nationalists all play. Nevertheless, the
realization that such a re-establishment of an organic society is not possible
or, if possible, not desirable, is becoming increasingly apparent to many people
of all shades of opinion, albeit in an almost unconscious form. But if a
society is to be formed in which groups of rather different outlooks on life
and committed to varying basic values are mutually to co-exist, social mech­
anisms in terms of which the necessary continual adjustment and readjust­
ment among such groups are to take place must be constructed.



                The Holidays—Ceremonies of Social
                     Integration and Conflict
the analysis of such mechanisms on the Modjokuto scene, aside from those
already suggested, would take us too far afield into an analysis of the
political system, the proliferating system of private associations, clubs, unions,
parties and the like, and, in general, into the hundreds of specific social be­
haviors by means of which the Modjokuto people actually get things done.
But symbolic of both the strains towards integration and the sharpened con­
Conflict and Integration                                                  »375«
flicts of the emerging society are the ceremonies, practices, and beliefs focused
around the increasingly important national holidays and those traditional
holidays which are still of importance. The holidays mirror the religious,
political, status, and other conflicts upon which I have touched, reflecting the
sharpened antagonisms which arise in any society which is changing its
form; but they indicate also, dimly and uncertainly, something of the new
forms which may emerge, presenting an indistinct and misfocused image of
the value choices with which abangan, scintri, prijaji, all three, are for the
moment faced. As such, a brief treatment of them forms a useful conclusion
to this description of Modjokuto religious belief and behavior.
     Since the Revolution, the number of holidays has greatly multiplied, at
least in theory if not in actual practice. Nationalist holidays, traditional holi­
days, religious holidays all crowd one another until it sometimes seems that,
indeed, in Indonesia every day is a holiday. For example, there are Hari
Lagu Kebangsaan (Holiday for the National Anthem), Hari Ibu Kartini
 (Princess Kartini’s Day, Princess Kartini being a turn-of-the-century fore­
runner of the nationalist women’s movement), Hari Peladjar Internasional
 (International Students Day), Hari Pelawan (Heroes Day, commemorating
the victims of the Revolution), Hari Angkatan Perang (Armed Forces Day),
Satu Mei (First of May; sometimes called Hari Buruh Internasional, Inter­
national Worker’s Day), Hari Gerakan Wanita (Women’s Movement Day),
and Hari Kemerdekaan (Freedom Day, Indonesia’s “Fourth of July,” which,
as it falls on August 17th is consequently commonly referred to as tudjuh-
belas-Augustus)—all of them being more or less nationalist holidays, as is
indicated both by the events they celebrate and by the fact that they have
Indonesian names. Then there are special religious holidays which only
part of the population celebrates: Idul Adha (Sacrifice Day, commemorating
Abraham’s sacrifice), Mi’radj (the day on which Mohammed ascended to
heaven to address God), Maulud (the Prophet’s birth- and death-day), etc.
for the Moslems; Hari Natal (Christmas) and Hari Pentacostal (the Penta-
cost) for the Christians; and the first of Sura, the actual Javanese New Year,
for a few scattered adherents to mystical sects. But the big holiday is still
the traditional end-of-fast celebration: Rijaja, the one holiday with an im­
portant significance to all Javanese.



                             N ational Holidays
with the exception of May First and        August Seventeenth, almost all the
national holidays are, so far as the mass of the people are concerned, empty
formalities. Some of them, such as Princess Kartini’s Day or Armed Forces
Day, occasion very little celebration of any sort in Modjokuto and are known
there mainly from newspaper descriptions of celebrations in the larger cities.
Others, such as International Students Day or Women’s Movement Day, are
the concern only of that small minority of the population in the relevant
»376«                                         THE    RELIGION         OF    JAVA
special organizations, in this case of students or of “awakened” women. Even
within such relatively homogeneous subgroups, however, all is not always
harmonious. The Moslem student groups held aloof from Students Day be­
cause they regarded the main secularist student group—Ikatan Peladjar dan
Pemuda Indonesia, or IPPI—as Communist dominated, and held their own
celebration on a different day. The women managed to do better. A joint
committee of representatives from all women’s groups—Moslem, nationalist,
and left-wing—conducted the celebration, which consisted mainly of a mass
meeting with speeches in the town hall. But the whole affair nearly came to
grief over the polygamy problem, leaving embittered feelings and resolutions
of “never again” on all sides.
     On National Anthem Day, a corps of Chinese students dressed in white
uniforms marched briskly into the District Officer’s yard. There was an (ob­
ligatory) competition in the singing of the anthem (which, as it is in Indo­
nesian, is not within everyone’s power) by the village officials of the eighteen
village-clusters, and there were speeches by several town leaders and the
District Officer. But very few people came to watch the proceedings, and those
who did were, most likely, merely reminded of their prejudices against the
commercially prosperous Chinese.
     In general, abangans and santris tend to regard the less important national
holidays as a largely prijaji concern and are “ashamed” or “embarrassed” to
go to them.

  At Bu Ardjo’s credit society meeting (Bu Ardjo was our landlady, an
  abangari), Bu Merto announced, as a representative of PERWARI (Persatuan
  Wanita Republik Indonesia, an entirely prijaji women’s club), that there was
  going to be a ceremony of flower strewing on the graves of the heroes of the
  Revolution on October 5, the Armed Forces Day, at 4 p.m. Bu Ardjo said
  on the way home that she was going. . . . On the morning of the fifth we
  went to the market to buy the flowers, but in the afternoon Bu Ardjo said she
  wasn’t going, that just Supiah (her granddaughter, aged 12) would go as her
  representative. I asked why, and she said that women without underpants
  could not go in a graveyard; and I said I didn’t believe it. She then said that
  she would have to sing, and that she doesn’t know the songs. Later I asked
  Supiah what it was, and she gave the same reasons, but added that there were
  going to be a lot of prijajis there. When it came time to go, Bu Ardjo said that
  the affair was at five; so we waited until 4:30 to go. We found when we
  (Supiah and I) got there that it was all over, having happened at 4:00. . . .
  This not going to the ceremony which was run by PERWARI shows up the
  class position of PERWARI. When Sulastri (a prijaji girl from Djokja) was
  visiting us she asked Bu Ardjo if she belonged to women’s clubs and Bu Ardjo
  said no, she couldn’t write.

    May First is rather more of an occasion. The labor unions—by-and-large
“Communist dominated,” parade around town carrying banners demanding
the death of imperialism, the cessation of corruption, the cession of Western
New Guinea to Indonesia, and so on. They end up at the town square, where
a large rally is held under some huge pictures of Stalin, Lenin, Mao, and
Conflict and Integration                                                  »377«
national Communist heroes and leaders (recently, the displaying of portraits
of foreign leaders has been forbidden). Partly because during the field period
the Communist party was supporting the Government, partly because the
Government, afraid of violence, laid down rather strict rules about what
could be said and done on May 1st and enforced them by the presence
of a goodly number of well-armed policemen, the rallies and celebrations
tended to be rather mild.
    Although the influence of this holiday in the villages is undoubtedly less
than it is in the town, it is not wholly absent, especially since the unions
are very strong in those villages near or within the former Dutch plantation
areas. Santris, of course, hold aloof (as do some of the more anti-Communist
prijajis) and in fact unsuccessfully attempted to establish a new holiday—Hari
Kabungan Nasional (Day of National Mourning)—to “celebrate” (on May
1st) the attempted Communist revolt against the Republic at Madiun in 1948.
     In the large cities, May 1st celebrations are very large indeed and, along
with the unions and such religious groups as PERMAI, form another mech­
anism by means of which abangans can be attached to left-wing causes,
which in the absence of any important radical non-Communist political
movements of importance means, ultimately, the Communist party. (In the
large cities separate Socialist rallies are usually held on May 1st, but there are
no Socialists in Modjokuto, and even in the large cities the movement seems
to be crumbling.)
     The largest of the nationalist holidays is undoubtedly August Seven­
teenth, Freedom Day, the day on which (in 1945) President Sukarno and
Vice President Mhd. Hatta issued their declaration of independence from
Dutch rule and so inaugurated the Revolution. The symbols in terms of
which the Seventeenth of August is celebrated are, for the most part, not those
of Islam nor of traditional abangan religion nor of mysticism, but those of mod­
em nationalism, of intelligentsia culture. There is a parade of school children,
complete with drum corps; there is a laying of wreaths on the graves of
victims of the Revolution (there is a special cemetery for the war dead next
to the District Office); there is a flower-arrangement contest for women,
for which the prize is a set of dishes; there are various sports contests—bad­
minton, volley-ball, one-o-cat, soccer—for which trophies are awarded to
the winning teams; there is a baby-show at which winners are selected for
health and beauty; there is a profusion of Indonesian national flags; there
is a banquet and formal reception for town leaders of all groups at the District
Office; and, at the climax, there is the President of the Republic’s speech
broadcast from Djakarta and sent out over loudspeakers to crowds of people
gathered in the public square. Some more traditional symbols persist. People
decorate their houses with young coconut palm leaves as for any celebration;
Nahdatul Ulama holds a terbangan in the mosque; and there are Javanese
dances, popular dramas, wajangs and so forth, both at the District Officer’s
and at the railroad union hall. But, in general, the holiday takes the forms
of its expression from the vocabulary of modern nationalism.
     The degree of participation' if only passive participation in the sense of
»378«                                         THE     RELIGION         OF   JAVA

mere observation of the events or displaying of a flag, of the mass of the
people in the August 17th celebrations is surprisingly great, particularly, of
course, in the town, but also outside of it. August Seventeenth is a genuine
“new” holiday symbolizing the new forms of social and cultural integration be­
ing proposed for Indonesian society by an urbanized and educated elite; and
its remarkably great importance in the minds of the people generally, many
of whom have but little understanding of the political changes through which
they, are passing, is evidence that nationalism’s hold on the average Javanese
is already very extensive and gaining in strength. August Seventeenth is the
“new Indonesia,” with all its strength and weaknesses. It is an urban sponsored
advertisement for a way of life which though still unclearly formulated is of
increasing attractiveness to more and more Indonesians.
     But die appeal of August Seventeenth as a truly national holiday, a general
ritual form acceptable to all subgroups within die society, is still severely
limited by several factors. In the first place, although participadon in the holi­
day is certainly far more extensive than in any of the other new nationalist
holidays, it is still predominandy a prijaji affair so far as active organization and
direction of it is concerned. Baby-shows, flower-arrangement competitions, and
banquets at the District Officer’s are not likely to prove very meaningful even
to the least tradition-bound peasant; and the centering of all planning effort
on ceremonies in the town leaves the countryside with littie but a passive,
mass-audience role to play. As for the santris, although they cooperate to
a degree, they do so hesitandy and passively, for they are still not entirely
convinced of prijaji sincerity in making the holiday genuinely non-partisan
in respect to religion. “We don’t mind serving on the sub-committees (planning
the program), say sports or something,” one santri leader admitted uneasily,
“but we don’t like to get involved in the main committee. We just sort of hang
back because there are so many prijaji involved.” At a Muhammadijah
regional conference, a Muhammadijah leader deplored this attitude and
urged Muhammadijah people to participate more in such national holidays
and accept more responsibility for them, not just stick to Moslem holidays
such as Maulud, so that these new holidays will be truly national and people
won’t say santris aren’t in favor of progress.
    Another limiting August Seventeenth as an effective integration ritual is
the fact that any event which brings together rather antagonistic groups
naturally emphasizes not only their willingness to cooperate but also their
differences. Thus a government sponsored Seventeenth of August meeting at
which leaders of all groups spoke was notable for the suppressed tension and
for the sly digs the speakers took at one another. “They didn’t say much,” a
teacher said to me afterward, “but you could certainly feel them jabbing one
another.” This phenomenon of a supposedly integrative ritual symbolizing
divisive elements as well as those making for harmony does not mean that
the division is more genuine than the harmony, but merely that any ritual
which really reflects the values of a society will reflect not only how they fit
with one another but also how they don’t fit. This is even more apparent in
the case of what is easily Java’s most important general holiday : Rijaja.
Conflict and Integration                                                          »3 7 9 «

                     Rijaja: The End of Fast H oliday
i n Rijaja almost every theme we have discussed in this report finds its place.
The holiday, coming as a gala climax of the Fast month, manages to hold
within itself the whole range of religious belief and practice characteristic of
present-day Modjokuto. Abangan, santri, and prijaji; ardent nationalist and
subdued traditionalist; peasant, trader, and clerk; townsman and villager—
all can find somewhere in this most syncretic of public festivals the sort of
symbol congenial to them. This syncretism, this easy tolerance of religious
and ideological diversity is, as I have repeatedly stressed, a fundamental
characteristic of Javanese culture, the recent intensification of inter-group con­
flict to the contrary notwithstanding. But, recent or not, that conflict, too, finds
its expression in Rijaja. In a sense, Rijaja is a kind of master symbol for
Javanese culture, as perhaps Christmas is for ours; and, if one really under­
stood everything one observed on Rijaja—a simple impossibility—one could
say one understood the Javanese.
     The central ritual act of Rijaja is a personal, individual begging of for­
giveness patterned in terms of status differences. The child asks forgiveness
of his parents, the young of the old, the worker of his boss, the tenant
farmer of his landlord, the politician of his party chief, the former pondok
student of his kijaji, the cured patient of his dukun, the mystical student of
his guru. Each of these (relatively) lower status people goes to the home of
the higher status one, where he is received, usually with tea and snacks,
where he formally begs the pardon of the host.* The meaning of this act
is that the petitioner wishes the host to forgive from the depths of his heart
any injuries, intended or unintended, which the latter has done to him in the
past year, so as to lighten the weight of his sins. Having theoretically expiated
his sins in the Fast, he now asks those against whom they were committed
to forgive him for them. Santris sometimes say that this pattern is mildly
heterodox, for only God can forgive sins; but it is probably the most uni­
versally practiced ritual in Modjokuto today. Even many Christians do it
even though, strictly speaking, the holiday is Moslem.
     Because of the inherent relativity of status, the celebration usually must
spread over several days; and in any case higher status people tend to re­
main at home so as to receive petitioners until toward the end of the period,
when they journey out to the few people who outrank them. Very high
individuals, such as the doctors or the District Officer, may make very few if
any visits; the village chief in the semi-urban village in which I lived spent
three wearying days receiving guests in his home without going out at all.
     Despite the nominally religious aspect of the forgiveness ritual, the visiting
around is for most people a gala, quite unserious business. Everyone al­
most inevitably buys new clothes for Rijaja as we do for Easter, and pre­
pares the best food he can for his guests. The visiting pattern is, thus, as
much an opportunity to display one’s clothes and one’s fancy food as it is
    * The most common phrase—in high Javanese—is nuwun pangestunipun sedaja kale-
patan kula, lair batin: I request your pardon for my faults, inside and outside (i.e., your
genuine, undissembled, pardon). This is often shortened to lair batin.
»380«                                            THE     RELIGION          OF    JAVA

a sacred ritual, and the day is both holy day and holiday. The people move
in colorful throngs through the streets and roadways, passing from house
to house, stopping at each for only fifteen or twenty minutes, so covering a
dozen or so in the day, sometimes even two dozen.
    In the more urbanized circles one often finds a replacement of the indi­
vidual visiting pattern by a Idnd of secular party—one high prljaji actually
held one at which beer was served—called a haled bihalal (Arabic for a
mutual begging of pardon), which both simplifies the ritual almost to the
point of disappearance and strongly emphasizes its festive aspects. Perhaps
the final stage in this secularization process is the increasingly popular custom,
more so in larger towns than in Modjokuto, where it is confined to the
highest status levels, of not actually making the pardon-begging visit but
merely sending a small card, rather like a Christmas card, with the pardon
request printed on it in Indonesian.
    There are, of course, other more explicitly religious rituals. As I have
already mentioned, mass prayers are held at dawn in the town square and
in the mosque; santri organizations give out the zakat-fitrah religious tax to
the poor; there is a special slametan on Rijaja (as well as one five days
after). Also, simply because it is such a universal holiday, one in which
absolutely everybody participates (it is the one day in the year when the
market closes down), Rijaja reflects the religious strains, conflicts, and re­
adjustments I have been discussing. Perhaps the most striking example of this
is the fact that one cannot properly speak, in Modjokuto at least, of one
single Rijaja day, for the various groups do not agree on the proper date. In
1954 some people celebrated the Rijaja on Wednesday, some on Thursday,
and some on Friday, each holding that the other people were incorrect.
    The immediate cause of this conflict is the different modes of calculating
the day. We have already seen that there is a conflict over the proper mode of
calculating the date between modernist and conservative santris: the modernists
calculate ahead of time by means of astronomical data; the conservatives
wait, with true caution, to see the moon appear. But they both agree that
the proper day is the day the moon appears, and in 1954 this was Wednesday,
June 2. Abangans and prijaji, however, use the so-called abogé system of
calculation, which is, in essence, but another pétimgan numerological system
like those described in the abangan chapter above.* The lunar year drifts,
    * In the abogé system, the “a” stands for Alip, one of the eight years in the wittdu
cycle (i.e., eight years, each with a different name, make up one wittdu), “bo” stands for
Rebo, one of the days of the week (Wednesday), and “gé” stands for Wage, one of the
five market week days. This means that the year Alip always starts on Rebo Wage, and
knowing this, one can figure the day on which Rijaja falls in any year merely by ex­
tended, though simple, calculation. A shorter method is to take the day on which the
year began and apply the waldjiro formula to calculate Rijaja. “Wal” is Sawal, the
month; “dji” is sidji, “one”, “ro” is loro, “two.” This means that Rijaja (which falls on
the first of Sawal) is calculated by counting one from the week day and two from the
market day on which the year began. For example, if the name of the year is Éhé, it
must have begun (i.e., the first of Sura) on Ngahad Pon. The first of Sawal, or Rijaja,
then falls on Ngahad Wage eight cycles (of thirty-five days each; seven times five) and
22 days later, because Wagé follows Pon in the five day cycle and you count: “Ngahad-
one”; “Pon-one, Wagé-two.”
Conflict and Integration                                                    »381«
 of course, in relation to this rigid mathematical calendar; so in 1954 this day
came out to Friday, June 4 (actually, Djumaat Wage). Now Djumaat
 Wagé, it just so happens, is an unlucky day generally, so that many abangans
made their beg-pardon calls on Thursday, while many prijaji, regarding the
unlucky notion as mere ignorant superstition, did their visiting on Friday,
the proper day. The result was that the santris held Rijaja on Wednesday, the
abangans (and a few prijaji) on Thursday, the prijaji (and a few abangans)
on Friday, a phenomenon which gave rise to a tremendous amount of dis­
cussion and a sharp highlighting of some of the religious strains in con­
temporary Modjokuto life.
     Despite all the disharmonies it reveals, Rijaja, simply because it is the
most catholic, the most festive, and the most genuinely collective of their
ceremonies, reveals even more clearly, though less explicitly, the under­
lying unity of the Javanese people, and, beyond them, of the Indonesian
people as a whole. With the exception of Hindu Bali and a few Christian
and pagan areas, it is everywhere a major holiday. In a broad, diffuse, and
very general way it stresses the commonalities among all Indonesians, stresses
tolerance concerning their differences, stresses their oneness as a nation. It
is, in fact, the most truly nationalist of their rituals, and, as such, it indicates
the reality and the attainability of what is now the explicit ideal of all Indo­
nesians—cultural unity and continuing social progress.
                                 Appendix: A Note on
                                    Methods of Work



T h e w o r k on this report on Javanese religion has been conducted in several
phases.
     In the first phase, from September 1951 to July 1952, intensive preparation
in the Indonesian language (i.e., Malay) was undertaken at Harvard, first
under Professor Isadore Dyen and then under Mr. Rufus Hendon, later direc­
tor of the project, with the assistance of native speakers. July to October of
1952 was spent in the Netherlands interviewing Dutch scholars on Indonesia
and making use of the unparalleled library resources on Indonesia at the Uni­
versity of Leiden and at the Tropical Institute in Amsterdam.
     The second phase, from October 1952 to May 1953, was spent mainly in
Djokdjakarta, a central Javanese court town, where a study of Javanese lan­
guage, using students from Gadjah Mada University, was undertaken, and a
certain amount of general familiarity with Javanese culture and urban life
gained. A month and a half was also spent, during this period, in Djakarta,
the capital of the country, interviewing religious and political leaders, col­
lecting statistics, and investigating the organization of the government bureauc­
racy in general and the Ministry of Religion in particular.
     The third phase, from May 1953 to September 1954, comprised the field
work period proper, and was spent in Modjokuto. My wife and I lived during
this whole period with the family of a railroad worker at the northern edge of
the town, the house actually being located not in the village of Modjokuto
itself, but in a neighboring one which was only urban in its southeastern
quarter.
     This family consisted of the worker, a man of about sixty-five, his wife,
perhaps five years younger, an adult married, but now divorced daughter,
probably in her late thirties, a son of about twelve years of age, and a
daughter and son of the adult daughter—i.e., grandchildren of the house­
holders—about ten and four years of age. Two other older married sons lived
in Djakarta and returned once or twice for stays during this time. We had one-
half of the house more or less to ourselves, and built a wooden “office” in
the main room for additional privacy.
                                       383
»384«                                        THE RELIGION            OF J A V A

     All work with informants, formal or informal, was conducted in Javanese,
 with the exception of a few young, highly nationalistic students who preferred
 Indonesian (Malay). No interpreters were ever used, and although during
 the early months of research, communication was both awkward and not
 wholly reliable, this total sink-or-swim commitment to Javanese fairly soon
 led to at least a relatively high degree of fluency and comprehension, and the
 knowledge of the language thus attained proved to be by far the most im­
 portant single research tool in the investigation of religious beliefs and
 practices.
     Despite the focus of this report on religion, and despite the formal division
 of labor among the six field workers taking part in the project, all aspects of
 Modjokuto culture and society were given some attention in the actual proc­
 ess of research, and work on religion as such occupied a good deal less than
 one-half of my total time.
     Various procedures of research were employed. I did a good deal of ex­
 tended and systematic work with particular informants on particular topics,
 either in their own homes or in our wooden “office.” These informants repre­
 sented every major religious stream in the local society, the major occupational
 types, the main political affiliations. They were also scattered as to place of
 residence, class standing, regional background, and age, as well as being of
 both sexes (the bulk of formal interviewing of women was done, however, by
 my wife). It cannot be claimed that as a group my informants were a repre­
 sentative sample in the specific sense, for the practical problems of securing
 informants in the field and the lack of a wholly reliable and detailed quantita­
 tive description of the population as a whole, made this impossible. But the
 group was at least neither heavily loaded in any one direction nor lacking
in representatives of any major social and cultural category. With one or two
exceptions, I did not explicitly pay informants, but rather periodically gave
 them gifts as expressions of gratitude.
     The bulk of the period of research was actually not spent in the formal
interviewing of specialized informants however, but in more informal “par­
ticipant observation” activities. I attended dozens of public events, organiza­
tional meetings, rituals, and so on. Hours were spent in “idle” conversation
or informal interviewing in coffee shops, in stores and market stalls, in the
fields, in the office of the village, in the mosque yard, etc. Trips with inform­
ants—to their parents’ home, to the city, to see some ruin or other, etc.—were
taken. I sat in school rooms, watched soccer games—even in the movies one
does not escape one’s work, because one finds oneself more interested in the
pattern of audience reaction than in the movie, particularly as the movie is
usually “Tarzan’s Savage Revenge.”
     Finally, a good deal of statistical and other data were gathered from the
various government offices in the town; Thematic Apperception Tests were
given (by my wife) to thirty-five subjects; sentence completion tests were ad­
ministered to high school students, who also wrote short “life history” com­
positions for us (in Indonesian). Together with other members of the pro­
ject, most notably Donald Fagg who planned and directed the work, a map of
the urban area was prepared showing house types, business, public buildings
Appendix: A Note on Methods of Work                                        »385«
and areas, etc., which was then correlated, as well as possible, with voting lists,
to give at least a rough household and occupational census of the town.
     I represented my role, as did the other members of the project, in a
simply straight-forward way for what it was: I described myself as a university
student come to Java to gather material on “the Javanese way of life” in order
to write a dissertation for a university degree. Not all my informants, of course,
understood very precisely what I meant—though a rather surprising number
did—but the fact that I was murid, a student, was a fully comprehensible and
readily accepted role, for reasons which should be apparent from the text.
     Though attitudes toward me and assessments of my “real” motivations
naturally varied, the overwhelming majority of the people with whom I came
in contact seemed willing to accept me as more or less what I said I was, and
to assist me in my work. During the whole period I never met with an outright
rejection, a simple refusal to have anything to do with me at all, a reflection
of Javanese etiquette rather more than my own social skills, and a great many
people responded with genuine enthusiasm—or at least as much enthusiasm
as the Javanese feel it proper to permit themselves to feel—to my requests
for aid. Despite the fact that there were, altogether, eleven of us Americans
in and around Modjokuto, no incident, political or personal, occurred and
no member of the project experienced any unusual difficulties in carrying out
his research plans.
     The single space quotations in the text are from my field notes, with at
most a few grammatical and syntactical repairs, the removal of some unpro­
fessional editorial comments, and a translation of a great number of words
and phrases, sometimes whole sentences or paragraphs, from Javanese. I took
notes in English, translating what I and my informant were saying as I went,
but left expressions which were either peculiarly apt, peculiarly difficult to
find English equivalents for on the spur of the moment, or were of technical
importance to record, in Javanese. The result was a kind of field note pidgin
which became rather more Javanese and less English as the period wore on,
so that ultimately the notes become unreadable for anyone who does not
know Javanese; a defect I have, I hope, removed in the text excerpts.
     In formal informant interviews, and in many other cases, notes were taken
at the moment. When, especially in certain kinds of informal contexts and
certain kinds of meetings, etc., note-taking would alter the social situation, I
wrote notes only afterwards, usually within an hour or so. Handwritten notes
for one or two days were then typed, mainly at night, in a chronological
fashion. A tape recorder was used for TAT’s and some other material, but be­
cause it is so much easier to put material on to such a recorder than to tran­
scribe it off again, I did not use it very much in interviews as such.
     As a result of this method of work there is perhaps less verbatim mate­
rial in the notes than in those cases where the anthropologist works with an
interpreter and records, electrically or by hand, the text and its translation,
 or demands a “literal” account from the interpreter. Much of my material is
 thus a paraphrase, or at least a somewhat catch-as-catch-can translation, of
what the informant said rather than his exact words. When, however, quota­
 tion marks are put around an informant’s statement in the notes quoted above,
»386«                                        THE RELIGION            OF J A V A

it is, at least more or less, a literal, or close, translation of what he actually
said, for I wrote down the Javanese. My own opinion is that whatever loss
of accuracy is involved in non-verbatim translation it is more than compen­
sated for in the increased quantity and variety of material one gets and the
greater degree of naturalness and free-flow quality of the interview situation
(it also has the virtue of not presenting as verbatim what is really paraphrase).
But this is a debatable point, and for some sorts of material—myths, folk­
tales, linguistic texts, etc.—verbatim transcription is of course essential, and
was used here as well.
     The final phase of the report was, then, the writing of it, a full-time occu­
pation from October 1954 to August 1955, when I was employed as a re­
search assistant at the Center for International Studies, at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, the sponsors of the project. Because of the joint
nature of the project, and the division of labor into “aspects” for purposes of
reporting, as well as because of the paucity of specific data of a modem
anthropological sort on Java, it was decided by the members of the research
team to write reports which were basically descriptive, rather than either com­
parative or explicitly theoretical in nature.
     The above report, with a different introduction and conclusion, was sub­
mitted as a doctoral thesis to the Department of Social Relations at Harvard
University in the Spring of 1956.
                                                          Subject and
                                                         Author Index



Abduh, M., 137-38                               curers
Abraham, 79, 173                                    belief in, 90-91, 95-96
agricultural rituals, 80-81                         Chinese, 103
ancestor worship, 76                               personal characteristics of, 89-90
Arabs, 125,132, 139                                possessed, 99-103
Ardjuna, 43, 264, 265-66, 268, 270,                 techniques of, 9 Iff, 100-102
        272, 290-91                                training of, 87
art                                                types, 86
    contemporary, 262, 302-308                     Western trained, 105
    classical, 260-88
    Islamic, 155-58, 178                        dance, 156-57, 282-87, 296-300
    popular, 261-62, 289-302                    Dar Ul Islam movement, 211
                                                Déwi Sri, 8 In
Batara Guru, 81                                 death beliefs, 68,70, 71, 72-76
betrothal, 53-54                                detachment, 53, 69, 70, 71, 73, 74
Bima, 264, 266, 268, 270, 272-75                Dewey, Alice, vii, ix
Brataséna; see Bima                             disease
                                                    cure of, 91-95
calendar, 31-32, 38-39, 42, 52n, 77n,               theory of, 95-99
        380n                                        types of, 92,97-99
calendrical ceremonies, 77-81                   divination
chanting, 72                                        methods, 32-35, 81
childbirth, 45-47                                   occasions for, 31, 80, 91
    ceremony for, 47-49, 84                     divorce, 202, 203, 206
Childe, V. Gordon, 235                          Djakasudana, 81
Chinese, 1, 2, 3, 103, 367, 372, 376            Djanaka; see Ardjuna
circumcision, 51-53                             Djokjakarta, Sultan of, 237
circumcisor, 51-52                              drama, 155, 262-80, 289-95, 302,
“cleansing of the village” (ceremony),                  306-307
        82-83                                   dreams, 76, 84
conservatism vs. modernism, 112ff,              DuBois, C., 234
        130, 139ff, 148ff, 162-63, 177-
       -80, 182-97, 221-24,235-38               eternal retribution, 75
                                          387
»388«                                     THE RELIG IO N          OF    JAVA

etiquette, 24Iff                             Friday service, 215, 218-20
    principles of, 243                       trust foundations, 179n, 201, 203
    linguistic, 248-60                       Indonesian form of, 127ff
                                             Indonesian history of, 131-47
Fagg, Donald, vii, ix                        community, concept of, 128-29
fasting, 29, 220-24, 323-25                  “conservative” and “modern,” 130,
fate, Islamic concept of, 149, 150-52            133ff, 139ff, 148ff, 162-63,
folk-tales, 301-302                              177-80, 182-97, 221-24
food symbolism, 39-^10, 48-49, 50, 52,       and art, 155-58, 178
        78, 79                               and education, 177-98
Foster, G. F., 227n, 228n                    and politics, 135, 136, 139ff, 144-
“Freedom Day” (August 17th), 377-                47, 162ff, 207-10
        78                                   and the state, 199ff, 207, 210-13
funerals, 68-72, 117-18                  Islamic State, concept of, 211-14, 368
    speech at, 71
                                         Japanese
Geertz, Hildred, vii, ix, 258n               occupation period, 142-44
Gibb, H. A. R., 121, 137, 160, 199           attitude toward Islam, 143-44
Gonda, J., 239                           Jay, Ann, ix
von Grunebaum, G. E., 211                Jay, Robert, vii, ix
                                         Judistira, 264,266, 272-73
Hadith, 121-22, 158                      “Just King,” concept of, 330, 366
Hari Raja; see Rijaja
harvest specialist, 81                   Kahin, G. McT., 350, 35 In
Hasjim, Wachid, 144                      Koran, 121-22, 158-59
Hatch, R., ix                            Koran teacher, 128-29, 134ff, 178ff
Heine-Geldem, R., 23In                   Korawa, 264ff
Hendon, Jane, ix                         Kunst, J., 262n
Hendon, Rufus, ix, 253n                  Lebaran; see Rijaja
Heyne, K., 92n
Hindu-Buddhism, 228-29, 236-38           magical lore, 88-89
Hizbullah, 145                           Mahabharata, 263, 269ff, 285
holidays, 374—81                         Mansoer, H., 144
Hurgronje, C. Snouck, 123-24, 125,       marriage
        126                                 ceremony, 53-61, 84, 117, 203
                                            dress, 57
Idul Fitri, 173, 222; see also Rijaja       payments, 54, 56
Idul Adha, 173                              specialist, 42
Islam                                    Masjumi, 144ff, 149, 153, 158, 162ff,
    general summary, 121-23                     208-209, 221-24, 364, 366
    law, 122, 129, 138-39, 199ff         “May First” (holiday), 376-77
    Five Pillars of, 122-24              medicine
    Confession of Faith, 41                 Chinese, 103
    Meccan pilgrimage, 125, 133-34,         herbal, 92-93
         135, 177, 181, 204-205             magical, 103-104
    tithe, 173-75, 223                      metallic, 94
    prayers, 215-18, 221-22                 patent, 104
    fast, 220-24                            Western, 105
Subject and Author Index                                                  »389«
menstruation, 44                          “National Anthem Day” (holiday),
midwife, 42                                      376
Millikan, Max, ix                         “Night of Power,” 79
Ministry of Religion
   national organization of, 200-201      Oliver, Douglas L., ix
   local organization of, 202
   functions of, 203-207                  Pantjasila, concept of, 115, 214, 352
   and Moslem political parties, 207-     Partai Indonesia Raja (PIR ), 351-52
         10                               Partai Komunis Indonesia (P K I), 376-
Modjokuto                                         77
    settlement of, 131-33                 Partai Nasional Indonesia (PN I), 213—
    population of, 1                              14, 236-37, 352, 364
    agriculture in, 1-2                   Partai Sarekat Islam Indonesia (PSII),
    trade in, 1-3                                 144-45, 162, 191-92, 210, 222
    bureaucracy in, 3-4                   Pendawa, 264ff, 285
    development of Islam in, 131-47       Permai, 112-18, 364
mosque, 180ff, 215-16                     Pigeaud, Th., 4n, 262n
Muhammad, 39, 41, 78, 121                 poetry, 280-82
    birthday of, 78, 159                  political parties, 112ff, 126, 128-29,
Muhammadijah, 124, 126, 138ff, 145-                135, 136, 139ff, 144-47, 148-
         46, 148-49, 154,162ff, 192-97,           4 9 ,1 5 8 ,162ff, 188-90, 190-91,
         210, 221-24, 344, 367, 368,              191-92, 207ff, 335, 351-52,
         378                                      364, 366, 371, 376-77
music, 156, 278-80, 302-305               possession, 19-21
mutual aid, 6Iff                          prayer house, 18 Iff, 215-16
mysticism, 46, 59, 91, 153-54, 155,       pregnancy ceremony, 38-44
          182-84, 269, 271-75, 281-82,    puppeteer, 42, 262-67
         284, 286, 287, 309-38
    teachers of, 311, 312, 313, 328-33,   Rachman, Abdur, ix
         343, 344, 345, 346, 348          Ramayana, 263
                                          Ryan, Anola, ix
     theory of, 310-12, 315-16, 320-
                                          Ryan, Edward, vii, ix
         21, 327-28, 337-38, 342, 343-
                                          Redfield, R., 227
          44, 345, 346
                                          reincarnation, 75
    sects, 309, 330-32, 339-52
                                          religious conflict, 113-14, 127-28,
     techniques of, 317, 322-26, 341,
                                                    140-42, 148ff, 154, 175-76,
          343, 346, 348
                                                    198, 223, 336, 355-81
     uses of, 319, 349
                                          religious officials
     and politics, 333-35, 349-52             sub-district, 55-56, 139-40, 202
myths                                          village, 56, 68ff, 206-207
     creation, 23                         rice marriage ceremony, 81
     village founding, 27                 Rijaja, 222, 224, 379-81; see also
                                                    Idul Fitri
Nahdatul Ulama, 128-29, 139ff, 145-       ritual feasts
      47, 148-49, 153, 158, 162ff,             described, 12-14, 77ff
      188-90, 208-10, 212-13, 221-             interpretation of, 14-15, 79-81
      24, 366, 371                             types of, 11, 30ff, 38ff, 77-79, 82-
naming customs, 47-48, 84                           83, 84-85
»390«                                      THE RELIGION            OF   JAVA
ritual feasts (cont.)                    sorcery, 74, 96, 106-11
    costs, 36-37, 61-67                      practitioners of, 106-107, 110
    class variations in, 67                  defense against, 107, 110
                                             methods of, 107, 109, 110
Salim, H. Agus, 136                          types of, 107-108
Sardjito, Dr., ix                            reasons for, 110
Sarekat Islam (SI), 126, 135, 136,       spells, 43, 45, 46, 47, 59, 93, 94
         190-91                          spirit beliefs
schools.                                     types, 16ff
    pondok, 125, 134, 135, 177ff, 185-       “frighteners,” 17-18
        87, 203, 209                         possessing, 19-21
    madrasah, 137, 187-90, 203, 209-         familiar, 21
       10, 211                               guardian, 23, 26
    modernized religious, 138, 173,          guardian, of the village, 82-83
         190-97, 210                         place, 24
    secular, 4,197-98, 287                   offerings to, 20, 21, 25, 52
Schrieke, B., 357                            interpretation of, 28-29
Semar, 23, 264, 265-66, 275-78, 285,         spirit siblings, 46
        290-91                           Sitara Rakjat, 370
Seno-Sastroamidjojo, R. M., 92n          Sufisim, 154-55, 182-84
seventh-month birthday ceremony, 49-     Sunan Kalidjaga, 39, 325-26
        50
                                         Suwanto, ix
shadow-play, 155, 262-80, 302
    plots of 263-66
    interpretations of, 267-78           Taman Siswa, 287
    performance, 267-69                  textile design, 287-88
    characters in, 264                   theosophy, 340-42
    ritual significance of, 268-69       Tisnawati, 81
social stratification                    Tjokroaminoto, H. O. S., 136, 373
    gentry vs. peasantry, 227ff          Toynbee, A., 235
    system of, 229-31                    transvestitism, 291-92
    changes in, 259-60
Soemimihardjo, x                         Weber, M., 231
                                  Index of Javanese and
