Chapter 14                      The Santri Educational




Abangan religion , so ritualized and so tied to custom, needs no formal train­
ing to support it. It can be learned as almost everything else in a peasant’s life
is learned, casually and concretely, through following out examples set by
others; and it persists on the basis of a constant rehearsal of its compacted
dramas, woven as they are into the whole rhythm of social and cultural life.
Prijaji mysticism demands training, but, in die absence of any concern for
orthodoxy or any hostility from the society generally, elaborate formal or­
ganization of such training is hardly necessary; and, in fact, prijaji religious
education is quite commonly almost autodidactic. By contrast, a religion
which is at once doctrinal and important must almost necessarily rely upon
a well-developed formal school system for its propagation and for its mainte­
nance, and “true” Moslems are in a special position. The doctrinal complexity
of their creed, its lack of close integration with some of the basic social forms
and fundamental attitudes of peasant society, and the hostility to it on the
part of most non-santris demand that there be a special and persistent effort
made to indoctrinate those who wish to be its followers. Religious illiteracy
and backsliding, neither of them even meaningful to abangans, are central
problems for the ummat, and the Islamic school system is designed specifically
to combat them.




                   Pondok: The Traditional Pattern
at the center of the traditional school system lies the pondok, also sometimes
called pesantrèn. A pondok consists of a teacher-leader, commonly a pilgrim
(hadji), who is called a kijaji, and a group of male pupils, anywhere from
                                       177
»178«                                           T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
three or four to a thousand, called santris.* Traditionally, and still to an ex­
tent today, the santris live at the pondok in cloister-like dormitories, coolc
their own food, and wash their own clothes. They gain their sustenance by
working in the fields of the kijaji or other leading Moslems of the com­
munity, by craftwork such as cloth-dyeing, cigarette-making, and tailoring,
and by contributions of rice and money from their families at home. The
kijaji is not paid, and the students pay no tuition; all the costs of the institution
are borne by pious members of the ummat as part of the religious duties in­
cluded under die zakat, the religious tax.
     The pondok buildings, almost without exception located in the country­
side, usually consist of a mosque (mesdjid), a house for the kijaji, and a set of
dormitories for the santris. Classes are held in the mosque, where the kijaji
chants passages from books of religious commentary (and, since the rise of
Muhammadijah, increasingly from the Koran and Hadith themselves) and
the santris echo him, line by line. If the kijaji understands Arabic, which is
far from always the case, he may comment from time to time on the meaning
of certain passages, the santris writing his comments in the margins of their
books (in Arabic script). If he does not, he can use an Indonesian translation.
In any case, it is not the content but the form which is of primary importance
so far as the chanting proper is concerned.
     The kijaji may hold such classes anywhere from one to five hours a day,
but there is no required attendance by anyone. (Advanced students may lead
the others if the kijaji is not present.) One goes if he wishes to, stays away if
he does not want to attend. The pondok has no fixed schedule, and one may
live there without even chanting at all if he so desires, so long as he earns his
own keep and is not a behavior problem. People go at their own speed, learn­
ing as much or as little as seems necessary to them. When a book is completed
one “graduates” for that book; and when a number of people have finished the
same book, a ceremony called a kataman is held, at which pentjak, gambus,
and terbang amusements are usually presented and various strength contests
held. But there are no “grades” in pondok either in the sense of “classes” or
of “marks,” and one does not graduate from the school but merely leaves
when one feels like it or has a need to.
    Thus people wander in and out of a pondok, only having to gain the
kijajVs permission, which is easily enough obtained if one has a good reputa­
tion. Some stay two weeks, some ten years. Some students move around rest­
lessly from one pondok to the next, often traveling great distances from home,
spending some time here, some there. (Different kijajis often have different
specialties. One is good on law, one on astronomy, one on philosophy, and so
forth. During the Fast it is traditional for santris to spend the month at a
different pondok from the one at which they have been normally staying, but
this too is up to the individual.)
    * Thus the term santri has a broad and a narrow meaning. In the narrow sense it
means “a student in a religious school called a pondok or pesantrèn," the latter name
being constructed on santri as a root and so meaning literally “a place for santris." In
the broad and more common sense of the term santri refers to a member of that part
of the Javanese population who take their Islam seriously—who pray, go to mosque
on Friday and so on.
The Santri Educational System                                                                                 »179«
     Although in some ways pondoks remind one of monasteries, santris are
not monks. Married men are not allowed as santris, not because there is any­
thing unholy in marriage but merely because the duties and responsibilities
of family life conflict with the unregulated pattern of life characteristic of a
pondok. Both divorced men and widowers may become santris. Old bachelors,
insofar as there are any in Java, do not usually remain in pondoks. (Most
santris are between the ages of twelve and twenty-five, although I have known
some as young as six and as old as thirty-five.) Since being a santri is not
a life’s work, middle-aged or old men in pondoks, except as kijajis, are de­
cidedly rare.
     What one has, then, is not the strictly ruled monastery system of medieval
Catholicism, but a system in which each elderly religious scholar is settled
into his own academy,* while students come and go more or less casually
 (although in the pondok they are expected to stay there and minimize contact
with the secular world), supporting themselves by working, doing as much
chanting as they wish, discussing religion with their fellows. There is a marked
tendency for santris to settle down after a time to one pondok and become a
follower of its icijaji, thus often giving a religious sect atmosphere to pondoks,
but the rigid organization of Catholic monastery life is notable for its absence.
A santri is not an apprentice saint; he is merely a young man becoming adult
in a religious environment, growing to maturity with the droning chants of
Islam echoing in his ears.
      But the chants began to echo long before he entered the pondok. The
 typical sequence of religious education of the village santri boy begins at about
the age of six, with his mother telling him stories from the Moslem tradition
 (or the Javanese tradition, adapted to Islam), informing him that God created
 the world and will punish him if he misbehaves, and perhaps teaching him a
 short prayer or two. At eight or so, sometimes younger, the boy begins ac­
 companying his father (or older brother) to the village mosque, where slowly
 he learns to imitate his father’s actions and memorizes a few of the set phrases
 used in the praying. But he is not expected to be deeply serious. Islamic
 services are generally informal enough so that a child running around and
 paying little attention to what the adults are doing is not very disruptive; even
 today almost any mosque will have a few children sitting around or playing
 quietly while adults pray, oblivious of them. Often groups of children are
 gathered together at one person’s house or at several people’s houses in turn
 and taught simple chants.
      When the boy is ten or twelve and seems self-reliant, he is finally allowed
 to go off somewhere to pondok, returning home from time to time for short
 periods (and for circumcision), finally settling down in his own home when his
 parents have arranged a marriage for him. From then on he does his daily
 prayers, goes to mosque on Fridays, contributes to the support of pondoks
 if he can afford to, and visits his old kijajis from time to time for advice,
  spiritual counsel, and even for a little curing:
       * Pondoks a r e u s u a lly d e c la r e d t o b e “ th e p r o p e r t y o f G o d ” u n d e r th e r u le s f o r
I s la m ic re lig io u s f o u n d a tio n s ( wakap) .
»180«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
  He (Usman, Nazir’s half-modernist kijaji son) said that people often went to
  older kijajis for advice, and he mentioned a kijaji in Bragang who gives ad­
  vice to lots of people. He said that in addition to the directly religious as­
  pects of the pondok two other things were always associated with the pondok
  in the old days: pettijak (the fighting dance) and the kijaji as a curer.
  Mainly the kijajis cured people through the use of herbs, but they also prayed.
  Praying was very important, for the kijaji did not want to let the patient
  think it was just the herbs that cured him and not God, lest the patient be­
  come materialistic and think all he needed was the herbs and not God. The
  way it worked was this: The patient came to the kijaji. The kijaji would then
  pray, and while he was praying there would appear in his mind the diagnosis
  and treatment, which herb to use and where to get it. (He said many kijaji
  grew all kinds of herbs in their gardens, but sometimes the herb had to be
  secured from a great distance.) After the patient had got the herb the
  kijaji would then pray over it to make it effective. Usman seemed to think
  curing by kijajis was entirely legitimate from the Islamic point of view and
  quoted to me an American doctor who had said that some sicknesses are of
  the spirit and must be cured by spiritual means. . . .
    The kijajis—curers, counselors, teachers, and scholars—were the men
of top prestige within the ummat. Mostly they were sons of farmers wealthy
enough to have sent them on the pilgrimage—or more commonly, to have
taken them. An old man of sixty-five who had saved for forty years, burying
his money in silver coins under the dirt floor of his house, departing on the
pilgrimage with his young son or grandson was a common sight in the years
before the war. They might be descendants of a long line of kijajis and hadjis
whose steady accumulation of land over the years had transformed them into
small-scale landlords. Religious status and wealth coalesced to produce a
class of mutually independent religious intellectuals who both determined
doctrine and wielded a social power no less important for being informal and
indirect.
  He said kijajis, when they correct someone’s (i.e., a layman’s) point of view,
  never tell him he is wrong but do it by telling a story of long ago from which
  the individual who is wrong can see that he is wrong without being told so
  directly. I said: “Don’t the kijajis sometimes disagree among themselves?”
  He replied, “Yes, this is so. Sometimes England, France, and America don’t
  agree. Isn’t that so— on small things even though basically they are united?”
  I agreed. “That is the way it is with kijajis,” he said. “They often disagree
  over details, but on main issues agree.” I said, “Well, how does the layman
  know which is right?” “He just chooses the kijaji he respects and follows
  him,” he replied. He said that some kijajis have very great influence because
  of their learning, and thus people follow them rather than lesser kijajis who
  oppose them.



   Langgar and Mosque: The Local Santri Commmunity
t h e kijaji and his pondok, then, have formed, and to an extent still form the
nucleus of rural Islamic social structure and the climax of kolot culture.
The Santri Educational System                                                                                        »181«
Combined on the one hand with the pilgrimage and on the other with the
institution of the langgar (small prayer-houses, usually attached to individual
homes), this part school, part temple, part religious brotherhood both related
the Javanese ummat to the wider Islamic world and defined the nature of
orthodoxy for it. Through the returned hadji-kijaji, the concepts of orthodoxy
current in the world capital of Islam filtered down to the mass of the ummat,
first to his santris, then to the rest of the population through the mosques and
langgars, which were the real terminal points of the communication network.
     A langgar is the same as a mosque except that it is smaller, it is often
privately owned (although some langgars are public foundations, as are nearly
all mosques), and Friday service is not conducted in it. Usually langgars are
separate buildings to one side of the house of the owner, but sometimes even
a room in one’s house, from which one has removed all the furniture, may be
consecrated as a langgar. (As in a mosque, one must enter a langgar shoeless;
and, of course, one should not conduct secular activities in a langgar even if
it is but a room in one’s house.)
     In a santri neighborhood or village men will gather in the langgars an hour
or so each evening after sunset prayer, or perhaps for two or three hours on
Thursday evening to pray and chant the chants they learned at pondok. As
there is generally a langgar in such neighborhoods for every twenty-five or
thirty households—usually owned by one of the richer peasants— there occurs
a crystallization out among the ummat attached to the village’s mosque of
smaller congregations of thirty people or so, made up mainly of older men
who have studied at pondoks and returned to marry and their younger sons
who have not yet gone off to the religious schools. (One does not, however,
have to go to the langgar nearest one’s house; nor is it necessary to attend with
absolute regularity, any more than it is at a pondok.)
     Such was the religious division'of labor in the rural ummat: the rich man’s
son went to Mecca to discover what the meaning and form of Islam were in
fact supposed to be;* adolescent boys exposed themselves to the kijajfs learn­
ing in schools supported by the members of the entire community; adult men
chanted in their langgars and instructed their women and young children in
the bare essentials of Islam,** and contributed what they could spiritually
and materially toward maintaining Islam:
   According to Islam, he (an urban Moslem who, however, grew up in a
   small village) said that there are rich and there are poor and there are
   people in between, and this is God’s way; but the rich and poor have dif­
   ferent duties to God. The rich must give money to take care of the poor.
      * T h a t m o s t o f th e s e p ilg rim s a c tu a lly d e riv e d t h e ir n o tio n s o f o r th o d o x y f r o m
th e ir e x p e rie n c e in J a v a n e s e pondoks a n d th e ir c h ild h o o d a r o u n d J a v a n e s e langgars,
b e h a v in g in M e c c a m o r e lik e to u ris ts th a n s c h o la rs , a n d t h a t m o s t p ilg rim s r e tu r n e d
to r e m a in m e r e hadjis a n d n o t kijajis— h o n o r e d f o r h a v in g g o n e o n th e p ilg rim a g e b u t
n o t n e c e s s a rily re s p e c te d f o r th e ir re lig io u s le a r n in g o r w isd o m — a r e tr u e , b u t b e sid e
th e p o in t.
      * !|!T h e w o m e n , th o u g h u n v e ile d a n d in n o w a y se c lu d e d , w e re n e v e rth e le s s b u t
m a r g in a l p a r tic ip a n ts in th e re lig io u s life : th e y h a d b u t to d o th e p r a y e r s , w e a r h e a d -
sh a w ls in th e s tre e t, a n d lo o k to t h e ir h u s b a n d s f o r re lig io u s le a d e rs h ip .
»182«                                      T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
 They must pay the religious tax, give to charity; this is a bounden duty and
 they have no choice if they are good Moslems. They cannot forget the
 poor. They must teach them, help them, support them. It is they who must
 give money to build mosques, pondoks, and so forth. The poor have a lighter
 duty to God. They must pray, be patient, and accept help from those who
 have more money than they and work hard. But they cannot be expected to
 contribute to building mosques or pondoks. He said he himself had it easy.
 If a mosque was being built, he was not asked to give money, just to con­
 tribute a little labor, painting or something of that sort. Yet he wasn’t so
 poor that he could no nothing but receive. Yes, he said, chuckling, he had
 it easy; and he seemed to think that was the best state to be in—not rich
 enough to be too heavily taxed and not poor enough to suffer want and
 have to accept charity. He said that all he had to be responsible for was the
 welfare of his wife and his children, while the rich man had to be re­
 sponsible for more than that—for poor children, for example, and a really
 poor man received help to take care of his family.

     That this noblesses oblige pattern operated so perfectly is to be doubted,
as the same informant in almost the next breath complained of how the
Jcijajis used to embezzle the religious tax, but the integration of roles within
the rural ummat does seem to have been fairly stable and to some degree still
is.




              Tarèkat: Traditional Islamic Mysticism
mysticism , another phenomenon of rural religious life, cut across the segrega­
tion of the unmarried apprentice from the married journeyman santri and
brought adult men, especially aged ones, back into pondoks of a rather
special kind. Mysticism, under the banner of Sufism, was, of course, rife in
Mecca until Wahhabi reformers put it to flight in the twenties; and for many
Javanese pilgrims, who grew up in a society in which mysticism has always
been a characteristic theme, the ecstatic practices of the Sufis were im­
mediately attractive. There were often secret mystical societies within the
pondoks, esoteric fraternities in which only a small minority of the santris
participated but which seem to have had important informal power within the
pondoks somewhat as exclusive university clubs often have. Spiced with
strength testing, flesh mortification, and extended fasts, these sects within a
sect must have approached in intensity some of the Arabic mystical orders in
the Middle East and North Africa, but as they are extinct now and were secret
then it is difficult to find out very much about them. There was also some
mystical practice in the langgars, people counting their beads for hours at
a stretch. But perhaps the main form which mysticism took was that of
brotherhoods of aged men, grouped around a kijciji who was expert in the
science, forming a kind of old man’s pondok, although often the “santris” went
home between sessions and some younger men participated.
The Santri Educational System                                              »183«
  I asked him (a modernist, and so quite hostile to Sufi practices) about the
  kijaji who died this morning. I said, “Why was he called a kijaji, and did he
  have a pondok?" He replied that the man was a mystical kijaji who had
  (in a village adjoining the town) a pondok not of students but of very old
  men (about thirty at any one time) fifty or sixty years old and up who
  did nothing but sit around all day and worship—praying, repeating the
  Confession of Faith maybe a thousand times at a sitting, just going out to
  the toilet and then coming back to go on again, just chanting and praying,
  often starting on Tuesday and going straight on till Friday with only the
  shortest of breaks to eat, sleep, and eliminate. He said that thus this “kijajF
  was concerned with mystical science and headed a mystical brotherhood.
  He said that this man didn’t know anything about the Moslem law. He,
  Ashari (the informant), knew more; and he had talked to the kijaji once and
  asked him what kind of a kijaji he was not to know about the law. He said
  that the old men would come there from their homes for a month or so at
  a time, bringing their own food, sharing everything together, and engaged
  in this mystical repeating, and preparing for death.
    Such mysticism in Java is called tarékat. Although several different Sufi
sects have penetrated Indonesia, the two of major importance in East Java
seem to have been the Kodirijah (Qadiriyya) and Naksabandi (Naqshbandi)
orders, both of which are considered orthodox because the participants do not
abandon the regular pillars. They usually operate on the basis of a four-stage
theory of mystical advancement: saréngat, the carrying out of the usual duties
of Islam; tarékat, which means special mystical techniques; chakékat, which
means “truth” or “reality”; and makrifat, which means gnosis. The typical
image is searching for pearls. For the pearl-gatherer the boat is the saréngat,
the rowing actions he performs are the tarékat, the pearl itself is the chakékat,
and the knowledge he has that this is indeed a pearl—Ills ability to tell a true
pearl from a false one—is makrifat, the goal of the mystic.
    The method employed is the counting of beads; and I never heard around
Modjokuto of any more spectacular techniques, although the bead-counting is
inevitably connected with fasting and staying awake. Counting beads is done
with a string of 99 beads called a tasbéh marked off into three groups of 33
grey beads each by an interspersed white bead. The mystic holds the tasbèh in
his hand and moves the beads along, repeating silently in his mind a holy
phrase such as Allahu Akbar (“God is most Great”) until he has said it 33
times (i.e., arrived at the white bead), at which point he shifts to another
phrase. The same thing can be done without beads by counting three counts
on each finger, thus giving 30 counts on two full hands, to which one more
finger is added for 33.
    Mystic orders of this sort have declined in numbers since the rise of
modernism, which vigorously opposed them, but they have not entirely dis­
appeared. There was one in the village in which I lived, and there were said
to be several in villages up in the mountains towards the east. There was a
very large one with a reputed 900 members, around thirty miles to the north,
and a new one had opened in the next district to the west since the war. But
compared to the situation in the years before the rise of the modernists, when
there were at least a dozen such pondoks in the Modjokuto area, it is clear
» 184«                                      T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
that Sufism has been severely weakened in Java. One of the most significant
factors in the loss of strength by the mystic sects in Java was the Wahhabi
purification of Mecca under Ibn Saud in the twenties:
  When I asked him (an old hadji but not a kijaji) about the Sufi kijaji near
  me, he said that the purpose of this man’s teachings was to help the students
  get it really embedded in their hearts that God exists. . . . He said that the
  students for their part hoped to receive blessings in return for their piety
  and their submission to the kijaji, while the kijaji wanted the students to
  fear him and be completely obedient to him. The students believed that if
  they committed a sin they could ask the kijaji to pray for them and the
  kijaji would pray to the Prophet Muhammad and Muhammad would pray
  to God. He said that when he was in Mecca the first time, in 1921, there
  was a place with a small pile of stones in the middle of the room, and men
  came there every Tuesday and counted beads, but when he got back there
  again in 1930 the Wahhabis had come in under Ibn Saud and cleaned them
  all out. Ibn Saud told them that their practices and beliefs were not from
  the Koran and Hadith, and challenged them to prove that they were, within
  three months, or face execution. So they fled Mecca.




     Pondok to Sekolah: The Santri Educational System
                               in Modjokuto
t h e triumph of Ibn Saud gave a positive jolt to other aspects of Indonesian
reform too, most particularly the school movement, which made rapid prog­
ress after 1924. Of all the reforms the modernists introduced, the idea of
schools designed on a Western model was probably the most bitterly resented
by the kolot, and the most strongly resisted; for by striking at the pondok
system such schools were striking at the very roots of kijaji power. But time,
youth, and the “spirit of the age” were on the side of the modernists; and by
careful construction of their program they were able to weaken the effective­
ness of the accusation of being “infidel” which the kijajis had traditionally di­
rected at colonial “native schools” and now turned upon them. They proposed
that schools be set up on the Dutch model with Western teaching methods,
blackboards, rulers, textbooks and all the other appurtenances of Western
education, but argued that they should still remain under private Islamic
auspices. They insisted that both sexes should be educated, but agreed that
they must be separated. They argued for a regularized class schedule of so
many hours a day, but agreed to make Friday rather than Sunday the vacation
day. And, although they insisted on teaching modern subjects by modern
methods, they included Islam as a modem subject and made it an integral
part of the curriculum.
     As a result, in the Modjokuto of 1953-1954 the idea of the school, if not
the form, had penetrated nearly everywhere, and one found a whole range of
types of educational institutions: pure uncompromised pondoks which gave no
The Santri Educational System                                              »185«
quarter to modern educational theories; mystic brotherhoods heedless of the
general disapproval of them, even by some of the milder conservatives;
pondoks which included rough-and-ready approximations to Western-type
schools within them, in \yhich older santris taught arithmetic, the reading of
Latin characters, and a little general science to younger ones; conservative-run
schools which, although generally approximating the Western pattern, still
concerned themselves with religious teaching of a fairly traditional kind for
as much as three-quarters of their time; and modernist schools in which re­
ligion, although still important, took up less than half the curriculum and was
taught in the same manner as any other subject.



                  The Pondok Pattern in Modjokuto

before the Second World War the Modjokuto landscape was dotted with
pondoks large and small. Different informants give different statistics, but it
seems certain that around 1930 there were at least six large pondoks and many
small ones in the immediate Modjokuto area; and, of course, one of the largest
and most famous in all Java was some twenty miles to the north. (Almost all
NU leaders and a few of the Masjumi leaders have spent some time at this
pondok ; in the thirties there seem to have been twenty-five or thirty people
from Modjokuto there all the time.) Now there are only two large pondoks
and eleven smaller ones, the large ones having about two hundred and three
hundred students respectively, the smaller ones averaging around sixty. The
layout of the two large pondoks, one of which is half a mile east of town and
the other, the larger, four miles west, is about the same and typifies the
traditional pondok “campus” : a large mosque in the center, surrounded by
six or seven dormitories, and a kijajVs house off to one side.
     The dormitories are contributed by the various ummat around Java for
the use of young men from that area (although others use them too, if there
is room, and there are some “general” dormitories). At the larger of the two
big pondoks most of the dormitories were built with contributions from santri
communities in Central Java (Banjumas, Tjilitjap, Solo, Kedu), and, con­
sequently, most of the students are from those areas rather than from Modjo­
kuto. At the smaller of the two, the dormitories and the students are predomi­
nantly from East Java, but again not from the immediate Modjokuto area
but from the north and east.
     The dormitories, the newest of which cost Rp 10,000 and was completed
while I was in Modjokuto, were built by the student santris themselves and are
designed in a severe cloister style, with a covered porch running the whole
length of the building and a series of small, bare, doorless cells opening out
onto it, in each of which four or five boys sleep crowded together on mats
spread on the floor. At both these pondoks, and evidently at most others in
Java, the custom of working for one’s living has largely died out, although
there is still a little of it, and most santris are supported by contributions from
»186«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF     JAVA
home. But all housecleaning, cooking, and clothes-washing is still done by the
santris themselves (people eating when they wish to, either alone or in groups
of two or three), and die secular organization of the pondok is run, largely
independently of the kijaji, by a board elected from among them. Even ad­
mission and expulsion are largely in the hands of the students themselves. It
is little wonder that the main defense the kolot make of the pondok system,
in the face of modernist charges that it is antiquated, impractical, and asocial,
is that, although it may be all that, it is also an excellent model for that ideal
to which Indonesia’s revolutionary battlecry commits her—freedom.
     At both of the large pondoks the chanting hours in the mosque (led either
by the kijaji himself or one of his advanced students, the larger pondok hav­
ing two kijajis ) are from 7-12 A.M., 1-3 P .M ., 4-5 P .M ., and 8-11 p .m .
Since the five prayers are additional, it is clear that anyone who followed all
the “courses” woud be leading a very intensive religious life. In actual practice,
almost no one chants all day. People just wander in and out of the mosque at
will, joining in the chanting and noting the kijaji1s comments when it suits
them or when he is going over something in which they have a particular in­
 terest.
     The typical subjects “taught” (i.e., chanted, with occasional commentaries
or translations by the kijaji ) are fiqh, tasawuf, tauchid, nahwu, falaq, achlaq,
tarich, tafsir, and hadith. Fiqh is the study of religious duties and has two
divisions : that concerned with the correct manner of performance of the pillars
—the prayers, pilgrimage, fast, and so on; and that concerned with personal
relationships—marriage law, criminal law, commercial law. Tasawuf (“Suf­
ism”) is most characteristic of mystic pondoks because it is concerned with
Islamic mystical philosophy, with the “meaning of religion”; and many ortho­
 dox kijajis consider it somewhat dangerous to teach, particularly to younger
 students, because it is difficult and because too much philosophy or mysticism
 in the heads of the young tends to lead to heresy. Nevertheless, all of the
 pondoks in the Modjokuto area teach a little of it. Tauchid is concerned with
 Islamic logic and theology; nahwu with Arabic grammar. Falaq consists of
 astronomical methods for calculating the times of the prayers, the fast, and
 so forth. Achlaq is ethics, often included under tasawuf. Tarich is Islamic
 history. Tafsir is religious commentary, either on the Koran or the Hadith; and
 under hadith is included the scholarly methods by which the hadiths are sub­
 stantiated as being valid. Modern-influenced pondoks sometimes add direct
 reading and chanting of the Koran and Hadith. Of the fourteen pondoks in
 the Modjokuto area, nine teach only tasawuf, fiqh, and the Koran, while the
 two large ones include most of the above. It is rather doubtful, however, that,
 except in the case of very keen students, much content of any but the most
 general and fundamental sort gets communicated to the santris; although
 many of them learn to chant with great skill and artistry a beautiful language
 of which they have no comprehension.
      Both of the large pondoks now include schools taught by the older santris
 for the younger ones—not because the kijajis want them or even approve of
 them, but because the students themselves demand them.
The Santri Educational System                                             »187«
 Kijaji Chotib, from Pleset (a nearby village), was sitting there a while.
 He has a pondok in his place at Pleset, but it is very small. After he left,
 H. Zakir said: “He is very, very clever. He is the only kajaji around who
 has memorized the entire Koran perfectly. (He is also on the NU Govern­
 ing Board.) But he is also very kolot and so he is losing out; his pondok
 isn’t successful; he isn’t getting anywhere with it. The trouble is he sticks
 to the old method exclusively—chant and echo—and does no teaching,
 and the youth these days won’t accept this any more. You have to have the
 school pattern now, at least to some extent. Even the conservative youth no
 longer will accept the old pondok pattern in pure form, and so Kijaji Chotib
 is losing out, even though he is very clever.” Zakir said that he had told
 Chotib this a number of times, but that the latter wanted to stick to the
 old pattern.
    Most kijajis have enough contact with the altered reality of modern Java
to permit at least some school-type teaching, although even such schools are
rather rudimentary and irregular in their organization.
  (The informant is relating his experiences during a four-year stay at a large
  pondok in the next district south of Modjokuto, but the pattern is identical
  with the large pondoks in Modjokuto.) In addition to the chanting there
  was a regular religious school in which only religious subjects were of­
  fered, which the older santris taught. One chose whether he wanted to at­
  tend the school or just chant, but if one started with the classes he was
  expected to stay with them or drop out altogether, not just come in and out
  as one could with the chanting. For those participating in the school there
  was a discussion hour each evening on the previous lesson in the subject to be
  taught the next day. E.g., if tomorrow the religious classes were in tauchid
  and fiqh, one would discuss the last class in each of these subjects, trying
  to get things straight. Problems the students could not solve themselves (the
  older teachers not being presènt at these meetings) they would ask the
  teacher about the next day. The school ran on an irregular schedule, in­
  formation simply being passed around, say the day before, when there was
  going to be a class. In addition to the pondok (chanting) and the school (all
  religious), there were also some general classes given by teachers selected
  both from among the santris and from people outside who had special
  talents. The courses taught when he was there were civics, English, psy­
  chology, education, and arithmetic. To take the whole set one had to pay
  Rp 2.50. But there were no organized classes; one just took what one wished,
  and none of the various branches were coordinated with one another.




     Madrasah: The Conservative School in Modjokuto
IT can be seen from the foregoing that the idea of the school—a graded, time-
regulated, content-stressing educational institution—has penetrated, in the face
of kijaji hostility, into the darkest reaches of the ungraded, casual, form-em­
phasizing pondok. The next interval along the scale toward the secularized
school is represented by the NU schools which one now finds in almost every
»188«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
heavily santri village. These schools, independent of any pondok or kijaji
connections, are typical NU compromises with modernism, and as such are
still not always accepted by the most conservative. Although NU is a con­
servative organization, it must be remembered that in a wider context its
efforts have been toward reform; the very idea of secular organization of the
ummcit, even to protect tradition, is in itself a radical idea in some kolot eyes;
as is the notion of a school no matter how heavily religious.
  In the afternoon I spoke with Kosin, who lives on Merapi street in the big
  house with the langgar attached. He said that his father, who has been dead
  since the Dutch time, was a big trader in tobacco here before the war. . . .
  He was a hodji and one of the richest men in town. Everybody, said Kosin
  proudly, knew his father. His father was a very kolot santri, bitterly opposed
  to Muhammadijah and didn’t even approve of NU. . . . His father was
  illiterate and opposed to school and sent all his children to pondok} and
  Kosin went to the one to the east of Modjokuto for eight years, living there
  all the time. The kijaji was the same one as now. Kosin gave the usual picture
  of pondok life—mostly chanting books and memorizing what they meant
  by listening to and noting the kijaji's translations. Books on law, inheritance,
  family life, and so on were all to be memorized and their meaning noted.
  After a while—eight years—NU opened its school in the kanman in Modjo­
  kuto, and Kosin (who is now in Masjumi) went there for a few years—
  against his father’s will. He said that in those days no kolot santri would
  think of sending his children to the government schools, and the schools of
  the Islamic organizations, which were just beginning, weren’t very well re­
  ceived either. I asked him where he would send his child later (now aged
  two); and he said that there was a difference of opinion between him and
  his wife. His wife, kolot, wanted to send the child to pondok, but he, modéren,
  wanted to send him to school. He said that he didn’t know how it would
  come out later.
     NU schools are called madrasah, which means “religious school” in con­
trast to pondok, at least in Java. There were eleven such madrasahs in the
Modjokuto subdistrict in 1952 with a claimed total attendance of over 1,500,
of whom about a third were girls, and a teaching faculty of 37, of whom three
were women. (As they often are rather fly-by-night affairs, their number is
likely to fluctuate somewhat from month to month.) All but two of these were
three-year schools, the other two being five years. (Government elementary
schools, called sekolah, are three or six, mostly the latter.) Eighty per cent of
the curriculum was devoted to religion, taught pretty much in the old pondok
manner but with a little more effort to explain its meaning, and 20 per cent to
“general studies,” by which was meant reading and writing (in Latin char­
acters) and simple arithmetic. Although these schools were nominally NU,
they were, in line with the very loose central organization of that party,
actually independent and autonomous under the direction of the leaders who
supervised them and who neither asked for nor received much assistance or
advice from the NU Governing Board in town. As they were almost en­
tirely locally financed as well, their self-containment was complete and the
desperate efforts of the more modern town leaders to raise their standards and
improve their organization met with the usual difficulties.
The Santri Educational System                                             »189«
    In an effort to accomplish something along these lines, the Modjokuto
unit of NU founded in 1953 a mualimin or normal school, designed to train
teachers for the various madrasahs. Since it took its students (of which there
were 24 in 1953, there being two teachers) from among the graduates of the
grade-school madrasahs, so all the students were village boys (no girls),
most of whom had been to pondok for a while as well. The mualimin course
is three years, one-half religion, one-half general studies, after which the
graduates can go back and teach in the madrasahs. The hope, obviously, is to
train a group of somewhat more modern teachers who can then “bore from
within” in reforming the village schools toward more “progressive” methods,
undoubtedly a more effective method than putting pressure on the kolot
supervisors of the school directly.
    The mualimin, which is located in the Modjokuto kauman, gives six 45-
minute classes a day for six days a week (Friday being a holiday). One of the
two teachers, (a “graduate” of a five-year stay in the NU headquarters pondok
north of Modjokuto) teaches all the religious subjects; and the other (a
graduate of an evidently fairly modem NU school in the large northern port
city, Semarang) teaches all the general subjects. The religious subjects in­
clude the typical pondok stand-bys—fiqh, tauchid, and so on, but no tasawuf
because it is “too advanced”—with something of a novel emphasis on achlaq,
or ethics, often with more of a Javanese than an Islamic quality to it.
  (The informant is the teacher concerned.) Ethics is taken from general
  life, from the hadith, and from Islamic philosophy books such as that of
  Ali Fikri, a classical Arab writer. This ethical teaching is concerned with
  “politeness” (having in Javanese a rather wider meaning than in English—
  more like “proper behavior”) to God and between human beings. For ex­
  ample, one tells the students that to get angry or say something in a “hard”
  way to someone is wrong. About secrets—if one knows someone’s secret,
  one should keep it to oneself. For example, if A knows B has a big debt he
  mustn’t tell anyone about it. I asked, “Do you mean that if A knows B is
  going to steal, A shouldn’t say anything?” He said, no, he meant things
  which are slightly sinful and that people wanted to keep hidden, such as
  debts and so forth. If a man fights with his wife and one knows it, one
  should not tell other people. He said that there was a hadith on this. A
  friend of the Prophet told the Prophet that he was about to commit an
  indiscretion with a girl. The Prophet said to him: “Are you crazy? Why do
  you tell me about this? You should keep it to yourself.” The point is that one
   should not divulge either one’s own secrets or those of other people; if one
   is going to do something wrong, one should keep it quiet. Another thing
   one shouldn’t do is scare or startle people—for example, startling someone
   at night by wearing a mask. The ethics teacher also teaches that people with
   more than enough food should share it with those who don’t have enough.
  The secular subjects taught are geometry, algebra, English, Indonesian,
pedagogy, physical education, general science, accounting, and geography.
The total budget for the school is about Rp 150 a month, of which Rp 100 is
donated by the NU Governing Board, the rest coming from the very nominal
tuition paid by the students. (Officially, the fee is Rp 10.00 a month, but since
none of the students can afford this they actually pay only Rp 2.50.) The
»190«                                                                <b JAVA
                                              T H E R E L I G I O in j
entire budget goes for the salaries of the two teachers; other needs—benches,
blackboards, and supplies—are met by irregular donations of the NU member­
ship. (The building and grounds were donated to NU by two rich hadjis before
the war, at which time it housed the first NU madrasah in the subdistrict.)
Seventy-five rupiahs a month is not a living wage, but both of the teachers
are peasants with a little land of their own, and they are given their noon meal
each day by the chairman of the school board, a fairly well-off cigarette manu­
facturer. I attended classes now and then at this school, and the following
extract from my notes gives a sense of what the mach-asahs are like:
  I met Cholip, the “general studies” teacher of the NU mualimin, and went
  off with him to sit in on his classes. . . . There were 20 students present,
  mostly 18 to 20 years old, some of them perhaps a little younger. . . .
  Since only two or three students had books (which cost from five to eight
  rupiahs each and are hard to find), Cholip spent the first hour or so writing
  down the text of the textbooks word for word on the board, and the students
  copied it down. (The subject was botany.) He evidently tired of this, and
  so for the second hour he read word for word, slowly, so that they could
  copy from his dictation the content of a book on zoology (he had reached page
  7 of a 105-page book) a passage about sea lions, something called “sea dogs,”
  and so on. It was straight description of the odd animals and fish and classi­
  fications of them—nothing else, and there were no pictures. (The textbooks
  they were using were mimeographed and had only a very few drawings.) This
  rather non-functional information must have been somewhat incomprehensible
  to the students. The few who had textbooks had nothing to do but just sit
  there, which they did, sometimes chatting quietly with other students; the others
  just copied and copied and copied. After the zoology, the teacher read from
  a book a set of questions for them to answer, and then the class was over.
    It is plain from this that, despite the change in external form, these
educational institutions have not moved very far away from the traditional
pattern in which the teacher reads from a book he only slightly comprehends
to students who comprehend it less, with now and then a clarifying comment
added.



          The M odem Religious School in Modjokuto

t h e next interval on the scale from pondok to sekolah (secular school)
is occupied by the old Sarekat Islam school, now operating under the imposing
title of Islamic Educational and Pedagogic Foundation (Balai Pendidikan
Pengadjaran Islam) but known generally as BPPI and familiarly as “the Arab
school.” This is a six-year elementary school with 188 students (tuition:
Rp 2.50 a month) and five teachers, headed by a nephew of H. Nazir, the old
SI leader, and is located in the Modjokuto kauman directly behind the mosque.
Only two of the teachers are graduates of teachers’ schools, and salaries run
Rp 60 a month. This is not a living wage, but all of the teachers have some
outside source of income.
The Santri Educational System                                                                                           »191«
   Ruslam (brother of a BPPI teacher) said that the head of BPPI got only Rp
   80 a month and the teachers Rp 60, and that they taught for love, not for
   money; they had to have a “large spirit.” He admitted that they couldn’t live
   on this; he said the head had a little rice-land of his own and the teachers
   were mostly young men still living at home. Muhammadijah used to be this
   way, but now they were more efficient in collecting money and could pay
   their teachers more, although it was still far less than what the teachers in
   the government schools got. . . .
    The course pattern is similar to that in the NU elementary schools except
that instead of being 80 per cent religion and 20 per cent general, the propor­
tions are 40 per cent religion and 60 per cent general. The teaching evidently
is comparatively good, since of 16 sixth-graders who took the government
final examination, seven passed. (NU madrasah graduates would not even
attempt to take it.) As BPPI is the oldest private school in Modjokuto and
was, before the revolution, one of the three seven-year elementary schools in
town which taught general subjects in the Dutch language (the other two
being non-santri private schools), it is not only deeply entrenched within the
Modjokuto ummat but also has had a longer time in which to develop and
perfect its program. It is still considered the santri elementary school par
excellence.
    But, as SI, now PSII, has shrunk in size, much of the vitality and spirit of
the old days has disappeared and hardened into a conservative modernism,
dreaming of the victories of the past, and most of the younger teachers in the
group are dissatisfied.
   Rasid (a teacher in the school) said there was quite a bit of strain between
   the teachers in the school and PSII proper, particularly its school committee
   (headed by H. Zakir and including all the older leaders), because the com­
   mittee paid almost no attention to the school and wouldn’t let go of any
   money. He said the committee never gave the school any money. It was
   hard to get them to even repair the building; and as for books—well, the
   school committee considered that its duty concerned just the building and
   the desks, and didn’t worry about books, teachers, and so on. In 1951 three
   of the five teachers quit because the party wouldn’t give them any money for
   the school. He denied that this action had been a strike but did admit that
   it had been an expression of their dissatisfaction. He said that he did not
   participate much in PSII itself, because it was a monopoly of the old guard;
   in that the “younger group” stayed around the school and had pretty much
   given up any ideas of doing much with PSII . . . (Rasid was about thirty.)
   He compared their situation with Muhammadijah, where he said the school
   committee people were much more understanding, and the relation between
   the parent organization and the teachers was pretty good.*
       * I t m u s t b e r e m e m b e r e d t h a t to a c e r ta in e x te n t th e M o d jo k u to s itu a tio n is a
p a r ti c u l a r o n e , so t h a t c o m m e n ts a b o u t th e M o d jo k u to b ra n c h e s o f n a tio n a l o r g a n i­
z a tio n s s h o u ld n o t b e ta k e n to b e n e c e s s a rily c h a r a c te ris tic , e x c e p t in a r a th e r b r o a d
se n se , o f th e s e o rg a n iz a tio n s th r o u g h o u t J a v a o r o n th e n a tio n a l lev el. In a n o th e r to w n ,
f o r e x a m p le , o n e m ig h t fin d P S II m u c h m o r e a c tiv e a n d M u h a m m a d ija h less so , d e ­
p e n d in g u p o n th e a c c id e n ts o f lo c a l le a d e rs h ip , h is to ry , a n d so o n . T h e g e n e ra l d is tin c ­
tio n s b e tw e e n kolot a n d modéren t h a t I h a v e d r a w n w o u ld h o ld , I th in k , a lm o s t
e v e ry w h e re in J a v a , b u t th e d e ta ils o f t h e ir in s titu tio n a liz a tio n w o u ld n a tu r a lly v a r y
r a t h e r w id e ly .
»192«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF       JAVA
    But the young teachers keep struggling to improve the school despite their
frustration. (In order to escape from the local pressures, they have been trying
to get BPPI set up independently with direct relationships to PSII’s central
school division in Djakarta rather than working through their own chapter, but
they have not yet been successful.)
  Rasid said that the teachers had introduced two reforms this year, both over
  opposition from the older PSII people. First, religion is now taught in
  Indonesian rather than in Arabic as it used to be, because the children
  couldn’t understand the Arabic. Of course they still read the Koran in Arabic,
  but the language of instruction is now Indonesian in all subjects, general or
  religious, not Indonesian in general subjects and Arabic in religious ones as
  before. Second, BPPI is now closed Sundays rather than Fridays. This was
  very much opposed by the Arabs particularly, who said they would take
  their children out of BPPI if the change went in. It did go in, but they didn’t
  take their children out of BPPI because they knew no other school would
  take them. (The dynamic Arab children are notorious as behavior problems
  in the more genteel atmosphere of Javanese schools, and, with the excep­
  tion of BPPI, most schools refuse to accept them because “they behave like
  animals.”) The argument was that if the children were off on Sundays they
  would be going to church and becoming Christians. Rasid thought this pretty
  asinine, but said it was hard to change anything in PSII in Modjokuto, the
  other men are so conservative.
    As BPPI fairly well fulfills the scmtri elementary school need within the
town (and the need of the modernist element in the villages: of the 188
students, about 130 are from the countryside), Muhammadijah’s effort is
mainly directed to the high school level, although they do have an elementary
school which is having a fairly difficult time in the face of BPPI competition.
  (This is a transcript of a report on a Muhammadijah school committee
  meeting by another member of the project.) The elementary school seems
  to be withering on the vine. First grade, 10 pupils; second, 16; third, 10;
  fourth, 20; and fifth and sixth, none (a function of the time when the
  school was reopened after the revolution—i.e., four years ago). Now there
  is no teacher for the first year, and also there are too few pupils in the class
  for a full-time first-year teacher. What to do? In general, the school is
  dwindling in size, and all but about twenty of the pupils are from the (Mu­
  hammadijah) orphanage, this last being a fairly stable population which
  is getting older. Anyway, what to do this year with the first class? They
  don’t want to force the children into another school. In the first place, the
  orphanage arrangement with the people who put the children in there is
  that they will go to a Muhammadijah school, and they don’t want to go
  back on this. But they don’t want the few outside children to suffer for the
  orphans’ good either. . . . Also, it wouldn’t be possible to find places for
  them all in the government schools anyway. It would be easy to get them
  into BPPI, but this would involve a surrender of their principles, for that
  is a different “ideology” (iudjuan—literally, “direction”) which has too
  much religion; Muhammadijah emphasizes general education as against the
  NU and PSII religious emphasis. In the end they decided to keep the school
  going and spread the teachers out.
The Santri Educational System                                                                                     »193«
    Muhammadijah also runs a kindergarten for pre-school children, which,
from my observation, has almost no religious character at all and is attended
by children of santris and non-scintris alike, and a strictly religious school,
called diniah, with 80 students, all girls, and three teachers.
   I asked what was taught in the diniah and she (a teacher there) said mainly
   religion, . . . because the children get “general studies” in the regular
   Muhammadijah schools in the mornings. . . . The religious teaching is all
   set forth for her in a little book issued by the Central Governing Board of
   Muhammadijah in Djokjakarta. The parts of religion which are taught are
   achlaq, fiqh, the Hadith, and the Koran. Muhammadijah emphasizes in its
   teaching of the Koran that the students should understand what they read.
   It is better to be able to read and understand a few pages than to be able to
   recite the whole book with no understanding of the content. This is the
   big difference between Muhammadijah and other groups. . . .
    But it is its high school which Muhammadijah regards as the heart of its
program. The Sekolah Menengah Bawah Muhammadijah—“Muhammadijah
Lower Middle School”—is comparable to our junior high school, consisting of
grades seven, eight, and nine, and teaching subjects similar to those taught
in our junior high schools. A summary of the distribution of the 232-hour
weekly teaching Toad borne by the staff of nine teachers (two of them women)
gives a picture of the character of the curriculum and an excellent indication
of the over-all education policy under which Muhammadijah operates:

                                                                                                                    hours
  Indonesian (i.e., reading, writing, and speaking Malay, fhe Indonesian'notional language)                          41
  Algebra                                                                                                            24
  Religious Ethics (i.e., moral instruction based on Islam)                                                          21
  Geomo/ry                                    -                                                                      19
  English                                                                                                            18
  History                                                                                                            16
  Chemistry and Physics                                                                                              16
  Geography                                                                                                          15
  Biology                                                                                                            15
  Business Arithmetic                                                                                                12
  Javanese (i.e., writing good Javanese, reading traditional literature, etc.)                                       11
  Piiysicai Education                                                                                                10
  Arabic                                                                                                              5
  Handwriting                                                                                                         5
  Drawing                                                                                                             4


    A dedication of 11 per cent of the curriculum to religious subjects (count­
ing Arabic as a “religious subject” )— and that largely to generalized “moral
instruction” *—is a far cry, not only from the 80 per cent emphasis in the
NU schools on technical religious subjects, but even from the 40 per cent
in the “modern” BPPI. This difference is not due to the fact that this is a high
school rather than an elementary school (although the fact that Muham-
      * W h e n I a sk e d th e b o y w h o ta u g h t th is f o r s o m e e x a m p le s o f th e in s tr u c tio n h e
im p a r te d , h e g a v e s u c h m a x im s as “ D o n ’t d r in k w h ile s ta n d in g u p ” a n d “N e v e r e n te r
a n y o n e e ls e ’s h o u s e w ith o u t first r e c e iv in g p e r m is s io n .” H e a ls o te a c h e s th e m o r a l
sig n ific a n ce o f s e le c te d K o r a n ic p a s s a g e s a n d hadiths.
»194«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF     JAVA
madijah-has far more high schools in Java than either NU or PSII is itself
indicative of the greater strength of the school idea within their group).
The relative emphasis of the various education systems remains about con­
stant at each school level.
    The whole organization of the school testifies to the distance between it
and both the pondok and the madrasah. Six of the teachers are full-time and
can live moderately well on their salaries of Rp 200 to Rp 275 a month,
especially as they are furnished free quarters either in Muhammadijah homes
or in empty houses owned by the richest member of the organization, a store­
keeper. Tuition for the nearly 200 students is Rp 10 a month, and Muham­
madijah donates Rp 600 a month toward the budget. Six of the teachers have
diplomas from senior high schools or above, and the rest either from an ad­
vanced religious school or a junior high school. Success in passing the govern­
ment entrance examination for senior high school have steadily increased
since the school was founded after the war; and in fact the student body
managed to startle almost the entire Modjolcuto populace in 1954 by having
the best record in the examination of the three private junior high schools in
town, although the other two had been generally considered to be academically
superior. (Before the war, Muhammadijah had only an elementary school.)
    Unlike the NU system, Muhammadijah’s school system is patterned ex­
actly after the government school system. Their effort has been not to set up a
self-consistent Islamic school system complete in itself, but rather to or­
ganize a private system which will parallel the national system and be able
to take advantage of it. An example was the founding of a new teachers’
school by Muhammadijah, during the time I was in Modjolcuto. The lower
normal school (i.e., one which trains teachers for elementary schools) in the
national system is the same as the junior high school except that the normal
school is four years long instead of three, the extra time being needed for
education courses. As there was a severe shortage of places in the government
normal schools, Muhammadijah opened a lower normal school of its own,
consisting only of the fourth year—i.e., mainly education courses—and ad­
mitted graduates from the junior high schools. Thus a pupil would have his
three years of general education in the usual junior high school, either govern­
ment or Muhammadijah, and his year of professional courses in the Muham­
madijah normal school. The school committee talked a prijaji who was prob­
ably the most competent and dedicated teacher in the public school system into
heading the new school in addition to his regular job, all the courses being held
in the evenings. Since only about a dozen students participated and there was
some question as to whether the school would continue a second year, the
success of the venture was at best ambiguous. But the setting up of the school
at all is indicative of the energy, imagination, and persistence with which
Muhammadijah pursues its aim to educate the santri community along more
 “Western” lines.
     Another example of the comparatively greater vitality of the Muham­
madijah education program is the effort—first proposed by the Modjokuto
 chapter—of all the Muhammadijah chapters in the residency (six, one from
 each of the six largest towns) to form a kind of regional school system
The Santri Educational System                                           » 195 «
among themselves by (1) coordinating their curricula so that the same
subjects in the same amount would be taught at each school, facilitating
interchange of teachers, standardization of texts, and the like; (2) main­
taining comparable standards at each school so that students could move
easily from one to the other without either advancing or going back a
grade; (3) appointing a “school inspector” to inspect the schools and give
advice on how their standards could be raised; (4) holding regular joint
meetings of the school committees from each chapter to coordinate policy;
(5) initiating a “Muhammadijah Students’ Day” at which students from all
the schools would gather for sports once a year. Admittedly, this somewhat
grandiose plan had hardly got off the ground by the time I left Modjokuto,
and many obstacles stood in the way of its full realization. Nevertheless, even
the mere conception of it is a sign that Muhammadijah thinks about educa­
tion rather differently than do the other santri organizations.
    This rather different way of thinking about education, which, except
that it maintains some contact with Islamic ideology, is nearly the same as
that of those who direct the secular public school system, has, from a func­
tional point of view, some of the defects of its virtues when considered in
relation to the santri context in general. In the first place, although the
technical level of the education is no doubt higher in Muhammadijah schools
than in NU schools and, of course, in pondoks, it is purchased by allowing a
greater secularization of the curriculum, which, in turn, keeps it from reach­
ing the conservative elements in the um mat as effectively as it might.
    Even the more religious members within Muhammadijah itself were some­
what restive about the rudimentary quality of the religious education pro­
vided in their schools and tended to be apologetic and defensive about it.
Muhammadijah schools are more or less the terminus ad quem of the
pondok- to-school transformation, the point beyond which it would be seem­
ingly impossible to go and still claim to be giving santri education (the normal
school being, in fact, almost entirely secular). They are thus far removed from
being attractive to those who are still strongly opposed to “infidel” educa­
tion but, realizing the need and demand for some degree of Western-type
education, are willing to go along with the school idea so long as religious
teaching in a somewhat recognizably traditional form is maintained as an
important part of it. There is an interesting and very marked tendency for
the more progressive elements in each subgroup in the umm at to have their
own children educated not in the schools of their own organizations but in
those of the next more modern group. Thus the less inflexible kijajis send
their children to NU schools as well as giving them pondok training; the
urban leaders of NU seem almost always to send their children to Muham­
madijah schools; and most children of Muhammadijah parents attend public
schools.
     The second and, to my mind, more serious functional defect of Muham-
madijah’s more secular approach to education is one it shares with almost
all educational thinking in Indonesia in both private and public systems—
a concern with financing and organization at the expense of considered re­
flections on general policy and educational philosophy. There is a tendency
»196«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
to spend so much time in trying to worm subsidies out of the central govern­
ment and in planning new schools and revising the forms of old ones that
little thought is being given to what kind of education is best suited to the
Indonesian context or to the santri community they are supposedly serving.
  Rachmad (head of the Muhammadijah high school, reporting to a school
  committee meeting) gave a report on his trip to Surabaja to the office of
  the Ministry of Religion. As nearly as I understand it, the same situation
  exists in the religious normal schools as in the secular ones: i.e., there are
  not enough places. The religious normal school is just like the secular—three
  years’ general education, plus a years’ professional training—except that
  the professional training in the religious school is in religion, not pedagogy.
  They thought that now they could just add a little more religious teaching
  to the high school course (to bring it up to 25 per cent) and stretch the
  curriculum out over four years and they would have a religious normal school
  all their own and could attract some of these students here, perhaps a few
  on government scholarships, which would be helpful financially. . . . So
  Rachmad suggested they do this. They would just keep running the high
  school (as well as the secular normal school) and hire another religion
  teacher, or ask the ones they have to teach a little more, and then just
  ask the students who entered whether they wanted to be high school stu­
  dents or religious-teaching students. High school students would get high
  school diplomas, and religious-teaching students would get religious-teacher
   diplomas, although all would have the same education in the same courses,
   except that the high school students could omit some of the religion courses
   and get out a year sooner. They would all sit in the same room and hear
   the same teacher, but some would be in high school, some in religious
   normal school. As a result the number of students could be increased because
   they could attract both kinds of students. (The high school has never been
  full.) . . . This remarkable manipulation of names pleased all immensely
   . . . and H. Ustaz talked about writing an article for the newspapers about
   the founding of a new school by Muhammadijah in Modjokuto, gleefully
   reciting it out (“In a meeting on June 1st at the orphanage . . .”), and they
   discussed the ethics of this for a while and decided that perhaps they ought
   to say something like “a new division.” But H. Ustaz went happily on, and
   when I saw Ali (chairman of the school committee) the next morning
   he said to me: “You see, Muhammadijah is still forging ahead, we’re
   going to found a new school”; and Ustaz said that pretty soon Modjokuto
   would have as many schools as Blitar. . . . This making two schools
   grow where one grew before by simple manipulation of the excessively
   complicated and specialized Indonesian educational system seems to me
   to be rather typical of educational efforts in Indonesia in general now, not
   just Muhammadijah. In all the meetings of the Muhammadijah people that
   I have attended they never once discussed an educational problem. This
   annoys Pandji (the prijaji head of the teachers’ school); he says that the
   secular school groups never discuss educational problems either. They al­
   ways discussed finances, manipulations—as last night, or how to get some
   more money out of some government bureau. . . .
    Thus, although Muhammadijah has been without a doubt the most suc­
cessful of the santri groups in providing adequate general education for the
ummat, and has made (at least in Modjokuto) perhaps the most tireless
The Santri Educational System                                            »197«
private effort actually to do something on the local level about some of the
social problems facing contemporary Indonesian society, their tendency merely
to ape the dominant public school system in both its strength and its
weaknesses has made their efforts rather less effective than they might other­
wise have been. By imitating the secularism of the public schools they have
lessened their appeal to the ummat, the result being that they are caught in
the middle. Without the finances to raise their teaching to the level of the
public schools, they are unable to attract away from those schools the non-
santri urban students, whose interest lies in an adequate modern Western-
type education; without adequate religious teaching, they tend to put off the
more orthodox in their own camp who are ready to make a compromise
with the modem world but not, as yet, a capitulation to it.
     Moreover, by imitating the concern of the public schools with externals,
necessary as some of them may be, rather than considering the problems
they are trying to tackle in somewhat more fundamental terms, they have
so far been unable to provide a genuine fusion between the intellectually
more effective educational methods of the West and the religious-practical
orientation of the old pondoks. The latter, for all their ideological short­
comings, were more integrated into the society of which they were a part and
at least impressed upon their students the virtues of simplicity, the moral
significance of honest sweat, and the necessity, in an almost entirely agri­
cultural society, of working with one’s hands either in the fields or in pro­
 ducing simple manufactures. Such a fusion could provide a genuine alternative
 to the white-collar literary-lawyer type of education to which the public school
 system seems committed rather than merely a somewhat weaker copy of it.
      These considerations, it ought to be admitted, have not been wholly
 overlooked in the higher echelons of Muhammadijah leadership. When I
was in Djokjakarta, the Central Governing Board of Muhammadijah for all
 Indonesia was engaged, in cooperation with the Ministry of Religion, in
 setting up an experimental school in which the students would study religion
 one-third of the time and general subjects one-third of the time and spend
 the last third working either in small industries learning commercial methods
 or on farms learning modern agricultural techniques. If such experiments
 prove successful and percolate down to the Modjokuto level, a genuinely re­
 formed version of Indonesia’s strongest scholarly tradition may eventually
 appear. But there is no sign of it at the moment.



           Religion in the Public Schools in Modjokuto

one last stage on the pondok-tosekoîah continuum remains to be briefly
considered—the teaching of religion in the public schools. This is a post-
revolutionary innovation, made necessary by the political pressure of the
santri parties on the national government. Grades four, five, and six in the
public elementary schools receive two hours a week of instruction in Islam of
»198«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF     JAVA
a very simple sort, taught by two Muhammadijah people who are paid
salaries by the Ministry of Religion for performing this task. The classes
are voluntary, but most children seem to participate as a matter of course;
most Javanese are too outwardly polite to insult a teacher by taking their
children out of his classes no matter how little they may think of him or his
religious position. The subjects taught are the most elementary—how to pray;
the characteristics of God; who the Prophet was, and what he did; the correct
marriage and death procedures; and simple ethics, mostly taught by means
of children’s stories about Javanese “Islamic heroes.” There is a great deal
of resentment on the part of the non-santri community at this religious
“invasion” of the secular schools.
  When I asked her (a prijaji public school teacher) what the difference is
  between public and private schools, she said that basically, in the teaching,
  there is no difference. Even in the matter of religious teaching they are
  almost the same, for now there is religious teaching in the public schools. I
  asked what per cent of her class take the religious course, and she said
  all of them in her class. She said that many people don’t want their children
  to take it—for example, she herself doesn’t want her own children to; and
  she named another teacher who won’t let her children attend the class.
  This is because it would confuse their thinking. Later, when her children
  have graduated from high school, she herself will teach them a little about
  religion. . . . I asked if she would teach her children to chant, and she
  said no, she would teach them just a few Arabic words and their meanings.
  Pak Surjo (her husband) doesn’t agree with her that they ought to be
  taught religion at all; he thinks they ought to be left alone to find out for
  themselves. She says she just keeps quiet about the issue.
Chapter 1S                                    The Administration
                                             of the Moslem Law:
                                              Islam and the State
                                                    in Modjokuto

T he I slamic law (sarak) is, in Gibb’s phrase,* the very conscience of
Islamic culture; it is through the law that the commands of God, as given
in the Koran, are translated into concrete prescriptions for secular behavior.
Thus, in a sense, there is no genuinely secular behavior for a true Moslem
just as (as we shall see) there is properly speaking no “state” as opposed to
“church.” All aspects of life fall within the jurisdiction of the law; and, as the
law is sacred, all aspects of life are in theory sacred. This is the real meaning
of theocracy in Islam: the unreserved acceptance by the ummat of the pre­
scriptions of the law as binding for daily life “in all its parts and activities.”**
    Since the death of Muhammad and his immediate successors, such theoc­
racy has everywhere proved possible only of approximation. Everywhere the
Moslem law has had to compromise with local custom. Everywhere the effort
of the pious scholars and judges has been to extend the sacred law into the
whole of a given community’s secular life, to establish Dar Ul Islam, “the
abode of Islam.” And everywhere this effort has been resisted by the less
pious. Thus the administration of the law is a crucial practical concern of
the leadership in any Moslem country. This is no less true in Indonesia,
where the compromise the sacred law has had to make with engrained tra­
dition has, perhaps, been greater than in many other Islamic countries. So
we find in Modjokuto a third social form—in addition to the party system and
the network of Islamic schools—in which the santri religious orientation is
embedded: the religious bureaucracy.
   * H . A . R . G ib b , Mohammedanism ( L o n d o n , 1 9 4 9 ) , p . 10.
   ** Ibid.




                                                 199
» 200«                                            T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A

     The General Organization of the Ministry of Religion
b y “the religious bureaucracy” I mean the Ministry of Religion* and its
subordinate bureaus and offices, which administer all government regulations
concerning religion. Although there are Protestant, Roman Catholic, and
“Other Religions” sections, the Ministry of Religion is for all intents and
purposes a santri affair from top to bottom. A much simplified organization
chart of the Ministry follows.**




National
capital
level




Provincial
level




Regency
level



Subdistrict
level
{Modjokuto}



Village
level



    Concerning the national, provincial, and regency levels little need be said
here. The Minister of Religion has been a member of either Masjumi or
     * Almost every educated santri will tell you, “Israel is the only other country besides
Indonesia which has a Minister of Religion with cabinet rank.”
    ** Before the war, the religious bureaucracy was not nearly so elaborated as now.
It lacked all of the middle-rank offices and bureaus which are now so important in
its functioning and was of far less significance in the over-all governmental structure,
being but a small division under the Education Department of the colonial government.
The Administration of the Moslem Law                                             »   201 «
Nahdatul Ulama in all the cabinets,* and almost all the offices in the bureauc­
racy are occupied by members of these two parties, plus a few scattered
people from minor santri parties such as Partai Sarekat Islam Indonesia
 (PSII). One of the most important informal functions of the ministry is,
then, to provide jobs for deserving Moslems, a function extremely valuable
in terms of patronage for santri party leaders attempting to build up local
machines.
     The Bureau of Religious Administration is the largest and most important
of the four bureaus and the only one whose branches extend to the Modjo-
kuto level. Besides the technical management of the ministry as a whole—
budgeting, the arrangement of office complements, etc., the Bureau of
Religious Administration is concerned with the administration of the mar­
riage and divorce laws and laws relative to the setting up and maintenance
of religious foundations (wakap); listing and reporting on the condition of
private mosques and inspecting their finances:** the organization of the
pilgrimage, which is now managed by the government in every detail; and
the collection of various sorts of statistics, such as the number of religious
schools, teachers, and students, the number of registered circumcisers, and
the like. The Protestant, Roman Catholic, and “Other Religions” offices are
under this bureau, but, except in heavily Christian areas and in “Hindu-
Buddhist” Bali, such offices are confined to the national level. (Hesitancy
on the part of Christians about allowing any official interference in their
affairs by an almost wholly Moslem government reduces the ministry’s func­
tions in relation to them largely to counting the number of churches, regis­
tering Christian marriages for the record, and publishing a booklet on
Christianity every now and again to show that the ministry is “for all religions,
not just Islam.” )
     The Bureau of Religious Education is concerned with providing re­
ligious instruction in the public schools; awarding subsidies to private religious
schools; running such government-owned religious schools as the Islamic
University in Djokjakarta (Perguruan Tinggi Agama Islam Negeri) and
several government-owned schools for religious judges and for religious
teachers; providing Moslem chaplains for prisons, the army, police barracks,
and the like; printing and distributing schoolbooks on religion, including
translations of foreign books. The Bureau of Religious Propaganda is con­
cerned with distributing pamphlets, booklets, posters, and the like concerning
Islam and in providing translated sermons (chotbah) for use in local
mosques if the directors of the mosque so desire. The Bureau of Religious
Justice regulates the Moslem courts, the function of which in turn is to give
    * It was a conflict within the unitary Masjumi over whether a Muhammadijah or an
NU man was going to get the seat in the Wilopo cabinet which finally drove NU—
Muhammadijah having won the intra-party struggle—out of Masjumi in 1952.
    ** Since mosques, especially in town, may be dedicated as wakaps with a proviso
that the nadjir (official caretaker) be the head of the local religious office, this often
includes the actual management of such mosques, although in theory all mosques are
private.
» 2 0 2«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF         JAVA
advice to those who request it on difficult points in the Moslem law—most
often centering around inheritance*—and to grant divorces to women who
complain of desertion or maltreatment under the clause permitting divorce
for such reasons included in every marriage contract.



       The Local Organization of the Ministry of Religion

in   a subdistrict capital such as Modjokuto, where there is only an Office
of Religious Administration (Kantor Urusan Agama, commonly referred to
as KUA or the Kenaiban, from naib, the chief official in the office), what­
ever functions of the other three bureaus need to be performed at that level
are either channeled through it or, more commonly, handled directly by the
regency or provincial office. Thus the religious teachers in the government
schools are supervised by the Regency Office of Religious Education in
Bragang, the regency capital, and the one religious scholar in the area—
a Masjumi leader—who prepares Friday sermons for government distribution
works directly out of the Office of Religious Propaganda in Surabaja, the
provincial capital. As for legal advice, the local naib will give it if he is
able, which is not likely if the case is very complex, but if not he will refer
the petitioners to the Islamic Court in Bragang.
     The head of the local KUA is the naib. Under the new set-up there
should be a “Head of the Religious Office” (Kepala Kantor Urusan Agama)
over the naib, so that Christians cannot argue that the office is entirely
Moslem; but in Modjokuto (and, I imagine, elsewhere on the subdistrict
level) this has not yet been instituted and the naib heads the office as
traditionally. His duties mainly concern the general direction of the office
and the regulation of marriage and divorce. He is assisted by a staff con­
sisting of the chotib, who has as his special duty the giving of information
talks to Moslems about the requirements of the Islamic Law; the imam, who
leads the worship in the Modjokuto mosque and is generally concerned
with problems focusing around religious ritual; the mukadin, who assists
the imam and who calls the ummat to prayer from the mosque tower; the
merbot, who cleans the mosque, office, etc.; and the ketib, who is the office
clerk. Actually, the table of organization, although all the jobs in it are
filled, is more theoretical than actual, and in Modjokuto all the officials
(except the merbot, who is a janitor pure and simple) do all the work of
the office without any apparent division of labor among them, save for
the general executive functions of the naib.
    * One does not have to use Moslem inheritance law, however, and few people, even
among the santri group, do. The Islamic courts have only advisory powers and may
act only in cases voluntarily referred to them by petitioners who are free, so far as
the civil state is concerned, to reject or ignore their decisions. Only concerning marriage
and divorce are the civil and the Moslem laws fused (except for Christians and the
Balinese, who are Hindus); in all other areas recourse to Moslem law is voluntary.
The Administration of the Moslem Law                                      »203«

                          Marriage and Divorce
ideally, the KUA should, from a santri point of view, be concerned with
administration of the whole of the Moslem law, but in fact it is largely
restricted to that surrounding marriage, divorce, and remarriage. Under
Moslem law a man who wishes to divorce his wife must pronounce the so-
called talak phrase: “Kowé kok-talak ” (“You I divorce” ). If he pronounces
the talak only once, he may change his mind at any time within three men­
struation periods and take his wife back, a process known as rudjuk. He
then has two talaks left. He may, say ten years later, dismiss his wife again,
and then remarry her within three menstruation periods. If after either of
these first two talaks he does not remarry her within the prescribed three-
month period, the pair is irrevocably divorced and cannot remarry unless
the woman has in the meantime married and been divorced from another man.
Similarly, after a third talak (i.e., after two rudjuks ) the pair cannot rudjuk
and so cannot remarry unless the woman has married and been divorced from
another man in the interval. It is also possible for a man who is particularly
angry at his wife to issue two or even three talaks at one time, making rudjuk
impossible; but the naib usually attempts to discourage this latter practice
as rash and unreasonable. The administration of this and of the marriage law
takes up probably 80 per cent of the time of the officials of the KUA in
Modjokuto.



            Religious Foundations and the Pilgrimage

the other 20 per cent of the officials’ time is employed in gathering various
statistics about the ummat, running the Modjokuto mosque, giving courses
for village modins (a class being held each Thursday morning in the Kenaiban
for these village religious officials, the instruction dealing largely with their
duties and with various elementary points of Moslem law), regulating re­
ligious foundations, and, to some extent, organizing the pilgrimage.
     A religious foundation is called a wakap. It may consist of nearly any­
thing of value—house land, buildings, rice fields. The wakap is usually
made over by the donor to a local kijaji or, sometimes, to the naib, who
is then its executor ( nadjir ) but not its owner, for it is considered to be
the property of God. It is not taxed, but the government requires that all
products of the wakap —for example, coconuts from a wakap garden—be
recorded by the naib's office as well as all expenditures for repair of buildings
and the like, to prevent misuse of wakaps by dishonest nadjirs. The nadjir
appoints his own successor before he dies. Several mosques, langgars, madra­
sahs, pondoks, and Moslem schools in the area are wakaps, some with a little
wakap rice land to help pay expenses. Large, extensive wakaps covering
many acres or controlling great amounts of wealth, do not exist around
»204«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
Modjokuto; and, although the naib's supervision of it is more theoretical
than actual, there is no apparent abuse of the system such as occurs in some
other Islamic countries.
    For the most part, the organization of the pilgrimage is handled directly
from the regency office, the Kenaiban merely keeping the statistics on the
number of hadjis,* giving out information on the process, and the like. The
pilgrimage is carefully regulated from beginning to end by the Ministry of
Religion. The would-be hadji merely pays a lump sum (Rp 7,300 in 1954)
to the ministry, which takes care of everything including ship passage and
room and board in Mecca, and even doles spending money out to him, the
whole three-month trip being planned in every detail by the government.
That this kind of regulation is, to an extent, necessary is shown by the
description an old hadji informant gave me of the situation as it was in the
Dutch period.
  He said that there were many ticket brokers, both Arabs and Javanese, who
  often swindled people. They sold ship tickets to the peasants about to go
  on the pilgrimage, and made a tremendous profit from it. If a ship ticket
  cost Rp 550, they would tell the peasant it cost Rp 575; and, as the peasant
  knew no better, he was entirely at the mercy of such dishonest brokers.
  Worse yet, once the peasant was in the hands of a broker like this, the latter
  kept milking him of more money. Thus, when the prospective hadji arrived
  in Surabaja, he might find that he had to pay five rupiahs a night to sleep
  there until his ship left, often not till a month or so later, the broker
  having deceived him about the departure date. (The elder brother of the
  storekeeper on the corner had to wait 26 days in Surabaja for his ship, the
  storekeeper told me, and just about exhausted his resources.) Then he would
  have to pay five rupiahs more for various services upon embarking, one
  rupiah for a bus to the dock, and so on. Each time the pilgrim’s baggage
  moved around or got stored, the broker gobbled up a few more of his long-
  saved rupiahs. Another swindle the brokers practiced was selling time. A
  would-be hadji, for example, might give the broker Rp 500 for the trip, and
  the broker would buy a ticket for a ship due to leave in two weeks. However,
  he would hold the ticket and not tell the anxious pilgrim that he had already
  obtained it, telling him instead that he was still looking for a ticket. What he
  was actually looking for was a richer man who would pay more for the ticket
  in order to get a ship just about to leave. The broker would then sell the
  ticket for Rp 550 to the rich man and buy another for a ship sailing in a
  month or two. The routine would then be repeated, while the poor pilgrim
  out in the village waited impatiently, constantly assured by the broker that
  it would not be much longer. After six months or so, the pilgrim would finally
  get his ticket, but only after having provided free capital for the broker for
  half a year. After he got on the ship, his troubles were still not over, for
  there he would run into even more brokers trying to sell him a place to
  sleep in Mecca, tours to Medina, and so forth.
    As there has been a severe shortage of foreign exchange since independ­
ence, the number of people allowed to make the pilgrimage has been drasti-
   * A census made in 1952, which was probably inexact, revealed 194 persons who
had gone on the pilgrimage at one time or another living in the subdistrict. Of these,
27 were women.
The Administration of the Moslem Law                                             »205«
cally limited during the past few years. (The quota for the whole regency
of which Modjokuto is a part was only 37 in 1954.) A prospective hadji
must first convince his village chief that his family will not suffer, economically
or otherwise, if he goes on the pilgrimage. He then must take a physical
examination and a written or oral test on religion and on Indonesian affairs.
(E.g. : “Who can go on the pilgrimage?” “Moslems who are not crazy, slaves,
or children.” “What happened on August 17, 1945?” “Indonesia’s independ­
ence was declared.”) The individuals then actually allowed to go on the
pilgrimage are chosen by lot from among those eligible, except that people
turned back in previous years are given priority.
    Actually, the limitation on the number of hadjis is not felt as much of a
hardship by the ummat because the pilgrimage is not nearly so popular as it
once was. In the towns, interest in the journey to the Holy Land has prac­
tically died out altogether. There has not been a single pilgrim from the town
of Modjokuto since 1930; and each year since the war ah applicants for the
trip in the district have been from the countryside. When I asked people
why this loss of interest had occurred, they usually said that people no longer
feel that they have to go to Mecca to find out about Islam, since there are
good schools for it in Indonesia; that people in towns prefer to plow the
money they save back into their businesses rather than “throw it away” on
a trip to the Middle East; and that, anyway, going on the pilgrimage is
nothing so special any more.
     (The informant made the pilgrimage in the late twenties.) When he was a
     child there were only about fifteen or so hadjis around, and they were very
     honored, each one usually having one or two hundred people as followers.
     However, as time wore on, more and more people made the pilgrimage and
     this reduced the homage paid to hadjis because they were no longer any­
     thing particularly out of the ordinary. Formerly, the pilgrims were the only
     villagers who had been out and seen the world; but nowadays you can get
     to Surabaja in two hours by car, so this doesn’t count for much any more.




        Religious Propaganda and Village Religious Officials
in addition to their administrative duties, the officials of the Kenaiban are
charged with the task of enlightening the rural masses as to the basic re­
quirements of Islam and as to what the Ministry of Religion is attempting to
do, a duty they fulfill by traveling around to all the villages in the subdistrict
to give talks on subjects related to the work of the office.
     Hadji Arifin (the chotib, speaking in a village near town) talked about mar­
     riage and divorce. He said that the KUA is much interested these days
     in “improving marriage.” He said marriage is an important problem to
     Indonesia, which is trying to build itself up to be a first-rate country. Divorce,
     he said, is tough on the women and on the children especially, for they are
     the ones who really suffer, grow up uncared for, uneducated, all this at a
     time when Indonesia is trying to build up the country. He quoted some
»206«                                      T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  Arabic from the Koran and translated it to show that God is not in favor
  of easy divorce; and he said that in line with this KUA is endeavoring to
  bring about marriages which are “true marriages” and which last. He said
  they have made some progress, but things are still bad. Last year, before
  starting their propaganda campaign, they had 800 divorces per 1,000
  marriages and now it is down to about 500 in 1,000. (These figures are
  exaggerated, but only slightly: the Javanese divorce rate is very high.)
  Obviously, he said, we need more diplomacy in marriage, and also people
  who are about to marry must truly want to. . . . He seemed to place all the
  blame for marriage failures (perhaps because he was speaking to an all­
  male audience) on the men not knowing their duties and so forth. . . .
  He gave some examples of masculine neglect culled from his experiences in
  the Kenaiban as the kinds of things to be avoided. The first was about
  a man who went to the movies when his wife was having a baby. He
  said this is the way love gets lost. The second had to do with men who
  don’t help their wives with the wife’s work when it gets too heavy. If
  the wife’s work is too heavy, this can cause divorce; and a man should
  not have rigid ideas about what is properly his work and what is his wife’s,
  but should help the wife if she is overloaded. The third example was of a
  village man who sold his harvest and then didn’t take the money home but
  bought himself a sarong with it, which made the wife angry because he had
  not discussed it with her first. . . . Then he went on to the problem of
  registering marriages with the KUA. He gave the number of the national
  law involved here and said that as Indonesia is trying to become a law-
  regulated state people must obey the laws. Only two religions have as
  yet been accepted by the Ministry of Religion: Islam and Christianity;
  the others have not yet been acknowledged. If a marriage is not recorded
  in the KUA, the couple are living in sin; also, marriages which are just
  a meeting of minds (“I am willing”—“I also am willing”) are sinful. The
  lack of registration leads to other things, such as a man having many
  wives in various places because there is no way to check on him. Then who
  is the victim? Our women.

    But the main mediation of the interests of the Ministry of Religion
to the villages is carried on by the modin. .The modin is elected for life by
his fellow villagers. (In order to stand for nomination he must take a simple
examination in Islamic law and must be literate.) He is actually subject
to two ministries at the same time: the Ministry of the Interior, as a village
civil servant, and the Ministry of Religion, as the village religious official.
 (There may be more than one modin to a village, or one chief modin and
several assistants.) His religious duties are twelve: (1) to prepare corpses
for burial and to give advice to the survivors on the proper conduct of the
funeral; (2) to see that the graveyards are kept up (the actual cleaning
being done by a handyman who gets small donations from families who
have relatives buried in the cemetery); (3) to conduct people who wish to
be married to the Kenaiban after checking to make sure that everything is
as it should be—that the girl has the right wali (guardian), that the man
is unmarried, etc.; (4) to perform similar duties in divorce and (5) re­
marriage cases; (6) to give advice to people on inheritance according to
Islamic law (although usually he tries to get them to settle their differences
The Administration of the Moslem Law                                          »207«
by customary law so as to avoid open breaches and if unsuccessful refers
them to the naib)\ (7) to perform the slaughtering of oxen, goats, or sheep,
which he must report to the subdistrict officer after having inspected the
meat:,: (since people disobey with impunity the rules requiring goats and
sheep to be slaughtered by a modín, and almost all oxen or water buffaloes
are slaughtered in the town at the abattoirs, this is not of too much im­
portance to the average modin); (8) to pray at slametans if requested to
do so; (9) to give advice and consolation to people who have recently lost
a relative by death; (10) to see that the religious tax is correctly gathered
and not embezzled (not making the collection himself but checking on the
organizations which do— at least theoretically); (11) to answer any attacks
upon Islam and defend the faith against the criticism of infidels; (12) to
provide an example for the villagers by himself carrying out the religious
and social duties of Islam correctly and completely. The modins, who, natu­
rally enough, tend today to be village political party leaders as well as tra­
ditional religious leaders, provide the main contact with Islamic law for
almost all the abangans and many of the less educated santris, and as such
they wield considerable power. They are paid, as are all other village officials,
by a grant of land from the village rice fields, which they then work.



                        The Ministry of Religion
                     and the Santri Political Parties
two rather more general problems demand discussion in connection with the
religious bureaucracy: first, the relation of the bureaucracy to the two-winged
party structure which I have already described as being pervasive in santri
life; and, second, the place of the bureaucracy in respect to the Islamic
formulation of that fundamental concern of all religious political theory—
the proper relation between “Church” and “State.”
     As for the party problem, I have already related how the prewar ideo­
logical struggle between the modernists and conservatives reached its point
of maximum intensity in a fight over succession to the post of naib within
the family which had dominated the Kenaiban since its founding in Modjo-
kuto. With the abolishment of the semi-hereditary system encouraged by
the colonial regime and the substitution of a modern rational-legal bureauc­
racy and the ever-increasing tendency for posts to be filled in terms of
party patronage, the family which had so long controlled the offices was no
longer able to do so. Although the naib who had earned his succession by
bitter intra-family maneuvering was not displaced from the bureaucracy, in
 1950 he was promoted and moved to another town. The establishment of
higher posts in a bureaucracy which had once been almost entirely local
    * The slaughtering of animals is a duty of the modín because Islamic law prescribes
rituals which must be performed when an animal is killed in order to make the meat
lawfully edible.
»208«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF     JAVA
means that the possibilities for mobility are made comparable to those in the
civil service, with the result that the old stability of tenure, in which a man
who was appointed naib remained naib until his death, has been disturbed
and replaced with a system in which there is a constant turnover of per­
sonnel and a continual jockeying for position between the two major santri
parties.
    In any case, after the old naib, now a Masjumi member, had been trans­
ferred, Nahdatul Ulama was able, in part because its national head was
Minister of Religion at the time, to take over all the posts but one in the
Modjokuto KUA. (The naib is the chairman of Modjokuto NU; the imam
is the party secretary.) This event very much disturbed the modernists.
  H. Husein (a Masjumi leader) said that now the NU people have just
  about taken over the Ministry of Religion and regard it as their province. He
  said that H. Muchtar (the chotib) is the only Muhammadijah-Masjumi
  man in the Modjokuto office now, and that he wouldn’t be there if it were
  not that he is so clever and knows so much about the situation around here,
  having lived here all his life, that they can’t do without him. If perchance
  H. Muchtar had been stupid, they would have kicked him out long ago
  and there wouldn’t be any Masjumi people left.
    Thus the control of the local religious bureaucracy is an important issue
in party politics and tends to have significance for die organization of the
ummat generally, determining even the choice of mosques.
  He (a young modernist and a member of the family which controlled
  the office of naib before the war) said that in the old days when his uncle
  was the naib here there were many more people who went to the mosque
  here on Friday—so many that they spilled over into the yard. In those
  days Ali (chairman of Masjumi), Iskak (chairman of Muhammadijah),
  and the naib himself gave the sermons. Now the new naib is not so good
  and is not so well liked; and so things are calmer, and nearly all of the
  sermons are given by NU people and are mostly about religion, with only
  “We must choose an Islamic State” tacked on at the end. Now many of the
  Muhammadijah people go to other mosques—for example, to Banjuurip
  (a village Masjumi stronghold about five miles from Modjokuto). . . .
  He said that most of the sermons are about the same nowadays since
  NU took over—fear God and behave yourself—and are not very interesting.
  They don’t suit the times.
    Although the NU control of the Modjokuto Kenaiban gives that party
an important advantage over Masjumi, Masjumi leaders seem to do better
at the regency and provincial levels (although the penghuiu, the head of the
regency religious bureaucracy, is also an NU man now, being the son-in-law
of a Modjokuto NU leader, and the modernist family which used to control
that post no longer does so). One Masjumi leader is employed—“part-time”
—in writing sermons for the Provincial Office of Religious Propaganda
(headed by a Masjumi man) to distribute to local mosques. The head of
Muhammadijah is employed—“part time”—as a chaplain to the army by
the Regency Office of Religious Education. And the chairman of Masjumi
is employed—“part-time”—as a school inspector for all the private religious
schools and madrasahs in the Modjokuto area which receive subsidies from
The Administration of the Moslem Law                                         »209«
the Ministry of Religion, a job which not only allows him to go around to all
the villages and combine official work with party work but also provides him
with a motorcycle on which to do it.
     It is not necessary to trace here the manifold ways in which the religious
bureaucracy and the party structures intertwine, the manner in which party
interests can be served by control of various ministry offices, or the ways in
which the bureaucracy responds to the tensions and pressures of party politics.
But one issue—that of subsidies for religious schools—reflects the interaction
between the two structures rather vividly and leads as well directly into the
“Church” and “State” problem.
     The response of the various groups to the idea of government subsidies
for private religious schools takes pretty much the forms one would expect.
Pondok kijajis, for the most part, want to have little to do with the govern­
ment as it is now constituted because they feel that the requirements their
institutions must meet to be eligible for the subsidies limit their personal
freedom to run their own affairs in their own way. Moreover, they are sus­
picious of a secular government in which non-santri prijajis, occupying the
great majority of the civil service posts, play such an important role. What
they would like, and what they agitate for, is an “Islamic State” dominated
by kijajis which would give subsidies to pondoks on the same basis as the
religious tax is now given them by the populace generally: as a divinely com­
manded obligation of the less religiously concerned toward the more religiously
concerned and with no strings attached except that the religious education
must be orthodox.
     Madrasah directors are willing to accept subsidies and to reform their
schools slightly to get them, but are both unwilling and unable to sacrifice
religious training in order to raise the level of their general education pro­
grams high enough to meet the “comparatively strict technical requirements
for private school subsidy applicants set by the Ministry of Education. As a
result, NU leaders, as representatives of this group, have backed a policy of
“something for everyone, no matter how little,” in setting up within the
Ministry of Religion a much smaller subsidy program for religious schools.
As this party has had the dominant voice within the Ministry of Religion for
most of its existence, this is the policy which has been followed. Every local
religious teacher who is willing to add a course or two in arithmetic or
writing Latin characters* is given something, but usually very little. One NU
school in Modjokuto had a Ministry of Religion subsidy of two rupiahs per
child per year, and the total subsidy of another for the year came to 30
rupiahs. Thus the resources of the Ministry of Religion, small enough in
the first place because most of the money for education is channeled through
the Ministry of Education, are so diffused through the thousands of Indo­
nesian religious schools, good, bad, and indifferent, as to be almost entirely
ineffective. NU has, of course, lobbied for a larger total budget, but in a
political context where the Ministry of Religion is only barely tolerated to start
    * Pondok kijajis have largely refused to meet even this requirement. In Modjokuto
no pondok was getting any subsidy while I was there, although the kijaji of one of the
larger pondoks was thinking of asking for a few rupiahs for the student-run secular
school included in his program.
»210«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
with by the majority of non-santri party leaders, this has not proved very
successful.
     Muhammadijah, and to a lesser extent PSII, while also interested in in­
creasing the total budget, tend to favor a policy of fewer Ministry of Re­
ligion subsidies but larger ones. Caught between their inability to raise
their standards to meet the requirements of the Ministry of Education (not
always: some Muhammadijah schools do manage to qualify for the larger
subsidies, and the Muhammadijah high school in Modjokuto was trying hard
to raise its standards toward such an end) and a severe shortage of money
which the present Ministry of Religion subsidy program does almost nothing
to alleviate, they have argued for a concentration of the resources of the
Ministry of Religion into a few large subsidies to be awarded to those re­
ligious schools most technically qualified to make good use of them—i.e., their
own schools.
   The first point on the agenda (of a Muhammadijah school-committee meeting)
   was the problem of asking the government for a subsidy. This soon resolved
   itself into ( 1) asking for a subsidy for the high school from the Ministry of
   Religion and (2) asking for one from the Ministry of Education. The difference
   between the two is that the Ministry of Religion subsidy is small but quite easy
   to get, that ministry operating on the principle that “although only a very little,
   everyone is able to receive,” while the Education Ministry subsidy is larger and
   harder to get, since it demands “results” before one gets anything. . . . H. Ari-
   fin said he thought that the subsidies given by the Ministry of Religion ought
   to be made about the same size as those of the Ministry of Education . . .
   and that maybe all the Muhammadijah people in the residency should get
   together and ask the government to do this. Rachmad (head of the high
   school) was dubious about this. He said that it would be “striking blows”
    at fellow Moslems in NU who had madrasahs in the villages, because it
   would mean fewer and larger subsidies in the Ministry of Religion which
   would be harder to get, so that these little schools, with mostly religious
    teaching, would be out in the cold. . . . And so the question was, “Do we
    want to stir up bad feeling by ‘striking’ our NU friends or are we willing
    to do so for the sake of larger subsidies from the Ministry of Religion?”
    There were many aggressive jokes here about “blows” etc., and they
    finally decided to plan a regency meeting to push the idea of fewer but
    bigger Ministry of Religion subsidies. . . . As for the Education Ministry
    application, they weren’t very optimistic but felt they might as well try:
    “More Muhammadijah students passed the government examination this
    year, and all they can do is reject us again.”



           The Islamic State: The Santri Approach to the
                   Problem of Church and State

the problem lurking both behind this specific issue and behind the Ministry
of Religion in general (which a number of non-santri parties wish to abolish)
is the one Western political scholars formulate as the relation between Church
The Administration of the Moslem Law                                            »2 1 1 «

and State. This formulation fits badly with Islamic political theory, however,
because of the absence of a church and because of the theoretical ideal (if
almost never the actuality) of absolute theocracy—of Dar VI Islam, “the
Abode of Islam,” which has been present in Islam since the days when
Muhammad headed his own army and state and the first four caliphs to
succeed him continued to be the supreme authority in both religious and
secular affairs.* Since the title-slogan Dar Ul Islam has been appropriated by
santri fundamentalists in open military revolt against the established Republic
in West Java, in South Celebes, and sporadically in Northern Sumatra, those
santri parties loyal to the new national state and committed to parliamentary
methods for pursuing their aims have adopted the title-slogan Negara Islam,
“Islamic State,” to indicate the “theocratic” ideal for which they are agitating.
     I put “theocratic” in quotation marks because a series of interviews with
santri party leaders in Djakarta on the subject and my experience in Modjo-
kuto have convinced me that not only is the idea of Negara Islam an ex­
tremely vague one to just about everyone who holds it (as, admittedly, is
the opposed Negara Nasional, “National State,” of the secularist parties)
but also insofar as it means anything to anyone, it means quite different
things to different people. In general, more conservative people tend to
conceive of a Negara Islam in terms of a theocracy more familiar to us—
one in which kijajis will dominate. Even here the exact methods which can
bring about such a domination in the absence of a church organization within
Islam is not clear, although people suggest such notions as having a special
parliament of kijajis to check on secular legislation passed by the regular
parliament to make sure it is orthodox, placing kijajis in high government
position or appointing the most learned one as Head of State, and introducing
a great deal more religious teaching into the government schools—i.e., turning
them into madrasahs. Presumably, it is for some such program as this that the
santri rebels in West Java and elsewhere are fighting insofar as they are
fighting for a program at all.
     Modernists, on the other hand, although also committed to a Negara
Islam tend to restrict it to a general proclamation of an Islamic State: that
is, the institution of a law that no non-Moslem can be Head of State (an
occurrence extremely unlikely in any case with a population 95 per cent of
    * Not only is there no church in Islam; there is properly speaking no state either.
The basic political unit in Islam is the umma Muhammadiyya, Muhammad’s com­
munity, defined not territorially but legally, and composed of all those who follow
the Moslem law: “Perhaps the greatest difficulty in the way of the new Arab countries
is the necessity to overcome rapidly the traditional Islamic concept of, and attitude
toward, the state as such. Islam never developed the idea of ‘the State as an inde­
pendent political institution,’ which has been so characteristic of classical and Western
thought. In Islam the State was not a [territorial] community or an institution, but
the totality of those governed, umma, with the imam as their leader. As a result, the
Oriental State had no conception of citizens in the modern sense. Government was
not everybody’s business nor even that of a privileged class. Participation in executive
power was, in the public mind, as haphazard and accidental as were, apart from
taxation, the contacts of the individual and government in general.” (G. E. von Grune-
baum, Islam: Essays in the Nature and Growth of a Cultural Tradition [Menasha, 1955],
P* 73.)
»212«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
which is nominally Moslem), and a constitutional provision stating that laws
should be in accord with “the spirit of the Koran and the Hadith,” leaving
it up to the legislators themselves to make certain of this. (Negara Islam is
perhaps the single most powerful slogan among the santri masses. Any party
which came out flatly for a separation doctrine—such as the secularists sup­
port—would lose almost all its rural backing.) Obviously, such a doctrine
is not much more “theocratic” in fact than the recent effort of a New England
senator to get the U.S. Congress to pass a resolution declaring Christianity
the official religion of the United States, although it has some of the same
symbolic drawbacks in the eyes of religious minorities and those suspicious of
organized religion that the proposed resolution did.
    For people holding either of these positions, or just vaguely affirming the
dire need for an “Islamic State,” the Ministry of Religion is an embarrassment
because it dramatizes the fact that the State is not in fact officially “Islamic.”
Both parties are caught between trying to widen the scope of the Ministry of
Religion within the present secular government in order to increase their
power within that government and realizing dimly that by doing this they
are in part going along with a heterodox view of the relation between religion
and politics. A number of religious scholars at a conference called by the
ministry in 1954 tried to resolve this problem by declaring the Ministry of
Religion a kind of “temporary Islamic State,” an agent of the government
which, at least for the time being, was legitimately to be obeyed in terms
of the Moslem law. (Actually, they extended this beneficence to the cabinet
as a whole and to the president, but the point of the proclamation was to
give the Ministry of Religion a legitimate status according to Moslem law.)
A number of party leaders and religious teachers cried havoc at this, how­
ever, evidently fearing the world-wide tendency for the temporary to become
permanent in things governmental, which, in this case, would cut the ground
from under the struggle for an “Islamic State.”
  I talked to Fachid (a young NU shopkeeper) about the Ministry of
  Religion conference in Sumatra which decided that the president and
  cabinet are a legitimate Moslem government and which some santri members
  of Parliament have been attacking. He said that it is only a temporary
  compromise until the general elections can be held. The problem is that
  the Kenaiban, under the Ministry of Religion, is marrying and divorcing
  people and performing other religious functions, and there had to be
  clarification as to how this was legitimate since some people had questioned
  it in terms of religious law. The result was that some kijajis looked into
  the law books and came up with this temporary legitimization which says
  the government’s efforts in the Ministry of Religion relative to religion
  are legitimate but must be reviewed again after the election. In the
  meanwhile, Moslems are to obey the ministry in things religious—for
  example, its determination of the day the Fast is to begin. . . . Fachid,
  evidently somewhat nonplussed at my interest in the subject and also
  somewhat depressed over the Church-State issue himself, said that, whereas
  Christians want a split between Church and State, Islam doesn’t permit this.
  Thus the problem is very difficult.
The Administration of the Moslem Law                                             »213 «
     In any case, this note shows that in identifying separation as a “Christian
doctrine” and non-separation as the Moslem one the santris are unable to
support an open split between Islam and the secular government such as
has occurred in Turkey. It also shows that some compromise is possible,
with santris settling for less than an Islamic State if the government “does
not transgress the religious law,” i.e., is willing to allow a certain degree of
State-Church fusion to serve santri interests. In such a situation the Ministry
of Religion may in fact turn out to be a permanent compromise which can
resolve santri political theory with the facts of the situation, namely, that not
all Indonesians by far are santris.
     Actually, however, the type of political thinking done by people in all
the parties tends to militate against this because each group— abangan,
santri, and p rijaji —sees the political struggle not so much as a process of
mutual adjustment between their separate interests as parts of a larger
society but as a naked struggle for power in which one group wins and the
others lose.
  Fachid went on to say that it is natural that every group has its own
  ideology and wants it to triumph. The Communists want Marxism, the
  Nationalist Party wants Nationalism, and the santris want Islam. No matter
  what, they are interested in winning and will give the elbow to the other
  groups in order to gain the power to put their own foundation under the
  State. When in power, they will of course take care of their own followers.
  A man may have adopted children, but he always likes his own just a little
  better no matter how fair he may be. So each group tries to get its ideology
  and its own people into power. I agreed with this but said that maybe no
  one group will win such a decisive victory that the other groups can be
  ignored; and he said, “Well, it is so; the minority has rights. But an Islamic
  State will protect them.” (He mentioned that, although the Christians want a
  separation of Church and State,* when something like the forced Islamization
  of Christians in the Celebes occurs they want the State to do something
  about it.) If two men are running for election, the one who has lost can
  still spread his ideology, but the man who is in is the one who rules. It is like
  a store. The man next to me may run his business differently than I do
  and that is up to him, but in my store I run things my way. So if the
  santris are in control of the country, they will run it their way: i.e., there
  will be an Islamic State.
     This “if we win it’s our country” view of politics is common to nearly
all shades of party opinion, sa n tri and non-santri; and the following transcript
of a statement of it by a local Masjumi member may be compared to the
NU quotation above.
  He talked a little about the Islamic State, saying that some people are afraid
  it will mean they can’t gamble, drink, or hold slametans, and will be forced
  to pray. He said no, it won’t mean this, it will just mean that the laws will be
  Islamic. (Like just about everyone else I talked to on this subject, he could
  cite as an example only that thieves’ hands will be cut off.) He said that the
  government will be a legal Moslem government, fit to be obeyed in both reli-
    * Though santris tend to discuss separation as a Christian doctrine, its main sup­
porters in Indonesia in fact are the Nationalists, including the president of the country.
»214«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
 gious and secular matters. I asked if the Ministry of Religion was not this
 temporarily; and he said (wrongly) “No, not yet, it is just a ministry.” He said
 that later in the Islamic State the Minister of Religion will be the Prime Minis­
 ter (his own idea, not Masjumi policy). I said: “Well, won’t the non-santris re­
 volt if you try this?” he replied: “That’s the way elections are. The PNI [the
 Nationalist Party] wants the Pantjasila (President Sukarno’s Five Points, put
 forth as the ideological basis of a National State), the Communists want
 Communism, and the Moslems want an Islamic State; so whoever wins gets to
 put it in.”
Chapter l 6                The Santri Ritual Pattern




Santri r i t u a l l i f e is modulated in time by the five fixed prayers—morning,
noon, afternoon, sunset, and evening—repeated day after day in the same
simple form. In space it is bounded by the borders of three progressively in­
clusive social circles defined by the three institutions in which the prayers are
typically performed: the home, the neighborhood îanggar (prayer house), and
the village mosque.
     The morning, noon, afternoon, and evening prayers are usually performed
in the home; the sunset prayer is often carried out (by the men, the women
always praying at home) in a nearby langgar with a few friends; the Friday
noon prayer is almost invariably performed in the mosque in the company
of the whole of the village ummat. It is the intersection of the temporally
patterned prayers—for it is fidelity in performing the prayers which, ultimately,
defines a santri; prijajis and abangans almost never do them—and the spa­
tially outlined social groups of household, neighborhood, and village which
organizes the elemental Islamic congregation, the individual’s most immediate
ummat, which in turn has a marked tendency to be incorporated as a unit
into one of the two over-arching santri political parties.
     Thus the religious and the social aspects of Islam lend support to one
another.
  (The informant is an NU shopkeeper.) It is permissible to do the prayers
  in one’s house, but it is always better to do them in a group in the mosque
  or in a langgar than to do them alone at home. Each prayer of the five is
  better performed in the mosque or langgar, although this is compulsory only
  for the Friday noon prayer. The reason for this is that when the prayers
  are done in a group the mistakes, the good works, and the blessings are shared
  among all. Thus, if one is doing the prayers in a mosque or langgar and
  makes a mistake (in the ritual) or is not concentrating enough (for one
  never really knows how effective and pure and correct his worship is),
  then the punishment which comes for this can be spread thin over the
  whole group, who will carry it on their shoulders, and the burden will be
                                       215
»216«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  much lighter and in fact hardly felt. But if one performs the prayers in the
  house by himself and he makes a mistake, he gets all the punishment himself.
  Contrariwise, when one prays in a mosque or langgar one benefits from
  the piety of others more deeply versed in religion and better at praying,
  and thus gets more blessings and builds up more good works. Just going to
  the mosque is enough to get one something. For instance, if one goes to
  the mosque intending to pray but instead falls asleep, one still gets some
  credit in heaven for having come to the mosque with the intention of
  praying and also as a result of the prayers performed by the more pious
  present. Thus it is always better to pray with other people than to pray alone.




                                 The Prayers
a ctu a lly, “prayer” is not an altogether accurate translation of solat (also
called sembcihjcing) because, unlike Christian prayers, the solats are fixed not
only in time but also in form and content, a sharp distinction being made
between these obligatory acts of worship and any voluntary personal prayer
(doa) one may wish to direct to God for various special purposes of one’s
own, which may be done anytime, with any phrasing, and in Javanese
rather than Arabic if one wishes. Thus solat might better be translated “ritual
incantation.”
    In any case, the form of the solat in Indonesia is the same as in any
other Islamic country; and, as this has been so often described—the lustra­
tions, the prostrations, and the chanting, I need not review the manner of
their performance here except to note that, although all santris do the solat
regularly, they differ somewhat in the elaborateness with which they carry out
the act.
  Bisri said in connection with describing the prayer that there are several
  optional parts. There is a part in the middle where one recites any passage
  from the Koran. Bisri knows about eight verses, all very short and easy.
  There is another place where one chooses between two prayers; he doesn’t
  even know the longer one. After the main prayer is over many people
  continue to say certain phrases over and over, usually 33 or 66 or 99
  times—phrases such as Allaha Akbar (God is most Great)—but he never
  does. He just gets the whole thing over with as quickly as possible.
    The prayer pattern fits quite neatly with the daily round of the typical
peasant. The 5:00 a . m . prayer gets him out of bed and early to work. By
noon or one or two o’clock the work is done and the second prayer can be
performed, to be followed by the big meal of the day and a nap in the mid­
day heat. At three or four he is up for the afternoon prayer and then can either
return to the fields if work is unusually heavy or, more commonly, visit
around in the cool of the afternoon, ending up in the langgar for sunset prayer.
Then he goes home to an evening meal, the final prayer, and bed.
    In the town, the prayer pattern fits less well, although storekeepers can
The Santri Ritual Pattern                                                »217«
always take five minutes to do the prayers in back of their place of business
(which is often their home as well). Other urban occupations raise problems;
and I knew one santri who quit driving a taxi and returned to being a farmer
because his taxi-driving took him on long trips during which it was impossible
to do the soiat correctly. (Strictly speaking, one can perform a solat in a
field or along a roadway so long as one does the proper lustrations first,
which is no problem in well-irrigated Java, but Javanese seem reluctant to do
this; and all the time I was in Java I never saw anyone performing his solat
in this manner. ) Another santri claimed that santris often do not like to enter
the army because the military routine often makes it difficult to do one’s
solat.
     I doubt, however, that such considerations are very important for most
people; the prayer regime is rather more flexible than it looks. In the first
place, one can do the required prayer any time between the correct time for
it and the correct time for the next one. Thus the noon prayer can be done
from shortly after noon to 3:30, the 3:30 prayer from 3:30 until sunset,
and so on. (The sunset prayer must be done while there is still light in the
sky, however, and so is an exception.) In addition it is possible, for good
reason, to combine certain couples of the prayers into one: e.g., if one misses
 the noon prayer one can do it at 3:30 along with the prayer for that time;
and, conversely, if one knows he will not be able to do the 3:30 prayer,
he can do it ahead of time at noon.
     The brevity and simplicity of the prayers also make it easy to fit them
into the daily routine. I have dozens of times interviewed a husband and wife
 in their home alternately through prayer time, each of them taking turns
 to go out back for about five minutes to do the prayer. (It is not impolite
 either for them to do this or for one to sit there; one is not expected to leave
 while people do their prayers.) Sometimes if one is talking with only one per­
 son, he will nevertheless excuse himself for a minute and go off somewhere
 in the house to perform the solat. (Although Arabs have performed their
 prayers in their homes in front of me—while I talked merrily on with those
 of the family who had completed theirs—no Javanese ever did this. They
 always went into a little room or out to the back of the house where others
 could not see them.) On long bicycle trips with santri informants we stopped
 at a wayside mosque or langgar for a few minutes while the informants per­
 formed the prayer, and then we went on. Thus the urban pattern of life, in
 Modjokuto.at any rate, had not yet made the prayer-sequence awkward to
 fulfill for most people.
      I have been told that in Surabaja, where some people must work from
 8:00 A.M. until 4:00 p .m . in offices, the noon prayer is sometimes regularly
 skipped, even by good santris, and only four prayers are done a day, al­
 though strictly speaking, this is heterodox. In any case, for most santris, doing
 the solat is not so unrelated to such more mundane considerations as seeking
 one’s daily bread as it might seem; like the Catholic act of crossing oneself,
 the daily prayers are a kind of ritual reflex, assuring one of material well­
 being as well as spiritual:
»218«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  (The informant was a common laborer on the roads.) He asked me if I
  went to church on Sunday and was quite surprised when I said no. I asked
  him if he went to mosque every Friday and he said yes. Did he know how to
  pray? “Yes,” he said, “since I was a child. It’s better if you pray, ask for
  clothes, food, well-being for yourself and your children, a healthy strong
  body.”



                            The Friday Service
the Friday group-prayer represents a symbolic coming together of the ummat
of the entire village; and the sense of having a “mosque of one’s own” is
strong enough so that people who move into town from nearby villages often
return to the mosque in these villages for Friday prayer. (For those who live
immediately around it, the mosque acts as a neighborhood langgar in which
the evening prayer may be performed daily.) The control of the village
mosques is entirely local, the director and the governing board being chosen
by the people whom the mosque serves.
  (The informant is an official in the Office of Religious Administration.) To
  set up a mosque, one first builds it either alone or in a group (or, of course,
  pays to have it built). Then a paper is signed surrendering it to the populace
  in general and the Office of Religious Administration in particular. The Office
  gathers together the people the mosque is to serve (i.e., the people who
  live around it), and they choose the nadjir, the man in charge and his name
  is entered in a book. (In fact, this is almost inevitably the man who built it
  himself or someone approved by him.) Here in town the head of the
  Office of Religious Administration is automatically nadjir, so the nadjir
  changes as the naib changes; but in the villages a man remains nadjir until
  he dies, when a new one is chosen. In addition to the nadjir, a general
  governing body for the mosque is chosen from among its ummat, which
  aids him in keeping it up.
   To give a feeling for what the Friday prayer is like, I cite the following
description from my notes on a mosque service I attended with an urban in­
formant in the nearby village where he had been bom and had grown up. The
mosque was an NU-dominated one and thus old-fashioned in manner, as one
can see from the fact that the chotbah (sermon) was not translated.
  I went to mosque for Friday services with Amiri yesterday in the village
  where Amiri lived until the Japanese time. We just went in and sat down
  at about 11:30. The mosque, a small, square, white-plaster building with
  a slightly peaked red-tile roof, was just a big empty room—or rather two since
  there was a wall, pierced by two glassless windows and two doorless doors
  at the sides near the outer wall, about three-quarters of the way back, behind
  which Amiri and I sat. Outside on the porch hung not the usual slit gong
  (called a bedug) but a huge parade drum, which some people were engaged
  in beating with a large wooden club, first slowly and then faster and faster,
  repeating this about a half-dozen times and calling out in Arabic for
The Santri Ritual Pattern                                                  »219«
  people to gather for the prayer. As we squatted there on the stone floor,
  men and boys of all ages (the youngest perhaps six or seven) wandered in
  (some of them stopping to shake my hand and touch their chest, none of
  them seemingly surprised to find me there) and then squatted down, either
  on a woven mat or on their sarong or just on the bare stone floor. (Amiri
  rode out on the bike in trousers, but changed to a sarong when he got there.)
  Many of them were carrying Korans, which they left on a table near the
  mid-room door. Eventually there must have been 150 people there, and it
  was quite crowded.
      When we arrived, there were already some people chanting, not in unison
  but individually, each at his own pace with his own rhythm. The result,
  some of the voices being deep and old, some high and adolescent, and
  all chanting at varying speeds, was an oddly beautiful cacophony. As others
  came in, they started chanting too, but finally at about 12 noon, they all
  stopped suddenly, perhaps on a signal from the imam (prayer leader), whom I
  could not see because of the wall, and then began the formal prayers.
  However, they still were not in rhythm, but each man went at his own
  speed. When one was bending over, another next to him was still standing
  up; and when one was bending over the other was touching his forehead
  to the floor. (They chanted to themselves now, moving only their lips,
  although the imam at the front was chanting aloud.)
      In five minutes or so the praying was over, but the man at the front
  chanted on in Arabic in what I later found out was the chotbah but at the time
  thought was merely more praying while the ummat sat and waited. After
  maybe 20 minutes the chotbah was over, and they all prayed again; but this
  time they were all together in their motions. After this was over, most of
  the people left, others sitting there a while quietly or resuming the un­
  organized chanting that had gone on before the service began. Amiri sat
  there quietly for a while, and then in about ten minutes we went out and went
  across the street to see a friend of his. . . .
    The problem of whether or not the chotbah should be translated is still
a very live one, and most conservative mosques still refuse to do so, almost
always using Arabic chotbahs written years ago by a famous Javanese kijaji
from Semarang. (The Modjokuto mosque, now NU-dominated, continues the
translated chotbahs introduced by Muhammadijah before the war.) The
Javanese-language sermons holographed by the Bureau of Religious Propa­
ganda are distributed to all the mosques whose officials want to use them, but
few do. Those willing to give translated sermons want to make up their own
more politically pointed ones, because nowadays when translated sermons are
given, especially by urban modernists, they tend to be on political and social
problems as much as on religious ones. (There was in fact an intense contro­
versy in the parliament while I was in Indonesia concerning the use by
Masjumi and NU of the mosques for political purposes.)
  (The informant is the Modjokuto imam.) Imam, he said means the man who
  leads the prayers, but in the office of Religious Administration his duties
  are broader. In the first place he is in charge of the sermons here in the
  mosque on Friday. There are four sermon-givers (two NU men, one
  Masjumi man, and an Arab, the latter still giving his in Arabic) who alternate
  from week to week, and they write their own sermons. He said that the
»220«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  sermons are not only about religion but depend on the situation and are
  sometimes about politics. The one he gave last week was on Communism,
  warning the unmat not to believe the Reds when they say they are pro­
  religion; he said he wanted to prevent the more unlearned santris from
  being taken in by Communist propaganda. . . . He said soon there will be
  a sermon on Acheh (a province in North Sumatra where a Moslem revolt
  against the government had just broken out).
This pattem is, however, largely confined to town. Even in those more modern
village mosques which accept translated sermons they are usually still mostly
on religious subjects.
  The village chief was copying a sermon out of an old sermon book written
  by a man from Surakarta. He said that he had to give one of the four
  monthly sermons in the Sidomuljo (a village Masjumi stronghold) mosque
  the next day. He said that he always copied them out of this book; he wasn’t
  clever enough to make them up himself. He said the sermon was entirely con­
  cerned with religious things—urging people to pray, to believe in God;
  all quite simple. He said that he read it first in Arabic and then in Javanese.
  Evidently it isn’t very long.



                                   The Fast

the droning chant of the interlocked solat-ummat pattern which flows along
quite evenly through eleven months of the year, dividing each day into fixed
segments, assembling the santri neighborhood each evening and the santri
village each Friday noon, reaches a kind of crescendo in the F ast month
(Pasa), when strictly religious activity is suddenly intensified and strictly
secular sharply curtailed.
  We talked about the Fast. He (a Masjumi leader) said that political activity
  for Masjumi and NU slows down very much in the Fast, which is used
  for religious reflection. He said that the Fast is not just to be viewed as a
  month of fasting but as a much more religious month than all the rest.
  In addition to fasting, one is not allowed to say evil things about other people
  or listen to or see evil things. Religious activity in general is much stepped
  up; and Pasa is considered the month in which a Moslem is supposed to get
  his religious house in order. . . . A sin in the Fast is much worse than
  the same sin in another month. And at the end comes the zakat fitrah
  (religious tax) to help erase the sins committed in the Fast.
    After sundown each day during the Fast everyone eats a large meal and
then gathers at the langgars (or the mosque if they live near it) to perform
the evening prayer and, after it, the trawèh and darus. (Just before this begins
one hears the children around each langgar gaily shouting TRAWÈH,
TRAWÈH, TRAWÈH, in a manner somewhat akin to a football yell.) The
trawèh consists of extra prayers (i.e., solats, not free prayers) as special added
duties— although, strictly speaking they are voluntary— for the Fast. The dams
The Santri Ritual Pattern                                                  »221«
is a reading of the Koran verse by verse; this also is voluntary, and evidently
felt to be somewhat less incumbent than the trawèh.
      In both these rituals there is, once more, a difference between koiot and
modéren as to the correct manner of carrying them out. Concerning the
trawèh, this difference is over the correct number of solats which should be
performed. There are two legitimate hadiths on this matter, the first saying
that one should do 23 solats and the other that one should do 11. Until the
rise of modernism, 23 was the number accepted in Java as orthodox, and
NU people still do 23; but Muhammadijah-Masjumi people mostly do 11. (The
Modjokuto mosque, although now NU-dominated, has not shifted back to 23
from the 11-system introduced by the modernists when they were in control.)
The NU people say the modernists are lazy and not very much interested in
religion anyway. The modernists say that, although they do fewer prayers, they
perform them more carefully and with greater understanding of the meaning of
what they do, while the conservatives just race through their prayers super­
 ficially.
  (The informant is a modernist.) The 11-system is the newer and was
  largely spread by the modernist movements here and sharply opposed
  by the more old-line people when it was originally introduced. It was
  introduced in the Modjokuto mosque by Kijaji Nazir (the old Sarekat
  Islam founder) over much opposition—so much, in fact, that most NU
  people went elsewhere to pray, to their own langgars and the like. The
  reason that the 11-system is preferred by the modernists, in addition to the
  fact that it is a direct tradition from the Prophet while the 23-system is from
  the Companion Umar, is that it is possible to do the prayers slowly and in
  order, and thus to be more pious, while with the 23 they are always
  hurried through. The old men, who prefer the 23-system, feel that the
  greater the number of prayers the greater the good works credited to one’s
  account; the younger, usually, and more pious people who prefer the 11
  feel that if one does not do the prayers deeply and piously one will not get
  any good works on his account at all.
    The dams conflict is over whether participants should read the Koran
alternately or concurrently. The traditional system, still employed by NU, is
for each individual to read one of the 30 Koran sections (not the chapters—
surat—which are of uneven length; but the sections—djuz—which are of
equal length, each %0th of the Koran) alternately and to be corrected by the
others if he makes a mistake. There is no attempt to complete the entire Koran
in one night; but, since each langgar tries to get through the whole Koran once
or twice in the month, the chanting, in this system, often lasts until three or
four in the morning. (Santris do a good deal of sleeping during the daytime in
the Fast.)
    The other method is one in which the participants sit along a bench, each
being given a section to read and then everyone chanting at once in a grand
cacophony of mispronounced Arabic, thus completing the whole Koran in
about an hour or so. (If there are less than 30 people, the man who finishes
his section first runs down to the other end of the bench and starts in on one
of the extra sections.)
»222«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
    It is not strictly accurate to describe the differences between these two
systems in modèren-kolot terms; it is more a rural-urban difference (except
for the trawèh difference). In town, most santris are either traders or small
craftsmen, notably tailors. Since the end-of-Fast holiday, Idul Fitri, stimulates
a great buying splurge (especially in clothing because, as among us on Easter,
everyone gets out and parades around in new clothes if he can) business for
most of these people is heavier during the Fast month than at any time during
the year. In general Muhammadijah people simply do not do the dams at all,
considering it pretty much of a kolot pattern anyway, but the simultaneous
system is embraced by NU urbanites and the more moderate modernists who
simply cannot afford to sit up all night chanting the Koran but cannot bring
themselves to discard the darns altogether.
  He (a PSII member and urban îanggar head) said that he doesn’t like the
  new system but he is using it anyway in his own langgar. It makes it im­
  possible to correct the reader, which is the whole point of the dams, and
  is in general more superficial. The main reason for its popularity is that
  in town people don’t have time to sit and read the Koran and are in a hurry
  to be off. I asked him why, if he didn’t like it, he used it. At first he said
  something about still being able to make the corrections even with all reading
  at once. (He said he lets only those people read together who he knows
  can do it. The ones who are not yet good readers he makes read a section
  by themselves.) Finally he admitted that those who frequent his langgar
  are mostly young men, and, like most young men, they want to get off in time
  for the second show at the movie.
     The praying in the Fast reaches its climax with the prayers on the morning
of the end-of-Fast holiday, Idul Fitri. (Only santris refer to it by this name.
Others call it Rijaja in Javanese and Hari Raja in Indonesian.) Muham­
madijah holds its prayers in the public square; NU, orthodox to the end, holds
its in the mosque. More people usually turn up at the mosque than at the
public square, but the prayers in the public square are usually marked by the
presence of a few high prijajis who never go into the mosque but who turn
out for the Idul Fitri prayers, much the way some of us turn up at church on
Easter and Christmas. (Outdoor prayers are held in the public square by
Muhammadijah on Idul Adha, “Sacrifice Day,” as well as on Idul Fitri.) The
chairman of Masjumi usually gives the sermon in the public square. (The
NU mosque ceremony is about the same as any Friday prayer, only larger.)
The times I heard him, he spoke on the equality of women in Islam, the need
for Indonesians to study in the sciences, and the fact that all over the world
members of the ummat were performing similar prayers.
     The very fixing of the day ending the Fast (as well as the one beginning it)
is a source of conflict between the modern and conservative groups. Weeks
before it is to happen, Muhammadijah people receive the word when the Fast
is to begin and end from their central headquarters in Djokjakarta, where it is
figured out by their leaders according to the system (called falak) for com­
puting the phases of the moon given in special Islamic treatises. NU, as well
as the NU-dominated Ministry of Religion, since they distrust this system,
are always forced to wait like so many anxious empiricists for the moon
The Santri Ritual Pattern                                                  »223«
actually to appear. As the moon always appears when Muhammadijah predicts
it will, this gives them something of an edge on NU in such things as gathering
the zakat fitrah tax.
  The naib (and chairman of NU) said that the best way is to wait until the
  night when the Fast is supposed to end and see if there is a moon. He
  said that for him and NU, both being naturally cautious, it is like when one
  adds up a long string of figures to see how much money one has. When
  one finishes adding, one still counts his money itself to see if it checks with
  the figures; and if it doesn’t, one trusts the money rather than the figures.
  Muhammadijah, on the other hand, trusts the figures and so knows way
  ahead of time when the day will fall and doesn’t have to wait to see if
  there is a moon or not. He thought this rather lacking in caution, but ad­
  mitted somewhat sadly that they do always seem to be right. In Sumbersari
   (a nearby village) the head of the Masjumi told me gleefully that Masjumi
  got a better return on its zakat-fitrah efforts this year because he and the
  rest of the party felt assured that the moon would show when Muhammadijah
  had said it would and so had no problems and just went ahead and collected
  the zakat; but NU vacillated, not being sure what day it would be, with the
  result that they got a late start and didn’t do so well.
     As for the fasting itself, for the most part only santris keep it very well,
although a few abangans and a number of prijajis also do because fasting is
a Hindu-Buddhist custom as well as an Islamic one and deeply engrained in
the culture generally. The great mass of non-santris make no attempt to keep
the Fast; nor do they put up any pretense of doing so. They eat in the Fast
along the street or in coffee-shops in full view of fasting santris, with little
thought on either side that this is either unfeeling or impolite—although the
santris naturally regard the non-fasters as rather inadequate Moslems. One
pious hadji who fasted but ran a ^coffee-shop for a living told me that he tried
unsuccessfully to keep his coffee-shop open during the Fast—because, after
all, every nickel helps. But, he said sadly, with his reputation as a firm santri,
people were a little embarrassed to come into his shop in the Fast because they
knew he would think ill of them even if he didn’t say anything and accepted
their money with his usual eagerness, and so he was forced to close.
     Fasting all day every day for a month is for many people quite taxing.
One old NU leader of 70 or so told me that he had fasted in each Fast all
his life had never gotten used to it and each year seemed more hellish than
the last. He said that with some people it was easy but with others, perhaps
most, it was just a month of suffering. Each evening one sees fasting santris
sitting around nervously waiting for the slit-gong to sound signifying that it is
lawful to eat. There are various compromises with their stomachs that people
make, such as fasting only on the first and last days of the Fast (which one
kijaji at an NU meeting compared rather aptly to wearing a hat and shoes but
nothing in between) or fasting only until noon (legitimate for younger chil­
dren, but most santri children can fast the whole day by the time they are
twelve), which are mostly employed by people who say they work too hard
to keep the Fast. But most people either fast or do not; and most santris do.
     When one asks santris why one is supposed to keep the Fast, they almost
»224«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
invariably give three reasons: to show obedience to the commands of God, to
experience what it is to go hungry so one can have greater understanding of
what it is like to be poor and not have enough to eat, to steel oneself so that
one will be able to take whatever suffering comes his way. It is exercising the
soul the way sports exercise the body; and one young educated santri com­
pared it to an examination in a school.
  He said that he always feels before the Fast as he does before an examination
  in school—anxious. Because it is like an exam, he is afraid he won’t pass.
  Last year he was ill and couldn’t fast, and he didn’t feel right because aÛ his
  friends were fasting. When the end of the Fast came he went along to the
  prayers as though he had been fasting, but he still didn’t feel right. During
  the Fast one is not supposed to do any wrong things, not supposed to gossip
  or swear or deceive people. Every day at the end of the day he takes ac­
  count of himself.
     The Fast reverses the hours of eating and shifts the hours of sleeping for
those who observe it. The Fast is broken at sunset with only a small bite of
food, usually a date or a piece of fruit, this being called the buka or “opening.”
After evening prayer a full meal is served, and the darns and trawèh follow
this, often lasting until after midnight. At 2:00 a.m . the whole family,
wakened by the beating of the mosque slit-gong, rises for saur, the main meal
in the Fast, and more pious santris, particularly in the villages, often sit up
reading the Koran until morning, sleeping much of the day. With Rijaja, this
upside-down month ends in a great holiday somewhat like our Easter, when
everyone buys new clothes, visits friends, and prepares feasts:
  He (a young modernist santri) said people tend to make Rijaja more im­
  portant than fasting. They talk about it more—about saving money for it,
  about the things they are going to buy. They discuss it all through the Fast.
  When I asked if santris do this too, he said yes, except those who “know.”
  I asked for an example of someone who “knows,” and he mentioned Pak
  Ali (Chairman of Masjumi, Vice-Chairman of Muhammadijah), who always
  says one shouldn’t wear new clothes on Rijaja but should dress just in ordinary
  clothes that' one likes to wear on every day, and who has never appeared on
  Rijaja in new clothes. Women are the worst. They always talk about clothes,
  money, getting ready all the special foods. . . . He said that when he was
  small he always liked the month of the Fast because it meant the Rijaja was
  coming.
    But Rijaja is not merely a santri holiday. It is one in which every Javanese
participates, regardless of his religious beliefs. As such, it will with greater
appropriateness be treated in the Conclusion.
P art T hree
