Chapter I J                          The Background
                               and General Dimensions
                                       of Prijaji Belief
                                         and Etiquette


               The Development of a “Great Tradition”
I t is Robert Redfield who has pointed out that, whereas the pre-civilized
hunter or villager is preliterate, the peasant is illiterate.* When people come
to live in cities and towns—and in Java they seem to have come to do this
shortly after the time of Christ—there occurs a splitting (which Redfield calls
a transformation) of the homogeneous cultural tradition of the self-sufficient
tribe; for this cultural tradition has now to serve two social structures: that of
the sophisticated city, economically dependent upon the village, and that of the
rustic village, culturally dependent upon the city. Out of the confining chrysalis
of inward-looking tribalism there emerges a dual tradition in which urban
elaboration of aesthetic, moral, political, military, religious, and economic
patterns is matched in the countryside by an increasingly effective elaboration
of agricultural techniques to support such specialized efforts.
     There is a cultural elite, whose ultimate basis of power is their control
over the central symbolic resources of the society (religion, philosophy, art,
science, and, most crucially in the more complex civilizations, writing); and
there is a subordinated practical hard-working peasantry, whose ultimate basis
of power is their control over the central material resource of the society, its
food supply. The two become symbiotically dependent upon one another,
their two variant traditions reflecting back and forth within one another as in
two etched mirrors, each catching dimly the other’s reflection. One cannot have
a peasantry without a gentry or a gentry without a peasantry.
     In such a situation whether one calls the peasant tradition a vulgarization
of the gentry,** or the gentry tradition a refinement of the peasant, is not very
    * Robert Redfield, The Primitive World and Its Transformations (Ithaca, 1954).
     ** Which in large part it certainly Is. The folklorists have taught us that, often, what
seem to be prime examples of spontaneous “people’s art” are but outmoded urban
traits “fallen by a peculiar cultural gravity into the lowest strata” (See G. F. Foster,
“What is Folk Culture?” American Anthropologist, Vol. 55, No. 21, 1953, pp. 159-173).
                                              227
»228«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
important. What is actually the case is that there is a persistent cultural
dialogue between gentry and peasantry, a constant interchange of cultural
material in which fading urban forms “coarsen” and “sink” into the peasant
mass and elaborated rural forms “etherealize” and “rise” into the urban elite.
  The symbiotic relationship between folk (i.e., “peasant,” although, as I
  have already pointed out, one finds “peasants” in town in modern Java)
  and non-folk (i.e., “gentry”) here postulated as the key concept of folk
  culture implies that the direction of culture flow is not alone outward and
  downward, from city to country and from upper to lower classes. Rather,
  we are facing a circular phenomenon in which folk culture draws on and
  is continually replenished by contact with the products of intellectual and
  scientific social strata, but in which folk culture continually, though perhaps
  in lesser degree, contributes to these non-folk societies. The dance is
  illustrative of this process. In the 17th and 18th centuries Western European
  dance masters introduced folk dances to social dancing, adapting them to
  the needs of the courts. English country square dances played a part in the
  development of the French quadrille, which was then introduced back into
  London. These folk dances then became the forms around which composers,
  then and now, created important works. Folk dances, now become court
  dances, spread from Spain and France to Latin America, and the process
  began anew whereby little by little they became the property of the folk.
  The current American rage for square dancing also reflects this process:
  after suitable time the folk entertainment of yesteryear becomes the pastime
  of the artistic avant-garde.*
     In a fully developed non-industrial civilization, then, there is typically a
ruling class of literates and a ruled class of illiterates (although both groups
may be further internally differentiated), the two facing one another across
an at best only sporadically bridgeable chasm of class. Those who can write
provide the ideal model for those who cannot, and the latter ape the former
as best they can from a distance which is usually great. The gentry represents
the Great Tradition as the peasant represents the Little; and, although both
may have been heavily stimulated by outside influences, as they were in Java
by Hindu-Buddhism and Islam, they grow in time so close as to become dis­
torted images of one another, alternately repelled by and attracted to each
other. In the peasant the gentleman sees both a disturbingly barbaric parody
of his own carefully controlled behavior and an attractive spontaneity and
animal power which tempt him from the infinite boredom of his own con­
stricted politesse. In the gentleman the peasant sees both a summation of all
that he wishes he could be—self-controlled, polished, learned, spiritually re­
fined—and a kind of self-important stuffiness and genteel fastidiousness which,
he feels, must surely take most of the joy out of life.



                     Gentry and Peasantry in Java
the abangans are Java’s peasantry, the prijajis its gentry. Abangan religion
represents the peasant synthesis of urban imports and tribal inheritances, a
   * Ibid.
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                    »229«
syncretism of old bits and pieces from a dozen sources ordered into a con­
glomerate whole to serve the needs of an unpretentious people growing rice
in irrigated terraces. Nowadays there are santri peasants also, for the old
homogeneous peasant culture is beginning to break up under the pressures of
modern life; but until this century, and still for most peasants (including many
of the nominally santri ones), die abangan tradition—a little native curing,
a little Tantric magic, a little Islamic chanting, all clustered about a simple
commensality ritual—served to define and order the basic social interrelation­
ships of the land-bound peasantry. And it projected for them a symbolic world
of meaning in which the work they did, the lives they led, and the values they
held all made cosmic sense.
     The prijajis have always been mainly of the towns; in fact, one of the
most sociologically interesting characteristics of modern Java is the degree
to which they have stayed in diem. Partly because of the political instability of
the pre-colonial kingdoms, partly because of their own inward-looking phi­
losophies, which elevate mystical achievement over political skill, partly be­
cause of Dutch opposition to their direct encroachment upon the peasantry, the
prijajis have not been able to turn themselves into a landed gentry. They are
not, with a few exceptions (none around Modjokuto), baronial landlords
working serfs or semi-serfs on huge estates. For the most part they are bureau­
crats, clerks, and teachers—white-collar nobles.
     The “noble” element is less important now. Prijaji originally indicated a
man who could trace his ancestry back to the great semi-mythical kings of pre-
colonial Java; but, as the Dutch, rulers of Java for over three hundred years,
employed this group as the administrative instruments of their policy, the term
widened to include commoners pulled into the bureaucracy as the supply of
authentic aristocrats ran out. Nevertheless, even in Modjokuto, which, being
but a district and subdistrict capital, represents the lowest reaches of the
central bureaucracy and so could be expected to be manned by the less ele­
vated in any case, the sense of the importance of noble descent remains.
      Then I asked him (a titled prijaji draughtsman in the government
  Irrigation Office) about class. He said that there were just two: prijaji
  and non-prijaji. Prijajis are people who do “refined” (alus) work, those
  who work for the government. The other group consists of people who do
  “unrefined” (kasar) work, and includes peasants, laborers, traders, and
  everyone else. He said that this is an outgrowth of the old system here
  before the Dutch, which is still present to an extent in Bali: the Hindu
  system which had five groups: (1) Brahmans, or priests and teachers; (2)
  Satrijas, or soldiers and kings; (3) Vaisias, or traders; (4) Sudras, or peasants
  and craftsmen, and (5) Pariahs, who are beggars. The last three were all
  really set off against the top two, and the prijajis of today are the descendants
  of the Satrijas, the old kings and courtiers. (He said there were no more
  Brahmans.)
      I asked about Sosro (the town’s largest landowner, who has about eighty
  acres and is a former government official, also titled). He doesn’t work for
  the government; is he a prijaji? “Yes,” said Wiro (the informant), “because
  he follows the style of life of the prijajis and mixes with prijajis, and because
  he is descended from prijajis.”
      How about H. Abdul (a wealthy santri merchant)? “Oh, no, he isn’t,”
»230«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF        JAVA
 said Wiro, laughing. “Yes, I know,” I said, “but is he really on the same
 class level as a carpenter out in the kampong?” And he said, yes, that
 from his, Wiro’s, point of view, they were on the same level. He said that
 this is relative, though: if one asked a village man whether H. Abdul was a
 prijaji he would probably say, yes, because he is up there so high that he
 seems like a prijaji to the village man.” (This, on my experience, is untrue.
 No village man would make the mistake of calling a rich santri, no matter
 how high up he was, a prijaji.) If one asked Abdul himself, he probably
 wouldn’t say that he was a prijaji, but he wouldn’t say that he was the same
 as a carpenter either, but higher. But from Wiro’s point of view as a prijaji,
 Abdul, die carpenter, and the peasants are all one big undifferentiated group.
       He said that there were a number of benchmarks which one could use
 to distingush prijajis from non-prijajis: wealth (but prijajis are, as a matter
 of fact, often less wealthy than rich santri traders and perhaps even than
 some of the richer abangan village chiefs); style of life—the clothes they
 wear, the houses they live in, the way they behave; whom they associate with,
 since prijajis associate almost exclusively with other prijajis; and, most
 important by far, descent. That is why Abdul and the carpenter are the same;
 their origins are the same—i.e., from commoners. . . .
      I kept at him on this, asking him about a boy who was born noble and
 was separated from his parents, grew up in a village, and then discovered
 his origin. Is he a prijaji? “Oh yes,” said Wiro, “if he is a descendant of
 kings he must be different; you would notice it right away. He would talk
 and behave in a much more refined manner than the village people around
 him.”
      I then said, “What about high government officials who haven’t got
 the pedigree—say the regent in Bragang? (The Regent of Bragang is a Mas-
 jumi man and so a santri, a situation which goes down very hard with almost
 all the prijajis in town, who almost never fail to lament his politically
 necessary appointment as “unfitting.”) Wiro guessed that the regent was
 considered a prijaji now, for the times are changing—a prijaji by “work”
  (i.e., achievement), which is more and more accepted now. However,
 from Wiro’s point of view the prijaji with descent is higher than any
 achieved prijaji could ever be. For example, there are many people with
 the titles of Mr. (i.e., Master of Laws) and Dr. (i.e., Doctor of Laws)
 now, and many of them are not from the prijaji group but are sons of
 rich village people, rich village chiefs, traders, and so forth and are not
 people with a real title but merely an academic one. Such people must think
 differently and have a different inner character no matter how hard they
 try to copy prijaji manners.
      I asked him just what the difference was. He said that those who have
 their status from riches and “work” (e.g., “study”) have less of a
 humanitarian feeling (rara kemanusian) compared to prijajis of the same
 level and education—for the most part anyway, although there may be
 exceptions. For example, the Sultan of Djokjakarta compared say with
 a prijaji leader has much greater “humanity” (kemanusian). Even though
 he was educated in Holland he still has his Satrija-ness. . . .
      He said that prijajis never have stores . . . because no prijaji is ever
 really clever at trade. It is not in their “inherited duty” (darrna), not their
 “cleverness.” Their “inherited duty” is as soldiers and guarding the govern­
 ment (i.e., as officials), and thus they can’t sell, and, if they try, their minds
 are unsettled. He knows that if he went into trade he would feel unhappy
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                                                       »231 «
  in his heart. Being clever at trade like other things is a matter of descent,
  but among non-prijajis—especially those from Solo, Djokjakarta, and Kudus.
  The “thought pattern” involved is lower than prijaji. . . . All non-prijajis
  have the same “inherited duty” and their souls are all the same. A trader
  thinks only about his own needs and not about society generally. . . .
      He said that the Pantjasila (President Sukarno’s Five Points, the basis
  of the present state) was an effort to re-establish the old Hindu system,
  which was very good. He said that in his view the times go in circles; history
  repeats in cycles and one keeps going back to the time before. This is the
  will of nature, the will of God. . . . What is important is not for the
  exact society of the past to be re-established, which is impossible, but
  just that people know each what his duty is according to his descent
  so that the descendants of peasants will be peasants, of traders traders,
  and so on. If not ordered so, society will be ruined. If common people keep
  acting like prijajis, who is going to hoe the fields after a while? The
  country will fall. However, he admitted, more and more village people are
  imitating prijajis, and he wondered who would hoe later. He said that if he,
  for example, were obligated to hoe, he couldn’t do it.
     This prijaji ethic, with its intense sense for status differences, its calm
assertion of spiritual superiority, and its dual emphasis on the inner life of
refined feeling and the external life of polite form, is the outcome of nearly
sixteen centuries of urban living. The ancient Hindu-Buddhist city-states were
headed by a king who was also a God, a divine monarch enthroned at the
very peak of spiritual refinement upon a symbolically divine mountain set
in the exact center of his squared-off capital.* They brought into being a
group of religio-aesthetically concerned warrior-gentry, receivers of foreign
cultural fashions and rationalizers of local ones. The city-states rose and fell,
one following the next as so many unsuccessful political experiments. With the
possible exception of the great fourteenth-century kingdom of Madjapahit,
and the seventeenth-century Mataram, they were unable to throw roots very
deep into the peasant mass. The Javanese aristocracy lacked the land-linked
system of feudal obligation of Western Europe with its fief-holding agricultural
gentry, or the rationalized Chinese bureaucracy drawing its officials from
rural gentry as well as urban. They lacked even the solidified patron relations
of the caste-organized India whence they borrowed so much of their world­
view. Therefore, the Javanese aristocracy had, until the Dutch came, but two
ways to hold the peasants in order to extract from them the rice and manpower
they needed to support their own specialization: simple military terror and
religious enthusiasm. They used both.



                  Basic Concepts in the Prijaji World-View
p e a s a n t s clung to gentry princes not only for military protection but also be­
cause the latter had about them that magical-mystical aura Max Weber called
   * S ee R . H e in e - G e ld e r n , “ C o n c e p tio n s o f S ta te a n d K in g s h ip in S o u th e a s t A s ia ,”
Far Eastern Quarterly, V o l. 2 , 1942.
»232«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF     JAVA
charisma. Spiritual excellence was correlated with political eminence and
culminated in the immobile king, the incarnation of Vishnu or Shiva, meditat­
ing in his castle at the center of the universe. Spiritual power flowed outward
and downward from its royal fountainhead, attenuating as it sank through each
layer in the bureaucracy, draining weakly at last into the peasant masses.
Peasant and king, center and periphery, pinnacle and base, God and animal,
sacred and profane—these were, and, with some reinterpretations, are now
the coordinate termini of the prijaji's metaphysical and social measuring rod,
termini summed up in a pair of concepts central to the prijaji world-view:
alus and kasar.
     A lu s means pure, refined, polished, polite, exquisite, ethereal, subtle,
civilized, smooth. A man who speaks flawless high-Javanese is alus, as is the
high-Javanese itself. A piece of cloth with intricate, subtle designs painted
onto it is alus. An exquisitely played piece of music or a beautifully controlled
dance step is alus. So is a smooth stone, a dog with his hair petted down, a far­
fetched joke, or a clever poetic conceit. God is, of course, alus (as are all in­
visible spirits), and so is the mystical experience of Him. One’s own soul and
character are alus insofar as one emotionally comprehends the ultimate struc­
ture of existence; and one’s behavior and actions are alus insofar as they are
regulated by the delicate intricacies of the complex court-derived etiquette.
Kasar is merely the opposite: impolite, rough, uncivilized; a badly played
piece of music, a stupid joke, a cheap piece of cloth. Between these two poles
the prijaji arranges everyone from peasant to king.
     But even to begin to understand the prijaji outlook, one must comprehend
the meaning of another pair of concepts: lair and batin. Batin means “the
inner realm of human experience,” and lair “the outer realm of human be­
havior.” The immediate temptation is to equate them with body and soul, but
this would be a serious mistake. Batin refers not to a separate seat of en­
capsulated spirituality detachable from the body but to the emotional life of
the individual taken generally—what we call “the inner life,” or “the sub­
jective”; it consists of the fuzzy, shifting shapes of private feeling perceived
directly in all their phenomenological immediacy. Lair, on the other hand,
refers to that part of human life which strict behavioral psychologists limit
themselves to studying—the external actions, motions, postures, and speech
of the individual. These two sets of phenomena, the inner and the outer, are
conceived as somewhat independent realms to be put into proper order sep­
arately, or, perhaps better stated, sequentially. The ordering of the outward
life leaves one free to turn to the ordering of the inward. The cultivated man
needs to give form both to the naturally jagged physical gestures which make
up his external behavior and to the fluctuating states of feeling which comprise
his inner experience. A truly alus man is polite all the way through.
     Of the two tasks, the ordering of the external life is easier, in support of
which statement I offer the following stanza, all too literally translated, of a
long poem (or song, for Javanese poems— ternbang—may always be sung).
It was composed by a Modjokuto Javanese, who, although he is actually some­
thing of a santri mystic too, expresses a basically prijaji outlook on life in this
set of moral verses intended for the edification of his children:
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette »233 «
             Politeness in outward behavior,
             Although complex, is easy to learn
             If only you wish to,
             Because it is both audible and visible.
             If you inspect it carefully and in detail, over and over again,
             You will be able in a short time
             To do the polite thing
             From the point of view of good form and customary behavior.
             Wherever you may live,
             You will be able to mix with everyone.
   The contrasting task, ordering the inner life, is much more difficult:
              Now as for ordering the inner life,
              This is not something every person knows about.
              It is very, very difficult.
              One feels even more uneasy
              When one tries to know the order of the inner life.
              Because it is invisible,
              Even more than fine powder is.
              One might say it is inexplicable, or that it is unclear.
              So if you are not very thorough in searching for it
              You certainly will not find it.
   By “finding” the “order of the inner life” the poet refers to that ultimate
aim of prijaji religion in general, mystical experience; for in the truly well-
ordered man the whole being is permeated by politesse, the inner and outer
merge, and there is a revelation of their significance.
              Whoever knows the politeness of the inner life
              Knows also the true nobility,
              Shows the true signs of high character.
              He will be able to care for his spiritual castle,
              Indeed, a glorious place,
              Which is never further from him than his beard,
              And which will be shielded with but a curtain of light.
              Lo! Such are the teachings of extraordinary men.
              It is fitting that you should follow their advice.
    The political metaphors which identify spirituality with political nobility
and employ the image of the meditating king’s castle for the light-shielded
inner life of man (where, as we shall see, God also dwells) depend upon the
more fundamental identification of religious and political status set forth in the
concept of a kasar-to-aius gradation. But the combination of the lair-batin
distinction and the kasar-alus continuum brings about a situation in which the
ascent from the uncivilized animalistic peasant to the hyper-civilized divine
king takes place not only in terms of greater mystical achievements, more and
more highly developed skills of inward-looking contemplation and refinement
of subjective experience, but also in greater and greater formal control over
the external aspects of individual actions, transforming them into art or near­
art. In the dance, in the shadow-play, in music, in textile design, in etiquette,
»234«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
and, perhaps most crucially of all, in language, the aesthetic formalization of
the surfaces of social behavior permeates everything the alus Javanese does.



           Prijaji versus Abangan: General Differences
of course there are no sovereign courts in Java, and there have not been for
centuries. The Dutch, however, not only drew their native administrators,
teachers, and clerks from among the descendants of nobles and king but also
permitted the two great courts of Djokjakarta and Surakarta to persist through
the entire colonial period, having destroyed their military power and relieved
their kings of any independent authority. Thus the cultural tradition persisted,
grafted now to a progressively more rationalized colonial bureaucracy. The
prijajis remained both the cultural leaders and, so far as the indigenous society
was concerned, the political ones even though everyone was aware that the
ultimate locus of power in the society had shifted into foreign hands. The
gentry concern for etiquette, art, and mysticism continued, as did the peasant
imitation of the forms they developed.
     The prijaji religious orientation is more difficult to set off from the
abangan than is the santri, because the change from a syncretic South Asian
polytheism (or “animism,” if “deity” is too elevated a term to apply to such
as danjangs, tujuls, and demits) to a Mid-Eastern monotheism is rather
greater than the shift from such a religion to a Hindu-Buddhist pantheism. The
traits I shall discuss under prijaji are not confined to them. The gamelan
orchestra and the wajang shadow-play, for example, could hardly be said
to be absent from peasant life; but they are included in this context because
their cultivation, the elucidation of their religio-philosophical meaning, and
their most elaborate variations are found in a prijaji context; and because they
have been pulled into and integrated with a general gentry style of life toward
which the whole rest of the society, even the santri sector, to an extent and
 grudgingly, looks as the very model of civilized living.
     Although the Prijaji and abangan orientations, from the point of view
 of culture content, are in part but genteel and vulgar versions of one another,
they are organized around rather different types of social structure and ex­
pressive of quite different sorts of values, a difference Cora Dubois has char­
 acterized, speaking of the entire Southeast Asian culture-area, as follows:
  Here was a class (the gentry) whose ethos was deeply at variance from that
  of the peasantry. It conceived of life in terms of hierarchy and power rather
  than in terms of simple communal democracy; in terms of privilege rather
  than mutual obligations; in terms of ostentation and aggrandizement rather
  than subsistence and communal obligations.*
     Thus, as one traces prijaji patterns downward, they tend to shift in sig­
nificance as they approach the abangan social context. Mystic practices tend
to turn into curing techniques; a vague and abstract pantheism gives way to
   * Social Forces in Southeast Asia   (St. Paul, 1949).
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                    »235 «
a vivid and concrete polytheism; a concern for individual religious experience
is replaced by a concern for group religious reciprocality. And the corollary
holds too: abangan sla m eta n s become prijaji formal banquets. In any case,
although the prijajis and abangans have, in many ways, very similar world­
views, and although they share many concrete items of religious belief and
practice, the ethics which can be deduced from these underlying world-views
and which the items are arranged to symbolize differ rather markedly.



                      Literati versus Intelligentsia
there is within the prijaji group something of a distinction comparable to the
conservative-modem division already outlined in connection with abangans
and sa n tris. Here the distinction seems to coincide with one made by Redfield,
building on Arnold Toynbee and Gordon Childe, between what he calls the
“literati” and what he calls the “intelligentsia” :
  In emphasizing two contrasting aspects of the functions and roles of the
  literate in the early and later civilizations, Childe and Toynbee point to a
  difference that might deserve the distinguishing terms that these writers give
  to the two kinds of literate people. Childe is impressed with the separation
  between craftsmanship and literacy in the early civilizations and with the
  “scholastic attitude” developed by those clerks who used writing to set
  down traditional lore and knowledge and who came to develop the exact
  sciences and philosophy. Some of these became custodians and interpreters
  of sacred books. In this aspect of their functions, internal to the developing
  civilization, we might speak of the new type of men as the literati. The literate
  elite of China illustrate the type. These persons are enclosed within the
  culture that has become civilization. They carry it forward into a more
  systematic and reflective phase. . . .
       Toynbee, on the other hand, writes of the functions of those literate
  persons who mediate between the society out of which they arose and some
  other and alien civilization which is impinging upon it. These people have
  learned something alien to the culture of their native community; they
  “have learnt the tricks of the intrusive civilization’s trade so far as may
  be necessary to enable their own community, through their agency, just
  to hold its own in a social environment in which life is ceasing to be lived
  in accordance with the local tradition and is coming more and more to be
   lived in the style imposed by the intrusive civilization upon the aliens
  who fall under its domination.” . . . These people Toynbee calls by a word
  which developed for them in Russia, the intelligentsia. In contrast to the
  literati, the member of the intelligentsia “is born to be unhappy.” He be­
  longs to two worlds, not one; he is a “marginal man.”*
    The intrusive civilization whose tricks the Javanese intelligentsia have
learned is, of course, the Dutch version of the Western. In addition to the
mysticism, the pantheism, and the palace etiquette there is in p rijaji life an
   * Op. dt.
»236«                                                              T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
all too familiar petty-bourgeois element whose provenance is not difficult to
guess. It is among the prijajis that one finds women embroidering, giving
wedding presents, furnishing their homes with heavy baroque furniture, and
decorating the walls of their little box-shaped cement houses—which often
would look less out of place in The Hague—with cozy landscapes. It is among
them that one finds men engaged in tennis, chess, swimming, and hunting.
One even still finds a few of them reading Dutch novels and magazines, al­
though this has dropped off since the Revolution; and I even knew one or
two who did pencil sketches, hardly a native Javanese custom. The peasants
for such people are something of an embarrassment: they are not only
ignorant and lacking in proper manners—a literati complaint—but they are
also “disorderly,” “dirty,” and “lazy,” and they bring up their children in an
irregular fashion.
  When I told him I was studying children, he (the head of PNI—Partai
  Nasional Indonesia—the major pr//a;7-dominated political party, and
  Modjokuto’s purest case of the intelligentsia type) gave me his opinions on
  this. He thought Javanese children weren’t “trained”; that they were just
  let alone to eat what and when they wanted, sleep when they wanted; and
  some never bathed or got their clothes washed. His children get up at a
  certain time, bathe, eat breakfast, go to school; and only after school can
  they play. The old lady (a distant relative of the informant) chimed in,
  echoing Rekso, remarking that peasant children don’t eat regularly, are dirty,
  have to gather wood and grasses for their mother instead of going to school.*
     Prijajis at the middle and higher levels tend to speak Dutch instead of
Javanese; and the higher levels do so to the point where, except for the low-
Javanese they use to command their servants, they are nearly unable to
speak their native language. It is the prijajis who before the war were the
beneficiaries of what education the Dutch provided the Javanese (some of
them even going to schools, with Dutch children), who worked as clerks and
petty administrators in the Dutch sugar-factories, import-export firms, and
transport industries; and it was from among them that the very few Javanese
chosen to be educated in Holland were in the main selected prijaji pilgrims to
a Western Mecca.
     Out of all this came a new model for the Javanese aristocracy and for the
commoners patterning themselves after them, a model based on white-collar
Western education emphasizing Dutch language, history, and literature and
Dutch manners and values. Women’s clubs, credit cooperatives patterned on
plans constructed by Dutch administrators anxious to raise the standard of
living of the “natives,” noblesse oblige adult education movements to uplift
the masses—by teaching them to read and write, to reduce their divorce rate,
and to wash their clothes—appeared alongside the dance groups, the religious
training sects, and the gamelan orchestras.
     Parallel to the social pyramid based on artistic-mystic skills and on close­
ness to the core of Hindu-Javanese court tradition there came to be erected
another pyramid based on skill in manipulation of Western ideas and values
   * T h is p a s s a g e is a tr a n s c r ip t f r o m m y w ife ’s field n o te s .
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                   »237«
and on closeness to the Dutch colonial community—an intelligentsia as well
as a literati.
  He (a well-educated young prijaji head of a private school run by a private
  prijaji educational society) criticized the failure of many prijajis to partic­
  ipate in modern life. . . . He said that Sosro (the landowner mentioned
  above by Pak Wiro) was an example of this. In the Dutch times he had the
  highest position in the bureaucracy of anyone who ever grew up in
  Modjokuto, being head of the Fish Harbor in Djakarta, but now he doesn’t
  do anything at all; he just sits home being alus, studying mysticism and the
  like. I asked if that was because he was old. Narjo (the informant) said,
  “No, he is only fifty, and quite healthy.” In this case the passivity was
  mainly due to his Surakarta wife. After he married her, a Radèn Aju (a
  fairly high female court title), he changed course 180 degrees and started
  doing things the Surakarta way, which is very slow and alus. Narjo expressed
  strong disapproval of this and said Rekso (the PNI head) was different in this
  respect; he was very active in things.
     The difference between the two groups is not nearly so sharp as the com­
parable difference among the santris, however. Most prijajis have both a
literati and an intelligentsia aspect to their outlook. (Even the above informant
belonged to a mystic society.) In general, as one progresses up the status
ladder in the direction of the large northern port cities—Djakarta, Surabaja,
and Semarang, the literati element steadily lessens and the intelligentsia ele­
ment steadily increases, until in some circles in Djakarta it would be difficult,
if one ignored physical anthropology, to tell that one was not in Holland.
Similarly, as one goes up the status ladder in the direction of the great inland
court centers, there is an increasing tendency for the literati element to grow
stronger, although the intelligentsia aspect does not necessarily decrease, until
in the court circles of Djokjakarta and, especially, Surakarta, it is possible, if
one ignores the furniture and the electric lights, to imagine one is in a pre-
Dutch Hindu-Buddhist court.
     Modjokuto, in the middle geographically and socially, gets influences
from both directions. If one were to wear customary court dress to the north,
around Modjokuto and Surabaja, he would be laughed at, one informant
told me; and he said that he knew a man who had had his traditional clothing
literally torn off him. But in the Surakarta-Djokjakarta direction people
prefer such dress, and many still look down on anyone who wears pants and
a jacket as a Dutch imitator.
     In general, however, the intelligentsia and literati elements tend to get
bound into the same person, with only relative emphasis on one or the other.
The current (1954) prijaji culture-hero is the Sultan of Djokjakarta, who,
it is said, behaves exactly like a conservative, mystic, traditional long within
his palace and like a progressive, modem, Dutch-educated political leader
outside of it. And even in the most intelligentsia circles in Djakarta one will
often run into mysticism in unexpected places:
  He (an advanced student in sociology at the University of Indonesia) asked
  me if I had studied philosophy, and I said, “A little.” He asked if I had found
  there a key to life, an answer. He said that he knew very little philosophy but
»238«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
  that he was always looking for such a key. He said that he had made up a
  philosophy for himself: one part Indian philosophy, one part Islam, one
  part sociology, and one part psychology. . . . He had written all this down
  and sent it to Siasat (a weekly socialist magazine), but the editor said that
  he should send it to a theological magazine. He thought he would just keep it
  for a while, because if he published it people might not understand it the same
  way he meant it and then would be led astray.




              The General Dimensions of Prijaji Belief
the three major foci of prijaji “religious” life are etiquette, art, and mystical
practice. I admit to using “religion” in a somewhat broader sense than may
be typical, but there is nothing else to do when these factors are so fused as
to make their separate consideration nearly meaningless. For etiquette, art,
and mystical practice represent the prijaji effort after order as it moves from
the surface of human experience toward its depths, from the outer aspect
of life toward the inner. Etiquette, the polishing of interpersonal behavior
into smooth decorum, lends to everyday behavior a spiritualized formality;
art, a dual discipline of mind and body, provides a revelation of inner sig­
nificance in outward gesture; and mystic practice, the intensive regulation of
the life of thought and feeling, organizes the individual’s spiritual resources
for an attack upon ultimate enlightenment. The connecting link between all
three, the common element in them all which ties them together and makes
them but different modes of the same reality, is what the Javanese, borrowing
a concept from India, call rasa.
     Rasa has two primary meanings: “feeling” and “meaning.” As “feeling”
it is one of the traditional five senses (pantjaindrija)— seeing, hearing, talking,
smelling, and feeling. It includes within itself three aspects of “feeling” that
our view of the five senses separates: taste on the tongue, touch on the body,
and emotional “feeling” within the “heart”—sadness, happiness, and the like.
The taste of a banana is its rasa; a hunch is a rasa; a pain is a rasa; and so
is a passion.
     As “meaning,” rasa is applied to the words in a letter, in a poem, or even
in speech, to indicate the between-the-lines “looking north and hitting south”
type of allusive suggestion that is so important in Javanese communication.
And it is given the same application to external acts generally: to indicate
the implicit import, the connotative “feeling” of dance movements, polite
gestures, and so forth. But, in this second sense, it also means “ultimate
significance”—the deepest meaning at which one arrives by dint of mystical
effort and whose clarification resolves all the ambiguities of mundane exist­
ence. Rasa, said one of my most articulate informants, is the same as life;
whatever lives has rasa, and whatever has rasa lives. To translate such a
 sentence one could only render it twice: whatever lives feels, and whatever
 feels lives; or: whatever lives has meaning, and whatever has meaning lives.
 As the first, or sensationalist, definition of rasa indicates both feeling from
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                 »239 «
without (taste, touch) and from within (emotional), so rasa in its second,
or semantic, definition indicates both the meaning of events in the lair, the
external behavioral world of sound, shape, and gesture, and in the far more
mysterious batin, the fluid inner world of life.
     The changes which the Javanese ring upon this protean root are numerous
and so marvelously consistent as almost to give in themselves a complete
picture of the phenomenological analysis of human experience upon which
the prijajis base their world-view. Ngrasani means to speak ill of someone,
to gossip about them. Ngrasakaké means to sympathize with or “feel with”
someone or something. (“My business is so bad,” moaned one storekeeper to
me, “you can’t even ngrasakaké it”; and people urged to cooperate are told
to ngrasakaké one another.) A rerasan (to rasa one another mutually) is
a discussion or conversation, usually an acrimonious one. Sarasa (to be of
one rasa) is to be in harmony, to agree. Mirasa is to reason over something,
think about something. Krasa indicates “feeling” as an abstract noun; thus
krasa bingah (bingah—“happy” ) means happiness. Krasan means to “feel at
home,” to feel comfortable in the situation which you are in, to be used to it.
 (“Are you krasan in Java?”—i.e., do you feel at home in Java? Are you
already used to the heat, food, and customs here so that they no longer
disturb your equanimity? This last is the Javanese equivalent of our perennial
question to visiting foreigners, “How do you like America?” ) Rasa-pangrasa
means to “feel out” one another tentatively and warily, to hold back one’s
feelings in untrusting concealment from one another, a typical prijaji pattern.
Rumangsa means to be conscious of, to perceive, something. As J. Gonda
points out in his Sanskrit in Indonesia,* the two meanings of rasa—“ultimate
meaning” or “hidden significance,” and “tactile sensation,” “taste,” or “in­
ward feeling”—actually derive from two different Sanskrit roots; but, as
he also points out, in modern Java “the latter . . . word . . . has, indeed,
blended with the former.” It is upon this blending that the prijaji religious
 analysis is based.
     By taking rasa to mean both “feeling” and “meaning,” the prijaji has
been able to develop a phenomenological analysis of subjective experience
to which everything else can be tied. Because fundamentally “feeling” and
 “meaning” are one, and therefore the ultimate religious experience taken
 subjectively is also the ultimate religious truth taken objectively, an empirical
 analysis of inward perception yields at the same time a metaphysical analysis
of objective reality. This granted, the characteristic way in which human
 action comes to be considered, whether from a moral or an aesthetic or a
 religious point of view, is in terms of the emotional life of the individual
who perceives it, whether from within or without; the more refined (alus)
 one’s feeling, the more profound one’s understanding, the more elevated
 one’s moral character, and the more beautiful one’s external aspect. The
 management of one’s emotional economy becomes one’s primary concern, in
 terms of which all else is ultimately rationalized. The spiritually enlightened
 man guards his psychological equilibrium well and makes a constant effort
 to maintain its placid stability. His proximate aim is emotional quiescence,
    * Nagpur, 1952, p. 158.
»240«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF    JAVA
for passion is kasar feeling, fit only for children, animals, peasants, and
foreigners. His ultimate aim, which this quiescence makes possible, is gnosis,
the direct comprehension of the ultimate rasa. To feel all is to understand
all. Paradoxically, it is also to feel nothing—but we shall come to that
problem later.
     Emotional equanimity, a certain flatness of affect, is, then, the prized
psychological state, the mark of the truly alus character. As the forms which
life takes vary from the disordered grossness of animal existence up through
the only slightly more refined peasant to the hyper-genteel high-prijaji, and,
finally, through the divine king to the invisible, intangible, insensible (except
mystically), self-sufficient Being of God, so the forms of feeling vary from
the vulgar actuality of base passion, through the spiritualized placidity of
the true prijaji to the ultimate rasa, where feeling is but meaning only. Happi­
ness and unhappiness, say the Javanese, are irrevocably connected and imply
one another as up implies down. “Happy now, unhappy later; unhappy now,
happy later,” is perhaps the most quoted prijaji maxim. The really good man
tries to get beyond happiness and unhappiness as our mystics attempt to escape
good and evil.
               If you can calm your innermost feelings
               You will be able to build a wall around them;
               You will not need to be or to feel greedy,
               To want this and that and the other thing.
               For the only things one receives in life
               Are merely happiness and unhappiness.
               In this there is no difference between the rich
               And the poor carrying burdens through the street.
               If you are happy now, you will be unhappy later.
               If you accept unhappiness, it will totally disappear.
    This stanza of my informant’s poem is worth comment. The word I have
translated “calm” (piintu) really means to think seriously about, or, better,
to talle yourself into not feeling about something you would normally feel
deeply about. An informant, asked for an example said: “If my parents die,
I am all upset; but if I say to myself, ‘Oh, they were already old and everyone
must die sometime,’ then I will be at peace— this action is puntu” This kind
of behavior, from my observation, is a major Javanese defense mechanism:
  When Pak Ardjo (my landlord, whose house had been robbed in his absence)
  got back home after the robbery, he didn’t say anything to Bu Ardjo about
  it for quite a while. In fact, when I came in, just after he returned, he was
  talking to a railroad friend and said there had been a lot going on here too,
  but he just ignored this and went on talking about other subjects. . . .
  Later he told me he had resigned himself about the theft; had convinced
  himself by saying, “If it’s gone, it’s gone, and that’s all there is to it.”
  Being upset wouldn’t bring the bike back, nor would getting angry at his
  wife. . . . He said he had kept himself from being upset about it all.
    There are three main values involved in this calming of the true feelings,
this flattening out of affect: trima, sabar, and iklas. ¡klas I have already
discussed, in connection with death, as meaning detachment from the con­
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                »241«
tingencies of the external world so as not to be disturbed when things go
awry in it or if something unexpected occurs. It is “not caring,” on the
premise that if one does not care about worldly things they cannot hurt
or upset one; or, as our poet puts it in another stanza:
          Although you may own
          A house like a great heaven
          And lock it with a golden key,
          You must surely die in the end and be buried in the ground,
          And all your material things are yours but for a moment.
     Sabar is usually translated patience. If one asks people what is the main
quality which a leader, political or otherwise, should have, this is the charac­
teristic they almost always mention. Sabar indicates an absence of eagerness,
of impatience, of headstrong passion. A sabar man advances carefully
through experience, stepping tentatively as we do when we are not cer­
tain that a plank is strong enough to hold us or that a hillside rock will
not give way under our feet. His aim, as another line from our poem puts
it, is to “go gingerly through life as a caterpillar inches over water.”
     Trima literally means to accept or receive; in value terms it means not
to kick against the pricks, to accept what comes without protest and without
rebellion. The three ideas are obviously very close. I Idas brings psycho­
logical peace through a lack of attachment to the external world; sabar
brings such peace by an inward restraint of emotional drive, an atrophy of
the will, an excess of caution; trima brings peace through the acceptance of
the inevitable with grace: “If you accept unhappiness, it will totally dis­
appear.”
     If one can calm one’s most inward feelings (by being trima, sabar, and
ikias), the poet continues, one can build a wall around them; one will be
able both to conceal them from others and to protect them from outside dis­
turbance. The refinement of inner feeling has thus two aspects: the direct
internal attempt to control one’s emotions represented by trima, sabar, and
ikias; and, secondly, an external attempt to build a well around them that
will protect them. On the one hand, one engages in an inward discipline,
and on the other in an outward defense. Mysticism is mainly training in the
first—how to be trima, sabar, and ikias. Etiquette is training in the second.
At bottom, the refinement of the inner world—the batin—makes possible the
refinement of the outer, which in turn protects one from being easily upset.
The prijaji thus has two lines of defense against the shocks of the external
world: the formalization of social behavior so that it is easily predictable, and
the flattening of affect so that if the unexpected does occur it will be less
likely to lead to an inward disturbance.



                          The R ole of Etiquette
the  wall, then, is a wall of etiquette. Etiquette provides the alus prijaji with
a set of rigidly formal ways of doing things which conceals his real feelings
»242«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
from others. In addition, it so regularizes behavior, his own and that of others,
as to make it unlikely to provide unpleasant surprises.
     In the model conversations dictated by prijaji informants teaching me
Javanese, the same sort of situation occurs and reoccurs almost to the point
of monotony. Two men are speaking. One wants something from the other
(a loan, a service, his company in going somewhere), and both know it. The
petitioner does not want to put his petition directly for fear of angering the
petitioned; and the petitioned does not want to state his refusal directly for
fear of frustrating the petitioner too severely. Both are very concerned with
the other’s emotional reactions because ultimately they will affect their own.
As a result, they go through a long series of formal speech patterns, cour­
tesy forms, complex indirections, and mutual protestations of purity of
motive, arriving only slowly at the point of the conversation so that no one
is taken by surprise. Etiquette is the transfer to the level of interpersonal
behavior of the calm and muted feeling tone of the inner life.
     The relation between rasa and etiquette often gets expressed in an
incisive commercial metaphor:
   What is the aim of life? (The informant, a teacher-leader (guru) of a
   mystic sect, was giving me a kind of catechism of his group’s beliefs.)
   The aim of life is to seek emotional peace; other than that there isn’t any.
   No one seeks upset, disturbance; everyone just seeks peace. Now each person
   starts out on this search for inward peace with a certain amount of capital,
   as in the market, only it is not in the form of money but of rasa. This
   capital is neither more nor less than the ability to make other people
   feel at peace. . . . Every person has a capital of rasa to accomplish this.
   When I came to his house he emerged in proper style to meet me. This was
   his capital because it put me at ease; and so I was in turn polite to him, and
   so he was at ease and his capital of rasa was increased. You often see
   written and hung in people’s houses, or hear people say: “Men must have
   etiquette-feeling (rasa sopan-santun).” This etiquette-feeling, this form
   of politeness, is a kind of instrument or tool for making others peaceful
   within, and thus yourself also; a kind of capital of rasa, because all movement
   is from rasa and so this politeness has rasa. If you meet a man on the street
   and you just coast by and don’t say, “Where are you going, Pak?” in high-
   Javanese (the typical Javanese greeting), he will feel upset; and later his
   upsetness will react back and you will feel upset.
        He said that each people has its own politeness forms, and that no
   American, for example, would behave thus—and then he gave a perfect
   demonstration of the way Americans in fact do behave, clapping someone
   on the back and saying, “Let’s go into town” while towering over him.
   (Having your head higher than another’s is impossible manners for a
   Javanese.) In fact, his imitation was so good that I misunderstood and
   missed the point, agreeing that was the way Americans acted. He looked
   appalled and then said, mumbling, “Well, if you knew someone for a very,
   very long time.”
     Lest this be thought but an interpretation of the views of just one sect,
I cite the following, from a conversation with a policeman who, although a
prijaji, was not at all learned in mysticism, which points up even more sharply
 the unity of etiquette with the rest of the prijaji religious complex:
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                   »243 «
  The policeman, who originally came from Surakarta but who has been here
  a long time, informed me of the various levels of the Javanese language
  and said that these were very important to the Javanese. Formal language,
  Javanese art, and etiquette, he said, were all of a piece. Each person has
  within him a capital of rasa which is his real riches and which is what
  makes for smooth relations between people and for peace among them and
  within people. Thus, said he, before I (the ethnographer) came here to
  Indonesia, I felt inside that I was going to try to be like the Indonesians and
  not try to feel higher than they were and try to get to know them; and
  so when I got here things worked out well and I was peaceful inside. This
  “emotional set” is what is called a capital of rasa, and it is very important.
  Etiquette, language, and art, such as the gamelan orchestra and the shadow-
  play, are all intended to build up within the individual this store of rasa
  capital.
    Four major principles animate prijaji etiquette: the proper form for the
proper rank, indirection, dissimulation, and the avoidance of any act sug­
gesting disorder or lack of self-control. Under the proper form for the
proper rank comes the all-important matter of the correct choice of linguistic
form, to which we shall come in a moment; but it also includes the andap-asor
pattern. Andap-asor means to humble oneself politely and is the correct
behavior to adopt toward anyone who is either of approximately equal rank
or higher. It is always a situation of some anxiety when two Javanese, espe­
cially prijajis, meet for the first time, for each must determine the other’s rank
in order both to employ the correct linguistic forms and to apply the andap-
asor pattern correctly. (There are many cues: dress, occupation, bearing.)
If the two are of the same rank or nearly the same, then both will adopt
the andap-asor pattern; and I have seen many prijaji conversations that
seemed to consist almost entirely of an attempt by each of the participants
to put himself in the lower position, a kind of obsessive competition to be
bottom dog. (The competition is pretense, of course. If either were to flatly
acknowledge the other’s inferiority in such a situation it would be a grave
insult.)
     If one participant is very obviously higher in rank than the other—a prince
and a commoner, a high official and a low one, a master and his servant, an
adult and a child, a rich man and a poor one (which is, however, a touchy
situation, since many a poor abangan peasant will be unwilling to acknowledge
inferiority to a rich santri trader)—the problem is much simpler. The lower
man takes the andap-asor pattern and the higher takes a superior one, some­
times even a haughty one even though it is considered unseemly. The problem
comes in the “about equal rank” situation—in deciding in borderline cases
whether one’s opposite number is clearly enough inferior to one to permit an
adoption of a superior attitude or, conversely, if the other is high enough to
be allowed to get away with such behavior. There seems to be a general
fear on the part of many people that they will ngrendahaké (literally: to
humble or lower) i.e., insult, someone lower than themselves and will be
met with a sudden burst of unexpected aggression in return. One must always
be careful in speaking to lower people, one woman said, because they are
very easily insulted and once insulted they become uncontrollably angry.
»244«                                           T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
     As a result, the tendency is to move “like the caterpillar creeping over
water”; to be doubly cautious about missteps. One gives people the benefit
of the doubt; and so the mutual andap-asor competition pattern is perhaps
the most common, at least within Modjokuto prijaji circles, where no one
is really high enough to get very haughty with anyone else. Similar problems
arise when separate rank characteristics conflict. What is an old man of no
particular standing to do when dealing with a young man of high rank (or,
nowadays, education); or a poor prijaji dealing with a rich trader? In part the
problem is resolved by the fact that the andap-asor pattern as well as lin­
guistic usage is not an absolute matter of either abject humility or lordly
pride but can be indulged in by degrees. This, in fact, is half the fun of it.
The accomplished prijaji can express all sorts of nuances of status (and
insult), many of which escape Western perception altogether; and a true
virtuoso can reduce novices to quivering immobility. As a Javanese put it, “I
have a friend who is very andap-asor [to me], so that I feel ashamed with
him because I am not capable of behaving as he does; and when I am going
to reply to him I want to be andap-asor too, but I can’t, so I feel ashamed.”
     In behavioral terms the andap-asor pattern consists in the first place of
all kinds of submissive actions, for the Javanese take the physical metaphor
seriously, associating height with high status. In the old days (and one still
sees it occasionally in prijaji circles in the larger cities) servants served the
family’s meals on their knees, and the correct greeting of an inferior to a
superior was to kneel and make the obeisance gesture (palms of hands
together with thumbs at the nose and a “horizontal nod” of the head) to the
superior’s knee or even to his foot. I saw this done only once in Modjokuto
—by an old servant who had come to visit her former mistress, the wife of
a high prijaji. This sort of thing is considered too extreme nowadays, but
the anxious effort to keep one’s head lower than a superior’s is still very
much present. So is the custom of the host not sitting at the visiting table*
when an important guest calls but placing himself on a low chair to the rear
and side of the guest. Allowing others to go first to take the best seats and
minimizing one’s own abilities, property, and accomplishments are part of
the same pattern.
     Indirection as a theme of prijaji behavior, and of Javanese behavior
generally, has been mentioned in this essay several times already. I have
quoted the proverb “to look north and hit south,” and related something about
the magnificent beating about the bush that goes on when the family of the
groom requests the bride from her family for their son; and I have quoted
the Modjokuto naib on the fact that old-time kijajis (Koranic teachers)
never explicitly informed people they were wrong but told little stories
from which the listeners could get the point less painfully. One must get the
rasa of what people are saying, the real content, informants are always
emphasizing, because alus people often don’t like to say what is on their
    * A small round or square table, which nearly all Javanese seem to have, around
which host and guests always sit, sipping lukewarm tea and nibbling bland cookies. It
is also part of the andap-asor pattern for the host to insist that the food being offered
is highly inadequate; the more the insistence, the better it is.
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                 »245«
minds. Bluntness is simply not a virtue, and by the time one comes to the
point in a well-modeled prijaji conversation everyone should be quite aware
of what one is going to say. Often it is not necessary to come to the point
at all—a great relief to everyone.
    One of my prijaji informants wished to divorce his wife, but he thought
it unseemly of someone of his status to go boldly into the naib’s office and
simply dismiss her “village style.” Instead, he unobstrusively exacerbated a
latent conflict between his wife and the mother-in-law of his first, now
deceased, wife, who lived next door. (He was living on his first wife’s
lands.) The conflict between the women soon got to the point where the wife,
evidently sensing her husband’s withdrawal of support from her (although
he said nothing to her and behaved as though things were as normal as ever
between them), could bear it no longer and went into town to request the
divorce herself. The husband thus appeared to the naib and to his neighbors to
be the injured party and to be doing his wife a favor by divorcing her. A
triumph, he said to me, of alus behavior.
    Another similar situation occurred in which a wife, unhappy not so much
with her husband as with the in-laws with whom she was forced to live, got her
husband to move away without coming right out and asking him to do so.
  One day the husband suddenly found a postcard in the house which said,
  “I can’t stand it any longer here. If my husband doesn’t want to move,
  it would be better for me to go back to my parents.” Then the husband was
  angry at everyone. First he went to his wife and asked her: “Did you write
  this?” No, she said, it wasn’t her writing anyway. Then he accused his younger
  sister, who also denied it. Since the parents couldn’t write, they were out of
  the question. He thought it might have been written by someone not in the
  household who wanted to make trouble. Nothing was done, and after a while
  things settled down again. Then the husband found another postcard just like
  the first, and again there was a quarrel. He gathered the family together and
  asked them one at a time about it, but no results. Five times the cards
  appeared. Finally the husband went to look for a house of his own, and
  after he moved things were peaceful again. Now everything is fine once more,
  but as yet no one has admitted writing the letters.
     The use of go-betweens is part of the same pattern (although in using
a go-between, a prijaji is caught between his great desire to keep his own affairs
secret and his unwillingness to face issues in their naked form). Several
prijajis in Modjokuto lend money, for example, and almost everyone knows
they do; but they nearly always employ agents to do the actual loan arranging
and keep their own identity as secret from the borrower as they can. As
the borrower on his side will often employ a close friend as agent (or, if not,
will insist anyway that he is acting as someone else’s agent), the circuitousness
of the process can become quite elaborate.
     Dissimulation is rather close to indirection, and most of the above
examples, especially the postcards, display it as well. The Javanese have a
word for dissimulation or pretense: étok~éíok. The characteristic quality of
étok-êtok, in contrast to our patterns of dissemblance, is not merely that it
is far more prevalent and that it is largely approved (being sometimes called
»246«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
“proper lying”), but that it need not have any obvious justification, being
merely gratuitous. I asked one informant to define étok-étok:
  He said: “Suppose I go off south and you see me go. Later my son asks you:
  ‘Do you know where my father went?’ And you say no, étok-étok you don’t
  know.” I asked him why should I étok-étok, as there seemed to be no reason
  for lying, and he said, “Oh, you just étok-étok. You don’t have to have a
  reason.”
      When we tell white lies, we have to justify them to ourselves, even though
the justification be weak. We tell a woman her horrible hat is pretty because
it would be rude not to; if someone sees us en route to a lawyer, we may say
we are going to the bank because we do not wish to advertise our troubles or
have others poking into our affairs. In any case, we usually have to find
some sort of reason for telling a lie. For the Javanese (especially the prijaji)
it seems, in part anyway, to work the other way around: the burden of proof
seems to be in the direction of justifying telling the truth. The natural answer
to casual questions, particularly from people you do not know very well,
tends to be either a vague one (“Where are you going?”—“West” ) or a mildly
false one; and one tefis the truth in small matters only when there is some
reason to do so. Thus, if a Javanese is going to the movies and people ask
him were he is going, he will probably tell them “to the store” unless he wants
them to join him or wants to ask them if the picture is worth seeing. When
I went to see a curer with my landlord about a half-dozen people asked him
along the route where he was going, and each time he replied that he was going
to the house of someone a half-dozen houses or so down from where they
were. It was only when he finally met someone he wished to invite to ac­
company him that he told the truth about his destination. In general, polite
Javanese avoid gratuitous truths.
      In terms of etiquette proper, étok-étok is especially valued as a way of
concealing one’s own wishes in deference to one’s opposite. As one informant
said: “For example, you are working. Then I come to visit. . . . I come and
call out at the door. Then you act as though you were not working, not doing
anything. Etok-étok you aren’t working.”
      The same sort of pattern is involved in the nearly absolute requirement
never to show one’s real feelings directly, especially to a guest. Any kind
of negative feeling toward another must be dissimulated; and people are
strongly enjoined to smile and be pleasant to people for whom they have very
little use. Strong positive feelings are also supposed to be hidden except in
very intimate situations. The effort is to keep a steady level of very mild
positive affect in interpersonal relations, an étok-étok warmth behind which
 all real feelings can be effectively concealed.
      Similarly, one must call out to any passerby one knows inviting him to
 stop in, even though he may be the last person on earth you wish to see. One
 must refuse food (unless the host persists in offering it) even if one is dying of
 hunger (and the host must offer it even if it would be great trouble to prepare
 and he wished the guest would go away and leave him alone). One should
 never refuse outright people’s requests to do something for them; rather, one
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                »247«
merely agrees even if one has no intention of going through with whatever
it is, and then one never gets around to doing it, putting the petitioner off
with various étok-étok excuses until he realizes at last that one was not serious
in the first place. For this last the Javanese have a proverb: “The crocodile is
quick to submerge but slow to come up,” meaning: it is easy to get people to
agree to do something but hard to get them actually to do it.
     One result of all this is that even Javanese are sometimes not quite sure
whether the other person is being étok-étok or serious. One hears people
saying: “Come to my house. I really mean it; it’s not just étok-étok. Please
come.” But the other person will still not be certain whether he is in fact
expected to come or not. Just when to accept offered food in a very prijaji
household is always a problem, for a host never quite believes the guest is
serious in refusing it, and there usually has to be much backing and filling
before the signals are clear.
     One often hears people say in praise of someone that “one can never tell
how he feels inside by how he behaves on the outside.” At a village election
where the candidates for village chief had to sit immobile and expressionless
in full view of the voters for the entire day, including the almost unbearable
tense period when the votes were counted aloud one by one, people kept
saying to me in a tone of high praise: “Just look at those candidates—they
may be burning up inside but they show no feeling at all on the outside.” One
political speaker in my village began by saying: “No one ever says what he
really thinks. People always étok-étok when dealing with other people. I’m
no different. I too never say what I really think, and you can’t tell how I feel
about things by what I say.” This seemingly self-defeating statement for a
politician was evidently but mere common sense to his audience, who listened
to him for all the world as though he were actually communicating something.
     Lastly, there is the avoidance of any act suggesting disorder or lack of
 self-control. According to the Javanese, the difference between men and
 animals is that the former “know order.” By “order,” the prijaji means
formality of bearing, restraint of expression, and bodily self-discipline—a
 constant awareness of himself as being an object of perception for others and
 therefore obligated to present a pleasing, alus picture. Spontaneity or natural­
 ness of gesture or speech is fitting only for those “not yet Javanese”—i.e., the
 mad, the simple-minded, and children. “If life is disordered,” writes our
 poet, “it has the value of a dried teak leaf,” and elsewhere he has a whole
 stanza on the subject:
       Because if you do not yet know
       How to put things in order
       And how to use them in order,
       You will become disoriented, wandering here and there,
       Mistaking things for their opposites.
       If you do things in this disordered fashion, you will meet troubles
       And will be confused by them.
       This may be said to be a loss of humanity.
       And as humanity is God’s greatest creation,
       You must not be careless with it.
»248«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF     JAVA
    Here he again emphasizes from the point of view of the individual’s spirit­
ual advancement the relation between order in the outer life and in the inner.
Order in the outer life regularizes stimuli so that they will not puzzle, shock,
or surprise. In the same way, following the “emotional capital” theory, one
should provide an ordered picture for others so as not to upset them. Here
one would point to the great concern with correct posture, with soft-colored
(browns and blues mainly) abstract textile designs, with graceful gesture,
with soft, slow, even speech. Care, deliberation, the careful sorting out of one
thing from another is the proper mode of procedure; and behaving otherwise
puts one in danger of being diguju pitik —laughed at by the chickens.



                           Linguistic Etiquette

b u t the entire etiquette system is perhaps best summed up and symbolized in
the way the Javanese use their language. In Javanese it is nearly impossible to
say anything without indicating the social relationship between the speaker
and the listener in terms of status and familiarity. Status is determined by many
things—wealth, descent, education, occupation, age, kinship, and nationality,
among others, but the important point is that the choice of linguistic forms
as well as speech style is in every case partly determined by the relative status
(or familiarity) of the conversers. The difference is not minor, a mere du and
Sie difference. To greet a person lower than oneself (or someone with whom
one is intimate) one says A pa pada slamet, but one greets a superior (or
someone one knows only slightly) with Menapa sami sugeng —both meaning
“Are you well?” Pandjenengan saking tindak pundi? and Kowé seka endi?
are the same question (“Where are you coming from?” ), in the first case
addressed to a superior, in the second to an inferior. Clearly, a peculiar obses­
sion is at work here.
     Basically, what is involved is that the Javanese pattern their speech
behavior in terms of the same alus to kasar axis around which they organize
their social behavior generally. A number of words (and some affixes) are
made to carry in addition to their normal linguistic meaning what might be
called a “status meaning”; i.e., when used in actual conversation they convey
not only their fixed detonative meaning (“house,” “body,” “eat,” “walk,”
“you,” “passive voice”) but also a connotative meaning concerning the status
of (and/or degree of familiarity between) the speaker and the listener. As a
result, several words may denote the same normal linguistic meaning but
differ in the status connotation they convey. Thus, for “house” we have three
forms ( omah, grija, and dalem ), each connoting a progressively higher
relative status of the listener with respect to the speaker. Some normal
linguistic meanings are even more finely divided {kowé, sampéjan, pand­
jenengan, pandjenengan dalem, for ascending values of “you” ), others less
 {di- and dipun -) for the passive voice; but most normal meanings, taking the
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                      »249«
vocabulary as a whole, are not divided at all. Thus the word for “table” is
medja no matter to whom one is speaking.*
    A further complication is that status meanings are communicated in
speech not only intentionally in terms of word selection within the speaker’s
dialect but unintentionally in terms of the dialect he uses as a whole. Not only
are there “levels” of speech within the dialect which are ranked in terms of
their status (or alus/kasar) connotations; the various dialects in the com­
munity as a whole are also ranked in terms of the alus to kasar spectrum, this
latter sort of ranking being characteristic, of course, of any stratified society.
    In order to clarify the relationship between the intra-dialect and inter­
dialect systems of status symbolization, one voluntary and one involuntary,
I offer the accompanying three charts depicting paradigmatically how a single
sentence alters within each of the dialects and among them. Chart I shows the
speech range in status terms for what I would call the non-prijaji but
urbanized and at least slightly educated group, which would include the better
educated abangans, most urban santris, and even some of the lower prijajis,
particularly when they are mixing with people outside their own immediate
circle. It is, then, the most common dialect in the town. Chart II shows the
dialect of most peasants and uneducated townsmen, which is the most common
style of all in terms of sheer numbers of users. Chart III depicts the prijaji
dialect, which, although spoken by a relatively small group of people, provides
an ideal^jnodel of correct speech for the whole society.
    The English sentence selected as an example is: Are you going to eat
 rice and cassava now? The Javanese words (low forms first) are as follows:
                         Are:    apa/ napa/ menapa
                         you:    kowé/ sampéjan/pandjenengan
                       going:    arep/adjeng/badé
                      to eat:    mangan/neda/dahar
                         rice:   sega/sekul
                         and:    lan/kalijan
                     cassava:    kaspé
                        now:     saiki/ sanikil samenika
    The numbers at the sides of the charts indicate the levels, and the sentences,
on the right, derived by reading across the chart at each level, are those
available to a speaker in the particular dialect concerned. This range of
sentences does not represent a mere theoretical set of possibilities. All of these
variations are used every day. Moreover the Javanese have names for each
of the levels. Level 3a is krama inggil; level 3 is krama biasa, or just krama;
level 2 is krama madya, or just madya. (These three highest levels are often
    * Although in terms of the total Javanese vocabulary the number of words which
show formal changes in terms of status connotations are relatively small in percentage,
since they tend to be the most frequently occurring in actual speech, in word counts
of common utterances the percentage of status-expression forms is quite high. In
general it may be said that there is no set rule by which one can determine which
words change in different status situations and which do not except a vague one that
the commoner the word and the more it denotes something fairly closely associated
with human beings, the more likely it is that it will have such forms.
                                                           Chart I

                           DIALECT OF NON -PRIJAJI, URBANIZED, SOMEWHAT EDUCATED PERSONS

Level    are         you         going    to eat    rice        and     cassava     now            Complete sentence


 3a              pandjenengan             dahar                                              Menapa pandjenengan bade dahar
                                                                                             sekul kalijan kaspé samenika?
        menapa                   badé                         kalijan             samenika
                                                                                             Menapa sampéjan badé neda sekul
                                                   sekul                                     kalijan kaspé samenika?



         napa     sampéjan      ad¡eng    neda                                               Napa sampéjan adjeng neda sekul
                                                                                   saniki
                                                                                             Ian kaspé saniki?


                                                                Ian                          Apa sampéjan arep neda sega Ian
 la
                                                                                             kaspé saiki?
                                 arep              sega                             saiki
         apa
                                                                                             Apa kowé arep mangan sega Ian
                    kowé                 mangan                                              kaspé saiki?
                                                       Chari II

                                  DIALECT OF PEASANTS AND UNEDUCATED TOWNSPEOPLE


Level   are      you      going       to eat    rice        and   cassava   now            Complete sentence


                                                                                     Napa sampéjan adjeng neda sekul
  2     napa              adjeng               sekul                        saniki
                                                                                     lan kaspé saniki?

               sampéjan               neda

 la                                                         lan    kaspé             Apa sampéjan arep neda sega lan
                                                                                     kaspé saiki?
        apa               a rep                sega                         saiki

  1             kowé                 mangan                                          Apa kowé arep mangan sega lan
                                                                                     kaspé saiki?
                                                          Chart III
                                                 DIALECT OF THE PRU AJIS


Level    are         you        going   to eat     rice        and      cassava     now            Complete sentence

                                                                                             Menapa pandjenengan baçlé çjahar
 3a              pandjenengan           tfahar
                                                                                             sekul kalijan kaspé samenika?
        menapa                  bade              seku!       kalijan    kaspé    samenlka
                                                                                             Menapa sampéjan badé neda sekul
  3               sampéjan               neda
                                                                                             kalijan kaspé samenika?




 lb                                                                                          Apa pandjenengan arep daharsega
                 pand¡enengan           dahar
                                                                                             Ian kaspé saiki?


 la                                      neda     sega         Ian      kaspé      sai Ici   Apa sampéjan arep neda sega Ian
         apa       sampéjan     arep                                                         kaspé saiki?


  1                  kowé                                                                    Apa kowé arep mangan sega Ian
                                        mangan
                                                                                             kaspé saiki?
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                      »253«
referred to merely as basa or language, although by high prijajis only the first
two would be so considered.) Level la is either ngoko madya, or just madya;
and level 1 is ngoko biasa, or just ngoko. Level lb, a prijaji specialty, is
called ngoko sae (“fine ngoko”) or ngoko alus.
     Krama, madya, and ngoko—or high, middle, and low—are the three
main levels expressing status and/or familiarity available to speakers in the
language. They represent sets of linked conjugates (menapa . . . badé . . .
samenika; napa . . . adjeng . . . saniki; apa . . . arep . . . saiki; etc.),
the occurrence of one of which for any given meaning (e.g., menapa/napaf -
apa) will predict the occurrence of the other if the meaning concerned occurs
 (i.e., badé/adjeng/arep; or samenika/saniki/saiki, etc.). In some cases the
madya conjugate is the same as the ngoko (e.g., Ian); sometimes it is the
same as the krama (e.g., sampéjan, neda, sekul); and of course, sometimes
the conjugate is the same in all three cases (e.g., kaspé).
     In addition to these sets of linked conjugates, there is a group of special
words, mostly referring to people, their parts, possessions and actions, which
occur independently of the first kinds of conjugates and which act to raise the
level of speech indicated by the first, inevitable selection, one “notch” higher
—or, better, one-half notch. Dakar and pandjenengan are such words in the
above sentences, rasing level 3, krama biasa (literally: “usual” or “common”
krama) to level 3a, krama inggil (“high” krama). In the ngoko level, the
use of krama words (e.g., sampéjan, or neda in the above) also has an
honorific effect, lifting ngoko biasa (level 1), to ngoko madya (level la ).
As these krama words employed in ngoko sentences occur in the same
meanings as the special honorifics, they might be called “low honorifics,” in
contrast to the special “high honorifics,” such as dahar, pandjenengan. Finally,
the use of high honorifics in a ngoko context yields level lb, ngoko sae. As a
result, the intra-dialect system of status symbolization consists, at the most, of
three “stylemes” (high, middle, and low) and two types of honorifics (high
and low). The honorifics occur, at least in the dialects described here, only
with the high and low stylemes, never with the middle one.*
     On the basis, then, of how many stylemes and how many types of
honorific are customarily employed and what combinations occur, the three
“class dialects” diagrammed in die charts are distinguished. In the dialect of
the non-prijaji, urbanized, and at least somewhat educated group (Chart I),
all three stylemes are customarily used (high, middle, low) and both types of
honorific (high and low). Since the high honorifics occur only with the high
style and the low ones only with the low style,** a speaker of this dialect has
    * In utterances of more than minimal length the chance that at least one
krama/madya/ngoko style marker will occur is nearly unity. I owe the suggestion
to treat the “style” problem and the “high word” problem separately to Mr. Rufus
Hendon, who has also suggested that the three linked conjugate sets be dissolved into
a new unit, called a “styleme,” which then occurs once in (nearly) every sentence, and
that the high words, which occur sporadically, be called “honorifics.” The formal parts
of the above discussion are heavily dependent upon his analysis.
    ** As the two types of honorific are in complementary distribution, high ones
occurring only with high Stylemes, low ones with low, the difference between them is
redundant and could be eliminated in a more elegant analysis.
»254«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
five possibilities, represented by the five sentences: 3a, krama inggil (i.e., high
styleme and high honorifics); 3, krama biasa (high styleme without honori-
fics); 2, krama madya (middle styleme without honorifics); la, ngoko madya
(middle styleme with low honorifics); 1, ngoko biasa (low styleme, no
honorifics).
     In the peasant and uneducated townsman dialect or idiom (Chart II),
two stylemes (middle and low) and one type of honorific (low) customarily
occur, the honorifics occurring only with the low styleme, to raise ngoko biasa
to ngoko madya.* Thus the possibilities for the expression of “status meaning”
for a speaker of this dialect are only three: 2, krama madya (middle styleme
without honorifics); la, ngoko madya (low styleme plus low honorifics); 1,
ngoko biasa (low styleme, no honorifics).
     Finally, in the prijaji dialect, the middle styleme— considered to be vulgar
—drops out. Thus, there are two stylemes (high and low) and both high
and low honorifics, the high occurring with both high and low stylemes, the
low, again, only with the high. This gives five possibilities: 3a, krama inggil
 (high styleme plus high honorifics); 3, krama biasa (high styleme without
honorifics); lb, ngoko sae (low styleme, high honorifics); la, ngoko madya
 (low styleme plus low honorifics); and 1, ngoko biasa (low styleme, no
honorifics).
     It will be noted that sentences 3 and 3a are available to both prijaji
and educated townsmen; sentence 2 to both educated and uneducated towns­
men and to peasants; and 1 and la to all three groups (although, as mentioned,
 la tends to be omitted by the more alus among the prijaji); lb is character­
istically employed only by prijajis.
     Given this brief and over-condensed formal analysis of the level problem,
the sense in which Javanese linguistic behavior is but a part of their wider
system of etiquette and, in fact, a simplified and summarizing model of it is
more easily set forth. First, as already noted, the levels themselves reflect
the kasar to alus continuum. Ngoko, level 1, is the basic language. People
think in this, fall into it whenever the urge to express themselves overcomes
 the desire to maintain propriety, and generally regard it, like the peasant him­
self, as the rough, down-to-earth, and necessary foundation on top of which
all the prijaji fancy work is erected. It is for this reason that all Javanese
terms in this report have been given in their ngoko forms.
     As one moves up the level ladder from ngoko toward krama (level 3) and
krama inggil (level 3a), the manner of speaking shifts too: the higher the
level one is using, the more slowly and softly one speaks—and the more
evenly, in terms both of rhythm and pitch. As, on the whole, the “higher”
conjugates tend to be longer than the lower ones (kow é/sam péjan/pand-
jenengan —and, for the very elevated, pandjenengan dalem —for “you”; ké n é /-
ingriki for “here” ), the high language levels, when spoken correctly, have a
kind of stately pomp which can make the simplest conversation seem like a
great ceremony. Like the forms of etiquette generally, the patterns of linguistic
    * As low honorifics are but high styleme “markers” occurring in low styleme
contexts, a combination of high styleme and low honorifics is, of course, impossible,
for the honorifics could not be distinguished from the styleme markers.
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                       »255«
etiquette modulate, regularize, and smooth the processes of social interaction
into an alus, unvarying flow of quiet, emotionally tranquilizing propriety.
    It has already bem pointed out how etiquette patterns, including language,
tend to be regarded by the Javanese as a kind of emotional capital which may
be invested in putting others at ease. Politeness is something one directs toward
others; one surrounds the other with a wall of behavioral (lair) formality
which protects the stability of his inner life (batin). Etiquette is a wall built
around one’s inner feelings, but it is, paradoxically, always a wall someone
else builds, at least in part. He may choose to build such a wall for one of
two reasons. He and the other person are at least approximate status equals
and not intimate friends; and so he responds to the other’s politeness to him
with an equal politeness. Or the other is clearly his superior, in which case
he will, in deference to the other’s greater spiritual refinement, build him a
wall without any demand or expectation that you reciprocate. This is, of
course, but a restatement of the andap-asor pattem discussed more generally
above. But in terms of language it is possible to state the exact nature of this
pattern, the core of Javanese etiquette, in a rather more precise, abstract and
formal manner.
    If we take the six levels (or three levels and three half levels) of speech
present in one dialect or another in Modjokuto, we can diagram them in terms
of the “wall” metaphor as follows:




                        2                 3                  3a

    The solid center is intended to represent the batin, the inner life. The
solid lines represent the stylemes—the low styleme taken as one “layer,”
the middle as two, the high as three. Low honorifics are represented by a
dotted line, high by a dashed. The circles—solid, dotted, or dashed—around
the solid center are thus intended to diagram the lair, the behavioral world
of etiquette. The higher the level of language spoken to an individual, then,
the thicker the wall of etiquette protecting his emotional life.
    In such terms one can diagram nearly any relationship between two
individuals of whatever rank or familiarity.* Thus, two close friends of
    * One complication is that it is not entirely true that the status and/or familiarity
relationship between speaker and hearer is the only determinant of status forms, be­
cause sometimes the status of a third person referred to, especially if he be quite
high, may determine the form used: thus, in speaking to a lower-status person one
will still use the high, krama, form of- “house” when speaking of the one the District
Officer lives in.
»256«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
equal rank (that two close friends will be of roughly equal rank is nearly a
tautology for most Modjokuto Javanese) will both speak ngoko to one
another:




                                8                 I

    A high official, say the District Officer, and an ordinary educated urbanite
will follow a sharply asymmetrical pattern:




                                '        (§>
—i.e., the District Officer will speak ngoko biasa, the ordinary man, krama
inggil.
    Two ordinary townsmen who are not intimate friends tend to speak
krama madya reciprocally:




                           2                          2

    Two prijajis who are not intimate friends tend to speak krama biasa (if
particularly elevated, krama inggil) reciprocally:




                          3                           3

    A peasant speaking to a higher status person will use krama madya, for
the most part, for he doesn’t use krama biasa or krama inggil:
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                »257


                                  2     (®)

                                   1

One might get a similar pattern if a “lower class” townsman were con­
versing with a “middle class” townsman, say a carpenter with a well-off
storekeeper.
    A peasant speaking to a fellow peasant with whom he is not intimate
might use krama madya, but more commonly he will use ngoko madya,
reciprocally:




                        la

Middle or lower ranking townsmen who are casual acquaintances might also
use reciprocal ngoko madya or krama madya, depending mostly on the oc­
casion, the content of what was being communicated, and so on.
    Ngoko sae, the prijaji speciality, is used between prijaji who know one
another fairly well and are of equal status but regard each other to be so ele­
vated as to make the reciprocal use of ngoko biasa, or ngoko madya, which
might sometimes be used in this context, unseemly:




                        lb                            lb

The inclusion of this level in the dialect shows the prijaji reluctance to use
very low language to anyone of much status. Ngoko sae is used to close friends
and relatives whom one knows well enough to use familiar speech but to whom
one wishes nevertheless to show proper respect. Thus sentences on this level
resolve the conflict between familiarity and respect implicit in the Javanese
etiquette pattern with a greater delicacy and subtlety than is possible in either
the “urbanite” or “peasant” dialects.
    A thorough semantic study of the contexts within which the different levels
are employed would in itself be a complex and extended investigation, for
»258«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
the number of variables specifically determining the selection of a particular
level are very numerous. They include not only qualitative characteristics of
the speakers—age, sex, kinship relation,* occupation, wealth, education, re­
ligious commitment, family background—but also more general factors: for
instance, the social setting (one would be likely to use a higher level to the
same individual at a wedding than in the street); the content of the con­
versation (in general, one uses lower levels when speaking of commercial
matters, higher ones if speaking of religious or aesthetic matters); the history
of social interaction between the speakers (one will tend to speak rather
high, if one speaks at all, with someone with whom one has quarreled); the
presence of a third person (one tends to speak higher to the same individual
if others are listening). All these play a role, to say nothing of individual
idiosyncratic attitudes. Some people, particularly, it seems, wealthier traders
and self-confident village chiefs, who tend to think the whole business rather
uncomfortable and somewhat silly, speak ngoko to almost everyone except
the very high in status. Others will shift levels on any pretext. A complete list­
ing of the determinants of level selection would, therefore, involve a thorough
analysis of the whole framework of Javanese culture.
     In terms of the more general relationship between the Javanese language
and Javanese culture, it is of interest to note how the three charts when taken
together present a picture of how the three groups—“urbanites,” “peasants,”
and prijajis—perceive the Modjokuto-wide status system, the varying form
of their etiquette systems, and how they are related to each other—how, in
essence, the ideal model set by the prijajis refracts through the rest of the
social structure. The prijaji chart (Chart III), with its excluded middle,
shows the prijaji tendency to put people into two categories: those to whom
one speaks respectfully, equals and superiors (i.e., other prijajis) ; and those to
whom one speaks familiarly, inferiors (i.e., non-prijajis) and very close
friends and relatives. As noted, level lb, ngoko sae, forms a nice compromise
between respect and familiarity, and among the more refined prijajis in the
larger towns, the omission of ngoko madya (la ) in their dialect would even
further strengthen the dichotomous nature of their model of the status system.
     The peasant chart (Chart II) shows both the peasants’ lessened sense of
internal differentiation of status within their own group and their view of the
whole structure from the bottom, the upper reaches of the system being mostly
beyond their ken. The chart, in fact, provides a concrete case in point of the
relationship between gentry and peasant culture patterns outlined earlier.
Gentry patterns are reflected dimly and in a somewhat distorted fashion in the
peasant context, but they are reflected there. Prijaji speakers of (what they
regard as) “correct” Javanese are continually making fun—to one another,
or to the ethnographer—of “ignorant” villagers who use tjinten as the high
form of tjina (Chinese), when “really” there is no higher form. Similarly for
the village use of konten for kori (door) and, worst of all, their creation of
high forms for place names which never should alter: Kedinten for Kediri;
   * For a discussion of the selection of language levels within the kinship and
family context, see H. Geertz’s volume in this series, The Javanese Family.
Background and Dimensions of Prijaji Belief and Etiquette                      »259«
Surobringo for Surabaja.*- For the abangan peasant at any rate, prijaji speech,
like prijaji etiquette, religion, art, and style of life, is the ideal form, even
though they may regard it as too difficult and restrictive for their own use. For
the santri the religion and art drop out as patterns worthy of emulation, but the
speech, etiquette, and style of life remain as models.
     Chart I shows the results of the jostling together of people from all walks
of life in the urban context. Since the average middle rank urbanite mixes
with everyone from prijaji to peasant, he employs whatever language level
seems reasonable in the situation. To speak respectfully to a peasant, he will
use krama madya (level 2) ; to a high prijaji, krama inggil (3a) ; and to people
of his own rank or slightly higher he will use krama biasa (3). But he will
have little use for the kind of subtleties represented by level 1 b, ngoko sae.
Thus, in place of the dichotomous (gentry versus the field) view of the status
structure of the prijaji and the relatively speaking more equalitarian view of
the peasant, the urbanite sees a more even gradation of status over quite a
wide range.
     Lastly, a word should be said about the increasing popularity of Indo­
nesian, the national language based on Malay, among certain groups, par­
ticularly the urban youth and the political elite of the town. Indonesian appeals
to those whose sense of political nationality as Indonesians rather than as
Javanese is most developed, to those who are interested in the cultural products
of the new Indonesia’s mass media (newspapers, magazines, movies, radio),
and those who wish to take leadership positions in government and business.
But the use of Indonesian, now taught in all the schools, is spreading very
rapidly beyond these somewhat special groups to nearly all townspeople and
to a greater and greater number of peasants. As most available reading matter
is now in Indonesian rather than Javanese, literacy more or less implies
Indonesian, although a reading knowledge does not, of course, imply its use
in everyday life. In any case, although the use of Indonesian for everyday
conversation is still mostly confined to the more sophisticated urbanites, and
its use suggests something of an air of “public speaking” for most Javanese, it
is rapidly becoming more and more an integral part of their daily cultural
life and will become even more so as the present generation of school chil­
dren grows to adulthood. That it will, in the foreseeable future, entirely dis­
place Javanese is, of course, entirely unlikely. Rather, it seems destined, at
least in the short run, to become part of the general Javanese linguistic system,
to become one more type of sentence among those available, to be selected
for use in certain special contexts and for certain special purposes.
   Before the meeting began, when they (the members of a mystical religious
   sect) were discussing language, Sudjoko said that one simply couldn’t
    * These “mistakes” are based on false analogies to types of formal alteration
which are common in moving from high to low Javanese. Though there are no specific
rules for such changes, a few sorts of changes occur repeatedly (lower terms given
first): (1) a shift of final vowel from a to iV djawa/djawi, “Javanese”; (2) a shift
form i to os: ganti/gantos, “change”; (3) a kind of "pig-latin” form in the higher term
involving, among other processes, various forms of medial or final nasalization:
kena/kenging, “hit,” “may”; karep/kadjeng, “wish,” “want”; kari/kantun, “left behind”;
(4) a complete change of form: omah/grija, “house.”
»260«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
 use Indonesian to discuss mystical philosophy. When I asked him why, he
 said: “Well, all the terms are in Javanese in the first place; and in the
 second place Javanese fits the kind of thought better. It would be very hard to
 express such thoughts in Indonesian; it just wouldn’t feel right.” Contrari­
 wise, he said that, giving a political speech in Javanese is one of the hardest
 things in the world to do; it just doesn’t seem to have the expressions. Some­
 one then noted that even when one goes to a political meeting in the village
 and they use Javanese, many of the words are Indonesian words which,
 although the people in the audience perhaps cannot use them or at least
 cannot make them into whole Indonesian sentences, they nevertheless under­
 stand quite well.
Chapter l 8                The Role of Classical Art




I n d is c u s s in g non-wanin' art in Modjokuto it seems profitable to differentiate
between three somewhat separate clusters, three art complexes the component
forms of which not only bear an intrinsic relation to one another but also enter
into the social and cultural structure I have been describing in roughly similar
ways:



                    Cluster I:    The “Alus Art” Complex

      1. wajang—the shadow-play, which uses leather or wooden puppets to
  dramatize stories from the Javanese versions of the Indian epics, the
  Mahabharata and the Ramayana, or mythological versions of the history
  of the kingdoms of pre-colonial Java.
      2. gamelan—the percussion orchestra which can either be played alone
  or can accompany the wajang or various other art forms.
      3. lakon—literally “plot” or “scenario.” A myth which may be drama­
  tized in the wajang but is often merely related orally as myths normally are.
      4. djogèd—Javanese court dancing, which may be autonomous or which
  may “dance out” lakons from the wajang.
      5. tembangs—poems, written in various rigid forms, which may be either
  read or sung, with gamelan accompaniment if one wishes.
      6. batik—the wax and dye method of textile decoration.



                   Cluster II:    The “Kasar Art” Complex

     1.     ludrug—popular farce, involving as major features male transvestitism
  and low clowns.
                                         261
»262«                                          T H E R E L I G I O N OF       JAVA
      2. klèdèks—female street dancers, who dance both “from door to door”
  and as hired performers at weddings, circumcisions, and the like.
      3. djaranan—popular dance, in which the dancers “ride” paper horses
  and become possessed, behaving as though they themselves were horses.
      4. dongèngs— folktales, legends, animal stories, and so on; the main
  difference from lakons lies in the fact that dongèngs are always told orally
  and never dramatized in the wajang.



                Cluster III:     The “National A rt” Complex

      1. orkès—popular “dance bands” (although no one ever dances to them)
  consisting almost entirely of plucked instruments—banjos, .guitars, etc.
      2. lagus—popular songs, played almost continuously over the radio and
  sung at circumcisions, weddings, and other such occasions by vocalists
  attached to the orkès. Originally patterned on Portuguese-inspired folk
  models from various parts of Indonesia, they are now more and more ap­
  proaching modern Western (i.e., American) models.
      3. kesusastraan Indonesia—modern, Western-style novels, poems, short-
  stories, and plays, written in Indonesian, the national language.
      4. bioskops—movies, Western and Indonesian (or Malayan).
    With the exception of the “National Art” complex, which has not yet been
widely discussed, the content, the technical analysis, and the distribution within
the Javanese-Sundanese-Madurese culture area of these various art forms—
as well as others not found in Modjokuto—have been thoroughly and system­
atically handled by generations of Dutch scholars, and so little of that need
be repeated here.*



                        Wajang: The Shadow Play
OF the three art clusters, the first—the “Alus Art” complex—is at once the
most widely spread throughout the culture, the most deeply ingrained, and the
most philosophically and religiously elaborated, this last largely by the prijajis.
The center of the complex is the wajang, the world-famous Javanese shadow-
play. The shadow play is called so because the puppets, which are flat cut­
outs of leather, painted in gold, reds, blues, and blacks, are made to cast
large shadows on a white screen. The dalang, as the puppeteer is called, sits
on a mat in front of the screen. A gamelan orchestra is behind him, and an oil
lamp hangs above his head (traditionally: nowadays, in the towns at least,
an electric lamp is used). The puppets are fastened to a tortoise-shell stick,
    * For the reader interested in further detail, in either technical, historical, or
distributional terms, the following two books, the first, unfortunately, still untrans­
lated are indispensable: Th. Pigeaud, Javaanse Volksvertoningen: Bijdrage tot de
Beschrijving van Land en Volk, ’s-Gravenhage and Batavia, 1938; J. Kunst, Music
in Java, Its History, Its Theory and Its Technique, 2 vol. (The Hague, 1949).
The Role of Classical Art                                               »263«
running from head to below their joined feet, at which point the dalang
grasps the stick as a sort of handle. The movable arms, the only movable
parts, also have short sticks attached to them which the dalang holds in the
same hand and manipulates with his fingers. He holds the puppets up in
either hand over his head and interposes them between the light and the
screen. If they are nobles, as most are, he must be doubly careful never to let
them get lower than his head. From the dalang’s side of the screen one thus
sees the puppets themselves and their shadows rising up dominant on the
screen behind them. From the reverse side of the wajang screen, one sees the
shadows of the puppets only.
     Along the base of the screen, in front of the dalang, there is a banana
tree-trunk into which are stuck the puppets not immediately in use. As the play,
which usually lasts all night progresses, the dalang takes and replaces char­
acters from the tree-trunk as he needs them and manipulates the puppets im­
mediately in play. (Mostly they are either engaged in very formal conversation,
in war—in which case he knocks them against one another—or, in the case of
the clowns, in some kind of burlesque.) He imitates all the voices called for,
sings when singing is appropriate, kicks an iron clapper with his foot to keep
the rhythm and to symbolize the sounds of war, and, as he has only the bare
outline of the story given to him by tradition, makes up most of the details of
the plot as he goes along, particularly in the comic scenes, which often contain
elements of contemporary social criticism. He does this the whole night long,
sitting until the dawn with his feet folded inwards in the formal Javanese
sitting posture, performing with a dexterity, a fertility of invention, and a
physical endurance which are altogether remarkable.




                              Wajang Stories
almost entirely, the stories ( lakons ) dramatized in the wajangs are from the
Mahabharata. Ramayana stories—often referred to contemptuously as “mon­
key stories” because of the prominence in them of the half-monkey hero Ano­
man and other similar figures—are not liked in Modjokuto. I never saw one
performed there (although I did in Djokjakarta) and never met anyone who
had anything favorable to say for them in comparison with the Mahabharata
stories. My dalang informant said that although he knew the Ramayana stories
he almost never got a contract to perform them. As for the stories of Madja-
pahit, Kediri, and other early kingdoms, they evidently are almost never per­
formed either in the leather-puppet or in the wooden-puppet form around
Modjokuto, although one old man who lived near me sometimes performed
with wooden-puppets for the casual amusement of the abangans in his quarter
as an avocation, and the lakons seem still to be popular as oral traditions.
There are in Java as a whole various different kinds of wajangs, classified
according to the type of puppets used and the stories dramatized. In Modjo­
kuto, in any case, almost all wajangs performed dramatize Mahabharata stories.
»264«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
   In the Mahabharata stories there are three major groups of characters:
       1. Déwa-déwi—the gods and goddesses, headed by Batara Guru (Siva)
  and his wife, Batari Durga, and including Batara Narada, Sang Hjang
  Brama, and Batara Kala. As in the Greek epics, the gods are far from
  uniformity righteous: Batara Kala, for example, eats only-children, unless they
  have been protected from him by a performance of a special wajang de­
  picting his birth.
      2. Satrijas—the kings and nobles of the Javanese kingdoms of olden days.
  Supposedly, the “Ramayana Time” (in India) was succeeded by the “Ma­
  habharata Time,” then by the “Buddhist Time” (i.e., the Hindu-Javanese
  period of Kediri, Singosari, Madjapahit, etc.), and finally by the present.
  Thus, in theory, the satrijas are the ancestors of the present-day Javanese,
  a circumstance which has led several scholars to view the wajang as an
  ancestor cult, originally connected with dual organization initiation rites
  in which young men learned the secrets of the tribe. Whatever the merits
  of this radier speculative theory, there is no apparent trace of such a view
  in Modjokuto today. There are several groups of satrija and various mythical
  kingdoms involved in the wajang. Among the most important characters are:
      a) The Pendawas: the five brothers who rule the country of Amarta—
  Judistira, Bima, Ardjuna, Nakula, and Sadéwa (the last two identical twins).
  The Pendawas are usually accompanied by Kresna, king of the neighboring
  country of nDarawati, who is an incarnation of Wisnu and general advisor
  to the Pendawas. The two other famous figures in this camp are Gututkatja,
  the powerful son of Bima, who can fly, and Angkawidaja, the son of Ardjuna.
      b) The Korawas: the hundred satrijas of Ngastina, led by Sujudana,
  Sengkuni, Durna, and Kama, the dissident half-brother to the Pendawas.
  Although cousins of the Pendawas, the Korawas have usurped the country of
  Ngastina from them, and it is the struggle over this disputed country which
  provides the major theme of the wajang, a struggle which culminates in the
  great Bratajuda war in which the Korawas are defeated.
       3. Punakawans—Semar, Pétruk, and Garèng, the great Javanese low-
  clowns, servants and constant companions of the Pendawas. Semar, the
  father of the other two, is actually a god in all too human form, a brother
  to Batara Guru, the king of the gods. The guardian spirit of all the Javanese
  from their first appearance until the end of time, he is perhaps the most im­
  portant figure in the whole wajang mythology.
    The lakon as the dalang learns it is hardly more than an outline, consisting
of a bare description of what happens in each of a half-dozen to a dozen
major scenes, which scenes are in fact a series of encounters in which the
ruling lord of one kingdom meet those of another and either talk or fight.
      He (a dalang who lived just outside of Modjokuto) said that in the
  wajang the same pattem recurs over and over. First the people face each
  other, then they talk, then they leave, then they talk again, and then they
  fight. He said that it is the same as now: when two countries can’t get together
  they talk; then the talk breaks down and they fight. He said that wajang
  has meaning for today too. The thing one has to do is talk and talk; and
  slowly the people come to agree (tjotjog) and then there is peace. Otherwise,
  if the talk breaks off, there is war. He said: “That is the way it is with people
  too. If you come to me to study, we talk with each other, slowly begin to
The Role of Classical Art                                                 »265«
  tjotjog, and after a while I leam from you about American art and you learn
  from me about Javanese art.”
    A sample story presented in the form in which it was dictated to me by
this Modjokuto dalang, and in the form in which he had learned it, follows:



                      The Marriage of Angkawidjaja

  S cene (bab) I. Present (djèdjèr—literally, “standing up”) in the Kingdom
    of nDarawati: King Kresna, his son Prince Samba, his brother-in-law
    Prince Sentjaki, and various courtiers.
      Subject of Discussion (ingkang dipun rembag): The request by Prince
  Ardjuna of Ngamarta for the hand of King Kresna’s daughter, Siti Sundali.
  Kresna agrees on the condition that Prince Ardjuna provide the girl
  with two female servants who are identical twins.
      A Visit (kasowan) : The Prime Minister of Ngastina. He also asks for
  the hand of Kresna’s daughter and is also told to provide two female servants
  who are identical twins.
  S c e n e II: Present at the Place of Meditation, Kembangsoré: The Holy Man
    Sempati with his disciples.
     A Visit: His granddaughters, Pregiwa and Pregiwati, who are identical
 twins. They tell him they are looking for their father. Sempati tells them to
 go to Ngamarta and look for Prince Ardjuna. They leave.
     The holy man tells his disciples to follow the girls and watch over them.
     The disciples meet the girls and tell them they have been instructed to
 guide them to Ngamarta. They walk with them to the edge of the forest.
     A Hostile Meeting (kepapagqn [whenever two groups of satrijas meet
 in the woods—i.e., outside of the protected compounds of each other’s
 cleared kingdoms—they seem inevitably to fight]): Various Korawas from
 Ngastina: Prime Minister Sengkuni, Prince Kartamarma, Prince Tjitraksa,
 and others. The Korawas ask the girls to come to Ngamarta as servants.
 They refuse. The Korawas attempt to force them. The disciples defend the
 girls and are killed. The girls run away into the forest. The Korawas hunt
 and hunt for them.
  S cene III: Present in the Castle in Ngamarta: Ardjuna, with two of his
   wives, Sembadra and Srikandri, his son Angkawidjaja, and his nephew
   Gatutkatja. Also the three clowns: Semar, Pétruk, Garèng.
     Subject of Discussion: The proposed marriage of Angkawidjaja.
     A Visit: Samba, Prince of nDarawati. He tells them of his father’s
 decision that they must find twin servants for his daughter in order for the
 marriage to occur.
     Angkawidjaja, Gatutkatja, and the three clowns are ordered by Ardjuna to
 search for two such identical twin girls. They leave.
     They go into the forest. In tfie middle of the forest they meet the two
 granddaughters of Sempati, Pregiwa and Pregiwati. Angkawidjaja asks them
 where they are from and they say, “From the Place of Meditation, Kem­
 bangsoré. We are seeking our father,' Prince Ardjuna.” Angkawidjaja then says
»266«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
 that he is the son of Ardjuna, and if what they say is so they are his
 younger sisters. He offers to take them to their father.
       Not long after, they meet the Korawas of Ngastina still searching for
 the girls. A great battle ensues. The Korawas lose, and run away to their
 home country, Ngastina. Angkawidjaja and his company return to Ngamarta.
 S c e n e IV: Present in the country of Ngamarta: The five Pendawas—King
     Judistira, Prince Bima, Ardjuna, Nangkula, Sadéwa.
       Subject of Discussion: The prospective marriage of Angkawidjaja and
 Siti Sundali, and the necessity of finding two identical twin servants.
       A Visit: Angkawidjaja, Gatutkatja, the three clowns, Pregiwa, Pregiwati.
 They announce that they have found the twin servants and that the girls
 are in fact daughters of Ardjuna. [Ardjuna, the masculine ideal, has many
 wives and countless offspring.] Everyone is very happy.
       The entire company then goes in a procession to nDarawati for the
 wedding.
 S c e n e V: Present in the country of Ngastina: King Sujudana.
       A Visit: Prime Minister Sengkuni, Prince Kartamarma, Prince Tjitraksa,
  and others of the Korawas, who are fleeing the scene of battle with the
 satrijas from Ngamarta. They tell the king they have been beaten by Ang­
  kawidjaja. The king calls his son, Prince Lesmana, and instructs him to put
  on his wedding clothes.
       The entire company then goes in a procession to nDarawati for the
  wedding.
  S c e n e VI: Present in the country of nDarawati: King Kresna, his son
      Prince Samba, and his brother-in-law Prince Sentjaki.
        A Visit: The Pendawa company, including the twin-girl servants.
        Angkawidjaja and Siti Sundali are then married in the castle.
       A Visit: The Korawas from Ngastina arrive. They request that Siti Sundali
  be married to Prince Lesmana. They are informed that she has already been
  married to Prince Angkawidjaja. They do not accept this.
        There ensues a great war between the Pendawa camp and the Korawas.
  The Korawas are beaten and flee home to Ngastina.
  S c e n e VII: Present in nDarawati: King Kresna, King Judistira, Prince
      Bima, Prince Ardjuna, Prince Nangkula, and Prince Sadéwa.
        They all eat together.
     Into this general schematic outline the dalang weaves noble speeches,
humorous episodes, and noisy wars until he stretches a story which takes only
a few minutes to tell (and is usually but a very minute part of the whole
Mahabharata cycle) into a performance lasting the whole night. The wajang
is like a sonata, Western-educated Javanese intellectuals sometimes say, since
it opens with an exposition of a theme, follows with a development and var­
iations of this theme, and concludes with a resolution and recapitulation of
it. From nine until midnight the political leaders of the various kingdoms con­
front one another and state the terms of the story: a wajang hero wishes to
marry the daughter of a neighboring king, a colonialized country wants its
freedom, or whatever. From midnight until three o’clock or so difficulties of
some sort set in: someone else is bidding for the daughter’s hand, the im­
perialist country refuses freedom to its colony. And, finally, these difficulties
The Role of Classical Art                                              »267«
are resolved in the last section ending at sun-up—inevitably by a war in
which the heroes triumph, after which there is a brief celebration of the
accomplished marriage or the achieved freedom.
    One informant had a more down-to-earth theory of why the wajang is
subdivided so. He said that the alus but rather boring speeches of the great
lords and diplomats are placed early in the evening before people are tired
enough to be put to sleep by them; at midnight, just as some of the audience
are beginning to feel drowsy, the clowns come on and initiate the development-
and-complications period and liven things up with their crude humor (one
of their chief functions, evidently, being to cheer up the heroes in their time
of troubles); and finally, toward morning, when people are really about to
drop off, the great wars begin, waking people with their great clatter and
vigorous dramatics.



          Prijaji versus Abangan Views of the Wajang
a  wajang performance is at once a kind of elaborated abangan slametan
and a refined art form subtly symbolic of the prijaji outlook and ethic. It is
literally viewed from two angles. In the old days the women and children sat
on the side of the screen where only the shadows of the puppets were visible
and the men sat on the other side. But now the situation has changed, and
the man giving the wajang (now usually a prijaji, not so much because the
peasant interest in the form has weakened as because the cost has grown too
great for most peasants to bear) along with his guests of both sexes—sep­
arated from one another—sit on the shadow side; while out in the yard, on
the dalang side, great crowds of uninvited peasants and lower-class townsmen
gather to watch. The arrangement indicated below is typical.
                                                     Key

                                        1. Inside room of the house
                                            —fe m o le g u e sts

                                        2 . Porch of the house—
                                           m ale g u ests

                                        3. W ajang screen

                                        4 . Dolang

                                        5. Gamelan

                                         6 . Uninvited onlookers *



                                      **
                                      ***
»268«                                           T H E R E L I G I O N OF        JAVA
     The wajang, rooted as it is so deeply in Javanese culture that even the
most hard-bitten santri modernist will admit that one ought to see one once,
is a prime case in point of the futility of attempting to determine whether
gentry patterns are rationalizations of peasant ones or peasant patterns cor­
ruptions of gentry ones. On the one hand, the wajang is part of the abangan
ritualistic-polytheistic-magical religious pattern, although this is decreasing;
and on the other hand it is part of the prijaji mystical-pantheistic-speculative
religious pattern. This last, too, is decreasing, but perhaps less rapidly. The
decrease in popularity of a once widespread art-form tends, initially, to in­
crease its cost as lesser practitioners drop out to leave the field to the more
highly trained, throwing the burden of its support more and more on those who
are willing and financially able intentionally and self-consciously to cultivate
it as a professional art. They may cultivate it, of course, more for reasons of
prestige than of appreciation or for both. In any case, all the wajangs I saw
while I was in Modjokuto were sponsored by prijajis and all the daiangs were
imported from the larger towns elsewhere,* although I do not doubt that
richer abangans still give them from time to time. The average fee for a com­
petent dalang seems to run about Rp 500.00.
     On the abangan side, the wajang is a popular drama of legendary heroes,
a drama the appeal of which is, perhaps, not so very different from that of the
other less pretentious popular dramas we shall consider presently; but it is also
a part of the slametan complex. In general, a wajang may be given on any
day on which a slametan may be given and for the same reasons for which a
slametan would be appropriate. Weddings, circumcisions, births are fit oc­
casions for wajangs, as is the Prophet’s birthday. For weddings and births
 (but not for circumcisions, a non-Hindu custom) there are specially ap­
propriate lakons, such as “The Marriage of Angkawidjaja” (or of Bima or
Ardjuna, there being such a marriage lakon for nearly every major hero), re­
lated above, for a wedding, or “The Birth of Gatutkatja” (perhaps the most
popular lakon of all) for a birth. I have mentioned the necessity of giving a
special wajang to protect an only-child from being devoured by Batara Kala.
One can also give one to prevent or cure illness. Contrariwise, some particular
lakons are considered likely to bring misfortune and so are almost never
played.
     In addition, the presentation of a wajang is itself set in a slametan context:
       He (a dalang) said that before one gives a wajang one must burn incense
  for the spirits to eat and pray—just as at a slametan. Then there is a sadjèn
  (offering), which is prepared by the man who contracts for the wajang and
  includes a banana, a coconut, incense, and 18Vi cents. Also, food is prepared
  —cooked chicken, coconut, etc., which the dalang takes home afterwards and
  eats. The sadjèn is placed next to the dalang where everyone can see it, and
  it remains there through the performance.
    As in a slametan, anyone attending a wajang is safe from all harm at
least as long as it is going on and probably longer. Thus the giving or attend­
   * Including, in one instance, one of the first female daiangs in Java, who, I suspect,
was more of an oddity than a portent.
The Role of Classical Art                                                   »269«
ing of a w ajang is in part the same kind of a ritual defensive act as a slam etan;
and one often sees a w ajang going on but no one really paying much attention
to it, the point being not the content of the story but the ritual efficacy of the
performance. Sometimes people regard the puppets themselves as being en­
tered by spirits during the performance; and good d alan g s are often said to be
entranced, which is why they have such powers of concentration and strength.
As one has possessed curers (d u k u n tibari) as well as those whose skill comes
through learning, so one also has possessed dalangs ( d a la n g tib a n ) as well
as the more common type who learn their skill from other dalangs.
  The groom-to-be came by again and said that there was a dalang tiban
  not so long ago near Kediri. Evidently a spirit came and entered him; for,
  although he had never dalanged in his life, he was then able to do so without
  study and did so for thirty-five days without stopping and then lost his spirit
  and didn’t know how to do it any more.

    For the p rija ji some of this ritualistic aspect of the w a ja n g may still be
of importance (incense being burned at court w ajangs too) although, as he
has turned the sla m e ta n into a nearly secular feast, in his hands the w ajang
becomes a fairly secularized art-form. But this secularization on the ritualistic
side actually tends to liberate speculation about the “meaning” of the w ajang,
to encourage—its formal ritual meaning gone—interpretation of its content.
And this tends to bring the shadow-play into even closer integration with the
prijaji religion than with the abangan. Art, like etiquette, is seen as providing
a material form for an essentially spiritual content, an outward symbolization
of an inward rasa:
  I talked to Pak Wiro (a prijaji draughtsman), the head of Budi Setia, the
  theosophical club. (We were watching a wajang.) He said that the wajang
  was originally a propaganda device of the Hindus to spread their religion.
  (Just about as often one hears that it was originally a propaganda device of
  the Moslems to spread their religion.) He said that the people would accept
  it more easily than in thick books which they couldn’t or wouldn’t read,
  and that Jesus, Muhammad, and Kresna were all the same really since all
  ascend to heaven and all are messengers of God. . . . All religions are at
  base the same. One of the two younger men next to me, who were listening
  attentively and approvingly, said, “Yes, many are the roads.” Wiro said that
  from the dalang side the wajang figures show their bodies, their outside,
  but from the shadow side they show their souls, their inside. The boy next to
  me said, “Yes, but their souls have different characters, just like people.
  Some are refined, some rough.”




                 Prijaji Interpretations of the Wajang
what , then, is the meaning of the w ajang for the prijaji?
   In essence, the Mahabharata is the story of a struggle between cousins, the
Pendawas and the Korawas, a struggle which culminates in the great war of
»270«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
kinsmen, the Bratajuda, during which the champions from each side face one
another. Ardjuna kills his older half-brother Kama, Bima dispatches Sujudana,
and so on. The immediate impulse is to call the Pendawas, who are certainly
heroes, the “good” men and Korawas, who are not quite so clearly villains,
the “bad” men; but to identify the figures in the drama as though they were
characters in a medieval morality play would be a serious misunderstanding.
 (The Pendawas are always on the right in a wajang, the Korawas on the left—
another reminder of those allegoric dramas of our own religious tradition.)
The absolutistic dichotomous morality of Western thought is generally foreign
to the pantheistic prijaji outlook which sees God in everything, the good as
well as the bad, in pain as well as pleasure.
     The struggle between the Pendawas and the Korawas is an endless one—
despite its seeming ending in the Bratajuda war (an episode almost never
actually played in Java, in any case). The time-bound realities of good and
evil, pleasure and pain, love and hate are dwarfed and rendered meaning­
less by the timeless and ultimately amoral background against which they are
fought out. The feudal virtues of courage and duty are resolved with the seem­
ingly antithetical religious virtues of renunciation and compassion by an invo­
cation of the cosmic-comic inevitability of human actions given the divine con­
text in which they are set. One does what one has to do only because the gods
expect one to. Only through action unmarred by passion, a detached perform­
ance of inevitable duty, does one reach peace.
     In keeping with their tendency to find ultimate reality in their own feelings,
to turn objective metaphysical meaning into subjective emotional experience,
the prijajis give the Mahabharata as it appears in the wajang, a psychological,
almost psychoanalytic, interpretation.
  He (a schoolteacher) said that the main purpose of the wajang was to draw
  a picture of inner thought and feeling, to give an external form to internal
  feeling. More specifically, it pictured the eternal conflict in the individual
  between what he wanted to do and what he felt he ought to do. Suppose one
  wants to steal something, and at the same time something inside tells you
  not to do it, restrains one, controls one. That which wants to do it is called
  the will; that which restrains is called the ego (literally, the word is aku—
  “I,” “me,” “myself”). AH such wishes and tendencies threaten every day to
  ruin the individual, to destroy his thought and upset his behavior. These
  tendencies are called goda, which means something which plagues or teases
  (someone or something). He then gave another example. “You go to a
  coffee-shop and people are eating, and they invite you to join them. You
  have already just eaten at home and so are full; yet you want to eat with
  them, and so you have a struggle within. Should I eat with them? No,
  I’ve already eaten and I will be overfull. But the food looks so good. . . .”
    This second, so very, very Javanese example, concerning food, points up
that the struggle is not between good and evil, as the first example might lead
one to believe, but between the old opposites of kasar and alus feelings, be­
tween base animal passion and detached, effortless self-control, like Ardjuna
calmly dispatching his half-brother in the Bratajuda war.
The Role of Classical Art                                                    »271«
  In the wajang the various plagues, wishes, and so on, the godas, are repre­
  sented by the Korawas, of whom there are 100, and the ability to control
  oneself is represented by their cousins the five Pendawas and by Kresna, the
  incarnation of Wisnu. The stories are ostensibly about a struggle over land,
  as the abstract elements in the rasa can be represented in concrete external
  elements which will attract the audience and seem real to them and still
  communicate its inner message. . . . For example, the wajang is full
  of wars which are supposed to represent the inner war which goes on
  continually in every person’s batin between his base and his refined im­
  pulses. In every lakon Ardjuna and the other Pendawas are continually fight­
  ing the giants and ogres, and, oddly, they have to keep killing them over and
  over again. They kill them once and then a couple of hours later they are
  killing them all over again. Why is this? It is because the giants and ogres
  represent the passions. They represent a person’s inner desires to amuse one­
  self instead of study, to play instead of work, to wander here and there
  rather than sticking to a fixed course; and, since these lusts and passions
  keep arising again and again, one has to keep fighting them off with good
  impulses, represented by the Pendawas. (The Pendawas are usually held to
  symbolize the five senses also, the correct ordering of them.) But one can’t
  ever defeat them once and for all. They always keep coming back and one
  has to keep killing them again and again.
     The metaphysical doctrine of the Indian Mahabharata is here stated in a
psychological rather than a socio-political vocabulary, but it remains essen­
tially unchanged. As the king’s castle becomes a symbol for the inner
heart and the height of political status becomes a sign of inward refinement,
so here the conflict in the Bhagavad Gita between the feudal obligation to
fight and the inner compassion for other mere humans is resolved by project­
ing both duty and compassion against the all-encompassing background of an
ever-present God. It is transformed into a conflict between the grosser sensory
necessities of natural existence and the polite ideal of refined feeling which
is resolved in turn by projecting both kasar and alus feelings against the all-
encompassing background of the ultimate “feeling-meaning,” or rasa.
  I asked them (a prijaji couple, members of a mystic sect) : “What do you think
  of when you meditate?” They said: “You don’t think of anything. What you
  try to do is clear your mind of any thoughts at all, so you can have direct con­
  tact with God. You have to get complete emptiness without thought; a pure,
  clear, serene insight.” I asked them if they felt anything when this happened;
  and they said, “Yes and no. There is a tremendous feeling but it is not like
  regular feeling, and you can’t explain it to anyone else. It is a purely private
  thing.”
    And the result of this kind of ultimate emotional understanding is the
same as the result of the understanding Ardjuna got from Krishna—an inward
serenity in the midst of an outward reality.
  I went to the market and bought some cloth from Pale Lamidjan and his
  wife, he being one of the ten gurus (teachers) of Sumarah (a mystic sect). He
  said that Sumarah was concerned with making one so that one does not pay
  too much attention to worldly things; so that you do not care too much about
  the things of everyday life. He said that this is very difficult to do. His wife,
»272«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  he said, was not yet able to do it much, and she agreed with him. She still
  likes to ride in motorcars, but he doesn’t care whether he does or not. It
  takes much long study and meditation. For example, one must get so that if
  someone comes to buy cloth one doesn’t care whether he buys it or not.
  One must not get one’s emotions really involved in the problems of commerce,
  but just think of God. He said that Sumarah wants to turn people toward God
  and avoids any strong attachments to everyday life.
    We shall return to mysticism in greater detail later. The point here is
merely to establish that the wajang, and hence those other arts of literature,
music, and dance which cluster about it, is, for the sophisticated literati at
least, part of the general religious complex constructed around the concepts
of kasar—alus, lair—batin, and rasa; and that the wajang states in an emo­
tionalist vocabulary the same formulation of what is perhaps the basic dilemma
of Indian religious thought as it is presented in the Mahabharata—how is
action possible, given compassion?
  Sudjono (the school teacher) went on to say that each of the three main
  Pendawas has a different character. The oldest, Judistira, is very good; in fact
  he is too good, too free of evil. The result is that in his extreme sense of
  compassion he is not a very effective king, being completely unable to rule
  the country for himself. For example, he views all things in the world as
  belonging to God, and people as unimportant parts of the larger whole. Thus,
  if a man comes to him and asks for his land, Judistira will just give it
  to him, the ultimate result being that all the land be given away and the state
  unable to hold together. Or he will give away all his food, unthinking
  of himself, and then starve to death. He is compassionate, too compassionate;
  and so he needs his brothers to help him rule. His main difficulty, said
  Sudjono in conclusion is that he doesn’t know the word “no.” The second
  brother, Bima, is just the opposite. If he has an intention he follows it
  out straight to its conclusion; he doesn’t look aside, doesn’t turn aside or
  idle along the way. He always advances and never looks back. Once he
  has an idea and feels that he is capable of carrying it out, he is brave to the
  end and will not listen to anyone or anything. He is single-minded and fears
  no one. The third brother, Ardjuna, has the ability to do good and to do evil.
  His goodness comes from the fact that he opposes evil, that he shelters people
  from injustice, without caring for himself, and that, also, he is courageous
  in fighting for the right. His badness is that he can kill in cold blood
  and that he does not feel compassionate enough, sympathetic enough. He
  does not feel mercy enough for evil-doers and thus can be brutal in the
  name of justice.
    The three major characters of the wajang (excluding, for the moment
Semar) thus state the action-compassion dilemma, presenting dramatic
metaphors of the several forms it takes in human experience. Judistira, his
ability to act drained by his compassion, is praiseworthy but pallid—a symbol
of the beauty and incapabilities of too unworldly a sensitivity. Bima, his will to
action interfering with his emotional flexibility, is colorful and attractive, but
in part a victim of his own somewhat immature will—a symbol of the vitality
and dangers of passionate commitment. The middle brother, Ardjuna (the
other two younger brothers, the twins, being minor characters only, notable
The Role of Classical Art                                                 »273«
for their dog-like fidelity to their elder brothers), is able to sustain action by
stifling compassion through an invocation of divine order or justice into the
human context, but only at the cost of leaving him a figure at once the most
coldly capable and the most mercilessly just.
     Judistira’s sense for the negating effects of the wider frame of existence
upon human actions, tout comprendre c’est tout pardonner; Bima’s sense for
the felt realities of injustice viewed in human perspective, rather than under
the aspect of eternity, and the consequent need to take resolute action against
such injustice; and Ardjuna’s cruel insistence upon the application of a divine
code to a human world, are all part of the same dilemma. And for all three
the solution is the same—mystical insight. With a genuine comprehension of
the realities of human situation, a true perception of the ultimate rasa, comes
the ability to combine Judistira’s compassion, Bima’s will to action, and
Ardjuna’s sense of justice into a truly alus outlook, an outlook which brings
an emotional detachment and an inner peace in the midst of a world of flux
but yet permits and demands a struggle for order and justice within such a
world. As our Modjokuto poet points out:
                     Indeed the saints
                     Know God directly every day
                     During the time they are in the world.
     In sum, the philosophy of the wajang stories is that insofar as one can
perceive ultimate reality, which is within oneself as an ultimate feeling, rasa,
one will be free of the distracting effects of earthly emotions—not only com­
passion, but anger, fear, love, hope, despair, and all. This gives one great
power—either for good, as in the case of the Pendawas, or for evil, as in the
case of the Korawas, who after all are alus too. It is not only the good who
can mediate, but the evil as well;- for mysticism is an amoral science anyone
can employ. It brings knowledge; and, as in science generally, knowledge is
power for good or for evil. Good and evil are human values only, and God
is in everything—the hate and the cruelty as well as the love and the com­
passion; and everything is in God. It is a religion arguing that understanding
of the self brings power and peace in this world, and the wajang stories often
point this up quite sharply.
  He told me a wajang story. Someone tells Bima that if he gets a special kind
  of water and bathes in it he will be invulnerable and thus will certainly win
  in the Bratajuda war against Sujudana. As he doesn’t know where this
  water can be found, he goes off to see a guru to find out where to get it.
  The guru, however, has lately been given lots of gifts by the Korawas,
  and so the guru aids evil and tries to send Bima to his death. (There are
  gurus like that, the informant said; some use their knowledge for good, some
  for bad.) The guru tells Bima to go and get the water at the top of the
  mountain—although he knows that two very powerful giants are meditating
  there and that they will be infuriated when they are disturbed by Bima
  looking for the magic water to make him powerful and invulnerable. Bima
  goes, and indeed the giants become angry and fight with him. He is nearly
  beaten, but finally he manages to strike the giants’ heads together, and lo,
  they turn into gods. Sometimes the gods themselves do evil; and these
»274«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
 two had done something wrong and had been incarnated as giants by Batara
 Guru, from which state Bima removed them by knocking their heads
 together. Grateful, they tell him that he has been deceived and there is
 no water there. Angry, he goes back to the guru and says that he has been
 deceived; but the guru explains by saying that he had sent Bima up the
 mountain as a test of his bravery and strength to make sure that he was
 able to undergo the actual journey he must make. Then he tells Bima that
 he will find the water in the middle of the sea, hoping that Bima will be
 drowned there. Bima leaves for the sea, single-mindedly, while his older
 brother, Judistira, and his younger brother, Ardjuna, plead with him not to go
 telling him that he is being deceived again. He pays no attention to them but
 marches straight to the sea. When he reaches the sea, after great struggles
 with monsters, he finds a god who looks exactly like himself except that
 he is only as big as his little finger. Bima, astonished at this midget replica of
 himself, tells him his quest. The little god says “Enter me”; and Bima does,
 through the mouth, the big man entering the little. Inside, he sees that
 the whole world is there, contained inside the little god. Then he emerges
  again, the god telling him that there is no water, that his power is within
 himself, and that he must look into himself, for that is the source of his
  strength. “If God is everywhere in the world, then he is in you too, and you
  must look into yourself and see the world there, and then you will have the
 power you seek.” And so Bima goes off to meditate. Sudjono (the informant)
  was quite conscious of the symbolism of all this and kept saying that the
  midget-god replica of Bima represented his inner self.
    Bima’s meditation brings him the knowledge he seeks, and the very form
of the wajang puppet which represents him serves as a reminder to the audi­
ence of the main “message” of the wajang, the need for mystical meditation.
  (The informant is a clerk in the hospital.) According to “Javanese science"
  (ilmu djawi), there are seven levels below the earth and seven levels in the
  sky, the earth being in between the two sets. People whose minds are clear
  can see down all seven and up all seven. All this is further explained in
  the wajang. In the wajang, Brataséna (another, far more common name for
  Bima) can see down all seven and up all seven. . . . His name, in fact,
  means to finish (brata) meditation (séna); and so this means that if
  people finish meditation—that is, attain mystical union—they can see
  all seven levels up and all seven down. Only very few people can do this,
  and those who can are called gurus, mystical teachers. One can go further
  into all this and look at the appearance of Brataséna in the wajang. First,
  there is the long thumbnail he has, the pantjanaka (five nails), which
  symbolizes that all his five senses (pantjaindrija) are sharp and acute.
  Second, there is the sarong he wears, which is checked in red, white, and
  black, the red indicating bravery, the white purity, and the black fixity of
  will, resolution. Next, there is die ear decoration he wears, which is called
  sumping and described as djinaroting asem endèk arep duwur buri, literally
  “the root of a tamarind which is low in front and high in back.” But each
  of these words has a second meaning. Djinarot, “root,” here has the force
  of “essence,” “core,” etc. Asem, "tamarind,” has the secondary meaning
  rasa or “feeling.” Endèk arep, “low in front,” indicates the ego, the
  individual self in its humbleness; and duwur buri, “high in back,” means
  God, because God is high and walks behind the individual. The meaning
The Role of Classical Art                                                        »275«
  of it all then, details aside, is that the lair, the outer aspect of Brataséna, shows
  that he has already made as one his “ego,” himself, and God. In more
  explicit terms, a man who has finished meditating has joined the outside and
  the inside, lair and batin, and made them as one and has also become one
  with God. Thus, the above aspects of Brataséna—that is, of any man who has
  meditated—can be summarized as follows: The thumbnail indicates that
  his five senses are as sharp as possible; the various colors of the squares on
  his sarong indicate that he is brave, pure, and fixed of will; and the ear-
  ornament means that he is one with God and that his lair and batin have
  merged. Theoretically, every man can be Brataséna—can meditate and reach
  this state.
    It is worth noting here that this is not the radical pessimism of later
Hinduism and of Buddhism, in which the tendency is to devaluate action
except as a necessary evil. Bima, like the other Pendawas, is no hermit and no
pacifist; rather, as the Javanese most often describe him and his brothers, he is
a “defender of society.” For the Javanese, mystical experience is not a rejection
of the world but a temporary retirement from it for purposes of increasing
spiritual strength in order to operate more effectively in the mundane sphere,
a refinement of the inner life in order to purify the outer. There is a time for
the mountain-top (where most really advanced mythical mystics do their
meditations) and a time for the city, one of my informants said; and Javanese
semi-historical legends repeat the single theme of the dethroned or threatened
king or the defrauded heir to the kingship retreating to a lonely mountain-top
to meditate, and, having gained spiritual power in this manner, returning to
lead a successful military expedition against his enemies. This theme persists.
Many Modjokuto people still insist that the leader of the ill-fated revolt against
the Japanese in a near-by city who disappeared when it collapsed is alive and
meditating on a volcano-top, and will return to lead a crusade of purification
against the present state of society. This is the warrior Kshatriya ethic before
India’s priestly Brahmans turned it other-worldly; it is not escape from life,
but escape in life which is prized.
  I asked him (another cloth salesman) about Sumarah. Why did they medi­
  tate? He said that it was only to make the heart peaceful; to make one
  calm inside so that one will not be easily upset. “For example,” he said, “if
  you’re selling cloth and you are all upset you may sell a cloth for forty rupiah
  when it cost you sixty, or some such thing. Suppose a person comes here
  and my.mind is not calm; then I can’t sell him anything.” Why, I asked;
  but he couldn’t explain very well, for he seemed to take it as self-evident
  that if one was not calm in the heart, the sale wouldn’t happen. . . . “Any­
  way,” he said, “that is all there is to Sumarah: a practice to help you calm
  your inner heart.” I said, “Well, why do you have to have a meeting? Why
  not just meditate at home?” And he said, “Well, in the first place you are
  not supposed to get peaceful by withdrawing from society. You are supposed to
  stay in society and mix with people, only with peace in your heart,”
    But what about Semar, the native Javanese figure (who does not appear
in the original Indian epics and so must have been introduced into the stories
after they arrived in Java) in whom so many oppositions seem to meet, the
»276«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
figure who is both god and clown, man’s guardian spirit and his servant, the
most spiritually refined inwardly and the most rough-looking outwardly?
Semar is said to be the eldest descendant of “He that is One” (i.e., God),
elder brother to Batara Guru. Batara Guru became king of the other gods—
Wisnu, Brama, Kala—who followed him, but Semar became a man—a fat,
awkward, ugly-looking man, full of rough talk, comic stupidities, and hilarious
confusions. At least this is the pure version; but syncretism, the need to ac­
count for new actualities, and the vagaries of oral tradition sometimes shift
things a little.
  The son (of the dalang) said in the beginning Java was all woods and full
  of spirits. Then the people came and displaced the woods and the spirits,
  but there are still plenty of the latter. The dalang said that he couldn’t tell
  me about spirits because he had never seen one and he could not explain that
  kind of thing to me. Evidently he was thinking of the scorn he had received
  from Westerners before on this point. When I said, “No, you can’t see
  them, but you can see people who have been entered by them and you
  can feel them,” he said, “If you have an opinion like that, then I can
  explain them to you. If you have a sceptical attitude, then you can’t learn
  anything about them; you just won’t understand what I am talking about.”
  His son said that all people are descended from just two people and so they
  are all the same and shouldn’t fight, but they forget this sometimes. The
  dalang agreed and gave me the following genealogy:
             Nabi (i.e., Prophet) Adam married Babu Kawa (Eve)
                                 and had children
             Nabi Sis             and             Sajang Sis (Semar)
  Nabi Sis then gave birth to all the Prophets, such as Nabi Ibrahim,
  (Abraham), Nabi Nur (Noah), Nabi Muhammad, and Nabi Isa (Jesus);
  and the various Western peoples descended from their nabis (The Arabs from
  Muhammad, the Dutch from Jesus, and so on). Semar gave birth to the
  Hindus and the Javanese. Thus all people are the same and all religions are
  the same.
    In any case, Semar, the lowliest of the low, upon whom the Pendawas
look, as one Javanese writer puts it, as they look upon the bottoms of their
feet, is at the same time the father of us all. Here is an explanation from a
schoolteacher:
  Everywhere Ardjuna goes he is accompanied by Semar Garèng-Pétruk,
  his “parents” (metaphorically, since he has a literal father, the defrauded
  King of Ngastina) and servants; and even though Ardjuna is a satrija he
  still listens to the advice of these comical old servants. Why? Because even
  though Ardjuna has killed many giants, he must not be proud and think he
  had conquered all. Even though he is higher than his “parents” and far
  more brave, far more clever, far more successful than they, he must still
  listen to them; for they have more experience than he, more wisdom even if
  they appear stupid and he clever. Thus, no matter how high above them he
  gets, he must still honor his “parents,” still ask and take their advice. For
  instance, young people are often extravagant and take ill-considered actions,
  and Ardjuna is also; and old people can hold them back from actions they
  would later regret the way the three clowns keep Ardjuna in tow and keep
The Role of Classical Art                                                   »277«
  him from rash behavior. Also, the satrijas must be always accompanied
  by Semar, because he is a representative of God. The satrijas guard and
  defend society, and they remain safe and unharmed because they are ac­
  companied by Semar until the end of time.
     A full analysis of Semar’s role in the w ajang could in itself fill a book, but
it seems clear that in some sense he represents the realistic view of life as
opposed to the idealistic. He calls Ardjuna back to everyday humdrum ex­
istence, cheers him up in his despair, and blunts the edge of his pride in his
triumph. He tries to moderate the satrija’s rigid sense of cosmic justice in
terms of comic reality. All in all, the closest parallel in Western art to the
w ajangs seems to be Shakespeare’s chronicle plays. In considering the re­
lationship between Ardjuna and Semar, one thinks immediately of the re­
lationship between Prince Hal and his symbolic father, who was also fat, ugly
and not a little wise. Even the form of the w ajang —the long formal scenes in
the courts with messengers coming and going, interspersed with short breath­
less transitional scenes in the woods or along the roads; the double plot, the
clowns speaking a rough common language and full of a practical worldly-wise
ethics, caricaturing the forms of action of the great nobles, who speak an ele­
vated language full of apostrophes to honor, justice, and duty; the final war,
which, like those at Shrewsbury and Agincourt, leaves the vanquished beaten
but still noble—even the form of the w ajang suggests Shakespeare’s historical
drama.
     The world-view the w ajang expresses is, however, hardly Elizabethan
at base, although there seems a peculiar similarity between Semar and his
English counterparts in the relationship in which, as clowns, they stand to the
two different traditions which dominate and motivate the two separate
theaters. Both Semar and Falstaff provide a rather general criticism of the
very values the dramas in which they are enclosed affirm. They furnish a
reminder that, despite over-proud assertions to the contrary, no completely
adequate human world-view is possible; and that, behind all the pretense to
absolute and ultimate knowledge, the sense for the irrationality of human
life, for the fact that it is unenclosable, remains. Whether or not Semar is, as
has been suggested, a master-symbol of the peasantry, a criticism of gentry
values in terms of the more earthy sense of life of the villagers (and the in­
creasingly important role the clowns play in the more popular forms of drama,
until they nearly swallow the héros entirely, leaving the latter rather overbred
fools than descendants of satrijas, would tend to support this), he does, in his
kasar human form, remind the alus Ardjuna of his own humble animal origins
and, most crucially, resists any attempt to make humans into gods and end the
world of kasar contingency by a flight to the alus world of absolute order, a
 final stilling of the eternal psychological-metaphysical struggle.
  He said that in that story (I had been relating a wajang I had seen and been
  largely unable to follow) Siva comes down to earth in the form of a
  mystical teacher in an attempt to bring the Pendawas and the Korawas
  together, and that he is succeeding quite well except that Semar stands
  in the way; for Semar is really a god even though he seems to be only
»278«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  a servant. Ardjuna is bewitched by Siva in his earthly incarnation as a
  mystical teacher and told that if he kills Semar the Pendawas and the
  Korawas will be able to make peace and the eternal struggle will end.
  Ardjuna does not want to kill Semar, whom he loves, but he is bewitched,
  and so he goes to Semar and is about to kill him. Semar then says, “So
  this is how you treat me after I have followed you around and served
  you and loved you.” This is the most poignant point in the play. Ardjuna
  is very ashamed, but he has given his word. Semar then says, “Well, all
  right, I will burn myself”; and he builds a bonfire and stands in it. But instead
  of dying he turns into his godly form and then defeats the magician. Then
  the war between the Korawas and the Pendawas begins again.



                     The Gamelan: Javanese Music

supporting the w ajang in its expression of p rija ji values, the gam elan or­
chestra presents to the ear the picture of the inner life the shadow-play pre­
sents to the eye. Except for the occasional inclusion of a two-stringed violin­
like instrument called a rebab, the g a m ela n is entirely a percussion orchestra,
which may consist of as many as fifty instruments in a very large court en­
semble but usually contains about a dozen. One even meets, in Modjokuto,
orchestras made up of only three or four people. I knew many individuals
who owned only one instrument, or perhaps two, which they played solo when
the mood struck them, or, regularly or irregularly, gathered together with
others who owned an instrument or two to form a small orchestra. As the
g a m ela n demands rather little of the delicate adjustment between separate
virtuosi required by the Western orchestra, with its greater freedom for in­
dividual interpretation and consequently greater need for a coordinating con­
ductor, there is little need for a stability of personnel. (But people say that
the members of a really good gam elan orchestra must p a d a ra sa ka ké: they
must “sympathize with,” “feel with,” one another.) One often sees one per­
former replacing another at a certain instrument right in the middle of a
piece; and any group of performers can form an orchestra on the spot, even if
they have never met one another before. (Almost every man in Java—the
players are all men—seems able to play a little g a m ela n music.) A lumber­
yard manufacturer around the corner from me bought a set of instruments
and placed them on a vacant porch for his workers, who played them almost
every night; but hardly ever was the orchestra made up of people who had
often played together as a unit.
     The basic theme of the g ending, or musical composition, quite simple and
severe in form, is usually carried on the saron, a kind of metal xylophone the
seven keys of which are struck one at a time with a wooden mallet and held
down with the hand immediately afterward to prevent overtones. Thus the
nuclear melody is struck out in a series of clear, distinct, and elemental tones,
following one another in an even-flowing and almost entirely unstressed
rhythm. A set of gongs of different sizes (of which the g o n g g ed ê, k e n o n g ,
The Role of Classical Art                                                 »279«
kempul, and ketuk are the most important, the first being the largest, the
latter the smallest) “punctuate” the music, the largest gong marking the
largest phrase, the second largest gong marking the next most gross subdivi­
sion, the smallest its basic units. Thus a gong gedé musical phrase, marked
by the dull boom of the big gong, may be divided into two kenong phrases by
the sounding of this somewhat smaller and hence higher-pitched gong; the
kenong phrase may be divided into two kempul phrases; and finally the kempul
phrase may be divided into two ketuk phrases.
     A number of other instruments, most particularly the gambang, a large
wooden xylophone struck with two mallets simultaneously, and the gendèr,
which consists of a xylophone with keys strung on cords above resonating
bamboo sound-tubes, play around the nuclear theme in small, delicate em­
bellishments to enrich the starkness of the basic melodic line. The double-
ended drum, one end of which is smaller than the other, the small end being
played with the left hand, the large with the right, provides the beat. (There
are sometimes two of these, one large, one smaller, both played by the same
man.) It maintains the rhythm until the point comes for it to break into a
new pattern; then it changes the rhythm, the other instruments following
after. It is for this reason that the drummer is often called the “leader” of the
gamelan orchestra and that the drum is considered the most difficult instrument
to play.
     Two major types of scales are used; slêndro and pélog, there being several
sub-types of each. Slêndro has five equal-interval tones covering our octave;
pélog has seven unequal-interval tones covering the same range. The slêndro
scale is used in the accompaniment of wajangs dramatizing Mahabharata or
Ramayana stories, the pelog scale for those dramatizing Hindu-Javanese king­
dom stories; and, of course, both may be played alone.
     The interweaving of the wajang and the gamelan is quite close. The three
major divisions of the wajang noted above—the opening period until mid­
night, the complications period until three, and the closing section until dawn
— are all marked off by the playing of special musical compositions or gendings
 (increasing, as the play itself, in noise and loudness as the evening wears on).
There are gendings for nearly each aspect of the wajang. A war scene demands
different gamelan tunes from those required by a court meeting between
satrijas; the Pendawas have gendings played for them different from those
played for the Korawas; there is a whole class of tunes used for announcing
the arrival of guests at court; alus figures are accompanied by different tunes
from those for kasar. Each of the major figures has a gending associated with
him, perhaps the most readily recognized tune being the one played at mid­
night to usher in the complications period and bring Semar ambling, in his
peculiar rocking gait, on to the scene.
     Another way in which the gamelan is married to the wajang, and to poetry
as well, is through the songs called suluk, which are sung by the dalang at
 appropriate points in the play. Again, there are special songs for special events
 (impending war, a king entering his castle) or special characters (for Semar’s
 appearance, for the appearance of such a meditating guru as Ardjuna’s
 grandfather), and, further, special songs appropriate to special emotions
»280«                                           T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
(grief over a dead satrija, love songs, songs of doubt and indecision). As the
suluks are derived from ancient Javanese versions of Hindu poems, and so are
in great part incomprehensible both to the wajang audience and to the dalang
himself, the emphasis tends not to be on their intrinsic meaning but, as in the
music generally, on the mood they suggest. They are viewed more as abstract
vocal music whose significance, like that of the gendings themselves, is in their
rasa, in the feeling contained in them.
    Playing (or listening to) a gamelan is a spiritual discipline, not just a
mere amusement; in Modjokuto, people will tell you that they often play on
a single gamelan instrument for a while in the evening in order to discipline
and restrain their emotions, in order to make them alus. On the other hand,
certain gendings are considered to have ritual efficacy, and so are proceeded
by the burning of incense and a sadjèn offering to the spirits.



                    The Tembang: Javanese Poetry

o n the other side, gamelan music connects up with Javanese literature as well
as drama through its accompaniment of Javanese poetry, the tembang. Tern-
bangs are both poems and songs. They may be recited in a half-singing rhythm
without accompaniment or they may be sung to a gamelan gending appropriate
to them. The tembang forms are quite rigid; the number of syllables the line
shall have, the number of lines, and the final vowel in the line are all carefully
prescribed. Hiere are about a dozen or so such forms, but only three are very
common in Modjokuto: dandang-gula, sinom, and kinanti, for which the
“formulas” are as follows:
                                1 2 3           4 5 6 7 8           9    10
                 Dandang-gula¡ 10/, 10a, 8e(o), 7u, 9/, 7a, 6u, 8a, 12/, 7a
                 Sinom:        8a, 8i, 8a,      8i, 7i, 8u, 7a, 8/, 12a
                 Kinanti:      Bu, 8/, 8a,      8i, 8a, 8/

     My diagram means that the dandang-gula form demands 10 lines: the
first line must have 10 syllables and have i the final vowel or final syllable;
the second line must have 10 syllables and a. It means that the sinom has 9
lines, the first being 8 syllables ending with an a syllable and so on. The poem
composed for his children by a Modjokuto tembang maker from which I have
already repeatedly quoted is in dandang-gula. Here I shall quote a stanza in
Javanese before translating it—to serve the double purpose of displaying the
form and, as the stanza concerns the prijaji view of language and poetry, of
connecting tembangs into the general alus art complex I have been describing.
  Rèhning Djawa ahli olah budi
  Kudu weruh surasané basa
  Kang sinandi sasadoné
  Kangikandas djroné kalbu
  Hambukaa kekeran batin
  Jwa tjawuh panjurasa
The Role of Classical Art                                                           »281«
   Awit jèn tan runtut
   Pangrembugé tanpa guna
   Nora antuk munfangaté kawruh batin
   Mung malah dadi wisa
   As Javanese are experts in exercising their spirits,
   They need to know their feelings of words;
   Those whose hidden meanings are unclear,
   Those which have come aground in the heart.
   Unfold the secrets of the inner life;
   Do not confuse your linguistic insights;
   Because if you do not put them, one by one, in order,
   Your talk will be without use,
   You will achieve nothing of any value in the understanding of the inner life.
   In fact, your confused understanding will be as poison.
     Here words are held to cloud meaning as much as reveal it; they are the
lair forms in which we cast, never directly but always obliquely, our inner
feelings. Words taken literally or impressionistically lead not to knowledge
but to the poisoning of the spirit. Each word, each expression must be taken
one by one in its proper order so that its true meaning, always vague and
elusive as the batin is vague and elusive, may be partially grasped. Lair
behavior, of which language (as well as music, dance, and drama) is a part,
masks the batin; and thus only those who study the lair patiently and in orderly
fashion are able to sort it out and get the “feeling”* that is subtly suffused
through it.
     For a sinom example I take not a stanza from the Modjokuto informant,
although he wrote a long sinom poem too, but what is perhaps the most famous
of all tembangs, certainly one nearly everyone knows and one you can hear
sung by everyone from pedicab drivers to district officers:
           Amenangi djaman édan
           Ewuh-aja ing pambudi
           Mélu édan ora tahan
           Jèn tan mèlu anglakoni
           Nora keduraan mélik
           Keliren wekasanipun
           Ja talah ñora salah
           Bedja bedjaning sing lali
           Luwih bedja kang éling lawan waspada
          We have lived to see a time without order
          In which everyone is confused in his mind.
          One cannot bear to join in the madness,
          But if he does not do so,
          He will not share in the spoils,
          And will starve as a result.
          Yes, God; not wrong:
          Happy are those who forget,
          Happier yet those who remember and who have deep insight.
   * Surasa; panjurasa, in line six, which I have translated “linguistic insights,” literally
means something like “the comprehension of the feeling of words.”
»282«                                      T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
    The “time without order,” the djaman édan, has been variously identified
with the depression, with the revolution, and with the present, with its motor­
cars, airplanes and atom bombs. In any case, a detachment born of deeper in­
sight is again suggested as the main defense against madness within or without.
 ( Waspada means to see clearly, to have clear insight into something; some­
times even in the sense of second-sight or clairvoyance.)
    Finally a kinanti, one of the simplest of all tembang forms. This famous
one is taken from the scene in the Ramayana in which Anoman, the monkey
hero, hears the imprisoned Dèwi Sinet, kidnapped wife of Rama, sing of her
love for her distant husband, thus proving her faithfulness:
                Duh Déwa duh Betara gung,
                Tingalana Solah mami
                Sèwu lara sèwu brangta
                Tan ana timbangé marai
                Jén pukulun tan panggiha
                Kalawan Pangeran mami
                O God, O Great God,
                See my gesture!
                A thousand sicknesses, a thousand longings—
                There is none such as I
                If I do not meet
                My Prince.
    As with us, different poetic forms are appropriate to different purposes.
Kinanti poems are almost inevitably love-songs. Sinoms are often moral in
tone, and sometimes prophetic as well, for example in the poetic predictions
the 19th-century Javanese writer Rangga Warsita is claimed to have made
of the coming of automobiles, airplanes, radios, and other modern wonders.
The dandang-gula form is not so sharply defined in terms of function and
may be used for various purposes, such as the didactic use above or for
beginning a wajang dance. Of all the forms of the alus art complex, the
tembang is perhaps the most widely diffused and the most often practiced,
for it takes no capital to sing and not very much skill. You cannot walle
from one end of Modjokuto to the other after ten at night and not hear
someone singing a tembang somewhere along the way.



                     The Djogèd: Javanese Dance

t h e gamelan connects drama to poetry and dance to them both. Javanese
dancing is called djogèd as opposed to dangsah, Western dancing, which
seems to appear almost obscene in many Javanese eyes. Evidently Javanese
formal dance is more closely linked to the Javanese sense of their own identity,
their body-image, than any other of their arts. Even people who are very West­
ernized in almost every other way still reject Western dancing with a shudder,
The Role of Classical Art                                                 »283«
using such expressions as, “When you dance djogèd you get lost in yourself,
but when you dance Western-style, you are still conscious of what you are
doing,” or “Dangsah may be all right for Westerners who are used to it, but
Easterners (of either sex) dancing so close to a partner are not able to
control themselves, and so it will inevitably lead to sexual intercourse,” or “I
don’t mind seeing Europeans dangsah together, but if I see a Javanese doing
it, it makes me feel queasy inside.” A student riot at Gadjah Mada Uni­
versity in Djokjakarta was set off during the time I was there by a few
students daring to hold a party with Western dancing; and the death of a man
in a Djakarta riot was held to have, in part, resulted from a similar situation.
      There are two main types of djogèd: the ancient “princess” (putri)
dances, srimpi and bedaja, performed only by young girls, and the much
more recent dances (usually of both sexes) which act out the wajang and
so are known as wajang wong, wong being the word for “man,” “human
being.” The srimpi and bedaja are both group dances, the former having
four dances, the latter nine. Until a few years before the war these dances
were restricted to the courts; and it has only been in this century that
Europeans have been permitted to watch them even within the confines of
the castle. Formerly, srimpi was the name of an office as well as a dance,
for each of the two courts (at Djokjakarta and Surakarta) had only four,
chosen from among immature descendants of the ruler and replaced when
pubescent. Bedajas, on the other hand, were pubescent but unmarried girls
sometimes taken from among the common people outside the court and often
serving as the sultan’s concubines. Dressed bare-shouldered in velvet bodices
and brown-white batik sarongs, a long bright-colored double sash hanging
between their half-bent legs from their waists to the floor in front of them,
their heads crowned with a black and gold headpiece, their faces painted
with the yellow powder we have'seen at Javanese weddings (for these are
 the “princesses” the bride is imitating), and moving with a kind of impossibly
decelerated grace which made every gesture a calm defiance of anatomy and
gravity, the srimpi and the bedaja summed up the Javanese theory of beauty
 and demonstrated it to king and court.
      In practice the above costume description applies only to the Surakarta
 (commonly called Solo) court. The Djokjakarta dress is slightly different, as
 is the dance style itself. The Solo style is usually considered to be rather more
 “soft” and “feminine,” that of Djokjakarta rather “stem” and “masculine”;
 but neither is likely to be considered very dynamic by our standards. This
 general difference runs through nearly all the arts of the two courts—music,
 dance, drama—as well as through the systems of manners; but to an
 untrained Western eye the differences are likely to be small enough to be
 missed entirely. In any case, since for various reasons Djokjakarta has
 traditionally been more conservative and encapsulated within itself than
 Solo, the latter has had a far wider influence on the countryside and has
 provided the aesthetic model for most of those outside the immediate en­
 virons of the court. This includes Modjokuto, where one sees almost no
 Djokjakarta style dancing at all, and where, when people say the kraton
  (“court,” “castle” ), they almost always mean Solo.
»284«                                      T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
     Interestingly enough, in the postwar period the situation has reversed
in the sense that the Djokjakarta court, led by its modern-thinking sultan,
has become a center of political consciousness in the new Republik while
Solo has been left behind clinging to the relics of its old supremacy. Since
the twenties, nationalism has had a greater impact upon the Djokjakarta
court than upon Solo, which remained vigorously pro-colonial to the bitter
end, with the result that the intelligentsia leadership of the prijaji group has
come more and more from Djokjakarta and the literati leadership, to a great
extent, has remained in Solo.
     The line between Javanese gestures in the dance and out of it is not very
sharp—as one realizes when a coolie on the back of a truck gestures to one
to pass with an arm motion that could have come out of a court dance, al­
though he no doubt knows no dance; or when a Modjokuto girl seats her­
self on the floor with the same unbelievably gradual sinking motion with
which this is accomplished in a srimpi. The gestures seem to flow along self-
contained, detached from the rest of the body, as though they were operating
in a world of their own, and then suddenly break into a final twist or turn
and join again into a unity with the other limbs, the trunk, and the head.
Many of the most intricate gestures of the dance itself—the pointed-finger
flipping of the sash in one direction or another, the kicking of the sarong
train back with the foot, the bending of the hand backwards toward the wrist,
or the movement of the head horizontally along the plane of the shoulders—
are considered so difficult to perform with the necessary grace that only
those who begin to study them very early can ever practice them with the
required skill; and as soon as a dancer grows to womanhood, about twenty
to twenty-five, she no longer will dance. One never sees anyone older than
the middle twenties dancing alus dances in Java; most performers are from
about ten to fifteen years old.
     Both the bedaja and the srimpi have stories behind them. Some of the
motions are supposed to be imitations of natural actions—such as “waves
of the sea,” a kind of half-rocking motion—or of such human behaviors as
combing the hair, dressing, fighting, or bowing to a lord. (Djokjakarta
srimpis involve the wielding of daggers—kris—and bows and arrows, for they
tell the story of a struggle of two girls over one man.) These natural actions
are so highly stylized that the dances are in no way realistic but starkly
abstract. The girls move back and forth within a square space, always facing
either north, south, east or west, never diagonally. The rhythm of the dance is
slow, deliberate, controlled; and the motions have a ritualistic exactness.
An absolutely correct posture is required, the shoulders in just such a
place that the shoulder bones do not protrude at all. Breathing must be
shallow and not noticeable. Eyes must be kept fixed in one place, directly
forward and a little down, giving a trance-like effect to the dance, an effect
heightened by the frequent use of the “waves of the sea” step, which is
merely a gently rocking motion while standing in one spot, a motion that
seems to be hypnotic for both the performers and the spectators. The set
expression, the carefully controlled motions, give a feeling of inwardness,
of concentration on the self, and of a conception of a perfection of self-
The Role of Classical Art                                                    »285«
contained grace which each dancer is trying to reach independently of the
others:
  At one point he (a member of the governing board of a Modjokuto gamelan
  and djogèd group) talked about the djogèd and said that its purpose was to
  njetiuiggalaken batin, to make as one, to unify and concentrate the inner
  life. He illustrated with arm motions from a man’s dance, with arms high
  and crooked in front and elbow rather forward, and said that the eyes must
  follow the point of the elbow, first on one arm and then on the other, and
  not just look here and there.
      The w ajang w o n g is less abstract. The modern w a jang w o n g came into
being only about the middle of the eighteenth century as part of a revival of
classical Javanese art after the blows it suffered during the period of Moslem
intrusion. It more or less amounts to a “dancing out” of the shadow-play
la ko n s, or, more often, of sections of them. Most of the la k o n s are from the
Mahabharata cycle (there being over a hundred of these, by far the largest
corpus of any of the cycles, which is one reason for its popularity), and
different dancers take the different parts—Ardjuna, Bima, Semar—speaking
lines as well as dancing. The form of the w ajang is somewhat simplified,
each scene consisting usually of a d jedjer, in which important persons stand
facing one another and chant a few words in a kind of gruffly pompous tone;
m la k u (literally, “to walk” ), in which they dance toward and away from
each other, often someone coming in and bringing news; and then prang,
war, in which some vigorous but formalized fighting-dances take place.
Some of the characters, particularly those representing giants, wear masks,
and the whole thing is accompanied by the gam elan as usual.
      Except for professional touring companies and, increasingly, on the
radio, one rarely comes in contact with a performance of an entire w ajang
w o n g . If one does, one witnesses more a dramatic performance, a kind of
opera, than a dance performance. At the court centers certain scenes or
dances, which differ rather little in basic form from scene to scene and la k o n
to la k o n in any case, are elaborated into dances complete in themselves
called p etila n or “excerpts,” such excerpts often including hilarious slap­
stick pantomime clowns—Semar and his sons—mimicking the hyper-a/ws
movements of the principals.
      In Modjokuto one sees only such “excerpts,” usually even more simpli­
fied (there almost always being no clowns), performed by amateurs, the more
drama-like w ajang w o n g s being left to professional companies. Thus the w a ja n g
w o n g in Modjokuto refers to two things: an opera-like rendition of a w ajang
la k o n by a professional troupe, which form I shall discuss in the next
section, and a set of abstract dances largely complete in themselves bui t
generally around w ajang themes and characters. In fact, the only difference
between these latter and the srim p i —which, indeed, is often mixed in with
them during a performance, more or less at random—is the addition of male
dancers and male-type dances; they are not developed dramatic performances.
      People can hear the full performances over the radio; and every fev
months or so a professional troupe of dancers and actors who travel about
»286«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
performing the w ajang w o n g will come to town and perform for a few days.
In both these latter cases, the w ajang has been even more adapted away from
its original form and become something like a Western opera—a mixture
of semi-realistic drama mixed with music and dance, although there is not
as much singing. The formal tripartite division of the w a ja n g w o n g proper,
which is essentially still a dance rather than a play, dissolves into a looser
and more dramatic form approaching the freedom and realism of the popular
dramas such as the ludrug, k e to p ra k , and others, to which we shall come
presently. Thus, at its “bottom end”—and some of the professional w ajang
w o n g s which come to Modjokuto are sorry affairs indeed from an aesthetic
point of view—are popular “folk plays” in which the name, the bare outline
of the plot, the characters, and the g a m elan of the w a ja n g are present, but
little of the rasa . At the upper end, however, the dance performers of
w a ja n g w o n g fragments which are performed in Modjokuto represent the
same a lu s theory of art as underlies the srim p i, perhaps best summed up by
a Djokjakarta university student, who said:
  There are three main principles of the dance, the essence of the dance:
      Wirasa [rasa: wi- is just a fancy prefix which no one but the elevated use]—
  the philosophy, the direction, the “mystic Weltanschauung” underlying the
  dance; the “purity” of it.
      Wirama—the music [literally: tempo, rhythm].
      Wiraga—the action, the dance itself.
  There must be a harmony between these three principles. All the actions
  have meaning, but you must know the wirasa to understand the meaning.
“You must always look at the dance,” a Modjokuto informant warned me,
“not at the dancer.”
    In Modjokuto there were four alus dance groups, three of them under the
same leader, a public school teacher who was also a d a la n g (and headed
an organization of all the dalangs in the area which was designed to raise
standards of performance, exchange material, and so on, but which seems
rarely to have met). He trained a group of young boys and girls from his
school to dance the srim p i and w ajang w o n g , contracting performances for
them at occasions such as weddings and circumcisions held by prijajis or
richer abangan villagers, such as village chiefs. He also taught a group of
young men and women in their late teens and early twenties who were attached
to the railroad union, an organization which had a lively interest in the arts,
owning a g a m ela n and having a special department for “sports and culture.”
This group performed in the union’s meeting-hall on various special occasions
such as the First of May. Lastly, he found time to teach a group of small
girls in an organization called Langen Putera Modjokuto (Modjokuto Recrea­
tion Society for Children) to do the srim p i . This organization, originally
founded by a retired civil servant in Modjokuto, was run for the most part
by officials from the government pawnshop and other government offices
to teach children to dance, play the gam elan, sing tem b a n g s, and so on—
although by the time I left Modjokuto it was beginning to lose much of its
impetus.
The Role of Classical Art                                                      »287«
    Lastly, there was a dance group of Taman Siswa* students who practiced
weekly at the home of one of the Taman Siswa school teachers. They per­
formed at Taman Siswa events of one sort or another and sometimes at the
district officer’s office on national holidays, although they had to compete
with the other groups for this honor. Some, but very little, alus dancing seems
to have been taught in the government sekolah guru—in teachers’ school—
in town. But with the new emphasis on subjects such as science, history, and
Indonesian literature in the public schools, the heavy emphasis on Javanese art
that marked the “native schools” before the war has disappeared.



                     Batik: Javanese Textile Dyeing
Batik, the final element in the alus art complex, is a method of resist-dye
textile design which uses wax as the resistant. A design, largely abstract al­
though sometimes there are bird or floral designs included, is drawn or
stenciled in pencil on a piece of white muslin which is then hung over a rack
about a yard high. The artist, always a woman, sits on a mat on the ground
with the bottom part of the cloth spread out before her. (She can roll up
the end on which she is not working on sticks.) Next to her she has a small
charcoal stove which keeps a pan of wax molten. With the aid of a small
metal instrument (tjanting), built on the funnel principle, she covers with
wax those parts of the design which she wishes to leave free of color. This
completed, the cloth is dipped in a vat of dye, most often either ink-blue
or brown, sometimes yellow or reddish-brown. Then the wax is scraped off,
and later one can, if that is the intention, apply more wax and dip again in a
second color.
     Since each of the important batik centers such as Djokjakarta, Solo,
Pekalongan, and Surabaja has special designs and colors, one can almost
always tell where a particular cloth originated or at least what style it is
following. In the days before the Republik certain designs were reserved
to royalty, and the female manufacture of batik was an important means of
support for many prijaji families whose male head spent much of his time in
largely unremunerative court duties. Also, like dance, music, and drama,
batik was a spiritual discipline. Since single pieces may take months to
complete, it took great inward concentration to work on such a piece of
very detailed and delicate cloth painting; and a favorite symbol of mystic
experience is still mbatik manah—“drawing a batik design on the heart.”
     Nowadays, however, probably 95 per cent of the batik production is tjap
—a semi-mechanized method in which the design is cast into a lead stamp
which is then dipped into wax and stamped by hand on the cloth. Although
still slow compared to Western mechanical methods of textile painting, tiffs
    * Taman Siswa is a Java-wide private school system, with headquarters in Djok­
jakarta. It has devoted itself to the preservation of Javanese culture and the building
up of “national feeling" among the masses.
»288«                                      T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
method speeds up production tremendously—at the cost of a loss of the
delicacy of the hand-drawn batik.
     Batik production is an important industry in Java, and all married women
still wear batik sarongs every day in Modjokuto. (Unmarried girls wear
Western dresses.) On special occasions men still wear batik sarongs although
the practice is disappearing rapidly. (They are always worn in the dances.)
In Modjokuto only two women told me they ever did any batik themselves;
and I never actually saw them do any. Most batik worn by Modjokuto women
is tjap imported from Djokjakarta, Solo, Surabaja, and other large cities.
In Modjokuto, hand batik-making is a lost art; but in the large cities one
still sees a little of it, serving now a carriage trade which can afford to
pay three or four hundred rupiah for a single sarong.



                  Classical Javanese Art: Summary
Wajang, lakon, gamelan, djogèd, tembang, and batik, then, form an inte­
grated art-complex expressing largely prijaji values. Although the forms are
well-known and still attractive throughout the whole of the society—but
perhaps not so attractive to most as the kasar art-forms we shall discuss
next, it is among the prijajis that they find their greatest strength and their
most explicit interpretations. Even in the past, the heart of these alus forms
was always in the courts, where they were cultivated and perfected and,
from which center they flowed outward and downward, as political and
spiritual power themselves, to the masses, increasingly ineptly performed as
they descended. If anything, the tendency for these alus art-forms to become
a gentry concern is increasing with the greater hold the popular dramas and
the more Westernized forms of art are getting on the masses, leaving interested
prijajis as the main patrons of the traditional high-art. It is at the large
prijaji conspicuous-display rites-of-passage celebrations that one mainly sees
this sort of art now in Modjokuto. The district officer gave his daughter a
two-day wedding, with imported djogèd dancers the first evening and a
shadow play with an imported dalang the second; a retired official of the
government pawn-shop hired the town hall in which to show a wajang when
his daughter married; and a prijaji politician hired dancers for his son’s five-
days-after-the-wedding celebration.
Chapter 19                  The Role of Popular Art




    Popular Drama: Wajang Wong, Ketoprak, and Ludrug

B eginning in the nineteenth century and increasingly in the twentieth, a
new art form has taken hold among the Javanese masses—the popular serio­
comic staged drama. There are many versions of this form of art—the
ketoprak of central Java (“invented” as late as 1923); the ludrug of
Surabaja; the farce-plays of West Java; and the most popularized forms of
the wajang wong. Although each tends to dramatize a different sort of story,*
they nevertheless have similarities : the half-hour prologue featuring a
comedy act of low clowns and/or some alus dancing; a main story, always
a serio-comic farce, which, whatever the mythic nature of its content, is
realistically acted; the playing (usually) of female parts by male transves­
tites; and, lastly, a commercial form of production with professional traveling
troupes, paid admissions, and a “theater” setting.
     These plays are composed of items from old, sometimes extinct, art-
forms—masked dancers, peripatetic rural comedians, outmoded rituals, alus
court art—all poured into a new mold, a theatrical convention certainly
heavily influenced by Western forms of drama, most especially the moving
pictures. As Modjokuto lies on the edge of the wajang wong and ketoprak
areas, and within the ludrug area, I shall deal only with these and give most
attention to the last, which, in Modjokuto, is by far the most popular
indigenous art-entertainment.
     Wajang wongs, ketopraks, and ludrugs are presented either in the wooden
theater at the south edge of town, which is owned by a Chinese, or at the
    * The term ketoprak, for example, seems to be applied to dramas which have plots
with either a Persian or a Hindu-Javanese kingdom background, ludrug to those with
a contemporary background, and wajang wong to those with a Mahabharata-Ramayana
background.
                                        289
»290«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
pasar malam (“night market” ) traveling carnivals. These carnivals, which
are very much like our own, with various types of gambling games, skill
tests, side-shows, and so forth, although perhaps not quite so raucous,
come to town (under Chinese sponsorship) once or twice a year. In general,
since the level of performance is very low, with the exception of the ludrug
company, which is quite skilled, they attract mostly peasants and lower
class townsmen. They are usually dominated by their clowns, as the following
synopsis of a wajang wong I saw will demonstrate, for here the alus sairija
heroes are pushed into the background by the slapstick antics of Semar
and his cohorts.

                       “Semar, Pétruk, Garèng, and Magic”
         . . . Curtain up after the gamelan (all such plays being accompanied
  by a gamelan) had been going for a while. Five srimpi dancers who sang and
  danced at the same time—the seediest group I’ve ever seen, one being a
  dwarf. They were crude, mechanical, ill-trained. Solo style.
       After this the story began. The King of Madura announces to a group
  of people that his daughter has been stolen by Duratmuka, a giant, and
  that whoever gets her back for him can marry her. Ardjuna takes the challenge,
  and he and Semar go off to look for her.
       They meet the two other daughters of the King of Madura, one of whom
  is attracted to Ardjuna and tries to persuade him to give up his quest and stay
  with her. When he refuses, she curses him, saying that if he is hungry
  later he won’t get food; if he is thirsty, he won’t get drink.
       The next scene is a fight with a giant who is guarding the forest where
  the missing girl is kept. The giant is very ferocious looking but rather stupid.
  The clowns approach him first, one at a time, singing to him, and he sings
  back and dances with them. Pétruk engages him in conversation, talking
  about how much the giant has traveled and how many languages he knows,
  with much play on words. While he is talking, Garèng creeps up and steals
  the giant’s dagger and goes off into the wings to sell it. He comes back a
  little later saying the market women won’t give a good price. Pétruk
  whispers to him to try again, while still engaging the giant in conversation.
  This occurs several times and finally Garèng, who is quite stupid, comes
  back and says that all the market women have gone home. At that point
  the giant discovers his dagger is missing and starts to search the clowns.
  As they bend over, he lifts up their shirts to look under them. With much
  clowning, they hand the dagger to one another, until finally they drop it and
  he finds it. Semar and the giant also act like clowns, Semar being chased
  by the giant and sticking out his posterior at the giant in ridicule. Later Semar
  tries the old trick of telling the giant to “look there on the ground" and hits
  the giant on the head. Finally Ardjuna comes in and kills the giant, but then
  Ardjuna faints for lack of food, a result of the earlier curse.
       Semar has an idea of how to get food. Having no money, he will hold a
  magic show and get paid in rice. He goes to a girl who lives in the forest and
  performs his act. He turns a stone into a tortoise, which Pétruk throws
  in disgust at the girl, who promptly faints, and he turns coconut leaves into
  an eel, which Pétruk is also frightened of and throws at the girl. They grab the
The Role of Popular Art                                                    »291«
  rice and run off, frightened of their own magic. Semar brings the rice back
  to Ardjuna, and they go off again in search of the girl. . . .
      They go back to guard the two other sisters because they fear another
  kidnapping. The three clowns go to sleep on the mat, while Kakrasana,
  another satrija who has joined Ardjuna, sits up. In the middle of the night,
  the son of Duratmuka comes by. Kakrasana knows that he is a girl-kidnaper
  and tries to catch him but fails. He then wakens Ardjuna, and there follows
  a long chase with more clownish humor. Finally, the kidnaper escapes.
  Ardjuna and Kakrasana decide to go to the enemy castle invisibly, which
  they do. Pétruk, also invisible, accompanies them and goes up to Durat­
  muka and smears his face and the faces of two of his henchmen with white
  paint—a great joke; and they all laugh at each other’s white-smeared faces.
  Then there is a general war, the giants lose, and the girl is taken home. The
  end.
      In this performance, obviously, the clowns predominate the whole play,
and the story, such as it is, is just a frame within which to display their antics
rather than having much point in itself. Even the a lu s Ardjuna, who in the
original w ajangs never loses his sense of proportion for an instant, is made
to engage in a clownish chase. As one informant said, in the w a ja n g s the
la k o n is the important thing but in the farce-plays, the story isn’t much of
anything; it is only the jokes that count.
      The k e to p r a k s are very similar except that they have, in Modjokuto, a
Hindu-Javanese background (although the stories may be dated in the time
of the post-Islamic Mataram kingdom). The one I saw was concerned with
stealing from a rebellious lord the spear which was the magical source of his
power, this deed being accomplished by the sultan’s daughter marrying him
incognito and flattering him and persuading him to leave it behind when he
goes out. (“It’s just like Delilah cutting off Sampson’s hair,” said my informant,
who had just seen “Sampson and Delilah” in the movies.) Although the story
was more important than that of the w ajang w o n g just related the play was
again clown-dominated.
      In the ludrug, the form most often produced in Modjokuto, the story
and humor balance one another off more and the aim to entertain (and
make a profit) is fused with an aim to instruct. The lu d ru g , whatever it was
before the war, now approaches the form of modern Western drama. It is
played in n g o k o , low-Javanese, except where k ra m a or Indonesian are
necessary for realism (e.g., in the speech of a high official or at a sophisticated
big-city party), and has plots set in the present or the immediate past, with
characters from “everyday life.” The female parts are played by men who
dress and act the part well enough to deceive most observers. (Every in­
formant with whom I attended a lu d ru g pointed out to me about a dozen
times during the evening that the “girls” were really “boys,” evidently un­
convinced that I believed them.) These female impersonators (who, from some
casual observation of them off stage, seem often if not typically to be overt
homosexuals) also sing “educational” songs between the acts.
      The songs are modern in form, something like the k ro n tjo n g s we shall
»292«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
discuss below, except that they are more distinctly Javanese in style and
their subject matter is supposed to be “useful.” One actor will sing a song
urging the men in the audience to take good care of their families, another
will insist on the necessity for education, a third will argue for the advantages
of honesty. Sometimes even political content will be inserted—usually of
a general type such as “Down with corruption,” or “We must build up the
country.”
     The major ludrug troupe which came to Modjokuto, evidently the smallest
town to which it toured, grew out of a leftist youth group active in the
Revolution. It was called Marhaen (roughly, “common people,” “proletariat”)
but apparently had no specific connection with the leftist religio-political
party, Permai (Persatuan Rakjat Marhaen Indonesia) even though it shared
a similar orientation and was identified in part of the public mind with it.
Before the war the Dutch forbade popular plays of this sort, unless licensed,
on the ground that the plays were “communist” (a label applied to nationalist
agitation generally); and the Japanese forbade them altogether. Even now,
some ludrug troupes are restrained from being even more explicitly political
 only by the weather-eye of the government, the rumor being that companies
have had their licenses suspended for referring too directly, albeit in song,
 to the disadvantages of the Marshall Plan.
     Although its prices were high (Rp 4.00 for a first-class seat; Rp 1.00
 for a fourth-class), the Marhaen ludrug was very popular in Modjokuto. I
 never attended one of its performances when the house was not packed or
 nearly so, and the company was a prime topic of conversation from about
 a week before it came until a week after it left, the general opinion being
 that it was excellent. (It came three times for a total of about thirty days
 during the fifteen months I was in Modjokuto.)
     The ludrug always began with a solo Madurese dance, the dancer singing
 the audience a welcome in high-Javanese. Next followed a long prologue with
 no apparent connection to the plot except that the clowns who were introduced
 in it later played leading roles, as the same characters, in the play proper.
 The following describes a typical prologue:
       A clown whose name turned out to be Rukun (literally: “cooperation,”
   “mutual help”) enters and gives a short monologue (punctuated by what
   for the audience is a series of hilarious hiccups) on people who drink and
   gamble and the evils that flow therefrom. Later he is joined by a second
   clown, Bawa (literally: “beginner,” “undertaker,” in the sense of “entre­
   preneur,” Bawa being the most important character in all the plays and
   acted by the director-leader of the troupe), who turns out to be the central
   character not as hero or protagonist but, in the manner of all such clowns,
   as a kind of catalyst for the rest, the thread which ties the whole together.
   After the two clowns have joked and chattered a while, Rukun starts talking
   about urip, which means “life” but is also the name of the third clown, who
   has now entered. Rukun is talking about how hard his life is, repeatedly using
   the word urip. Rukun does not see the third clown but the third clown thinks
   Rukun is talldng about him and becomes angry at some of the things Rukun
   says about him. During all of this exchange Bawa tries to tell Rukun that
The Role of Popular Art                                                     »293«
 Urip is there, making various signals and gestures, making faces, and so on.
     The three clowns then go on to talk about a fourth man who is conceited
 and whom they want to swindle. They have a discussion of “persatuan.”
 (Literally, persatuan means “unity,” but it is used to designate an organization
 in the way we use “brotherhood.” Since it is a very common word in the
 modern nationalist political vocabulary, and is an Indonesian, not a
 Javanese, word, this dialogue was a political satire in part.) They talk about
 the pitfalls of organization and how everyone tries to get the best things
 for himself under the pretext of mutual help. The next scene shows a fourth
 man in his home. There comes a knock on the door. He goes, but Bawa comes
 in another door, and sits down, and when the fourth man returns Bawa
 pretends that he owns the house and says he is going to sell it. After some
 twenty minutes of talk in this vein, Bawa goes off and Rukun comes on.
 Rukun says that he wants to borrow some money and tells a long story of
 his hard luck. When the fourth man refuses to give him money, Rukun grabs
 himself around the neck and ostensibly chokes himself to death. Bawa
 now re-enters to extort money from the now terrified fourth man as the price
 of his silence. (Bawa accepts the money with a very humorous gesture of
 unwillingness, raising his left arm and receiving the money with his right
 under it while backing away—as though the money were tainted—precisely
 as the host at a slametan often receives, although less exaggeratedly, a guest’s
 contribution.) Bawa then carries Rukun away—and Rukun stands up to
 put his arm around Bawa’s shoulder, somewhat mystifying the fourth
 man. When they have gone, Urip enters, shakes hands with the fourth man,
 and promptly falls across the table as though dead. Bawa re-enters and repeats
 the business of accepting money as the price of silence, using similar
 pantomime, and carries Urip away, grabbing him gingerly by the folds
 of his coat. Urip really walks under his own power. There follows a scene in
 which the three argue about the division of money while the fourth man
 comes upon them unseen. Rukun and Urip finally see him and steal away,
 leaving Bawa to face him and give him back the money.
    It should be apparent from this description that the clowns are not
without skill. In the stories proper they almost always play servants, a
continuation of the Semar tradition, and carry on the same kind of joking and
horseplay. The stories are usually of the “soap-opera” type. Everyone con­
cerned has many troubles of a common, recognizable sort, but all works
out happily in the end—although sometimes with a peculiarly Javanese
twist. In one story a boy is forced to choose between the servant he loves
(and has married secretly) and the girl his Assistant District Officer father
has chosen to be his bride, she being the daughter of a pensioned District
Officer. After much soul-searching (while Bawa keeps packing and un­
packing his master’s suitcase), the boy decides to accept his father’s decision
and casts off his present wife, who, unbeknownst to him, is three months
pregnant. Twenty years later, the boy, now a middle-aged man, is marrying
off a daughter by his prijaji wife against the girl’s will. (She wants to con­
tinue her schooling.) The daughter suddenly falls over, dead, the examining
doctor says, of a broken hearts The grief-stricken father wanders around,
meeting, of all people, the now grown daughter by his first servant-wife.
»294«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
The girl, who looks exactly like his second daughter who has just died, has
been raised by Rukun and Bawa in such sheltered circumstances that she is
unaware that the great majority of people have one parent of each sex.
The father, having just lost his daughter, has a happy reunion with her, and
all is forgiven on all sides. So all comes out right in the end—at least for
those who survive.
     In another story, a girl’s foster father (the clowns being his servants)
dies, and his brother, actually a thief, is appointed executor and tries to de­
prive the girl of her inheritance. He gives her a pill which will put her to
sleep for ten days and which, if she is not treated by a doctor in that time, will
kill her. Bawa and Urip, who have been sent on a vacation to get them out
of the way, return unexpectedly, discover the plot in the nick of time and
turn the evil brother over to the police. (They bury the girl first, thinking
she is dead, but dig her up again, and she recovers.)
     In a third story, a boy leaves home because his father wishes him to
marry a girl he doesn’t love. In another house, the daughter of a widowed
mother leaves her house in tears because her mother wants her to marry
a man she doesn’t love. After she leaves, the exiled boy comes to the house
of the widowed mother and asks to stay there. The widow agrees on the
condition that he marry her. Although she is no longer young and pretty, he
does so because, the housing shortage being what it is, he has no other place
to go. Meanwhile, at the boy’s home, his father is lonely without him, and,
when the exiled girl appears there the father marries her. Then the two
newly formed families meet, and there is much confusion about correct
kin terminology, for the wife of the son is the mother of the father’s wife.
The young man wants to exchange wives, but the father refuses, advising his
son to be satisfied with an old wife, for as long as there is mutual understanding
between husband and wife they will have a good life.
     In yet another plot, things are even less alus. A middle-aged man sees
a young girl in a restaurant and is attracted by her. He requests her in
marriage from her parents, but her parents, being modem, leave the decision
to her, and, seeing how old he is, she refuses him. He returns to his own
city, where he is a merchant, and resumes his business, vowing to himself
to get the girl as his wife somehow. Meanwhile his adopted son falls in love
with the girl, marries her, and brings her home. The merchant falsely
accuses his adopted son of embezzlement, and the boy is put in prison. The
father then rapes the girl and, to conceal the crime, kills her. When the
son gets out of prison, the father tells him the girl has left and returned,
home. Shortly thereafter, the ghost of the girl begins appearing, shaking
the father’s confidence. Then the parents of the girl come to pay a visit to
see her, and, with the aid of the ghost and a servant who witnessed the murder,
the story comes out. This is perhaps the most popular story of all, and is said
to be based on a real case which occurred in Surabaja before the war.
     The nuclear conflict in the ludrug seems to be the conflict of generations,
the conflict between the attachment to tradition of the older generation, par­
ticularly concerning arranged marriages, and the wishes of the younger. In
The Role of Popular Art                                                      »295«
the first play, the father forces the son to divorce the girl he has already
married in order to accept the father’s choice, and then the son, twenty
years later, destroys his daughter in a similar manner; in the third, both
a mother and a father exile their children—or the children exile themselves
rather than give in—because the latter will not marry the spouses they are
supposed to; in the last, a father and an adopted son compete for the same
girl. In this conflict it is the younger generation which is always right; the
rights of the heart and of self-determination are being asserted against the
rights of tradition and of parental authority. If the older generation is not
raping the younger, it is cheating it out of its inheritance, forcing it to marry
rather than continue school, breaking up its love affairs, or marrying the
young women and leaving the old ones for the young men. All in all, the
plays lend force to the common complaint of Modjokuto’s chastened older
generation. “We used to have a proverb, ‘The buffalo suckles the buffalo-
calf,’ but now we have to say, ‘The buffalo’s calf suckles the buffalo.’ ”
     There are other themes, of course, notably that of the “adopted child-
problem,” but all in all it is clear that, with its didactic character, its
special type of comedy, and its concern with social and moral problems char­
acteristic of a changing society, the ludrug is very much the child of the
present. But it is also a child of the past, for if it were not it would hardly
draw such crowds in a town like Modjokuto, where such problems as it
dramatizes are as yet real only to the most urbanized fraction of the audi­
ence. The clowns, the female impersonators (who are never humorous ob­
jects as such, tranvestitism evidently being funny to the Javanese only in the
sense of “peculiar,” not in the sense of “amusing” ), the dancers, and the
gamelan all tie the play to familiar cultural forms, so that a peasant who
is really only half-clear as to what the plot is all about can laugh at the
clowns, wonder at the transvestites, and enjoy the dancers.
     The attitude towards the homosexual aspects of the ludrug is, in fact,
quite ambivalent. Most people say that the ludrugs break up many homes
because the homosexuals attract the men away from their wives; and the
general opinion is that there is much homosexual activity among the various
members of the troupe. It is said—whether truthfully or not, I do not know—
that ludrugs are banned in some areas because of their deleterious moral
influence. Santris stay away from the ludrug almost entirely, and when I
took a santri boy with me to see one he was distinctly uncomfortable. Prijaji
parents regard the ludrug as too kasar. Although the parents often attend
themselves, they frequently prohibit their children from attending, saying
that it is bad for them to see such things at an impressionable age.* A
mixture of leftist politics (somewhat dampened at the moment), simple
melodrama, low comedy, and forbidden forms of sexuality, the ludrug*s
hold on its predominantly abangan audience would seem nearly unbreakable.
    * “It is kasar, I admit," said one woman in her defense when I taxed her with
her attendance at a ludrug, “but it is very educational and good for building up the
country.” She suggested that the Ministry of Information might profitably employ
the ludrug to get their less objectionable political message across to the uneducated
masses, who are bored with and confused by the usual propaganda meeting.
»296«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A

      Street Dancers: Klèdèk, Djaranan, and Djanggrung
the next element of the kasar art complex is the k lè d è k , sometimes called
also ta n d a k : female street-dancers and singers performing both as hired
entertainers and, more commonly, from door to door along the streets of
the town, in the market, or even in the villages. In this last capacity they
are often hardly more than beggars and are viewed as such. They stand in
front of a house or a store—their faces usually painted with thick white
make-up, an outgrowth of the old masked dancers pattern—and wail out
a song for a few moments until someone gives them ten cents to move on.
Some of them are somewhat more skilled and, accompanied by one or two
men playing g a m ela n instruments, dance poor imitations of the srim p i and the
b ed a ja with elements from folk sources mixed in. They also sing a kind of
te m b a n g - monologue of somewhat off-color sort and engage in some double-
entendre repartee with their accompanists. The small procession, sometimes
as many as two or three girls and a half-dozen accompanists (occasionally
with a male dancer), but more often just a single girl and a single accom­
panist, moves through the streets, stopping at each house to sing. Sometimes
people give them ten cents or a quarter to move on; often, however, they
 are ignored and move on of their own accord. Sometimes, however, people
will “hire” them, paying anywhere from Rp 1.00 to Rp 2.50, in which case
 they put on their whole act for about a half-hour, great crowds gathering
 to watch. As the girls are as often as not professional prostitutes, this art
 is at the bottom of the kasar-alus ladder and is consequently almost wholly
 confined to abangan circles.
      Somewhat similar to the k lè d è k is the djaranan, also a street-show of
 dancers. In the k lè d è k the dancers ride papier-mâchè horses ( d jaran means
 “horse” ) and become possessed so as to act as though they were themselves
 horses, prancing, neighing, eating rice husks (as well as hot peppers, broken
 glass, etc.), being whipped, and so on. They too are itinerant troupes wan­
 dering around from town to town playing in the streets and markets. The
 following is a description from my notes:
  In the afternoon a troupe of wandering performers of the horse-dance came
  by, and I hired them to perform. There were five people in the troupe.
  One man carried on his shoulders a set of instruments, drums, gambang
  (gamelan xylophone), angklung (a musical instrument made of bamboo
  tubes which is played by shaking it), and another man carried a big drum.
  As they went along the street they beat the drums to attract attention. The
  other three, one in a clown costume of burlap bags and a mask and the
  other two astride hobby horses painted white and black, pranced along in
  front of the people, weaving back and forth among them while wearing odd
  smirks on their faces, collecting dimes here and there as they passed by.
  To hire them cost Rp 2.50. . . . The horse-dance began with a beating of
  the drums and a playing of very simple, not very exciting music. Two of
  the players, who were astride horses, began to prance slowly around like
  horses, weaving in and out past each other. Meanwhile the third man was
The Role of Popular Art                                                      »297«
  getting ready a bowl of water and rice husks—which is considered proper
  horse-food—which we supplied. After a while the horses began to get
  more frisky and began a real prancing dance. Then one stopped and took a
  whip and began directing the first one with the whip, not hitting him at
  first, but just laying it on him from time to time. The first one was now in
  a trance and beginning to imitate a horse in great detail. While in this state
  he slopped up water like a horse and ate, with apparent pleasure, the dry
  rice husks, keeping up this action for some time—smelling the food, pranc­
  ing away from it, eating it, savoring it, and so on. At the end of this time
  he did another prancing dance and ended with the hobby horse lifted above
  his head. This was the climax. He was brought out of the trance, the helper going
  behind him and holding him while whipping his hands loose from the hobby
  horse, whipping his two feet together so that he would stand straight, the man
  in the trance rather leaning against the man in back of him. Then the hobby
  horse was taken and laid lengthwise along the front of the man, symbolically
  covering him, then the helper hitting the tranced one a sharp crack with the
  whip. When the tranced one was finally touched with a black rubber ball on
  the chest, he came out of the trance. He seemed bewildered. Dazed, he sat
  down and slowly came around to himself while the helper hovered around
  him to keep him from wandering off or running amok.
    The trance is evidently real enough, although evidently its intensity varies,
for some dancers are whipped harder than others, eat glass (one I saw ate
a light-bulb), and red-hot peppers, and go on longer and more vigorously
than others, some of whom barely trance at all and are rather colorless. Before
the performance the dancers usually bum incense to call the spirits who are
supposed to enter the dancer, and the owner of the house often prepares a
sadjén offering to protect himself against the spirits thus called. People, al­
though sometimes a little apprehensive of these tranced dancers, are not
afraid of them. They crowd around, adults and children, to watch them;
and I have never heard any story of their going amok or hurting anyone
while in a trance.
    The djaranan is not the only trance dance of this kind, merely the most
common. A dance called gendruwon (from gendruwo, “spirit” ) is often
seen, and the troupe described above also danced a gendruwon for us, for
another Rp 2.50. It went as follows:
  The single dancer was dressed in a burlap suit and wore a wooden goblin
  mask. The drums began to beat, and he began to dance, moving his hand
  and his head primarily, hands in some of the srimpi or wajang wong motions,
  head in the “horizontal nod” motion. He also went into a trance. I don’t
  know how the helpers knew when it had happened, but when it had, they
  removed the mask and gave him a plate of rice with some red peppers and
  a piece of soy-bean cake. The rest of the dance was a comedy built around
  his eating the food. He received it, examined it, ate it. He made a play on
  the hotness of the pepper, on taking too much in his mouth at one time—
  belching, breaking wind, and so- on. (He just stuffed the rice in his mouth
  until he couldn’t shut it and had to keep his hand stuffing it back in as he
  chewed and kept gagging.) The crowd was convulsed by this. After eating,
  he ran water on his plate, drank off the water, and took a mouthful of water
»298«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  and spit it out almost on the spectators in a big stream. There also was a
  long routine in which the helper offered him the food and then took it away
  from him, teasing him, and the dancer was very angry. The end of the
  trance came when, finished with eating, he danced a little, and the helper
  brought back the mask. As the helper came near him, from behind, the
  dancer reached back his hand and grabbed suddenly at the helper, at what
  I think was the helper’s penis, just gripping it and not letting go. They made
  a comic scene of this. The actual release from the trance came when the mask
  was put on his head again, and the whip was snapped, and the little black
  ball was rubbed on the man’s chest.
    Perhaps it is doubtful that all the trances are genuine. I have seen the
same dancer have two or three trances within the space of an hour. But the
spectators believe they are, and the performers say they are. There are
various other roving dances of this sort. (Klèdèks and djaranans may, of
course, both be combined in the same troupe.) Another dance acts out an
old legend of the Hindu-Javanese period in which a lion eats 144 soldiers
and then is killed by the king’s son. The lion dances. Girls riding horses
attack him and one by one are eaten by him. (Girls sometimes are the
trance subjects in the djaranan as well, although men are more common.
In this play there are four girls to represent the 144 soldiers.) Finally a
masked dancer representing the king’s son dances to the tune of a flute
and dispatches the lion. There is usually no trance involved in this.
    In addition, one sometimes sees the djanggrung dances. These are roughly
the same as the klèdèk except that the “dancing girl” involved is a trans­
vestite man. Both female klèdèk and homosexual male klèdèks are accused of
“ruining the morals” of the villagers and of being hated by village women
for making off with their men. (The djaranan and gendruwon, as can be
seen from the above descriptions, also show explicitly homosexual elements
along with their sado-masochistic and oral themes.)
    The wandering dance troupes— sometimes called amén as a group— are
almost wholly an abangan concern. Prijajis regard them as coarse and
obscene; and the troupes do not even bother to go to santri villages where
they might be set upon by the pious if they did. But, connected with begging,
prostitution, and homosexuality as they are, they are nevertheless (or con­
sequently) still very popular with the mass of the peasants and lower towns­
men. Almost every day one sees one sort or another of these amén perform­
ing in the market in the midst of a great crowd; and one would come by our
house at the edge of town nearly every week. (They did not appear at all
regularly; sometimes five or six would come within a few days, and then
weeks would pass without one.)
    All of these groups are said to originate outside of Modjokuto, mostly in
Tulungagung and Ponorogo, where this form of art is said to be at its
strongest. (The latter town is noted all over Java for the violence of its
inhabitants, for the radicalism of its politics, and for the great amount of
male homosexuality which is said to occur there.) Whether this is so or
simply indicates an unwillingness on the part of Modjokuto people to admit
that they would sink to such a level is difficult to say. Certainly some of the
The Role of Popular Art                                                         »299«
klèdèks, at least, were Modjokuto girls, but I never heard of a locally based
djaranan, gendruwon, or djanggrung.



                     The Tajuban: A Javanese Party
there is also another form of “art” in which the klèdèk plays a major role
and which still has some popularity in Modjokuto. This is the tajuban, a
combination drinking and dancing party given usually on the occasion of
rites-of-passage celebrations and so forth. A description of the pattern by a
Modjokuto informant follows:
      There is usually one klèdèk (almost always a prostitute), but at fancy
  tajubans there could be two or three. The klèdèk dances for a while at the
  beginning. When the tajuban itself is about to begin, the host appoints a
  man pramugari (“leader”). Now it is the pramugari’s job to point out to
  the klèdèk whom she is to choose to dance with her. This man must be
  clever in gauging the status of people because the order in which people
  participate is very important and must be right. If the occasion is a wedding,
  the groom, if a circumcision, the host, must be first. (The women are out
  behind and don’t like the tajubans at all. Organizations like Perwari, the
  main prijaji women’s club, hate the tajuban and are dead set against it.)
  After this the order is strictly according to status. If the subdistrict officer
  is there, he is obviously first, then the' village chief, and so on; and the
  pramugari has to be careful not to offend anyone. The pramugari is in front
  and starts off dancing, djogéd style, over toward the guests, the klèdèk
  following him with a tray in her hands which has a dance sash on it. The
  pramugari points out each time the guest whose turn it is and then goes off
  and sits down. The klèdèk kneels and holds the tray up to the chosen one,
  who takes the sash and drapes it around his neck. He then places on the
  tray some money, which the pramugari then takes from her and puts in the
  bowl on the table. How much money the guest puts on the tray is strictly
  dependent upon his rank and what die host put on his tray when he gave
  such an affair. If the host gave 10 rupiahs, and both are about the same rank,
  the guest gives 10; if higher a litde more, and so on. The klèdèk starts
  dancing backwards toward the other end of the space, and the guest dances
  about two feet in front of her (facing her), following her, dancing a male-
  type djogéd. Now two people come forth to “honor” the man who is dancing.
  Usually they are the same rank or slightly lower than the man dancing. For
  instance, a village chief or an office clerk will come forth if the sub-district
  officer is dancing; but sometimes, if, say the sub-district officer is very friendly
  with the village chief he may come forward for the village chief. One of
  these men takes two glasses, the other one glass and the gin jug, and they
  start dancing in the other direction, from the table toward the guests.
      Two glasses are for the helpers, the other for the main guest dancer.
  They dance this way until they pass each other and the positions are re­
  versed (i.e., the helpers are down by the guests, the klèdèk and dancer up by
  the table). Then they reverse and meet in the middle as the gamelan music
  stops.
»300«                                        T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
       At this point the man with the jug pours drinks in all the glasses and the
   three men drink. Then the two men take the main guest dancer by the
   elbows and push him up to the klèdèk and make him kiss her. (This evi­
   dently is not always necessary, for I did not see it in any of the tajubons
   I witnessed.) The helpers then retire, but the guest dancer may continue
   dancing, depending on the number of people who are there. If two other
   helpers come forth immediately he may go on; if not, the pramugari will
   choose another man. Usually in the beginning a man will only have to go
   through the routine once or twice, but toward morning, when people have
   started dropping out or becoming drunk and going home, and there are
   fewer people, one man may go on six or seven times. As the night wears
   on, all the formal order tends to be forgotten, and everybody is just dancing
   around, kissing the klèdèk, and drinking gin (and presumably tossing money
   in the dish) with gay abandon. . . .
     In view of the remarkable sobriety of the Javanese in general, the
tajuban seems anything but a typical occurrence.* Although at one time it
was apparently fairly popular among the prijcijis, it has become more and more
the property of highly urbanized abcingcms—chauffeurs, small craftsmen, and
others who see in the tajuban an attractive combination of Eastern and
Western vices—and of certain of the richer village abangan peasants for
whom it evidently represents the delights of urban wickedness. In Modjokuto
there were several groups of generally rowdy loafers who formed a kind
of circle of tajuban-givers, each inviting the others in turn, sometimes getting
to the point where the dancing was skipped altogether and people just sat
around and drank while the klèdèk sang songs to them to gamelan accompani­
ment, a form of “art” known as klenèngan.
     But prijajis evidently still give tajubans from time to time. The district
officer gave one late in the evening on the occasion of his daughter’s mar­
riage—collecting Rp 1500.00 from it in the process; and a nearby village
gave one for its bersih désa ceremony to which only town prijajis were in­
vited, giving a wajang separately for the local folk.
     In general, the tajuban, too expensive for the abangans and too kasar
for many prijajis, is dying out.
  Her husband (one of the more active tajuban givers and attenders) said
  that tajubans are rather few and far between now. There were more before
  the war but they have degenerated into a fairly crass money-making propo­
  sition since the war, and now people don’t like them very much. Few are
  given; few of those which are given draw much of a crowd. He said that one
  reason people don’t like to go is that since the money has to be given in
  view of all the guests some people always try to give a lot so that other
  people will be embarrassed. Before the war everyone at a tajuban gave
  the same amount, say fifty cents or one rupiah, and no one was embarrassed.
  People at any rate much prefer wajangs and the like, for there they can give
  money by the secret handshake method and no one knows what they
  give. . . .
    * Except at a tajuban I have never seen a Javanese drunk. In any case, only a
very small percentage of the population drinks anything stronger than fruit wine,
partly because they cannot afford it, partly because of their intense dislike of the
“confused” or “disoriented” feeling it gives them.
The Role of Popular Art                                                       »301«

                                    Folktales
J avanese folktales, stories which are not dramatized in the wajang but are
told orally, are usually called dongèng, in Modjokuto. They include little
moral stories and legends centering around certain sacred spots; tales about
the Hindu-Javanese period which account for the existence of ruins; similar
stories attributing magic power to certain objects—daggers, spears, gongs, and
so forth—called pusaka (“heirloom” ) stories; and animal stories.
    An example of the pusaka stories, of which there are literally thousands,
follows:
  One of the early district officers of Modjokuto, Pringgokusumo, was very
  powerful. He had a spear which every night became a snake. The spear’s
  name was “Kijaji Upas.” {Upas means “messenger,” “office boy.”) It wove
  around the banyan trees; and all the village guards were afraid of it, for if
  they slept it bit them. Later this man went with his spear to Tulungagung.
  When he got there, he caused a big flood all over the city in order to clean
  it up. His snake-spear also went around among the banyans there. Now,
  every year in the Javanese month of Sura there are slametans for the spear
  (which is still in Tulungagung) to which people come from far and wide.
  Everyone who cooks for the slametan must be clean—with hair washed, no
  menses, etc. Many dalangs come, and they wajang. And still people who look
  at the spear disagree as to how big it is. One will say it is a mile long,
  one an inch. If one sleeps near it, it will lift one up by the feet invisibly.
    Many pusaka stories are long and elaborate and have given rise to
pusakas which people come for hundreds of miles to “honor”— such as the
gong at Ludojo (a nearby town) which is really a transformed tiger (the
boom of the gong being his roar) from the time in the past when those
Ludojo people who had no crevices in their upper lips could turn at will
into tigers and devour their less fortunate neighbors.
    As for the animal stories, there are thousands of these too, the most
famous and best loved ones still being those about Kantjil, the sly, tricky,
highly intelligent, if somewhat amoral, mouse-deer who malees up for what
he lacks in strength by the exercise of his wits.
      Tiger was after Kantjil, about to pounce on him. Kantjil ran in fear to
  a place under some bamboos. The wind blew in the bamboos and they
  squeaked, rubbing together, and Kantjil said to Tiger: “Hear that? It is
  a magic flute. If a person can blow this flute, he will be healthy forever.” So
  Tiger wanted to blow the flute, and Kantjil told him he’d show him how to
  do it. He said Tiger should put his tongue between the two bamboo trees,
  which Tiger did, and when the wind blew his tongue got caught and Kantjil
  got away free.
      Another time, Tiger and Kantjil met under a tree where there was a
  bees’ nest. Tiger was angry at Kantjil because he had been fooled by him.
  Kantjil told him that the thing hanging up there was a gong, and that if he
  hit it all the animals in the forest would be frightened of him; and only
  Kantjil could hit it. So Tiger insisted that Kantjil let him hit it. Kantjil said:
»302«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF J A V A
  “Only if I run away first, and then when you hear me whistle three times
  you may hit the gong.” Which he did, and then Tiger hit it and was attacked
  by bees.
    Such stories are probably told to children in almost every Modjokuto
home. Kantjil is usually taken quite explicitly to symbolize “the little man” ;
and peasants talking about the gentry often quote the proverb: “When the
elephants fight, the kantjil gets crushed between them.” Many animal stories
make explicit value judgments, such as this one about the dangers of em­
ploying a go-between:
  A dog and a cat are fighting over some meat. They meet a monkey and ask
  him to divide it equally between them. He agrees, but says that he must have
  payment. He divides the meat in two parts and puts it on the scales, but
  one part is heavier than the other. So he eats a little, and then the other
  side is heavier and he eats some off of that side. And so it goes until he has
  eaten it all and the dog and cat don’t get anything.
    The kasar art complex of ludrug, klèdèk, djaranan, and dongèng is
admittedly not nearly so interwoven or so integrated as the alus art complex;
but all the elements share an expression of a more down-to-earth ethos, one
appropriate to a people whose world-view regards high refinement as an
excellent ideal but not so attractive a practice.



                             Contemporary Art
what I have called the “national art” complex is almost entirely confined
to the town and is in any case not always regarded as art by Modjokuto people
but merely as entertainment.
  Then he got on to talle about the wajang, saying that the wajang was art
  (kesenian) but a movie was just entertainment (kesenengan), and that the
  reason one could tell is that it is possible to see the same wajang over and over
  again. This is because the wajang has content, has meaning in it whereas
  the movie does not. (He admitted that nowadays even many dalangs don’t
  know what the meaning is and so can just play one lakon or something and
  do it automatically; but the good ones know the meaning of the wajang.)
  Therefore one can keep going back to a wajang over and over again and
  getting more and more out of it, whereas one gets all there is out of a movie
  by seeing it once.
    Despite the reservations of the conservatives, the forms of national art—
not only the movies, but the orchestras, popular songs, novels, and so forth—
continue to grow in popularity. I call them national art for several reasons.
They are not confined to Java; nor is there much of anything characteristically
Javanese about them as compared to other areas of Indonesia such as Sumatra
or the Celebes. Insofar as they are literary, they are in the national language,
Indonesian Malay, rather than in the “regional” language, Javanese. They are
The Role of Popular Art                                                   »303«
in part presented over the mass media, which of course extend all over the
islands—the radio, movies, and nationally circulated magazines. They are
practiced and appreciated by the same groups, mostly the urban youth, who
have always been in the forefront of nationalism. They are the forms of art
common in the large port cities—Surabaja, Djakarta—where indigenous forms
of art have been weakened in the general deracination of culture; and they
are especially popular among the new political elite which is in power in those
cities.



                    Orchestras and Popular Singers

on the musical side, the national-art complex is represented by the o rkès,
the name derived from o rk e st, the Dutch word for “orchestra,” and the
lagus, or popular songs. The o rk è s consists of stringed instruments tuned to
the Western diatonic rather than the g a m ela n pentatonic scale: banjos, guitars,
violins, bass fiddles, mandolins, ulceleles. On one occasion at least, in
Modjokuto, a trumpet was added. There were three such semi-professional
orchestras in Modjokuto, one of which more or less disbanded after a while.
They played at such ceremonies as weddings and circumcisions for fees ranging
from Rp 50.00 to about Rp 125.00, depending upon the elaborateness of
the occasion and upon whether outside talent was imported to improve the
band—such as the above-mentioned trumpeter or an outside singer. Most
o rkès groups had about five or six members and a female vocalist. (Some of
the musicians, usually all of them, doubled as male vocalists, there almost
never being any purely instrumental numbers.) The members were not full­
time musicians but tailors, chauffeurs, petty clerks, policemen, and the like;
but they were not without professional aspirations.
       Perhaps because of the similarity in some respects between the Arab-
 influenced gam b u sa n orchestra discussed in the sa n tri section and the lagu
 orchestras, among the most active of the o rk è s people were two or three
 local Arabs, younger men who formed the nucleus of the more vigorous
 groups. Several of the players were santris, and there was a tendency for such
 o rk è s to appear at the rites-of-passage celebrations of richer town santris —
 such as well-off traders—who wanted to engage in a moderate degree of
 conspicuous consumption but who would not consider giving a w ajang; but
 I have seen them many times at abangan affairs also. They seem to be
 characteristic of those among the thoroughly urbanized who have some sort
 of a relatively steady and more-than-subsistence income.
       Although the players take themselves seriously and attempt to improve
 their art by means of frequent practice, the level of skill is quite low and is
 generally recognized as being so. It was a commonly voiced complaint among
 the younger men in town that better orchestras did not seem to grow up in
 such an unimportant place as Modjokuto and that the ones which did exist did
 not seem ever to get any better. As the national radio network broadcast little
»304«                                      T H E R E L I G I O N OF    JAVA
else except lagu music most of every day (but a wajang wong on Sundays,
which was very popular), and many people kept their radios going continually,
there was a constant professional standard of comparison against which to
measure the relatively inept efforts of the local groups.
    The lagus (or, more properly, lagu-lagu populèr—“popular songs”) played
and sung by the ensembles are of several types. Some are in a Western (usually
Latin-American) form, such as the rumba or samba, and are composed
either by Western songwriters and fitted with Indonesian lyrics (which may
or may not translate the original words) or composed by an Indonesian,
Chinese, or Malayan composer. Sometimes Hawaiian or Chinese tunes are
used as models; and sometimes Southeast Asian folk tunes—the lagu Malajú
 (“Malayan songs” ) of Malaya and the Western archipelago, and the kront-
jongs of East Indonesia—are so used. The krontjongs, which were originally
based on Southern European folk music brought to Indonesia by the
Portuguese in the sixteenth century—particularly to East Indonesia: Flores,
Timor and the Moluccas, where the Iberian influence was at its greatest,
are probably the most popular of all; and, in fact, many Modjokuto people
refer to all popular songs in whatever style as “krontjongs.” The lyrics of
most of these songs tend to be rather heavily sentimental:

              The Handkerchief from South Bandung
    A white handkerchief of silk, decorated with colored flowers—
    A symbol of a wonderful magic love,
     From the south of great Bandung [a city in West Java],
    Accompanied by sweet words.
    Thank you, little sister {dik, the term of address for a wife, and in
          general a term of endearment],
     Don’t forget
     My tears are shining.
     Your handkerchief I keep.
     I kiss the end of your finger.
    With a prayer I say,
     Goodbye,
     Fight on,
     Don’t forget South Bandung.
    A somewhat less sentimental song is based on the traditional belief (which
I heard actually invoked in Modjokuto several times) that before a girl is
going to be married she will dream about being bitten by a snake. Here is
a song, considered to be slightly humorous, which was tremendously popular
during the first part of my stay in Indonesia, being played on the radio
mercilessly from mom till night:

                               Night Dream
  (Girl:) Last night, bung [“brother,” “comrade”; here a term of endearment],
          I dreamed
          I met a snake, bung,
          Very large.
The Role of Popular Art                                                     »305«
             The snake bit, bung,
             My toe.
             After it bit, bung,
             The snake went away.
             My cuts, bung,
             Bled.
             I screamed, “Aduh/” [an exclamation of pain, disappointment,
                   grief, etc.]
             Then woke up.
             What is it, bung,
             The meaning
             Of the dream last night, bung,
             So creepy?
      (Boy:) Don’t fear, dik,
             Don’t be sad.
             All is fate, dik,
             The will of Allah.
             Stories in the night, dik,
             Dispel the clouds.
             The stars come clear, dik,
             Finally certain.
             A flower in the garden, dik,
             When it has blossomed,
             Before very long, aduh,
             Is picked by someone.
             That’s it, dik,
             The meaning of it.
             Your dream last night, dik,
             Was a dream of happiness.
    In addition to sentimental ballads there are humorous, novelty, and
political lagus. (One of the most popular of the iagus in Modjokuto was one
beginning, “Let us go/ Let us go/ To the General Election . . .” Another
agitated for the turning over of West New Guinea by the Dutch to Indonesia,
a hot political issue in Indonesia.) All in all, tirelessly disseminated as it is by
the radio and attractive as it is to the urban youth, the lagu is probably at
present Indonesia’s most pervasive art-form, no more easily escaped than
“hit tunes” in America.



       Contemporary Literature, Drama, and Motion Pictures
o n the literary side, national art consists of modem novels (roman), poems
(sjair), short-stories (kissah), and plays (sandiwara) written in Indonesian
perhaps most commonly by non-Javanese, Sumatra producing a dispropor­
tionate number of Indonesia’s modem writers. The novels and stories are
»306«                                       T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
bought either as books or in magazines in the regency capital, after which
they are passed around from friend to friend. Several national magazines
have Modjokuto subscribers and are eagerly read by the younger urban set.
There is a bookstore in Modjokuto but it sells mainly textbooks and, as it is
santri-nin, Islamic books.
    There can be no attempt here to describe this literature except to say
that much of it concerns the Revolution—heroic stories of the battles, ill-
fated wartime romances, and so on; that it is extremely socially conscious,
being more reminiscent of our proletarian novels of the thirties than our
present psychological novels; and that it is written, for the most part, in an
extremely elevated romantic style. Most commonly, this literature takes for its
setting the big-city Djakarta-Surabaja-Medan asphalt jungle in which almost
all of the writers live and has for its heroes and heroines young men and
women—the group the Indonesians call pemuda (“youth” )—trying to make
their way in such an environment, or rather, trying to remake that environment
in terms of an ideal largely drawn from Western political theory.
     Since Indonesian Malay, the official national language, is taught in all
the schools and almost all town children and many village children go to
school for at least three years, and since the Indonesian government claims
to have reduced the illiteracy rate 40 per cent since the transfer of sovereignty,
this literature is almost certainly going to become steadily more important
as Indonesia proceeds through her history as an independent state.
     The sandiwara, or modern play form, grew out of the stambul or “Malay
opera,” which was a play something on the order of our earlier musical
comedies or Victor Herbert-type operettas in which a kind of artificial and
sentimental declamatory plot was interspersed with krontjong singing and
popular dancing, the plots being taken from popular folk stories and such
sources as the “Thousand and One Nights.” With the appearance of Southeast
Asian movies—Indonesian, Malayan, and Philippine, the stambul form shifted
into that medium, leaving the sandiwara to develop toward greater realism,
until today it displays the same general style and outlook as do the novels,
short-stories, and poems—a socially conscious romantic realism.
     The sandiwara appeals mostly to Westernized intellectuals, and, facing
double competition from the litdrug on the one hand and movies, Western and
Eastern, on the other, it almost never appears in Modjokuto. Only one
sandiwara was produced in Modjokuto during the period of my stay. A young
Modjokuto author wrote a play based upon his sister’s divorce from her titled
husband, also a Modjokuto man, and got the local chapter of a veterans’
organization to produce it in the hope (vain, as it turned out) of getting
some money for their organization, the sister herself playing the role of the
wronged woman.
     Indonesian moving pictures are made not only in Indonesia but also in the
Philippine Islands and in Malaya. For the most part they are on the stambul
pattern, being very stiff light operas usually built around a legendary or folk-
story theme. Among the more popular of such films during my stay were one
based on the folk story Bawang Merah, Buwang Putih about the stepmother
problem and another, made in the Philippine Islands, built on the Siegfried
The Role of Popular Art                                                   »307«
story, both of them done in the stambul form. But there have been a few
realistic pictures about the Revolutionary period in Djokjakarta (which was
the Republican capital during the war). One movie, written by a well-known
Indonesian novelist, included the first kiss ever shown in an Indonesian film
and aroused such a violent reaction from various pressure groups that the
kiss was eventually censored.
    The attitude involved is similar to that which I have noted in connection
with the dance. As one Javanese expressed it: “I don’t mind seeing kissing
and loving and the rest in an American movie, but in an Indonesian movie
it makes me all upset.” (Such actions are in fact more or less symbolic of
American movies—and, in part, of America—in the Modjokuto public mind.
The street in town which is lined with houses of prostitution is sometimes
nicknamed “Hollywood Street.” ) Evidently the psychic distance of an In­
donesian movie is much less for a Javanese than that of an American film, and
so the fantasy fulfillment of forbidden impulses can be carried on more safely
in the latter. In any case, American films are heavily preferred to Indonesian
ones—usually on the ostensible ground of technical superiority—and it was
one of the biggest events in years when the local motion-picture theater
(Chinese-owned) brought Cecil B. DeMille’s Samson and Delilah to town.
    Many people, especially younger men and women, go to the movies several
times a week; and I was continually being asked such questions as whether I
knew Montgomery Clift or how much education Doris Day had before she
became a movie star. For Modjokuto people, movies defined the social context
out of which I had come into their lives. To convince them that most motion
pictures were about as realistic a picture of American life as the wajangs
were of everyday Javanese life was nearly impossible. In addition to pre­
senting a picture of American life, the movies also provide a new ideal for
those interested in “progress.” True, Indonesians often disparage the movies,
as well as other aspects of American popular art—such as comic books and
popular songs—as cheap, vulgar, and materialistic, and argue that they want
to combine the material skills of the West with the superior spiritual qualities
of the East; nevertheless, the Indonesians are in the peculiar position of
launching a social effort after a utopia which they do not have to dream up
for themselves but can see played out for them every night in the local theater.



    Contemporary Art and the Emerging “Youth Culture”

t h e national-art complex reflects for the most part the intelligentsia values of
Indonesia’s emergent “youth culture,” a group of restless, educated, urban
young men and women possessed of a sharp dissatisfaction with traditional
custom and a deeply ambivalent attitude toward the West, which they see
both as the source of their humiliation and “backwardness” and as the pos­
sessor of the kind of life they feel they want for themselves (minus, of course,
the gangsters, the kissing, and the materialism). They are deeply committed to
»308«                                         T H E R E L I G I O N OF      JAVA
altering society in the direction of their borrowed dreams but have little idea
of how this is to be done.
     Painfully sensitive, easily frustrated, and passionately idealistic, this group
is in many ways the most vital element in contemporary Indonesian society—
even more so in the large metropolitan centers than in a town such as
Modjokuto. Probably they are the most unpredictable elements as well. They
are die Republic’s hope and its despair: its hope because their idealism is
both its driving force and its moral conscience; its despair because their ex­
posed psychological position in the avant-garde of social change may turn
them rather quickly toward the violent primitivism of other recent youth move­
ments in Europe whose inner need for effective social reform was greater than
the actual changes their elders were capable of producing for them.
