confers an advantage and explains new patterns. Arguments using prime
movers have never worked in archaeology and they are even less effective in
the Palaeolithic. What I have attempted here is to provide a context for gener-
ating patterns and in my opinion the only acceptable framework must be social.
I will dismay many by championing the individual and presenting an interac-
tional model for the performance of social life. Imake no apologies, either for
that framework or for the new vocabulary which must accompany it if we are
to break away from the theory-laden facts which prevent new analysis. I am
also unapologetic because while impressed by the virtuoso skills now evident
in the excavation of open and rock-shelter sites from the Palaeolithic, I
nonetheless have to ask, what is all this precision in recording artifact co-
ordinates and taphonomy about? What do refitting studies tell us apart from
the fact that we can do them and convince grant bodies to fund us? What social
archaeologist in the Roman period would bother to invest the same energies in
routinely refitting pot sherds on the scale now evident for the Palaeolithic?
Have we in fact run out of things to do and questions to ask? I don’t think so.
What follows is partly an experiment in asking how such precision will allow
us to move away from stomach-led and brain-dead explanations and instead
                Preface                                                        XXxi

direct our analytical ingenuity to the richness of the social data our evidence
contains.

 Many people have helped me with the ideas and information which follow. The
 invitation from Wil Roebroeks and Gerhard Bosinski in 1992 to be a co-
 ordinating member of the European Science Foundation Network on the earli-
 est occupation of Europe provided not only three years of travel, seminars and
 conferences, but the most rewarding academic environment for the discussion
 of Palaeolithic matters. The other network co-ordinators, Manuel Santonja,
 Lars Larsson, Alain Tuffreau, Luis Raposo, Nikolai Praslov and Margherita
 Mussi, will, I hope, approve of some of the results which I have included here.
 Our ESF minder, Max Sparreboom, deserves a special thanks for making so
 many things happen so efficiently.
    For field visits, discussions and just plain good times I would like to thank,
 in no particular order, Thijs van Kolfschoten, John McNabb, John Gowlett, Paul
Mellars, Steve Mithen, Nick Ashton, Tjeerd van Andel, Martin Street, Elaine
Turner, Sabine Gaudzinski, Paul Pettitt, Leslie Aiello, Mark White, William
Davies, Jiti Svoboda, Jehanne Féblot-Augustins, Mark Roberts, Dietrich Mania,
Patrick Auguste, John Wymer, Eudald Carbonell, Geoff Bailey, Andrew
Lawson, Janusz Kozlowski, Jean-Michel Geneste, Chris Stringer, Alan Turner,
Alain Turg, HansJiirgen Miller Beck, Elaine Morris, Rob Foley, Nick Conard,
Clemens Pasda, Francis Wenban-Smith, Rupert Housley and Geraldo Vega-
Toscano. The following all read earlier drafts and gave me valuable comments;
Stephen Shennan, Quentin Mackie, Paul Graves-Brown, JD Hill, Wiktor
Stoczkowski, Catherine Perlés, Adam Kuper, Vernon Reynolds, Antony Firth,
Stephanie Moser, Richard Bradley, Kate Gregory, Nathan Schlanger, Alasdair
Whittle, Anne Best, James Steele, Chris Gosden, Wil Roebroeks, Yvonne
Marshall and Olga Soffer. As always I have learnt and benefited from the inter-
ventions of Lewis Binford with whom there has been something of a race to
finish our respective books first!
   The research was generously supported by the University of Southampton
and by a Special Research Leave Award and travel funds from the British
Academy. This allowed me a sabbatical year in 1994/5 and the opportunity to
read. Iam very grateful to all my colleagues in the Department of Archaeology
who shouldered additional administration during this year and to Anthony
Sinclair who did my teaching while I was off researching ‘monkey men’. Sophie
Shennan got the bibliography and index into order and Martin Porr provided
valuable bibliographic assistance. Jessica Kuper remained the ever calm and
encouraging editor and Janet Hall guided the book through the press. The illus-
trations were expertly produced by Erica Hemming assisted by Nick Bradford
and Peter Hodge. I am very grateful to Mauricio Anton for his cover illustration
of the hominids from Sima de los Huesos portrayed in front of their family tree
at Atapuerca. The actions and personalities of the 300,000-year-old people we
see here created their intimate and effective networks.
            :
            i
XXil           Preface

   Finally, it is a great sadness that Catherine Farizy, who was also part of our
ESF family, and Kim Hahn, who helped me so much as a struggling postgrad
student, will not be able to give me the benefit of their opinions on what I have
written. This book is part of their legacy to Palaeolithic studies and I dedicate
it to their memory.

Constitution Hill
Nevis WI
January 1998
               CAEEAUP
                    ST        Ee



               PULLING ASIDE                THE     PALAEOLITHIC
               CURTAIN




               Society represents a claim, advanced and enacted in order to construct a
               state of affairs that previously was not.
                                                                              Eric Wolf
                                                                     Inventing society



Introduction

 The Palaeolithic of Europe is a record of observations and a register of ideas.
 Using this combination, archaeologists have recognized many patterns in the
 data and proposed several solutions, at a continental scale, to their recurrence
 in time and space. These explanations have emphasized the variable biological
 capacities of early hominids, their adaptations to ecological circumstances and
 their expression, in the form of stone tools, of persistent regional identities.
The transforming powers of human migration, combined with the selective dif-
fusion of cultural elements, have aided both the writing of culture history and
 the investigation of the same Palaeolithic records as long-term adaptive
 systems involving continuity and change.
   During these examinations of data and the development of analytical con-
cepts the subject of this book, the varied societies of Palaeolithic Europe, has
received some attention. But investigating society in the Palaeolithic has never
achieved the same research prominence as studies of the subsistence economy,
the spatial analysis of settlements, cave art or lithic typology and technology.
While great strides forward have been made by archaeologists studying the soci-
eties of later prehistory (Hodder 1990a, Renfrew 1973), their insights and
approaches have generally only touched upon interpretations of the Upper
Palaeolithic (Clark and Lindly 1991, Price and Brown 1985a, Soffer 1987). The
half million years of occupation in Europe prior to the Upper Palaeolithic
remains peopled by ecological creatures rather than social actors. We have
created these half-men, half-beasts, through the unequal juxtaposition of their
simple stone technologies against the gigantic forces of Quaternary geology.
According to our assessments, they wait patiently for the arrival of modern
humans from Africa to put them out of their long servitude to grinding nature.
   Gordon Childe was particularly gloomy about the prospects of social recon-
struction in this period. Writing in Social evolution, he expressed a widespread
view:
2              The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

The archaeological record is found to be regrettably but not surprisingly deficient in
indications of the social organisation or lack of it in lower palaeolithic hordes. From the
scraps available no generalizations are permissible. (Childe 1951:85)

Neither was he particularly encouraging about the Upper Palaeolithic and
Mesolithic where, even though the record was fuller, it was very one sided.
It offers a clear picture of nothing more than the economy and material culture adapted
to particular environments of ice age Europe and of the northern forest zone in early post
glacial times. (ibid.)

  These Mesolithic folk were also apparently waiting to be replaced, albeit by
agriculturalists. Writing thirty years after Childe, Richard Bradley could mem-
orably bemoan that archaeologists still stressed how
successful farmers have social relations with one another, while hunter-gatherers have
ecological relations with hazelnuts. (Bradley 1984:11)

  This picture has now begun to change. A degree of self-determination is cur-
rently accorded Mesolithic people, while the complexity of their regional
archaeological records (Bonsall 1991) is proving a rich source for social recon-
struction, as it is in the Upper Palaeolithic.


The image of the earlier Palaeolithic
