
strategies but instead in terms of enhanced settlement histories at a regional
scale. The comparative yardstick in the model was provided by ecology and
selection on adaptive behaviour. This selection was viewed against the repeti-
tive climatic changes which began 775,000 years ago with the first of the eight
interglacial/glacial cycles of the Middle Pleistocene.
   This may sound like a form of ecological determinism. However, I also
argued (Gamble 1986a:61) that as far as settlement behaviour was concerned
social relations were dominant over ecological relations (Ingold 1981). The
latter might determine many of the patterns of long-term land use and site
occupation but we should not expect them to account for all the variation in
the Palaeolithic record. This was easy to assert since the nine regions were
obviously large enough to encompass most social systems. But demonstrating
the dominance of social relations was more difficult. The case studies which
could show this concentrated on the Upper Palaeolithic where interregional
contacts and exchanges could be demonstrated (ibid.:Chapter 8). The periods
prior to 40,000 years ago seemed dominated by ecological rather than social
relationships (Chapter 1 this volume). In retrospect this conclusion was unsur-
prising given that I took a group-centred approach to the social units which
inhabited the nine regions. Moreover, my bridging argument between the
statics of the evidence and the dynamics of past behaviour was largely based on
ecological priorities.
   The present approach still takes account of the regional scale and the model
(Figure 3.1) will be used in later chapters where the data are examined.
However, I have expanded the approach to use locales and regions as a frame-
work for a detailed analysis of Palaeolithic societies but now with those
rhythms, the generators of social life, acting as the bridge. I have also chosen
these levels to counter the observation that many discussions of adaptation
tend to be overspecific. We need to achieve, as Gould has pointed out (1994:28),
the right level of abstraction that the data will support. On the one hand we do
not want to treat archaeology as an exercise in working towards definitions, and
on the other we must not leave the theory stranded from the data for want of a
methodological bridge. It is with this narrative requirement in mind that the
three analytical levels — locales, rhythms and regions — have been identified.


A framework for studying Palaeolithic society
In previous chapters I repositioned the study of Palaeolithic society to focus on
the individual, the creation of networks and the role of performance in
social life. This approach means that social archaeology no longer begins with
the richer record of the Upper Palaeolithic but instead extends throughout the
hominid record, from five million years ago to the present day. Instead of the
central question being the origins of band society with its implications of group
closure, style and ethnicity (Gilman 1984, Williams 1974), we are required
to explain the ‘release from proximity’, where social relations came to be
68           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

             Table 3.1. A framework for studying Palaeolithic society.

                LOCALES              RHYTHMS                 REGIONS

                Encounters        Chaine opératoire     Landscape of habit
                Gatherings
                                    * Taskscape
             Social occasions
                   Place           Paths & tracks         Social landscape

              INDIVIDUALS       >                          NETWORKS



stretched across time and space, and the related question of social complication
(Chapter 2).
   In order to address these questions we need to bridge the various scales of
analysis; the brief moments of interaction and five million years of complex
social life; the locale where a gathering took place and the wider regions where
social lives were independently performed; the individuals and the collective
surface structures which they both created and which defined their actions.
The focus that personal and global networks provide for the study of
Palaeolithic society now requires a spatial and temporal framework (Table 3.1).
   With this framework in place analysis can begin by treating the Palaeolithic
as an interpretative exercise where we ‘tack’, rather like a yacht (Figure 3.2),
between data and theory (Wylie 1993:23-4). In order to construct and confirm
arguments we move from the precision of mint-fresh artifacts, so-called
flagship sites, to the coarse palimpsest of heavily rolled stone tools, dredgers by
comparison, found in river terraces (Gamble 1996b). Reconstructing behaviour
involves tacking from the patches, whether fine or coarse structured, to the
scatters of which they are a part. The point of such methodological manoeuvres
is to contrast the scale of past behaviour as preserved in the archaeological
record. As we shall see in later chapters, we can recover fifteen-minute episodes
that took place half a million years ago and we also recover assemblages aver-
aged across 70,000-year chunks of time. The tacking works because we can rec-
ognize through the structure of the record exactly what temporal resolution is
attainable. Archaeology commonly relies on this method of making arguments,
and the Palaeolithic is no exception, even though its spans of time are larger.


Locales


The spatial arrangement of interaction
Locales, rather than sites, are where interaction took place and is preserved.
They take a number of forms. The starting point is the individual and her/his
movement through their environment. This involves ambulatory perception
           A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions                69

                                     TACKING


                  Scatters
                  Landscapes

                                                          Patches

                                                          Camps/Locales
                                             Seven)
                                Mepis
                 Eup   Lips
                                aia
                                          cian
                                                    4


                                                          Maesest

                                _pD—
                 eal ag
                                at
                                            ee

                                                                 tAhaa
                                                          79 900
                                         ee
                                on
                 Individuals    ~~



                                                          mee

                                aaa
              Ecological time   (=
                                                ae
                                                          Long-term



                                                          selection
                                            oes
              Geological time   i)



         3.2 ‘Tacking’ as a strategy to interpret the different scales and
             resolutions of data in the Palaeolithic (after Gamble 1996b:Fig. 7.1).


(Gibson 1979) along paths and tracks. From this starting point we can begin to
build a model of interaction. As individuals move so they perceive the affor-
dances, or use values, along the track they walk. Where their path intersects
with another we can describe a locale or node where such perceptual interac-
tion takes place. The encounter may involve an animal running across the
hunter’s path or another person coming into view. These encounters will also
involve plants and raw materials such as timber or stone. These consequences
of ambulatory perception can be illustrated by the example of a hunter’s trap-
line (Figure 3.3 and Ingold 1986). Both the encounter pattern of foragers and
the intercept pattern of collectors (Binford 1980) can be described in these
terms.
   The affordance of the encounter will lead to decisions about immediate and
future action — eat the plant food, kill and carry the reindeer, make the spear,
70              The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




                    1g mi

                    25 kan




     See       aN    pe

     Alaska   Highw>y




                                                                               ara 7
                                              2

                             Prophet River Pr She a




                                                                                    if
                                                                           kormerly j
                                                                           Sikanni i
                                                                                    ‘
                                                                                         Railroad”




                                    (i=               5            | nae
                                     » Buc kinghorse //
                                     \            >           re
                                         St               |            ‘




           3.3 Paths and tracks drawn and used by hunters based in the Fort
               Nelson and Prophet River reserves in the Canadian sub-Arctic.
               Prophet River people drew wide circles to show hunting that is
               done without a sense of limitation by terrain. Such areas are criss-
               crossed by individual paths. By contrast the Fort Nelson tracks
               follow a few wooded valleys and are limited by difficult muskeg
               country to the north (after Brody 1981:Fig. 15).
           A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions                 71

pick up the stone, greet the network partner, flee the stranger, remember and
recount the information to others in your network. Encounters are information
‘sound-bites’ about the environmental track along which the hominid is trav-
elling. They do not result in a residue that will survive.
   Gatherings are enduring locales. They endure because of the quality and
quantities of the residues left behind. These will accrue from either a single or
multiple visits. Encounters happened all the time. Gatherings are the encoun-
ters which have survived. In both contexts the individual provides information
which is either sent or exuded. This may literally be embodied in the form of
words, frowns, gestures, blows etc. and can only be transmitted when the body
is present. But such information can also be disembodied in the form of art,
sculpture, letters, photos, tracks, artifacts etc. Here the individual has done
something which traps and holds information through the affordances of cul-
tural objects to extend co-presence no matter how far apart the parties are. It is
such intensity which extends intimate and effective networks in absentia
(Chapter 2), produces societies of immense individual variety and which also
structures the archaeological record.
   The actions which occurred at gatherings may have been solitary, for
example when a hunter killed a reindeer, or they may have involved two or
more actors building a hut, enacting a ceremony or butchering a woolly rhino.
We do not have to specify interaction between people to infer a gathering
which, adapting Goffman’s (1963) terminology (Table 2.2), can imply either face
to face interaction or its symbolic substitute. The only criterion is that a
residue from that interaction is left behind.
   Gatherings use portable resources such as food, stone and bodies. These
materials form part of the performance between individuals as they negotiate
social ties. They structure the interaction and, coincidentally, determine the
spatial structure of the archaeological record. For example, the hearth preserves
the gathering in the patterning of the residues which build up around it as inter-
action takes place. These patterns remain robust enough to survive a range of
taphonomic processes (Stapert 1992, Whallon 1984).
   A gathering identifies an individual’s capacity for involvement and is, at this
micro scale of analysis, a fleeting, or at best a short-lived, event. Context is gen-
erated from such associations, so that Goffman could declare that the proper
study of interaction was not ‘men and their moments. Rather moments and
their men’ (1967:3). In his example juries, banquets and race meetings are all
moments. These are the structures which constrain the interaction rituals that
take place between the gatherings of people at these events.
   The size of the human body and its sensory faculties impose environmental
limits on the spatial scale of interaction at the level of the gathering. Two
people engaged in face-to-face interaction need, at a minimum, to be able to see
and hear each other. These minimum conditions are only met by reasonably
close spatial proximity. Dunbar (1993:690-1) has presented evidence which
shows that human conservational group sizes are limited to about four people
(!           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe


                       FORWARO
                      Joss    Arzea—-~




                                          )    BACKwaReo
                                              Toss    AREA
                                                          ae




                    'MEN’S'       OutTsiDe                     HEARTH   MooEL
                                         Scare       in    Merers




         3.4 Spatial patterns produced around hearths. Based on observations at
             the Mask Site in Anaktuvak Pass, Alaska (after Binford 1983a:Fig.
             89).

(one speaker plus three listeners). As people join a gathering so cliques form
within it, effectively splitting the group into conversational units of similar
size. Clique formation occurs in multiples of four and can be readily seen
among groups in refectories, pubs, theatre foyers, at wedding receptions etc.
Two is company, three’s a crowd, and four it seems is time to start another con-
versation (see Dunbar 1993:Fig. 4). One reason for these limits is the rate at
which speech attenuates with the distance between speaker and hearer under
normal ambient noise levels. Dunbar (1993) cites evidence that 1.7m, nose to
nose, forms the upper limit for comfortable conversation between dyads.
Allowing a shoulder to shoulder spacing of half a metre permits five people to
form a conversational ring (Figure 3.4). At this point the addition of other
people into the ring is likely to result in a new conversation clique being
formed.
   An ethnoarchaeological example of such a conversation ring is provided by
Binford’s (1978a) study of a Nunamiut hunting stand. This was known as the
Mask Site on account of the craft activities undertaken there. Activities such
as sleeping, card playing, target practice and game watching were also observed
in the three day study. When seated around hearths the dominant activities
were eating and conversation (Binford 1983b[1978]:Table 21.6). Some mask
making and card playing also took place in the horseshoe-shaped seating
           A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions               73

              Table 3.2. Four seating measurements around the hearths at the
              Mask Site (Binford 1983b:[1978] 303).
                                   Mean distance of left   Mean distance between
              Number of menin      kneecap toemberedge     left and right knees of
              horseshoe circle     of fire                 adjacent men

              3 and 4              62+6.8 cm               33+4 cm
              5                    1k BE), (eine)          24+3 cm



pattern around the hearth. Conversation groups were rarely more than four or
five people. This activity produced the dimensions shown in Table 3.2.
   Since the hearths were between 50 and 75cm in diameter (ibid.:Figure 21.3),
men seated on opposite sides of the fire would be 190 to 217 cm apart when five
were in the group and 174 to 199cm when four were seated. The figures are very
comparable to those quoted by Dunbar for standing gatherings. The Mask Site
figures suggest that with five people face-to-face interaction will become more
difficult. No data are available on whether the larger group size of five resulted
in conversational cliques forming but I would suspect this was the case.
   Binford does provide information on the spatial scatters that resulted from
throwing away food items, packaging and the wood shavings from mask
making. The residues are size sorted. Small items were discarded in a drop zone
where the men were sitting. Larger items were thrown either through the fire
(if no one was sitting there!) or over the shoulder. The drop zone forms a ring
some 50 to 100cm from the edge of the fire. The toss zone lies some 2.25 to
2.75m from that same edge (Figure 3.4).
   But, so long as the size of the body, rather than the performances in which it
was involved, is the means to interpret our spatial information from caves and
open locales (Binford 1983a) then, as Whitelaw (1994) has argued, such studies
remain mechanical and descriptive. The hearth should also be the focus for
further interpretation of the social use of space as indicated in Figure 3.5 (see
also Wilson 1988:36).
   However, we cannot simply identify patterns as manifesting a particular cul-
tural meaning (Whitelaw 1994:229). This is a general problem when investigat-
ing the symbolic organization of space in the Palaeolithic record. The human
body and its faculties may set conditions on communication but the content of
the interactions which such acts service is not implicit in the spatial patterns
they produce.
   Without material culture there can be, from an archaeological perspective,
no symbolic partitioning of space. The Palaeolithic record contains no evidence
for interactions which took place in the equivalent of the street or across a
crowded room. Residues must be generated and we have, as in this instance of
middle-range theory, to understand what generates such patterns. The function
of the Mask Site, it emerges, was not to watch for game as we might suppose,
74           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe


                  PUBLIC    INTERACTION        SPACE




                     PRIVATE    ACTIVITY     SPACE

                                 DUMPING

                                DEFECATION



         3.5 A model of !Kung San hearth-side spatial organization (after
             Whitelaw 1994:Fig. 11.4).



but rather to engage in pursuits which reduced boredom, such as playing cards
(Binford 1983b[1978]: 291). In other words to interact. The lonelier pursuits of
mask making and watching for game took place when the gathering was small
(ibid.:Figs. 21.1 and 2.1.12), the opportunities for interaction reduced and so less
noise was made which might break the craftsman’s concentration. The social
context, as Binford points out (ibid.:315), may not change, but the pattern of
interaction certainly does. It changes in expected ways as a function of gather-
ing size related to the spatial arrangement of fires at the Mask Site locale.
Gathering size and material structures such as hearths both act as uniformitar-
ian anchors to the past.
   Materials associated with gatherings are therefore best regarded as an exten-
sion of the social actor, a gesture as described by Leroi-Gourhan (1993), where
gesture is synonymous with material action (White 1993a). The use-value, or
affordance, in social transactions of portable resources, which includes tools, is
therefore closely linked to their association with the body as it performed those
social ties.
   At gatherings, relationships will be negotiated through interaction using the
appropriate resources (Table 2.8). The locales where this occurs are contexts for
performance organized either by competent members, who bring only the
resources of the body to such interactions, or by skilled practitioners who carry
additional externalized resources to structure the gathering.
           A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions                  75

Social occasions, places and the importance of attention
I draw a further distinction between gatherings and social occasions (Table 3.1).
The latter involve a context for performance which is established by objects
disembodied from the actor. The social occasion commonly involves architec-
ture as well as non-portable objects (Table 2.2).
  However,    a built environment      is not necessary    for a social occasion    to
happen. It can occur at a named locale invested with associations and mean-
ings. In order to avoid confusion I refer to such social occasions as place (Table
3.1), which has been defined by Ingold as deriving its special character from
the experiences it affords to those who spend time there — to the sights, sounds and
indeed smells that constitute its specific ambience. And these, in turn, depend on the
kinds of activities in which its inhabitants engage. (Ingold 1993:155)

   That classic Palaeolithic site type, the cave, provides an example of place.
Here is an affordance which provides shelter for humans and other animals. It
may contain the spent resources of hyena bone lairs, the pellets from owls with
their rodent remains, or the carcasses of bears which died during hibernation.
A cave may also contain the stone tools, bodies, hearths, art and food remains
of humans. The constraints of size, aspect, head height and floor surface, while
not symbolically created as is the case with architecture, will nonetheless
structure behaviour (Gorecki 1991, Nicholson and Cane 1991). The spatial
pattern of interaction and the relationships it produces have to accommodate
the cave’s structure. As Parkington and Mills (1991) show in their comparative
study of open windbreak camps and cave sites occupied by San people in south-
ern Africa, the use of the latter must have been fundamentally different because
of the arena they defined for social performance. The caves allowed privacy
where no constant communal monitoring of herding or sharing was possible.
But at the same time those close arm’s-length relationships, so characteristic
of interaction in the windbreak camps, were impossible.
   The limestone cliffs at Les Eyzies in thé Dordogne were and remain such a
place for social occasions. Under their overhangs hunters moved throughout
the Palaeolithic. While waiting for game to cross at the fords along the Vézére
they made stone tools and later engraved antler, bone and the rocks themselves.
These were places with associations based upon the rhythms of encounters,
seasons, hunting, growing up, sleeping and eating around hearths and under
rock abris. These rhythms established an hourly, daily, annual and generational
pace. They produced forms of doing and adapting which recurred and persisted
through repeated gatherings and social occasions over many millennia. We
investigate them in our gatherings and social occasions of the excavation,
laboratory, conference and publication which move to other social rhythms.
The creation of form and pattern is what makes the deep past accessible to our
inquiry. It depends, as an act of investigation, upon those associations being
social.
   These various locales — gatherings, social occasions and places — raise the
76            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

important issue of attention. Wilson (1988:4) has shown how visual attention
in such gatherings is of prime importance to humans, and to non-human pri-
mates. This is because attention contributes to our ontological security which
occurs when the natural and social worlds are as they appear to be (Chapter 2).'
   Locales are above all where social life is performed, where attention occurs.
Moreover we do not have to specify, these micro-scale contexts, such as gather-
ings, through structures which precede the individual. Neither, at a macro
scale, do we need to hold to a notion that society precedes its actors. What is
important about locales are the resources which these actors bring to them —
their bodies and material objects — and how they are replicated in time and
space.
   What is important is the persistence of gatherings and social occasions, their
recurrence in time and space. Are they attached to particular locales or are they
moveable feasts around the landscape? How often do they occur: weekly, yearly
or every generation? Do the resources used in making social ties have to be used
in different ways? And what mechanisms exist for such persistence arising
from nothing more than the interaction of persons with limited embodied and
disembodied means of communication? These are all relevant to the wider
question discussed in the previous chapter of how people, equipped with these
social skills and information, use them to ‘go beyond’ (Quiatt and Reynolds
1993:141) the context of the gathering and the social occasion.
   This is where the network as a unit of analysis proves important. It is the
mechanism to answer the questions above since networks bond and bind indi-
viduals together. They provide a pretext as much as a context for co-presence
to occur. As Goffman puts it, through interaction analysis
We look within an act for the involvement it seems to express; we look to the involve-
ment for the regulations by which it is bound; and we look to these regulations as a sign
of what is owed to the gathering and its social occasion as realities in their own right.
(Goffman 1963:247)


Sharing, co-operation and social structure

At a wider scale of analysis Whitelaw (1991, 1989, 1994) has argued that varia-
tions in the layout of camps and the numbers of people living in them can be
directly related to variations in the social relations of production within such
groups. The data come from 1,762 different social occasions in 800 commu-
nities and 124 different hunter-gatherer cultures (Whitelaw 1991:141). Within
this sample camp layout is studied by measuring the distances between shel-
ters and houses and the patterns they take — for example circular or linear
(Figure 3.6). Here we see that occupation density (the number of people per
hectare) falls dramatically as the population size of the camp increases.
   The degree to which co-operation and sharing act as a means to cope with the
risk of dietary failure goes some way, in Whitelaw’s analysis, to explaining the
degree of clustering and interaction distance on camp sites. This produces three
           A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions                                      77

                  EXTENDED     FAMILY            LOCAL    BAND               MULTIPLE    BAND   CAMP




                      Po
                      Se)




                             EXTENDED   FAMILY


                                                         LOCAL BAND

                                                                           MULTIPLE BAND CAMP




                 OCCUPATION
                 DENSITY
                 (PERSONS/HECTARE)
                                                   40       sO        oO
                                                 CAMP     POPULATION



         3.6 General model of hunter-gatherer social organization, community
             layout and occupation density (after Whitelaw 1994:Fig. 11.6).

different solutions from the global sample of settlements (Figure 3.7). Firstly,
in the Arctic and Australian arid zones where households are generally self-
sufficient, campsites cover large areas with households widely spaced.
Secondly, in the tropical rainforests, co-operation is often the best strategy for
reducing risk. Hence the small, high-density Efe Pygmy camps in Zaire where
many hands are needed to hold the nets in order to catch the dispersed, small
78            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

                                                                                               Arctic      ssa
                                                                                           [| Rainforest
                                                                                           (Grassland      |




%




                                                                       =
            0-100       100-250           250-500          500-1000            1000-2500       >2500
                                  Density of people per hectare on campsites

          3.7 Variation in hunter-gatherer campsites in three major habitats.
              High-density camps generally indicate co-operation between
              individuals and households whereas low density points to
              household independence (from Whitelaw 1989).

forest fauna (Fisher and Strickland 1991). Finally, it is in the savannahs and
grasslands that the greatest range of camping arrangements is found. These
range from low- to high-density camps, reflecting the mosaic structure of these
habitats and the variable degree to which co-operation and sharing reduce risk.
These elements of social structure are therefore mapped out in the spatial
arrangement of people on campsites (Whitelaw 1991).
   At a more detailed scale, Binford (1991) has examined Nunamiut campsites.
He concluded that their camping patterns were structured by the organization
of the workforce and consumers (ibid.:128) rather than by kinship. In summer
security is lowest as the caribou are lean and prey densities low. Consequently
alliances, emotional ties, and kin obligations all take a back seat to the fielding of as
many hunting parties as possible with as many combinations of partners going to as
many different places as possible. (ibid.:126)

   These flexible parties are drawn from the large populations living on spring
and summer camps. Households are interdependent at this time since the best
chance of hunting success is for young males to form hunting teams and search
for mountain sheep and small herds of caribou. But this co-operation, in con-
trast to Whitelaw’s model, does not lead to small high-density campsites with
households camping close together. Instead, on summer sites the campers are
further apart (mean distance between tents 69.7m) than at any other time of
the year (Figure 3.8). In terms of spacing between tents everyone seems to be
independent and indeed they are in terms of consuming the food once caught.
           A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions                        79




                   es     om                 Ss             NunAmivutT    EsKimo
                    CATT ER             >           Torlv@ganlakxe       Sire   2A




                                                          NG@ATATUARA
                                                       AUSTRALIANS
                                                       TikaTiKaA     Site




      YELLEWN,   1/977
     24 Pe0PLEe
     Foe /Z2 OAS
                                                                          OVCONNELL
                                                                          1979, Fig Sa



                                                                PEVAWEA.
                                                                       RAY
        San— Buvsnman                                    AVSTRALIANS
         UGaKkwe #0wa-CamelO                      Benosaiwerum   Sire


             Comparative Scovce-SeTTLEMeNT Sizes                     Among
                     Mosite  HUNTER —- QaTHERERS
                                ScaLe   iw   Meters

                                        as    ©6o      76




         3.8 Hunter-gatherer camp sites in different ecological settings (after
             Binford 1991:Fig. 19).

According to Binford it is not kinship but the separation between the organiza-
tion of work and consumption that is preserved in spatial layout. In the winter
and fall all campers are closer together (mean distance between tents 26.2-29.9
m) even though this is a time when people are living off stored food obtained
during the fall migrations and household independence is therefore greatest.
80            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

However, although he comes to a different conclusion his main point is very
similar to Whitelaw’s in that social structure, defined here as the relationships
based on variable levels of interaction, is preserved in spatial patterning.”

Attaching and detaching rituals
The challenge now is to unfreeze the performance of social life through inter-
action at locales as different archaeologically as the Lower Palaeolithic gather-
ing of Bilzingsleben with its lake, trees, stone and bone anvils (Mania 1990)
(Chapter 4) and Upper Palaeolithic Dolni Véstonice, where a social occasion
was based on a built environment of huts, graves, ovens and middens (Svoboda
1991) (Chapter 7).
   One way to approach this question is by considering attaching and detaching
rituals of people to gatherings as well as to social occasions and places. For
Goffman (1959, 1963), such structured interaction has its own rituals of engage-
ment, glance, touch, speech patterns and disengagement. Indeed, the whole
basis of social conduct could be described as a set of rules for guiding an indi-
vidual in his/her attachment to and detachment from social gatherings
(Goffman 1963:246).
   Attaching and detaching rituals represent intense interactions for any highly
social mammal, as the non-linguistic greeting ceremonies among chimpanzees
and elephants testify (Moss 1988, Reynolds 1966). Sometimes they can even
put the standing ovation for the leader at a political party conference to shame:
The two subgroups of the family will run together, rumbling, trumpeting, and scream-
ing, raise their heads, click their tusks together, entwine their trunks, flap their ears,
spin around and back into each other, urinate and defecate, and generally show great
excitement. A greeting such as this will sometimes last for as long as ten minutes. I
believe that the greeting ceremony maintains and reinforces the bonds among the family
members. (Moss 1988:128)

   It is by such attaching, or greeting, rituals that an elephant defines its society
as a network of negotiated relationships (Moss 1988:125). The elephant family
unit of eight animals, and bond group of twenty, bears some similarity to our
intimate and effective networks (Chapter 2). This is presumably because of the
similar nature of the resources which are used to define relationships within
each of these resource networks (Table 2.8).


Rhythms and social technology

The rituals of attaching and detaching ourselves from gatherings and social
occasions are two examples of social performance. It is the rhythms of the body
— walking, treading, digesting, sleeping, making - which produce a temporality
in human action uniting social and technical behaviour.
Rhythms are the creators of space and time, at least for the individual. Space and time
do not enter lived experience until they are materialised within a rhythmic frame.
Rhythms are also the creators of forms. (Leroi-Gourhan 1993:309, my emphasis)
            A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions                        81

Table 3.3. The grounding of social structure in individual agency. The
scheme recognizes a permeable boundary between the two forms of
consciousness (Giddens 1984:7).

Discursive consciousness             What actors are able to say about social
                                     conditions, especially the conditions of their own
                                     actions

Practical consciousness              What actors already know or believe about social
                                     conditions but cannot express discursively. This
                                     includes habit and routine
Unconscious motives



Forms of consciousness
Many of these rhythms can be described as habitual actions where, as Gosden
has pointed out (1994:188), we can act in complex ways because much of what
we do occurs without giving it much thought. Elsewhere Giddens (1984) has
described this as practical consciousness and has drawn the distinction
between this and a discursive or problem-solving consciousness (Table 3.3).
  The difference had previously been particularly well put by Leroi-Gourhan:
Most of the sequences we perform between waking and going to bed require only slight
conscious intervention; they take place, not in a state of automatism where conscious-
ness would be nil, but in a psychological twilight from which the individual is aroused
only by some unforeseen occurrence. In the gestures we perform when washing and
dressing or eating our meals or writing, the return to full consciousness is exceptional
but it is decisive, and that is why I prefer to speak of ‘mechanical operational sequences’
rather than of automatic, unconscious, or instinctive ones. (1993:231-2)

   This passage produces a striking paradox for archaeologists investigating why
brains got bigger during human evolution. Why did selection favour growth in
such an energetically expensive organ if all that it seems to do is carry out
increasingly routine tasks? But the paradox probably stems from approaching
consciousness with the model of cartesian dualism which separates mind and
body. Instead, if we unite mind and body, as in the philosophies of Heidegger
and Husserl, then we do not need to infer the world but rather we start with it,
in it, of it (Magee 1987:261). This means that we do not have to construct a map
or model of the world in order to interpret, organize and understand it. Practical
know-how is transparent. It does not even pass through our discursive con-
sciousness. Dreyfus describes the process as follows:
A driver has the same experience shifting from first to second gear. He does a lot of fancy
footwork with the clutch, but he may, at the same time, be absorbed in a deep philo-
sophical conversation. His coping need not enter consciousness. (in Magee 1987:260,
my emphasis)
   It is only when something goes wrong, the gear won’t engage, the door knob
sticks, the pan boils over, that the actor reverts to traditional type by noticing.
82,           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

She/he then becomes a problem-solving, rational animal as involvement with
the world moves from practical to discursive consciousness.’ As Leroi-Gourhan
put it, ‘mechanical operational sequences [practical consciousness] form the
basis of individual behaviour; they are our essential element of survival’
(1993:232).
Archaeological detectives
This unification of action, the involvement of individuals in, rather than
detached and separate from the world, is directly addressed by the concept of
rhythms and practical consciousness. Such agency, the act of doing, is also basic
to the bottom-up model of society which I favoured in Chapter 2. The issue is
fundamental to developing the study of Palaeolithic society. However, it can
become tortuous and frequently impenetrable if left to the words of Heidegger.
While I would recommend Gosden’s summary and interpretation (1994), let me
try putting the distinction another way.
   Archaeology is often likened to the trade of the detective and in particular to
Sherlock Holmes. The ability to deduce a person’s life history from a frayed
collar or a muddy boot has always appealed to our discipline. It is a fine example
of cartesian dualism, the application of thought to the world. By contrast, I
opened this chapter with a passage from another detective, Philip Marlowe. In
this situation he was well aware that his discursive consciousness had tempo-
rarily taken over from his practical routines. A man in your living room with a
smoking gun puts a whole new light on making a cup of coffee. For Holmes
deduction is normal. With Marlowe, who generally goes with the flow of life,
it is the other way around. He is in the world and surrounded by it rather than,
like Holmes, waiting for cases to come to him for solution in his Baker Street
rooms.


Chaine opératoire

Rhythms and forms are integral to Leroi-Gourhan’s concept of the chaine
opératoire or operational sequence which fuses social and technical activity
(Boéda 1988, Boéda, Geneste and Meignen 1990, Coudret et al. 1994, Dobres
and Hoffman 1994, Edmonds 1990, Julien 1992, Karlin and Julien 1994, 1986,
Lemmonier 1990, Pigeot 1990, Schlanger 1996, White 1993b, 1993c).
  At a basic, technical level, the chaine opératoire
takes the form of an ordered train of actions, gestures, instruments or even agents
leading the transformation of a given material towards the manufacture of a product,
through major steps that are more or less predictable. (Karlin and Julien 1994:164)

  Unfortunately, the chaine opératoire has become synonymous with ‘lithic
reduction sequence’ and applied mostly to the production of stone tools
(Hodder 1990b:157). But the concept of an operational sequence is, however,
much broader than this common usage. I believe Schlanger is closer to the spirit
           A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions                    83

of the concept when he describes the chaine opératoire as examining ‘the inter-
play between fixed and flexible’ (1994:144).
   What exactly does he mean? Material action, or gesture, is in part determined
by physical laws. Therefore it is to some extent fixed. Stone and wood have dif-
ferent properties which determine not only what can be made but how it can
be made. But material action is also flexible. There are choices to be made con-
cerning the what and how of any technical process. The flexibility of these
choices stems from social and cultural contexts, the gatherings and social occa-
sions with actors engaged in the performance of society. Consequently, the
fixed properties in any operational sequence do not in themselves make the
technical act less social, cultural or indeed human. As White points out
(1993a:xviii), the concept of operational sequences removes the dichotomy
between style, expressing social identity, and function, which has exercised
American archaeologists for over thirty years of sometimes heated debate.
Leroi-Gourhan’s essential point was therefore that technical acts are at the
same time social acts (Schlanger 1990:23).
   This use of the chaine opératoire does not underestimate the importance of
the disagreements where
the identification, location and deciphering of technological choices correspond to a
series of crucial questions regarding how, and in what respect, technologies are a medi-
ation (as well as a compromise) between inescapable universal physical laws and the
unbounded inventiveness of cultures (Lemmonier 1993:10)

but instead stresses that they will never be resolved so long as the division
between function and style is related to two different behavioural domains
rather than to one, the social.
   This social fusion occurs because many operational sequences are needed to
ensure material survival. These come from the rhythms of collective tradition
as ways of doing and acting. But far from imposing rigid conditions on the form
of objects such operational sequences vary considerably in terms of local and
individual output (Leroi-Gourhan 1993:253). Here lies the flexibility with the
chaine opératoire defined as socialized action applied to matter (Lemmonier
1980:1, Schlanger 1994:145). The chaine opératoire is more than just a suite of
muscle memories about how to do things without thinking about them. It is
the acts themselves and the linkages they provide across time and space which
matter.
   Graves (1994:440) has pointed out that Leroi-Gourhan did not, however, fully
integrate the social. He insisted on a collective view of society as well as stress-
ing the human capacity to achieve a cartesian separation between both our
internal and external environments (Leroi-Gourhan 1993:235). This was partic-
ularly apparent in one key area, our faculty for symbolic projection. This was
the means by which the collective was maintained and by which, through the
exteriorization of memory, human development was channelled. He defined
symbolism as
84            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

that property of the human brain that consists in maintaining a distance between lived
experience and the organism that serves as its medium. (Leroi-Gourhan 1993:234-5, my
emphasis)

   As a result, the individual gradually disappears into the collective world with
each technical advance that places more of our operational sequences outside
the body — figurative art, writing, print, film, electronic communication and
digital storage. Leroi-Gourhan does not explain why these changes occurred
except as an implied progressive tendency which involves a move from natural
to artificial rhythms; from the corporeal rhythms of the forager to the symbolic
rhythms of the city dweller.
   So, while Leroi-Gourhan provides many insights about the structure of
action and foreshadowed developments in social theory,’ it is not difficult to
see why the chaine opératoire has been used to analyse lithic reduction rather
than social action.

Artifacts in gatherings
This raises the interesting question of how we characterize the use of artifacts
in gatherings. If such performances are regarded as symbolic, because they are
based upon a concept of relationships, then it would follow that the objects
incorporated into such interaction must also be symbolic. They are literally
charged with the body as a source of social power and performance. Technology
is not just about making stone axes to chop down trees. The gestures which are
used to make the axe and then use it embody social representations, or ideas,
which are part of wider symbolic systems (Lemmonier 1993:3).
   As an embodied gesture the cup, spear, costume or paintbrush have symbolic
power as thought in action. When the artifact was being made, handled and
transported it took on the properties of the person as a social actor. This is
another reason why we need to reject in the Palaeolithic the distinction
between an artifact’s function and its style (Sackett 1982). The latter is gener-
ally recognized as that part of the artifact which communicates about social
identity and values, something which is added after the business of function
has been sorted out. Looking at the same artifact from the perspective of
material action, the gesture, makes us consider the social aspects of techniques
as ways of doing which have their own repeated forms, movements and
rhythms. Technology plays an active role, rather than the passive voice of style
alone, in the stasis and change of social life as individuals interact and perform
society through the construction of networks.
   However, it could equally be argued that those social representations embod-
ied in technology are the result of habitual routines and therefore not symbolic.
This was discussed above in terms of the symbolic change which accrues to
objects used in gatherings and social occasions. For example, what happens
when the tool is put down and the gesture broken? Once separated from the
body as a reference for action and power, how can it remain a symbolic exten-
sion of action? Freed from its direct association the handaxe would cease to be
            A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions                       85

a gesture and would become just another pebble on the beach. As Schlanger has
indicated, Leroi-Gourhan’s seminal idea was that the real existence of the tool
is when it is in action, when it is animated by gestures (Schlanger 1990:20). I
would therefore argue for a narrow definition of symbolic behaviour. I would
reserve it for interaction between people which takes place away from the co-
presence found in gatherings. In this sense artifacts are ambiguous not because
we have traditionally wrestled with their contradictory voices of style and
function but rather
by their sheer physicality and inanimacy [artifacts] are intrinsically thing-like, but in
their incorporation into the nexus of social relations they are also personified. (Ingold
1994:335)

  We can form intimate relations with objects because we can also stretch
social relations beyond the gathering. When artifacts become people we have
achieved that release from proximity which is our primate social heritage.


Paths and tracks

The chaine opératoire also leads us between locales via paths and tracks (Boéda,
Geneste and Meignen 1990, 1991, Geneste 1988a, 1988b). Mobile foragers are
concerned with intersection points where they either cross those of their prey
or encounter a plant resource. The locales and paths, rather than the surface-
area territories which surround them, are the important elements in the for-
agers’ socially constructed landscapes.
   This applies to highly forested habitats, where in northern boreal forests
traplines form the track through otherwise unexplored territory (Brody 1981:
map 12, Nelson 1973), and in tropical rainforests where Bahuchet describes the
territory of the Mbuti of Zaire as ‘characterised by narrow paths, which connect
several successive hunting camps’ (Bahuchet 1992:214). Among these African
rainforest foragers the path is synonymous with the home range or territory. A
similar pattern of habitual tracks is reported by Politis (1996) for the Nukak for-
agers of Colombian Amazonia.
   Paths are also important in open landscapes such as central Australia, where,
for example,
An estate, for practical purposes of life, might amount only to places on a track, ora   set
of tracks, between exiguous waters in a wasteland. (Stanner 1965:2)

  The image that foragers have of the world is linked to an itinerary (Leroi-
Gourhan 1993:326), not to a concentric surface area as proposed by site catch-
ment analysis (Vita-Finzi and Higgs 1970). Furthermore, the image that any
individual has of the world is of a similar track. This is due to our ambulatory
mode of perception (Gibson 1979). Paths and tracks link individuals to each
other and so to the wider landscape and region.
86            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

The taskscape

A further rhythm is needed to broaden the concept of operational sequences
and linear movements which are all too frequently linked to acquiring raw
materials and making stone tools. This is supplied by Ingold’s (1993:157) notion
of the taskscape which is built on activities which carry forward the processes
of social life. The taskscape is an arfay of related activities just as, in his terms,
a landscape is an array of related features (ibid.:158). It is a mutual environment
which surrounds an individual, moves with that person and so provides affor-
dances for action (Gibson 1979).
   The value of the concept lies in its stress upon the continuous character of
the activities in which an individual is engaged. Ingold makes the obvious, but
important point, that activity produces sound (1993:162). We see our environ-
ment as we walk through it and we perceive its affordances. However, we only
know that those affordances are being used when we hear the sound of stone
being knapped, deer screaming as they are killed, children playing with the
echoes in caves, or feet stamping rhythmically in a dance. In this sense actions
‘speak’ louder than words. Our eyes alert us to possibilities and our ears
confirm the social character of action. We relate to the taskscape through skills
such as walking, listening, watching, making and doing. These are skills which
have to be learnt and that learning takes place in the context of social life.
   Just as a landscape is continuous so is the taskscape. The landscape is what
we see and the taskscape is what we hear (ibid.:163). In both cases activities
cannot be chopped up into little segments and analysed bit by bit.
   The taskscape therefore has its own intrinsic temporality based on the
rhythms of action (Ingold 1993:157). The network of movements produces
forms which are interpreted by the senses. These may be movements asso-
ciated with a technique such as making a bow or butchering an animal or they
may move to the rhythms of face-to-face gatherings and social occasions.
Moreover,
The temporality of the taskscape is social . . . not because society provides an external
frame against which particular tasks find independent measure, but because people, in
the performance of their tasks, also attend to one another. (Ingold 1993:159-60, my
emphasis)

  People notice each other through observing movement and hearing sounds
of activity. Such attention provides the reference among individuals for pat-
terned and sequenced forms of behaviour. This point has been emphasized by
Wilson:
The seeing, perception, and understanding of others occurs most immediately within a
framework or context of a social arrangement by means of which individuals most effec-
tively prove their survival and well-being. Attention operates within this framework at
the same time as it serves to support the structure. (Wilson 1988:15)

   The taskscape is therefore close in concept to Leroi-Gourhan’s chaine opéra-
toire where
            A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions                        87
human beings are only human to the extent that they are in the midst of others and
clothed in symbols that give purpose to their existence .. . The human act par excel-
lence is perhaps not so much the creation of tools as .. . the creation of a human time
and space. (Leroi-Gourhan 1993:313)

   The taskscape adds to these collective insights into how temporality is con-
structed by rhythms which re-engage rather than distance individuals in the
social world of human action (Gosden 1994:188). While this occurs in locales
it is also conditioned by action and operational sequences at our next analyti-
cal level: the region.


Regions

Landscapes of habit

The wider region, traversed by the individual and all those with whom he or
she interacts, forms a spatial network of intersecting paths. To express this
pattern I have previously developed the concept of a local hominid network
(Gamble 1993d, 1995b, 1996a, 1998) which identifies a common structure in
the space-time behaviour of foragers, past and present. It encompasses both
subsistence and social behaviour. The network contains other hominids, non-
hominid competitors and resources. It is centred on the individual and the deci-
sions he or she must make. In this sense it is the wider spatial network for the
negotiation and reproduction of social life that occurs at locales.
   However, to avoid confusion with other uses in this book of the term
network, I have renamed this concept the landscape of habit, as described by
Gosden (1994:182). This change of term emphasizes how the everyday routines
which are performed at locales also have a temporal sequence that structures
the contexts of interaction. This continuous process involves interactions
between individuals where negotiation is achieved through display, gesticula-
tion, grooming, language, performance, sign and symbol. In other words the
routinization of life, described as that
habitual, taken for granted character of the vast bulk of the activities of day-to-day social
life; the prevalence of familiar styles and forms of conduct. (Giddens 1984:376)

Scale of the landscape of habit
From earliest prehistory the form of hominid societies is expected to be vari-
able. For this reason attention focuses here on the networks which supported
this social variety. These component networks are likewise variable in the use
of space and resources. However, the latter can be investigated for qualitative
and quantitative changes in the flows and use of materials, particularly lithics.
These items define the networks which contributed to the negotiation of
society at particular times and places.
   Elsewhere (Gamble 1993d, 1996a) I have discussed the dimensions of this
spatial concept using data on raw-material transfers. Recent studies from
88              The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

                Table 3.4. Proportions of raw materials present and utilized on
                Middle Palaeolithic sites in southwest France (Geneste 1988a,
                1988b). The same relationships hold for Upper Palaeolithic
                material and in many different regions (see footnote for
                references).
                                      bs!



                Km radius from site   % ofstoneonsite    % utilized, made into tools

                ‘Local’=within5 km     55-98              1-5
                Region=5-20 km          2-20              1-20
                ‘Distant’=30-80 km    <5                 74-100


different continents and time periods have produced consistent results,° which
concern both the distances over which materials were regularly transported
and the effect this has on the quantity and morphology of stone implements in
archaeological sites.
   The dimensions are summarized in Table 3.4 by referring to Geneste’s impor-
tant study of Middle Palaeolithic material from southwest France (1988a,
1988b, 1989).
   These studies of raw materials have led to the following general principle
concerning the use of raw material by foragers: distant raw materials are rep-
resented by the later stages of the reduction sequence (Gamble 1993d:36).
Using Geneste’s summary (Table 3.4) we see that distant refers to materials
transferred over 30-80km. From a larger worldwide sample the raw-material
data indicate a common scale for the landscape of habit with a radius of 40km
and an upper limit of 100km (Gamble 1993d:42). Within this radius we can
refer to all activities as local in terms of their social and organizational impli-
cations. The raw-material principle is the result of mobile hominids optimiz-
ing an aspect of their provisioning strategies. It expresses a simple relation
between mobility and the distance separating resources. It is an example of an
operational sequence embedded and embodied in a network of movements.
These establish a rhythm to this aspect of material action which is repeated as
a recognizable form at a regional spatial scale. It is the counterpart of the
chaines opératoires found in the manufacture of stone tools (see above, and
Boéda 1988, 1990, Lemmonier 1993, Schlanger 1990) at the spatial scale of the
gathering and social occasion.

Exploration and the landscape of habit
The landscape of habit is part of our hominid ancestry. We can trace it archae-
ologically through raw-material transfers which represent the rhythms that
resulted in paths and tracks (see above). What these transfers record, however,
are individuals constructing their own landscapes of habit through the routines
of social life. The transfer of raw materials is embedded in social activities.
   An ethnographic example of the scale and variety of such habitual activities
           A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions               89

              Table 3.5. Reasons for Aka visits and the
              average distances travelled (Hewlett, van de
              Koppel and Cavalli-Sforza 1986:Table 4.5).

              Family visits          average distance   47.6 km
              Hunting                average distance   22.8 km
              Dancing, ceremonies    average distance   17.6 km
              Work for villagers     average distance   66.4 km



is provided by Hewlett et al.’s (1986) study of visiting among the Aka pygmies.
They found, by asking individuals about their knowledge of the area, that visits
among the Aka ranged from 1 to 175km, with 96 per cent being less than 100
km and half of all visits less than 50km (Table 3.5).
   They calculated a half-range, the median of the distances from place of resi-
dence to places visited at least once, for individual travel. They then called this
the exploration range, ‘where subsistence activities take place, a spouse is
encountered, and other aspects of geographical as well as social knowledge are
acquired and transmitted’ (Hewlett, van de Koppel and Cavalli-Sforza 1986:65).
Men had a larger exploration range of 58 km compared to 32 km for women. The
combined average was 35km.
   Among the Aka, population density also influenced these distances. Between
the regions of Bagandou (high density at 0.031 persons per km?) and Ndele (low
density at 0.017 persons per km?), Hewlett (et al. 1986) show that in the former
77 per cent of Aka men and 83 per cent of Aka women live after marriage within
25 km of where they were born. In Ndele this distance accounts for only 44 and
22, per cent respectively. Here 72 per cent of men and 77 per cent of women live
up to 75km from their birthplace.
   This study of individual ranges, albeit in a tropical rainforest setting, pro-
vides some support for the dimensions of a landscape of habit. A further, theo-
retical example of the activities which result in the transfer of materials is
Wobst’s group based study of marriage systems among foragers (1976). These
systems consisted of between 175-475 people and estimates of their spatial
extent at different densities are given in Table 3.6.
   Wobst’s figures suggest a maximum of some 300km. He predicts that this
figure marks a threshold for mating-network size beyond which the costs of
interaction to maintain a closed system involving ritual, exchange and food
sharing would become prohibitive.
   What emerges from this review of actual and modelled spatial relations is
that individuals’ exploration ranges, and even the distances they move at mar-
riage, are unlikely to exceed 300km, and while necessarily variable, are prob-
ably mostly under 80 km as indicated by the nearest-neighbour distances (Table
3.6) and supported by the data on raw material transfers (Table 3.4). Among the
high-density population of Bagandou the average exploratory range for adult
90            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

Table 3.6. Mating network area and the distance relationships between
population density and intra-mating density in a hexagonal lattice with
nineteen local groups.

                                              Distance between   Distance between
Population density   Area     Diameter   NN _ most distant       central and most
(persons/km/7)       km?      km         km   local groups,km    distant groups, km

0.005                95,000   382        76   303                oul
0.008                597375   302        60   240                120
0.01                 47,500   270        54   214                107
0.02                 Ney LO   NEI        38   oy                  76
0.05                  SOO     20,        24    96                 48

Note:
NN=nearest neighbour (from Wobst 1976:tables 1 and 2).


males is 27.5km (Hewlett, van de Koppel and Cavalli-Sforza 1986). These are
the scales at which the intimate and effective networks are played out. These
dimensions can also include the extended network. But this is also the strand
in the personal network which may exhibit the greatest spatial extent, reflect-
ing the mobility of individuals.°
   It is probable that these exploration distances have a great antiquity. They
point to the repeated scale of the landscape of habit which is common to all
hominids. In this respect Steele’s estimates of home-range size based on brain
size and body mass provide an independent check. The upper limit for a carni-
vore scale model for most hominids indicates home ranges between 32 and 102
km in diameter (Table 2.10). The landscape of habit constructed around an indi-
vidual’s intimate and effective networks is therefore an integral part of hominid
heritage.


Social landscape

The social landscape is distinguished as a spatial concept by the scale which
negotiations achieve. It is the spatial outcome of individuals developing their
extended network and the appearance of the global network (Tables 2.8 and 2.9).
In Tindale’s apt phrase for aboriginal Australia, these networks deal with
‘tracks, travel, trespass and trade’ (1974:75). Their development redefined the
personal network and the way in which resources were used within it during
interaction and negotiation. The social landscape also produces that surface
structure of the group, which is a convenient shorthand for the summation of
intersecting networks, based on the individual and represented by a variety of
geographical scales. The term group has the advantage of focusing attention on
how cultural forms persist in time and space, how they seem to have a ‘life’
beyond the individual and his or her networks. One further aspect of the group
               A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions              91

 Table 3.7. Models of human and primate societies compared with a structure
 for the evolution of Palaeolithic society. While there is no strict equivalence
 between the terms in these three schemes the relative positions are
 indicated in order to clarify the archaeological structure.

 Social networks              Primate networks     Palaeolithic networks
 Boissevain 1968              Hinde 1976           conceptual structure

 Society                                           Social landscapes                R
                                                                        global      e
 Institutional complexes                                                            g
                                                                        extended    i
 Groups                       Social structure     Landscape of habit               Oo
                                                   effective                        n
 Quasi-groups or non-groups   Relationships
                                                   intimate
 Interactional networks       Interaction          Locales

 Individuals



  concept is that it is defined by the ‘other’, discussed in Chapter 2, through the
_ global network.
     Just as the group transcends the individual so the social landscape encom-
  passes a number of landscapes of habit. It does not replace them but rather rede-
  fines them. In the same way, participation in global networks did not replace
  an individual’s intimate and effective networks which were part of our primate
  heritage. The bottom-up approach advocated earlier is preserved, with groups
  an unintended consequence of the interactions of individuals but nonetheless
  influencing the form of those interactions.

 Social structure and change in the Palaeolithic
 These spatial relationships are summarized in Table 3.7 and placed within the
 wider framework derived from studies of human and primate societies. The
 scheme is not meant to imply that Palaeolithic society only existed when a
 social landscape can be claimed. Rather it is the case that without a social land-
 scape we have a different form of society.
    The landscape of habit represents a social structure in Hinde’s (1976) sense
 since it has a full personal network based on intimate, effective and extended
 ties. It is therefore a regional concept.
    The linkages between locales and regions in Table 3.7 indicate how this
 network structure developed and I will be examining the evidence for this in
 the chapters which follow. There were always rhythms which linked the locale
 to the region. What changed during the Palaeolithic was the character and
 extent of the regional scale. It is my contention that the extended network
 was the key to this change because it led to the possibility of individuals
92           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

negotiating their global networks. The material requirements of extended net-
works (Table 2.8) within a social landscape rather than a landscape of habit led
to the restructuring of resources and the elaboration of culture to carry the
novel social representations.

The development of inclusive social systems
The social landscape therefore achieves the distanciation, or stretching, of
social systems across space-time. It is through the social landscape that the
actions of individuals achieve that release from proximity (Chapter 2) and
where extended and global networks are explored at social and spatial removes,
as indicated in Table 3.7.
   What makes the social landscape different is that these negotiations are fixed,
not just by interaction, but by the possibility of interaction regardless of
whether it takes place or not. These are societies of distant relatives and com-
parative strangers. The hominid environment is therefore truly extended
beyond either a foraging or a subsistence scale. It transcends habitual action and
the pattern of life routines contained in the landscape of habit. Most impor-
tantly the social landscape sees a shift from social life being complex to becom-
ing complicated in the sense discussed in Chapter 2. In essence this replaced ‘a
complexity of shifting, often fuzzy and continuous behaviours, relationships
and meanings with a complicated array of simple, symbolic, clear-cut items’
(Strum and Latour 1987:791). The distinction is well made by Rowell (1991:260):
By use of symbols and material resources [complicated societies] can separate social
problems into a series of simpler tasks, and this allows each individual to handle a
greater elaboration of social arrangements.

   Moreover, alongside social elaboration we also find both syn- and diachronic
variety as the mechanism of negotiation leads to exaptive social outcomes.
Among the social problems Rowell refers to are those which arise from infre-
quent encounters and the ability of individuals to recognize a network of
acquaintances (1991:266).
   But how can a population-wide system be maintained without the sort of
complex and frequent interactions to negotiate its structure? This is certainly
a limiting factor for the landscape of habit where social life was characterized
as local and exclusive. The solution is that in addition to exclusive systems,
the social landscape entertains the possibility of including others in an
extended network (Gamble 1993d). As a result, a social landscape that incorpo-
rates several landscapes of habit, and which is associated with a complicated
system of negotiation, will be regional, as well as local. It will also be either
inclusive or exclusive in terms of boundary maintenance. An important
element in achieving these outcomes is the use of objects in the ‘performing’
of social structure and hence their contribution to the exercise of individual
power at a distance (Gosden 1994). This leads to the crucial point made by
Strum and Latour (1987:796) that with the creation of symbolic and material
            A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions                   93

bonds the actors now appear to be entering a pre-existing social structure rather
than creating it. This impression has led to the confusion, discussed in Chapter
2, over the proper way to characterize Palaeolithic society.

Objects and places as people
As individuals move along tracks between gatherings and social occasions so
they construct the social landscape as they also constructed the landscape of
habit. Objects also move along these tracks. In the landscape of habit they
moved with people, carried as raw material or tools as a portable and attached
affordance. Their transfer is embedded in other activities such as hunting, vis-
iting and the rituals of attaching and detaching from gatherings and social occa-
sions. McBryde’s study of the extensive exchange systems in Central Australia
makes this point:
The [distribution] system is embedded not in the economic or subsistence regimes of
the societies concerned, but in their social and ceremonial life in which material goods
and exchange play substantial roles. The meanings of the goods and the significance of
their source location are explained and maintained over time by the stories that also
map the symbolic and geographical world of these long distance transactions. (McBryde
in press)

   The difference with the social landscape is that in a very real sense objects
now become people. As artifacts and manuports are transferred between indi-
viduals they express relationships which refer to wider social structures.
Through exchange these objects supply a social affordance since this practice
incorporates the social acts of collecting materials and manufacturing items.
As a result the gestures involved in exchange are comparable to the gesture
which made the artifact or collected the manuport because both of them are
based on operational sequences. In this way material action incorporates social
representations from the wider community, the group as defined above. The
use of objects in the ‘performing’ of social structure and the construction of the
social landscape produces time-space distanciation (Giddens 1984). Social
systems are stretched due to the mechanisms of system integration, the means
by which they are extended in absentia (Chapter 2).

Symbolism, culture and the social landscape
This stretching is usually put down to the emergence of symbolism. As Leroi-
Gourhan put it, but without telling us why the shift took place,
symbolic ‘domestication’ allowed the human to pass from the rhythmicity of seasons
to the rhythmicity regulated and packaged within a network of symbols. (Leroi-Gourhan
1993:315)

   According to this view, culture came to organize our lives through its collec-
tive representations. It became our unique means of adaptation (White 1959:3)
and during human evolution the individual became increasingly submerged
within the group (Leroi-Gourhan 1993:253).
94            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

   The problem with this familiar explanation, that sees symbolism, usually
associated with language, as the final ingredient in the mixture which made us
human, is that it starts to look suspiciously like culture explaining culture.
This is no explanation at all.
   My answer to such a circular argument is the social landscape, which is the
sum total of individual networks. Since individuals are active agents, respon-
sive to, but also creating rhythms, movements and forms they never surrender
to this collectivity of symbols, this tyranny of culture. The social systems they
inherit are also those they can change. These social actors are both constrained
and enabled by their bodies, which allow mobility, negotiation and the exten-
sion of social ties through networks which involve different resources (Chapter
2). They are spatial as well as temporal beings rather than simply programmed
participants in culture.
   In this respect the social landscape consists of making tracks between indi-
viduals as well as between places. These people in turn become named ‘places’
in the sense that they form a social network — their associations and move-
ments providing the meanings of their own, and other individuals’, environ-
ment. Moreover, the association of people with physical places is the basis for
generating social contexts for action. These are variously constituted by the
numbers and kinds of people in the network who visit and interact.’ It is
through the knowledge of these paths and places, either for sacred or for secular
purposes, that the social landscape is constructed and the movement along
paths between places conceptualized. These places are effectively people in the
landscape because they are incorporated into networks. They are, to put it
simply, personified.

The scale of the social landscape and the creation of symbols
There are no upper limits to the spatial dimensions of the social landscape. The
American flag still stands on the Moon and Voyager II heads out of the galaxy.
It is not so much where hominids have been but where they can potentially go.
This potential has not however been a characteristic of all hominids during pre-
history and the limiting factor reverts to their different negotiation of social life
(Gamble 1993d).
   The change in scale with the social landscape is significant. Ingold
(1993:162-3) sets the limits of the taskscape as coterminous with the limits of
the auditory world. It is therefore local and mutual to individuals as they
engage in activities. The landscape of habit as shown above has an upper limit
of 80-100km. Among recent foragers this potential for spatial extension in a
social landscape can readily be assessed by the movement of resources.’ An eth-
nographic review by Féblot-Augustins and Perlés (1992) of stone and other
transported materials indicates distances well beyond the upper limit of 100
km of the landscape of habit. Transfer of materials over 600 to 3,600km among
hunters and gatherers can be readily documented.
   A classic example of such extended networks among recent foragers is pro-
             A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions                      95

  vided by the Australian axe trade (McBryde 1978, 1988, in press 1993). In her
  study McBryde found that stone from the greenstone quarries of Victoria was
  being moved as much as 800km and on average 228km from the Mt William
  source. While such stone might be regarded as utilitarian and necessary for the
  manufacture of stone hatchets it is clear from McBryde’s work that we have
  now moved beyond the landscape of habit and into a domain of social value
  where the objects are items for negotiation and affiliation to extended net-
  works.
     The same transformation can be traced with prestige goods, those gewgaws
  of social life, such as beads, jewellery and ornaments, as well as raw materials
  such as ochre, grinding stones and obsidians. By travelling far an object does
  seem to be automatically transformed from being mundane to being special
  (Gould 1980:142-3). The same transformation also happens to the travellers
  and the knowledge of exotic places they bring back (Helms 1988). But as Féblot-
  Augustins and Perlés point out (1992:13), we do not know exactly where this
  occurs. There is no magic distance beyond which an axe always ceases to be an
  axe and becomes a prestige good; where it is no longer just an affordance to chop
  down a tree but becomes a symbol of distant persons who in absentia now
  determine the performance of social relationships. It could be 5km or 500km.
  What needs to be understood are the social contexts which require the trans-
. formation in value from local to distant, from object to symbol (Gamble
  1993d:37). Understanding these contexts must be based on the role of objects
  in the negotiation of networks.
    With the social landscape inclusive systems can also be negotiated, and
  where openness and individual mobility are common. Here prestige goods
  serve a further function of allowing tolerated trespass onto others’ territories
  in times of shortage. Hill sums this up well when she points out that in
  Australia the focus on lexicon as opposed to phonological differentiation of lan-
  guages
 cannot be predicted by the dialect tribe model, but appear|s] to result from interpenetra-
 tion into the properties of local systems by area systems of adaptation. (Hill 1978:18)

    The variety of Australian social systems shows, at a continental scale, the
 two poles of social structure, inclusive/exclusive. These negotiated outcomes
 can in part be understood, as Peterson (1986) argues for Australia, by different
 ecological circumstances setting the conditions of existence and determining
 integration, ties to land and marriage customs (Table 1.2).
   At these levels of analysis the mode of transfer (exchange, visiting, partner-
 ship, kin-based etc.) is of less importance than demonstrating the existence of
 the extended social landscape where the tracks which define it are now longer,
 and more varied, than those associated with the ambulatory preception of any
 individual. What can be said is that local dispersal, those tracks associated with
 the habits and routines of the landscape of habit, is no longer the only mecha-
 nism to explain the generation of spatial patterning in material culture.
96           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

Summary

Social life in the Palaeolithic involved hominids in the continuous and differ-
ent construction of their surrounding environment. To investigate this propo-
sition I have set out a conceptual scheme using the spatial scales of locales and
regions. These are linked by rhythms, illustrated here by the paths and tracks
which Palaeolithic hominids trod, the operational sequences by which they
made their tools and the taskscapes where they attended to one another.
   I have further defined locales for archaeological purposes by the unfamiliar
terms, encounter, gathering and social occasion/place. They will serve as a
basis for analysis in the chapters which follow. I have used these terms rather
than the more familiar campsites, home bases, satellite camps, or Binford’s
(1980) distinctions between residential camp, location, caches and field sta-
tions. The reason is quite simple. These terms are very useful for investigating
settlement. They have been used widely as a set of definitions toward which
archaeological analysis aspires. I have used them myself on many occasions.
But they are so closely associated with the dichotomous approach to the study
of foragers (Table 1.3) that they have become theory laden. We do not need to
abandon them but rather to restrict their use to the analytical approaches that
they best serve.                                     )
   The point about a fresh vocabulary is its declaration that a new agenda is
being explored: in this case a study of Palaeolithic society rather than
Palaeolithic settlement. As we have seen at some length in the previous chap-
ters, this shift will only succeed if we change our concepts about society and
adjust our terms and methods accordingly.
   In this respect the work of Leroi-Gourhan (1993) is important in stressing the
social nature of technical acts. This may be flint knapping which occurs at a
locale, or collecting and transporting the raw material from one locale to
another. These operational sequences (the chaine opératoire) are social produc-
tions which evolve their rhythms and form as the body engages in material
action (Je geste). With this perspective a social archaeology is not therefore
confined to the stylistic elaboration of projectile points or the architecture of
institutions believed to represent social information. Instead, a social approach
involves all aspects of mobility, production, consumption and discard.
Repetition and persistence of material action in time and space produce the
well-known entity of the archaeological culture. These entities are the results
of individuals repeating the technical gestures they learned rather than the col-
lective mind of a group producing a pattern of culture to be followed.
   At the regional scale two further concepts are proposed: the landscape of
habit and the social landscape. The distinction between these two concepts
includes complex and complicated societies and the role of practical and dis-
cursive consciousness in deriving structure from agency (Table 3.3). The land-
scape of habit represents a social structure following Hinde’s discussion of
primate society (1976). Within this structure individuals build their own net-
           A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions               97

 works but their extended networks are only weakly developed and the global
 network is nonexistent. The social principle is one of exclusion alone. The
 spatial dimensions of the landscape of habit can be determined from the distri-
 bution of raw materials in the archaeological record. These supply a record of
 movements; an example of rhythms and operational sequences as individuals
 engaged in the activity of social living.
    I propose that the social landscape was an historical development from this
 common hominid heritage. Individuals extended the spatial and social scale of
 their action and interaction. This was aided by the use of material resources as
 social objects. Symbolic resources were the key to change. The web of networks
 was enlarged and additional resources were required to service them. This led
 to new operational sequences and the elaborated use of technical processes as
 social representations. The social landscape could therefore contain both exclu-
 sive and inclusive social systems. As a result the group emerges as a property
 of the density, scale and interactive intensity of individuals’ networks. There
 may not be more people in the system but instead many different ties that both
 enable and constrain social activity. Strangers were never absolute in the social
 landscape but instead formed a relative social category defined by the response
 on encounter. This was in contrast to the landscape of habit where absolute
 strangers could potentially exist. The difference lay in the stretching of social
. relationships across time and space. The limits to action set by co-presence
 were therefore removed and the potential for society to grow in numbers and
 geographical area became almost unlimited.
   The historical development between a landscape of habit and a social land-
 scape cannot be put down to a single factor such as enhanced memory, lan-
 guage, discursive consciousness or technology. Neither was it a gradual trend
 where the externalization of memory through symbols was progressively
 increased. In Palaeolithic Europe it was both a process of long-term innovation
 and contingent upon the replacement of population. It is to the issues of stasis
 and change that these concepts and models of Palaeolithic society have been
 directed and, so constructed, I will now turn to the narrative of the data to test
 my proposals.
             CHAPTER        4

             THE FIRST EUROPEAN SOCIETIES
             500,000-300,000 YEARS AGO




             Notre monde européen, et surtout sa partie occidentale, est un cul-de-sac
             vers lequel les vagues humaines, arrivées de l’est ou de sud sous les
             impulsions inconnues, sont venues méler et superposer leurs sédiments
                                                             Abbé Henri Breuil, 1912



Defining Palaeolithic Europe
The geographical boundaries of Palaeolithic Europe were flexible. In the north,
successive ice sheets changed the habitable area of the continent, while in the
west the continental shelf was drowned and exposed under the alternating cli-
matic rhythms of interglacial to glacial. In the south it seems most probable
that the Straits of Gibraltar were always open during the Pleistocene ice ages
although islands in the central Mediterranean must have served as stepping-
stones from Africa during times of low sea level.
   But the east provides the weakest set of geographical boundaries for
Pleistocene Europe. The steppes of the Ukraine and Russia, the Caspian and
Black Sea, and the upland plateaux and mountains of Turkey, the Caucasus and
the Near East provide no obvious absolute barrier either to settlement by or to
subsequent contact with other populations in the Old World. Instead, the lack
of boundaries emphasizes the peninsular nature of Europe which the Abbé
Breuil once described as a cul-de-sac, into which several waves of humans and
animal species had been washed (Breuil 1912).
   The difficulties of defining the size and shape of Palaeolithic Europe may
seem unimportant. After all, defining Europe today faces similar problems
(Graves-Brown, Jones and Gamble 1995), and the suggestion that modern polit-
ical and cultural boundaries should somehow be significant in the Pleistocene
is obviously nonsensical. However, there is a serious point to the exercise.
Identifying the geographical scale at which we should investigate Palaeolithic
societies is important from an evolutionary perspective. We need to ask if the
selective pressures for change and variation in hominid behaviour operated at
the scale of this Asian and African peninsula, or were they part of a long-term
set of environmental changes enacted over a much larger landmass? The
regional model based on latitude, longitude and relief (Figure 3.1) is sufficient
for examining variation in Palaeolithic behaviour within central and western
Europe (Gamble 1986a), but it may be inappropriate for unravelling the long-

98
               The first European societies 500,000-300,000 years ago            99

 term processes involved in hominid evolution. This possibility emerges when
 we Start to ask an historical question — such as when did hominids first colo-
 nize Europe? — and to examine what light the answer throws on their social net-
 works.


 Chronology, climates and habitats
  There are several aspects of Pleistocene chronology which need to be consid-
  ered in any discussion of the arrival of hominids in Europe. The first large-scale
  glaciation, and hence the commencement of the Pleistocene period, is now
  dated to 2.3 Myr BP (Zagwijn 1992). This was a period of strong cooling which
  can be traced both in the terrestrial pollen records and as a signal in the deep-
  sea core isotopic record (Ruddiman and Raymo 1988). Such a timescale adds an
  additional 700,000 years to the traditional length of the Pleistocene, where the
  boundary with the Pliocene is fixed at 1.6-1.8 Myr BP (Aguirre and Pasini
  1985).!
     The cooling at 2.3 Myr BP marks the start of a long-term climatic trend. This
  was partly the result of changes in the earth’s orbit, spin and tilt (Goudie 1977,
  Imbrie and Imbrie 1979) as well as the cumulative effects of mountain build-
  ing, particularly the Himalayas and the Tibetan plateau, which affected global
  weather patterns (Ruddiman and Raymo 1988). When combined, these two
  forces produced a recurrent pattern of global climate which, in Europe, alter-
‘ nated between temperate — interglacial — phases with greater forest and wood-
  land vegetation, and cooler — glacial — episodes with open vegetation and low
  sea levels. On occasion this resulted in the advance of northern ice sheets over
  Scandinavia and Britain as well as smaller southern ice caps in the Pyrenees,
  Alps, Carpathians, Balkan and Caucasus mountains. Quaternary research has
  shown however that within these broad categories of interglacial and glacial
  there were many varied conditions which were magnified in particular parts of
  the continent. These will be discussed, where relevant, in the following chap-
  ters.

 Changes in the duration and amplitude of climatic cycles
 Although cooling and deforestation in the Netherlands can be demonstrated
 at 2.3 Myr BP (de Jong 1988), the early cycles have a very weak signal in the
 deep-sea cores. This is measured in terms of the magnitude between the glacial
 lows and interglacial highs of temperature, vegetation, sea levels and ice
 extent. Zagwijn (1992:figure 2) has estimated, on the basis of the Netherlands
 pollen record, that July temperatures fluctuated between an average of 10°C to
 20°C during the period 2.3-1.5 Myr BP. After this time the range increases,
 with averages now fluctuating between 5°C and 20°C, which would have had
 major repercussions for plant growth and the structure of vegetation commu-
 nities. One result is seen in the Netherlands Bavel interglacial at 1 Myr BP.
 This is the first time that a pollen profile shows any stratigraphic succession
      SOT[OZSS91I9 A


                  eh




      IBYIIJOS
        seqieg
           MS                                                                                    qWeuolesqog




                                                                                                                 oroonuey eurjuOT
                                                                                                                 OPN
                       uoqo|ssuIz[Ig                                                                                                                OUPT[SOSTA
                                                                                                                                                03910'T-BSOUIA,
                         Yotred                                                                                                                 PIV Ul WIOL,

                                                                                                                          TP ae)
                                                                                                                                                  OOTITYDILION
                       WITOYUTIIS
                     usSUTUQYIS
                                                                                                 OW                                              eIeIPST[Od P&T
      ONwiroyusyoy
               roney]
                  WITOYUOSOT|I
                                                                uesd1Iq-ZouNW-wW
                                                                                                                                eIUIOS]
