Any progress that might be made towards a unified social archaeology gener-
ally founders on the rocks of the earlier Palaeolithic. What has happened since
Childe’s remarks in 1951 is that the Lower and Middle Palaeolithic have now
achieved the research status that he gave then to the Upper Palaeolithic and
Mesolithic. In the past forty years large-scale, multi-disciplinary projects have
recovered a wealth of archaeological and environmental data from sites
throughout Europe. Moreover, the development of a continuous Pleistocene
chronology based on the deep-sea isotopic record (Imbrie and Imbrie 1979), and
science-based dating beyond the period covered by radiocarbon (Aitken 1990),
has produced frameworks which encourage interpretation rather than mere
description.
   These interpretations are frequently presented visually. Many of the projects
provide artists’ reconstructions of the landscapes these European hominids
inhabited (Lumley 1979, Mania and Dietzel 1980). As Moser has argued, these
images ‘are more than just illustrations which summarize information pre-
sented in the text; rather they are reinforcements of .. . theories, and as such
constitute arguments in themselves’ (1992:833). By presenting the excavated
facts as visual summaries, it is also implicit as to how we should interpret
them. We see hominids attacking bison in the lake at Bilzingsleben (Mania and
Dietzel 1980), living in their tent at Lazaret (Lumley 1969a) or planning, exe-
cuting and then celebrating the elephant hunt at Torralba/Ambrona (Howell
1965). Through these devices, the unfamiliar deep-past, where the archaeolog-
                 Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                          3

ical ‘scraps’ are indeed meagre when compared to other periods, becomes
known and knowable.
  These images control our theoretical imaginations rather more than we care to
acknowledge (Stoczkowski 1994, Gamble 1992a, Moser 1998, Moser and Gamble
1997, Gifford-Gonzalez 1993). They make us feel comfortable with a natural-
history approach to reconstructing the past. The pictures compare with the way
geologists created scenes from deep-time during the last century (Rudwick 1976)
in order to establish their claims to be able to reconstruct the extinct worlds of
the Eocene, the Carboniferous or any geological epoch they chose.
   Such reconstructions are valuable in expressing ‘natural’ relationships
between the multifarious strands of data that are routinely collected and ana-
lysed on any Palaeolithic site. Nowadays an image of a hominid in a landscape
can combine evidence from the analysis of ostracods, mammalian micro- and
macrofaunas, herpetofaunas, calcareous nannoplanktons, soil micromorphol-
ogy, palynology, geology and sedimentology, to name a few of the possibilities
now in the Quaternary scientist’s armoury. We frequently use these images of
the deep-time past, as attendance at any Palaeolithic conference reveals, when
it comes to showing what we think all those data mean. Using these images
allows us to reach consensus about what regularly took place — hunting, gath-
ering, cooking, eating, child care, tool manufacture, hide scraping, sleeping,
burying the dead —- and which sexes and age groups were largely responsible
(Gifford-Gonzalez 1993, Moser 1989).
   But while these images appear to open a window into the Palaeolithic, they
also close curtains. The most important curtain they draw across our investi-
gations is the subject of this book, Palaeolithic society. The reason for this is
quite straightforward. The Palaeolithic has never been a seed-bed for the dis-
cussion of social theory within archaeology. Instead there have been extremely
important debates about how the Palaeolithic record was formed and the
causes of subsequent variability in lithic and faunal remains (Binford 1973,
1981a, 1981b, Binford and Binford 1966, Bordes and de Sonneville-Bordes 1970,
Dibble 1987, Mellars 1996, Mellars 1970, Stiner and Kuhn 1992). Such middle-
range theory (Binford 1983a) has been promoted in the fields of taphonomy and
the study of site formation processes such that we now have a much clearer
idea of what is known and is knowable in the Palaeolithic. New data have been
generated, and with them the opportunity to recognize fresh patterns at both a
site and a regional scale. However, these patterns have not been explained as
the result of social factors. Indeed, the Binfords’ critique of the five Mousterian
tribes of southwest France (Bordes 1968a, 1972) defined by their different lithic
assemblages was a deliberate move away from culture history and social expla-
nation.
   While the record of observations has grown enormously, the register of ideas
has also kept pace, albeit on a predictable track. The track is indicated by those
artists’ images which capture the ecological relations between hominids and
resources in the landscapes of the Palaeolithic. Elsewhere, these relationships

            a”
4            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

have been usefully expanded through the insights of evolutionary ecology to
include discussion of optimality (Bettinger 1991), decision rules (Mithen 1990)
or risk avoidance (Torrence 1989) among prehistoric foragers, but the emphasis
is firmly on the side of a natural rather than a social prehistory.
   Social relationships are not easily portrayed except as symbolic diagrams, but
see the cover illustration for this book by M. Anton. Hence an anthropologist
will provide a kinship chart rather than a photograph. These charts are an
essential aid to their arguments about the structure of social life. For archaeol-
ogists, the naturalistic reconstructions of bison hunting at Bilzingsleben are
more ‘believable’, because they are at least refutable through taphonomic
enquiry, than the imaginative depiction of the same hominids worshipping the
dawn by a lake in eastern Germany 300,000 years ago. An artist’s reconstruc-
tion of a complex concept such as society would meet similar difficulties, not
least because the artist would start without any guidance from scientific con-
vention about how to depict social life in the past. Those geological scenes from
deep-time provided a convention for reconstructing the natural landscape to
make it accessible. Societies, animal or human, were never shown. Only repre-
sentative taxa appeared as though in some taxidermist’s workshop.


Palaeolithic oppositions, convictions and solutions
A commitment to a social archaeology has existed for some time in later pre-
history (Flannery 1976, Friedman and Rowlands 1977, Redman et al. 1978,
Renfrew 1973, Renfrew and Shennan 1982) and from this largely processual and
materialist base various alternative social theories have recently been explored
(Barrett 1994, Barrett, Bradley and Green 1991, Bradley 1984, Gosden 1994,
Hodder 1990a, Moore 1986, Shanks and Tilley 1987a and 1987b, Thomas 1991).
In particular, these later works have stressed the archaeological record as text,
replete with meanings and inscribed ambiguity, which constitutes a landscape
where social actors are involved in deliberate action. The involvement of social
agents in the creation of their varied and dynamic social worlds stands in stark
contrast to the earlier texts in social archaeology. Here the investigation of the
social system and its various regulatory states formed the focus. The social
creativity of individuals was crushed by an overbearing system.
   The eons of the Palaeolithic when little seems to change, combined with
those ‘scraps’ mentioned by Childe, have never suggested any other interpreta-
tion than a natural, or at best a systemic one. But even with the latter it seems
that for long periods of time certain key sub-systems, such as religion and craft
specialization, were entirely lacking. This makes it even more difficult to argue
that change was internally produced by friction between sub-systems and
where homeostasis was upset. Dynamic change therefore had to be supplied
from outside. This can mean either the replacement of one population by
another or the climatic cycles of the Pleistocene forcing changes in subsistence,
settlement and associated technologies.
                Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                             5
     As a result, explanation in the Palaeolithic has stressed oppositions between
  ancient and modern humans, environment and culture, foraging and agricul-
  ture. This approach has established what many archaeologists still see as the
  truly important purpose of studying earliest prehistory: to discover when and
  where the foundations of the civilizing process, from which the western world
  ultimately benefited most, were laid (Gamble 1993a:20-3). For many years the
  Palaeolithic has been divided from the rest of archaeology by an interpretative
  curtain founded on these oppositions. For this reason as much as the ‘scraps’ of
  data argument, the Palaeolithic has not been part of the later developments in
  social archaeology, and hence has been largely ignored by post-processualists
  (but see Hodder 1990a).
     Many would regard this neglect as positively beneficial to Palaeolithic
  studies, and for a long time I would have agreed with them. I have changed my
  mind not because I am yet convinced by all of the post-processualist agenda,
  but rather because their attacks have highlighted the poverty of theory in my
  area of expertise. This poverty touches most on the units of analysis that the
  Palaeolithic uses and the goals it has set itself. These are explored more fully
  below and in Chapters 2 and 3. My intention is to tweak that interpretative
  curtain aside and seek solutions that do not rely upon traditional divisions.
     Of course I am not working alone at this project. The tweaking has already
‘ begun. The interpretative curtain, which seems to divide an active human past
 involving   trade, agriculture,   ritual, monuments,   towns   and power   from   a
 passive one of adaptation to the conditions of existence, is, in the case of the
 Mesolithic, already being pulled aside (Bender 1985:21). Neither does there
 seem to be any problem with drawing it further to include the rich record of the
 Upper Palaeolithic (Price and Brown 1985a, Soffer 1987). However, while these
 gains in approaching the past as a continuous stream are not negligible, it does
 appear that the curtain which separates Us from the Other, Civilized from
 Uncivilized, now falls across the Middle to Upper, Neanderthal to Modern,
 transition (Gamble 1991, Stringer and Gamble 1993). All we have apparently
 done is to shift its position by some 30,000 years.
    My contention is that we should scrap this curtain altogether. The deep-time
 past of the Palaeolithic does not need to be investigated through such opposi-
 tions. As long as we maintain these contrasts we can only pursue a divided
 archaeology, where much of the Palaeolithic will remain remote to the inter-
 ests of most archaeologists. The study of human origins then becomes nothing
 more than a story from a faraway land, as remote from people as the epochs of
 geology.
    My solution is to take society as a unifying focus. This may seem a strange
 choice given the complications of defining, using and interpreting such a
 concept. I have adopted it due to several convictions explored in a number of
 previous publications.
   Firstly, I can still see no justification why archaeology should have different
 procedures and standards on either side of an interpretative curtain which
               ia
6             The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

divides modern from ancient humanity. There is no reason to switch explana-
tions from predominantly ecological to mainly social just because the nature
of the archaeological record changes with the advent of agriculture and sedent-
ism (Barker and Gamble 1985, Gamble 1986a, 1986b, 1986c). Neither is there
any reason to change explanations during the Palaeolithic as soon as a more
varied record appears with the Upper Palaeolithic. My interest is in the differ-
ences among Palaeolithic societies and not the divisions between them. My
concern in this book is with analysis rather than definitions.
   Secondly, understanding social life in all its different forms should be an
archaeological goal since, as anthropologists of the past, we have the data to
enlarge and enrich such experience (Gamble 1991a, 1991b, 1993a, 1993b,
1993c). We would be poor anthropologists if we made no contribution to the
variety of societies available for systematic study (Gamble and Soffer 1990,
Soffer and Gamble 1990, Stringer and Gamble 1993). The investigation of
Palaeolithic societies is, in particular, an exploration of alternatives to ethno-
graphic experience. As put by Wobst,
Archaeologists are the only anthropologists whose data contain information about
behavioural variance in all its dimensions: in personnel from single individuals in
private to the largest structural poses; in space from the smallest catchment area to the
largest continent-wide population matrix, and in time from single events to millennia.
(Wobst 1978:307)

   Thirdly, the explanation of stasis and change lies at the centre of archaeolog-
ical enquiry. Social life was the heart which kept the varied systems beating,
whether or not change occurred (Gamble 1993a, 1993d, 1995a, 1995b). In most
cases the investigation of stasis and change proceeds little beyond opting for a
variable in the social system, such as population pressure on resources. Despite
a number of telling critiques of such simplistic, asocial, explanations of change
and intensification (Bender 1978, 1981, Lourandos 1977, 1985), there remain
unreconstructed social evolutionists who trace all human developments to a
single cause such as population numbers and environmental constraints (e.g.
Johnson and Earle 1987). I will side with the critics of these old-fashioned texts
by proposing a different view of the relations between humans and their envi-
ronments. I will stress the active engagement and mutual involvement of the
individual in the construction and negotiation of his/her environment.
   Finally, it is time that archaeology claimed its place within the social as well
as the historical sciences. To do this we need to set our own comparative
agenda, not only to provide reflections on the uses of the past to construct con-
temporary societies (Gamble 1993b, 1993c), but to provide the prehistoric per-
spective on those modern interactions (Gamble 1992b). This position is well
expressed by Binford:
we have a chance to understand humankind in a way that no participant, or no social
scientist addressing the quick-time events of direct social experience, could ever
imagine. To fail to recognise this potential, to fail to grasp a new understanding of
humankind from this different perspective — the perspective of the macroforces that con-
              Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                               iG

dition and modify lifeways in contexts unappreciated by the participants within
complex thermodynamic systems - is quite literally to ‘abandon our birthright’.
(1989a:52)

   It can fairly be stated that the social sciences have hardly noticed the absence
of prehistoric archaeology, let alone the Palaeolithic, from their syntheses of
social life. This situation is unlikely to change unless the case for an historical
dimension, and one which involves an understanding of the character of the
long-term prehistoric record (Murray 1987), is strongly put. The insights of
social theory, and in particular the vocabulary of network analysis, have been
adopted in this book in order to effect a translation between the very different
evidence for human social action at varied timescales and degrees of resolution.
However, I will not be arguing for a palaeosociology of the Palaeolithic any
more than for a palaeopsychology or palaeoanthropology of the period. The his-
torical and material basis of archaeology conditions the accounts of past soci-
eties and individuals that we produce. There will be no obvious support in such
accounts for the claims of one social theory over another that aims to under-
stand individuals and societies in the modern world. The methods and concerns
of the present and the past separate these various projects in social analysis.
   However, analysing prehistoric societies would ultimately serve little
purpose if it only had relevance for archaeologists. Our contribution must
therefore be directed towards influencing those future syntheses of social
theory. I imagine these syntheses will continue to recognize, in standard post-
modern fashion, that industrialization and civilization, while dominant social
forms, do not include all human social experience let alone represent its
highest achievements. It is here that archaeology has a contribution to make.
Synthesis, by the very nature of the process which produces it and the under-
standing which comes from undertaking it, must continually seek to broaden
our experience. Prehistory provides one route for such continuing awareness.



The narratives of theoretical archaeology
A major factor that has muted our archaeological voice has been the absence of
a common structure for discussion and comparison. A reason for this has been
Palaeolithic archaeologists’ adherence to the scientific method. In its crudest
form this subscribes to an objective view of facts as neutral, and a clear belief
in a structure that exists ‘out there’ and which will be revealed through greater
analytical precision and yet more facts. For example, Flannery and Marcus have
recently expressed their belief in this objectivity as follows:
Whenever science is combined with a social or political agenda — no matter how noble
that agenda may be - it is inevitably science that suffers. (Flannery and Marcus
1994:441, my emphasis)

   On the contrary, I find it difficult to see how a branch of historical science,
like Palaeolithic archaeology, can be separated from a social or political agenda
8              The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

(Gamble 1993b, 1993c) if it is to have any value as a form of knowledge.
Studying the past, just like studying particle physics, is not a neutral activity
undertaken for its own sake by individuals who, while doing it, temporarily
suspend their membership of humanity.
   Not surprisingly, then, many social theories have had an uncomfortable rela-
tionship with the scientific approach to knowledge. The sticking point seems
to be the way that knowledge claims are verified and causation established
(Clark 1993). Some of these fears lead to an almost entire rejection of the claims
of science, as for example in the work of Giddens (1984). This rejection has been
picked up by archaeologists who take to task the narrow scientific view which
is all too common in archaeological writings. They point out, quite correctly,
that it leaves human action out of the equation (Thomas 1991).
   However, nearly everyone agrees that the scientific method undoubtedly
works as a means to structure the investigation of the world in the physical sci-
ences. Palaeolithic archaeology has made considerable procedural advances by
adopting a scientific approach. But, this approach has led, as we shall see, to a
rather limited view of what the data can tell us about society. The similarity with
my earlier discussion about the restricted range of visual images is striking.
   So, by choosing society as my focus I am seeking to expand the present boun-
daries of Palaeolithic discussion. This does not mean a break with past
approaches. In writing this book I have not found it possible, or desirable, to
abandon the procedures of the scientific approach in dealing with the question
of Palaeolithic societies. I too am concerned with the verification of knowledge
claims. Hence there is considerable discussion of ecology and environment in
the chapters which follow, not because these provide an objective standard but
rather a mutual one for interpreting past human action. What I have attempted
to do is to broaden the scope of the scientific method by considering what a
common approach between the historical and social sciences might entail.
Such a realignment must involve not only the conceptual issues, such as
society, which are addressed, but also the manner in which they are expressed.
Here, I take my lead from Haraway, who observes in another context — the use
of primate studies in contemporary science and society — that facts are only
meaningful when contained within stories (1989). However, this approach still
needs a caveat for those, like myself, who are interested in how we verify our
narratives.
We should resist the temptation to assume that since stories are stories they are, in some
sense, unreal or untrue, for this is to suppose that the only reality or true truth, is one
in which we, as living, experiencing beings, can have no part at all. (Ingold 1993:153)

  The problem with the Palaeolithic is that currently there are very few stories.
Those which exist deal mostly with origins (Conkey and Williams 1991, Knight
1991a, 1991b, Landau 1991) and the inception of change, rather than with the
long periods of stasis between these rare moments of excitement. In adopting
society as my focus I aim to turn the spotlight on the narrative framework
                Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                                     9

 which is needed to examine and explain the data from very long periods of time,
 the 500,000 years of the European Palaeolithic. It is during this time when our
 register of ideas, just like the few images in the artist’s portfolio, runs low.
    A social approach to the Palaeolithic requires, among other things, that as
 well as recognizing the patterns in the data we can also reproduce them. At the
 outset it is important to understand that these Palaeolithic societies, however
 we might eventually define them, are not waiting to be revealed through the
 simple tabulation of their attributes. The challenge that the Palaeolithic pre-
 sents, and one reason the interpretative curtain exists, is that the basic assump-
 tions of the elements of social life which underpin so much of social
 archaeology cannot be taken for granted. Minimally these might concern lan-
 guage, material-based symbolism, reflexive thought, the metaphor of kinship,
 ritual and the differential exercise of power. From such a potent cocktail we are
 able to mix many social theories (Turner 1991) without once mentioning sub-
 sistence, ecology, natural selection and demography.

 Studies of Palaeolithic society: human social origins
  While Childe, in 1951, was pronouncing on the deficiencies of the Lower
  Palaeolithic record, research had already begun to fashion a model of social
- organization from those elements just mentioned above. This culminated in
  one of the great edited syntheses of modern anthropology, Social life of early
  man (Washburn 1961). Among the contributors to this Wenner-Gren sympo-
  sium were physical anthropologists, palaeontologists, primatologists, psychol-
  ogists, geneticists, zoologists, geologists and archaeologists.!
     Although I refer to it as a ‘great’ synthesis, anyone coming to it cold might
  be excused for wondering why. The papers seem to be saying very little about
  social organization and rather more about a timetable of events such as the
  appearance of cannibalism and the first use of fire (Washburn 1961:viii-ix).
  There are occasionally conclusions that appear to address a social perspective,
  even if they seemed to state the obvious:
 All [physical] evidence suggests that the Palaeolithic bands were not territorial units,
 that they were capable of large migrations, and that sexual relations must have existed
 between them (Vallois 1961:229)

 while developmental pathways were readily inferred:
 In evolutionary perspective a necessary locus and an indispensable condition for a cul-
 tural system is an organized system of social action in which social behaviour is pat-
 terned by role differentiation . .. A social structure, therefore, can be identified as one
 of the characteristic features of a protocultural stage in hominid evolution. (Hallowell
 1961:240]
   However, many of the contributions only seem to engage in speculation
 about social form and origins based on a minimal ethnography of hunters and
 gatherers and assertions about how to interpret the archaeological record.
10           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

   The importance of Social life of early man rests on three factors. Firstly, it
demonstrated the advantages of a multi-disciplinary approach to human
origins. This pattern would be taken up and pursued in early hominid research.
The mix of disciplines was heavily towards the natural and physical sciences
and it was from their crucibles that the agendas of ancestor research were to be
poured.
   Secondly, the outstanding paper in the volume was by Washburn and DeVore,
‘Social behavior of baboons and early man’. They dealt with troop size, range,
diet, population structure, sub-groups and play, mother-child relations, sexual
behaviour, economic dependence, dominance, home base, sounds and gestures.
This thematic framework has been the standard for subsequent research.
Throughout the paper they contrasted the life of baboons with modern forag-
ers, producing a summary table which listed spatial, demographic, affective and
behavioural differences for the topics mentioned above. They concluded that
‘because of the great behavioural gap between man and his nearest relatives,
some reconstruction of [social] behaviour is possible’ (Washburn and DeVore
1961:103). This gap presumably indicates extinct transitional stages between
the societies of apes and humans.
   The third factor is only apparent with hindsight. Washburn and DeVore
encouraged Richard Lee to undertake, between 1963 and 1964, his first study
of the !Kung San foragers of Botswana (Lee 1979:9-15). This marked the intro-
duction of anthropologists to the multi-disciplinary project of human origins
(ibid.:9) and led directly to the important Man the hunter symposium (Lee and
DeVore 1968). This and subsequent comparative volumes on foraging societies
(Bicchieri 1972, Burch and Ellanna 1994, Damas 1969, Hunn and Williams
1982, Ingold, Riches and Woodburn 1991, Leacock and Lee 1982, Lee and
DeVore 1976, Miracle, Fisher and Brown 1991, Smiley et al. 1980) have pro-
vided a rich source for defining the parameters of societies where nothing more
was assumed than that they lived in small groups and moved about a lot (Lee
and DeVore 1968:11).?


Characterizing hunters and gatherers

This description of the nomadic style became the basic model (Mueller-Wille
and Dickson 1991:26) for subsequent research into foraging societies. In a com-
parative synthesis of the papers in Man the hunter, Lee and DeVore
(ibid.:11-12) drew a distinction between elements in the organizational base
and the social system (Table 1.1).
   As might be expected, this basic model expanded on the views summarized
by Washburn and DeVore (1961) in their comparison between foragers and
baboons. The emphasis on open systems, alliances, mobility and lack of terri-
tory (Lee 1976), while not supported by all the papers in the symposium, did
offer an alternative view to the patrilocal, land-holding model of bands pro-
moted by Service (1966, 1971) in his classic statement on social evolution.
                 Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                                 11

 Table 1.1. The nomadic-style model of hunters and gatherers (Lee and
 DeVore 1968: 11-12).

 Organizational base
 * open social systems where local groups are commonly associated with a
   geographical range
 * communication between groups takes the form of marriage alliances and visiting.
   This results in hunting groups consisting of several ‘bands’ which are part of a
   larger linguistic and breeding community
 ¢ the economic system is based on a core of common features
   — ahome base
   — division of labour where the males hunt and the females gather
   — the collected resources are shared

 Social system
  e the prime necessity of mobility restricts personal possessions and material culture.
    This acts to maintain the egalitarian structure
  ¢ food supply keeps the group small, frequently fewer than fifty persons, and
    population is redistributed between bands, thereby maintaining the effectiveness of
    units
  e intergroup relations through marriage and other means of alliance are the means by
_   which shortfalls in resources are counteracted
  e exclusive rights to resources are uncommon
  e the environment is the storehouse and food surpluses are rare. This restricts the
    social use of food resources
  ¢ visiting prevents any strong attachment to one area. Conflict within the groups is
    most commonly resolved by fission



 Lee and DeVore’s model echoed Lesser’s earlier call to adopt, as a working
 hypothesis,
 the universality of human contact and influence — as a fundamental feature of the socio-
 historical process; [and] conceive of human societies — prehistoric, primitive or modern
 — not as closed systems, but as open systems . . . we [should] think of any social aggre-
 gate not as isolated, separated by some kind of wall, from others, but as inextricably
 involved with other aggregates, near and far, in weblike, netlike connections. (Lesser
 1961:42]
    Ethnographic examples can be found to support both poles of the argument.
 The reality, as Stanner (Peterson 1986, Stanner 1965) pointed out, is a contin-
 uum of differential social access to local groups and the resources they control.
 This variable association was enshrined in what he termed estate (religious
 core) and range (foraging area) relations (Gamble 1986a:33-4). The position of
 any group on the continuum was strongly influenced by variation in ecological
 conditions. The closer in size that a group’s estate and range become, the more
 likely it is to find a patrilocal, restricted access system. On the contrary, when
 resources are poorer, range size will far exceed the area covered by a group’s
                 ”
12               The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

                                     RANGE




                                     ESTATE



     Rich   <—
                                  Resources
            1.1 The transformation under variable ecological conditions of hunter-
                gatherer spatial behaviour, as predicted by Stanner (1965).


estate. This generally results in unrestricted access, sharing and an open rather
than closed system (Figure 1.1).
   Peterson (1986) has shown how this social continuum works for several
Australian foraging societies (Table 1.2). Ranged along an ecological gradient?
of good to poor resources it is possible to see systematic changes in the princi-
ples of social integration, association to land and marriage rules. The social
principles of inclusion and exclusion which change along this gradient are
examined in Chapter 3.
   I mention this debate concerning the open or closed nature of foraging groups
not only because it relates directly to my main concern, societies, but also
because it illustrates a recurrent feature in the way hunters and gatherers are
dichotomized (Table 1.3).
   Several of these authors do discuss the continuum which Stanner explored
so profitably. However, this gloss is often forgotten, and the extremes are used
as definitions that structure archaeological analysis and characterize the pre-
historic hunter-gatherer way of life (e.g. Johnson and Earle 1987, Keeley 1988).


A multi-disciplinary success story

The polar oppositions in Table 1.3 were introduced from the 1960s when both
archaeologists and anthropologists discovered, unlike Childe, that they could
investigate the social life of early hominids. The key to this discovery was to adopt
a multi-disciplinary approach to the problem of social and biological origins.
   This strategy is best exemplified by the success of the Leakeys at Olduvai
Gorge, Tanzania, where a cornucopia of fossils and archaeological sites was
now dated by scientific techniques (Leakey 1951, Leakey 1971). At the same
time they encouraged investigations into chimpanzees, with startling results
concerning tool use and group behaviour (Goodall 1986). Key elements in
Washburn and DeVore’s comparison between baboons and foragers, which had
suggested a space for the investigation of social life in the Palaeolithic, could
now be investigated for our closest primate relative.
               Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                               13

 Table 1.2. Australian social organization along an ecological gradient (after
 Peterson 1986:Figs. 6:5 and 151-3).

 Resource    Persons                                                    Social
 gradient    per km?           Integration    Ties toland   Marriage    principle

 Poor        1:200             Generational   Conception    Monogamy    INCLUSIVE
             (Pintupi)         moieties
 Medium      1:86              Patrilineal    Section/
             (Walpiri,         generational   sub-section
             Pitjantjatjara)   moieties       managers
 Rich        1:20              None           Descent       Polygyny    EXCLUSIVE
             (Yolngu)                         groups
             1:4
             (Kurnai)



     Faced with such success, the emphasis, not surprisingly, for such multi-dis-
  ciplinary research became heavily African (Clark 1976). This research was
  geared to the origins of social life* as later expounded in the work of Reynolds
  (1966), Howell (1965), Isaac (1972, 1978), Leakey and Lewin (1977), Zihlman
* (1978), Wilson (1980), Tanner (1981), Lovejoy (1981) and Humphrey (1983), and
  more recently by Parker (1987) Wilson (1988), Foley (1989, 1989), Knight
  (1991a, 1991b), Maryanski and Turner (1992), Rodseth (et al. 1991), Potts (1993)
  and Quiatt and Reynolds (1993). Several of these models are reviewed by
  Richards (1987:206-33) and by Knight (1991a:Chapter 5). A valuable set of fem-
  inist critiques is supplied by Fedigan (1986), Conkey (1991) and Sperling (1991).°
     What emerges from these accounts is that the social, in the context of
  research into human origins, was a way to link disparate, multi-disciplinary
  data together to form a coherent narrative. It was the paradigm which justified
  the enterprise, by supporting two different narratives: stories about change and
  adaptation.
     In particular, Glynn Isaac sought to characterize, using the early Pleistocene-
  age archaeology of East Africa, the nature of these early societies and their
  developmental trajectories. Hence his discussion of home bases (1978), net-
  works for cultural transmission (1972), and the superstructure of culture (1976)
  which was placed, in Hallowell’s (1961) terms, upon a protocultural base com-
  parable to great-ape organization (Figure 1.2).


 The worm in the bud

 But all may not be so rosy in the garden of human-origins research. While
 archaeologists celebrate the achievements of multi-disciplinary research and
 the products of the scientific method applied to a problem which, only forty
 years ago, Childe pronounced impossible, we have to ask ourselves what we
               ”
14              The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

Table 1.3. Some of the dichotomies used in the characterization of hunters
and gatherers, past and present.

Local group           Patrilocal        Composite bands       (Service 1971, Steward
                                                                1936}
                      Unilocal         * Bilateral            (Gardner 1966, Layton
                                                                1986}
Social                Territorial       Non-territorial       (Lee 1976)
organization          Tribal level      Band level            (Constandse-Westermann
                                                                 and Newell 1991, Fox
                                                                 1967)
Kinship system        Complex           Elementary            (Lévi-Strauss 1969)
                      e.g. Eskimo       e.g. Australian       (Fox 1967)
Network               Nucleate          Anucleate             (Yellen and Harpending
                                                                1972)
Interaction pattern   Closed            Open                  (Lee 1976)
                      exclusive         inclusive             (Gamble 1993d)
                      inegalitarian     egalitarian           (Woodburn 1982)
Settlement system     Collector         Forager               (Binford 1980}
                      circulating       radiating             (Marks 1983)
Return system         Delayed           Immediate             (Woodburn 1980)
Systemic              Complex           Simple                (Keeley 1988)
organization
Knowledge base        Group opinion     Memorate              (Gardner 1966)
                                        personal experience
Technological         Curated           Expedient             (Binford 1973, 1979)
organization          Reliable          Maintainable          (Bleed 1986)
Historical            ‘Hot’             ‘Cold’                (Bender 1985)
position              active            passive
Social world          Unencapsulated    Encapsulated          (Woodburn 1991)
                      pristine          enculturated          (Service 1971)
Evolutionary          Local group:      Family level group:   (Johnson and Earle 1987)
typology              acephalous        no domestication



have actually learnt. Not in terms of new archaeological sites, fossil skulls or
patterns, but instead in terms of those social origins which the whole multi-
disciplinary enterprise was created to investigate.
   Latour and Strum (1986) have examined seven accounts of human social
origins ranging in age from Hobbes’ Leviathan (1651) to the sociobiological
account of Axelrod and Hamilton (1981). They included one archaeological
account, Leakey and Lewin’s Origins (1977), which differs from all the rest® in
adhering to a science-based chronology for our social origins and presenting
many of these carefully garnered multi-disciplinary facts. However, when they
compared Origins with Rousseau’s A discourse on the origin of inequality
                        Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                                                                          bs

FOOD    SHARING/PROVISIONING                        COMPLEX                           ABILITIES        FAVOURED

                             Flexible,        social    groups          Tit for Tat   Information       exchange           (language)

                      Modules        : mates       + offspring                        Reciprocal      altruism
                                                                    Kin selection
                Kin    linkage         between         modules                        Planning     & social            chess

                                                                                                 (             a   4      De




                                                                                                 Elaboration of ab
                                                                                                     culture   : system
                        Central place foraging                                        «                        :                 pin




        Meat
  acquisition                Food)   sharing
                                                            Gathering




                            Division   of labour




                                Tool    use




                1.2 The ‘food-sharing’ or ‘central-place foraging’ model and its
                    implications for social evolution among early hominids (after Isaac
                        1989:Fig. 4.14),

(1755), written long before any fossil hominids or Palaeolithic archaeology had
been dug up, they found little difference in the structural framework and
assumptions. From their brief survey they came to a challenging conclusion:
We had assumed that the knowledge and introduction of better ‘facts’ about the origin
of socialness would produce better accounts. Yet this seems not to be the case. More
particularly, there appears to be an inverse law at work in our examples: the more facts
exist and are incorporated, the less attention is paid to the coherence of the framework
within which those facts are placed. As a result, the number of facts appears to be
almost irrelevant, since the most coherent accounts in our corpus were those, like
Rousseau’s, which laid aside all facts, and the least coherent were those with the most
facts. (Latour and Strum 1986:185, my emphasis)

   Challenging — at least to those who expect that the answer to human social
origins will be revealed by joining up the dots. Challenging also to those, like
Landau (1991), who regard it as sufficient to point to the repetitive nature of
human-origins stories written by archaeologists, without judging their coher-
ence against a wider guild of writers tackling the same subject.
   I draw the following conclusions from this cautionary tale of social construc-
tion. Facts, as Haraway tells us, are meaningful within stories. We need to
balance narrative coherence against the necessary selection of information. We
do not need to include everything that has been discovered to produce coher-
ent syntheses, but we do need to pay equal attention to the structure of our
                        -
16            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

narrative. The scientific method needs to recognize the mythic character of
accounts of social origins since these are laden with values concerning our
present status, roles and rights.
  What Latour and Strum are basically reminding us is that we should be
explicit about our starting assumptions. There is obviously always scope for
tightening logical procedures and‘considering what exactly it is that makes a
scientific account convincing in terms of verifying knowledge claims (Gardin
1980). I also take heart from their critique since although they emphasize the
mythic quality of scientific research, they do not dismiss the idea of studying
social origins. This is in contrast to the British anthropologist Evans-Pritchard
who once declared that such studies were a waste of time; speculations about
unanswerable questions (1965).’ Their insistence on social genealogy, where
origins debates are opportunities to negotiate and renegotiate what our society
is about, provides a necessary context for justifying the enterprise and one, once
again, where science will not suffer by being combined with a noble social or
political agenda.


Studies of Palaeolithic society: the origins of modern foraging societies
The most influential typology of social evolution in the past thirty years iden-
tified as its units bands, tribes, chiefs and states (Service 1971). Although most
people claim to have outgrown this typology, I suspect that most of them still
use it as a mental shorthand (Yoffee and Sherratt 1993). It allows a first approx-
imation whereby an ethnographic or archaeological example can be slotted into
an organizational scheme which, by its generality, is expected to tell us more
about the subject under scrutiny.
   The problem is that while in the broadest sense the divisions have some
reality — bands and states are different social realities — there is little agreement
about the criteria which would classify the conceptually much murkier transi-
tional societies to a particular rung of the typological ladder. Moreover, the
inevitable progression implied in the typology, what Johnson and Earle refer to
approvingly as an upward spiral (1987:15), is nothing more than a story about
the benefits of civilization. While it is a comforting myth about our western
social origins, such evolutionism tells us little beyond our belief in progress.


Open and closed societies: which came first?
These problems are well shown with the first category, bands. It took many
years for Europeans and North Americans to acknowledge that hunters and
gatherers had a social life and for its systematic investigation to begin (Kuper
1988). Once investigation had started, the problem then became one of how to
classify such a heterogeneous sample, scattered across the world, exploiting
very different resources, and exhibiting a wide range of customs.
   Steward (1936, 1955) and Service (1966, 1971) brought some order to this
               Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                            ye

 problem by recognizing that many of these bands were the product of contact
 with the modern world. These were the composite bands such as the northern
 Algonkians and Athabaskans (Service 1971:48-52), whose societies had been
 destroyed by western contact leaving only a fluid-membership, family-level
 type of organization (ibid.:97). These were seen as remnants of former patrilo-
 cal bands, which Service defined by exogamy outside the local group and viri-
 local residence, where on marriage women move to the husband’s household
 or campsite (1971:64). In Lee’s phrase, ‘the dominant impression one gets from
 accounts of patrilocal bands is one of semi-isolated, male-centered groups,
 encapsulated within territories’ (Lee 1976:75). These, according to Service,
 would have been the widespread form of social organization during the
 Palaeolithic. Ethnographic examples of patrilocal bands included all Australian
 societies and the central desert Californians.
   But this still left a great many bands outside the typological net. For example,
 the Eskimos and Great Basin Shoshone were regarded as anomalous (Service
 1971:83-97) because although affected by European contact they still retained
 some patrilocal band features. The Bushmen of the Kalahari were, even in the
  post-Man the hunter edition of his work (Service 1971:50), regarded as difficult
  to classify but certainly not patrilocal in form. Finally, the North West Coast
  foraging-based societies were on many counts outside the classification of band
’ societies and they were placed in the chiefdom or ranked societies category.
     Lee, on the other hand, challenged the widespread nature of patrilocal bands,
  regarding them as ethnographically rare (1976:76). His model, which traces its
  origins to Mauss (1906), emphasizes the fission and fusion of groups in which
  membership is organized bilaterally rather than just through the father’s line.
  The !Kung became the prime example of the ‘relatively open, social group with
  overlapping shared territories [which] seems to be the prevailing form among
  contemporary hunter-gatherers’ (Lee 1976:76). All this suggested a rethink of
  the status of the composite band. Maybe their form was not entirely due to
  their near destruction through contact with industrial civilization (Lee
 1976:77)2
    As we have seen, investigations of our earliest social origins in Africa are
 mainly interested in the acquisition of the elements of sociality (e.g. technol-
 ogy, territoriality, co-operation, hunting) rather than in identifying social types
 such as bands. The strategy, as shown by Isaac’s influential food-sharing model
 (1976:Figure 6, 1978), was to add a bit to the primate model of organization and
 take a bit away from modern hunters (Figure 1.2). The dominant view was that
 these earliest societies were essentially open, with fluid membership, and were
 non-territorial. They thus approximate to the descriptions of San groups
 (Barnard 1992, Lee 1976, Silberbauer 1981). The fluid social structure and
 immediate-return systems of these modern societies have been put down to
 their encapsulation by herding and agricultural societies (Woodburn 1991).8
 Hence the suggestion has resurfaced that these societies are in many ways com-
 parable to Service’s (1971) assessment of composite bands, as the product of
18           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

             Table 1.4..A division of contemporary hunting and
             gathering societies (Woodburn 1991:35).

             Encapsulated                     Unencapsulated
             Immediate return systems         Delayed return systems

             Africa                           North America
             !Kung                            Inuit societies
             Mbuti                            North West Coast societies
             Bee                              Australia
             India                            Aborigine societies
             Malapantaram
             Naiken
             Paliyan
             Malaysia
             Batek Negritos




enculturation rather than being indicative of earlier widespread social forms
(Table 1.4).
  An important aspect of the Kalahari research begun by Lee and his colleagues
has been to oppose this assessment. They have argued that open network
systems should also be regarded as original (Yellen and Harpending 1972:244).
The advantage of such systems lay in adjusting population to variation in
regional food supplies, using group fission to resolve conflicts by literally
‘walking away from the problem’ and evening out sex ratios and family sizes
between local groups within the bands (Layton 1986, Lee 1979). However, the
so-called revisionist critique of hunter-gatherer studies (Schrire 1984, Wilmsen
1989) now strongly supports the notion that the form of these ‘open’ societies
can be traced to the wider economic and social forces that have shaped the
recent political history of southern Africa. Individuals, it has been discovered,
move between hunting and herding economies with comparative ease and with
scant attention to the social niceties of typology.
  As a result the pendulum has swung back to consider that those societies,
largely unencapsulated by farmers or industrial nations, are in some way more
representative of a generalized pre-agricultural social system. In a world con-
sisting exclusively of hunters and gatherers, a higher proportion may have had
delayed-return systems (Woodburn 1991:61). Such societies are mostly from
the Arctic, the North West Coast of North America and Australia (Table 1.4).
Woodburn (1980, 1982) has argued that these societies are characterized by
delayed systems of return involving rights over valued assets. These assets take
the following forms:
           * valuable technical facilities used in production (nets, boats, fish traps)
           * processed and stored food usually kept in or near houses
               Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                            19

             ° wild products whose yields have been increased through intensifica-
               tion
             ¢ female kin to be bestowed by men in marriage (Woodburn 1991:32)
    Australia, the continent of hunters and gatherers, is rather troublesome to
 Woodburn’s suggestions concerning the original form of foraging society.
 Storage is rare and encapsulation by farmers did not take place until the arrival
 of Captain Cook. Yet, patrilocally based foraging bands did not exist in the con-
 tinent (Hiatt 1962). To get round this problem Woodburn proposes that
 Australian marriage systems were a form of delayed return with the older, ini-
 tiated men controlling the distribution of women between local groups in a
 connubium, or marriage universe. ‘Australians [are] farmers in disguise who are
 concerned with farming (and farming out) their women’ (Woodburn
 1980:108-9).
    But by insisting on the system of return, delayed or immediate, as the means
 to differentiate and characterize foraging societies, Woodburn ignores the
 importance of space and property as an asset. This is a serious omission since
  it is the transactions in property, as Layton (1986:30) shows, which shape the
  long-term processes of hunter-gatherer society and so determine its political
  structure. In this case property is owned by small descent groups, or clans,
  numbering from fifteen to fifty individuals (ibid.:22). Elsewhere they are
‘ referred to as the minimum band (Damas 1972) or local group (Birdsell 1968).
     In Australia this property consists of sacred sites over which each clan has
  exclusive rights. These sites form Stanner’s concept of the estate (1965). It is
  the association of people with the land and their active stewardship of the
  meanings connected with places that characterizes Australian foraging soci-
  eties. Such exclusive rights to geographical sites and sacred knowledge are con-
  trasted by Layton (1986:30) with other hunter-gatherers who exercise exclusive
  rights over territories and the food resources they contain. These rights are also
  vested in lineages and so form the basis for inegalitarian social structures.
     A rather different view is provided by Meillassoux (1973). He argues that the
  mode of exploitation of the land sets up relations of production that resolve
  themselves through the physical and social reproduction of society. The rela-
  tions of production between members of a hunting group do not in his view
  require continued membership of the group and so do not lead to long-lasting
  social cohesion. Moreover, where land is the subject rather than the instrument
  of labour, as is the case with farmers, this results in the rapid depletion of
  resources and hence the enforced movement of the group from one area to
  another in search of new food supplies. This makes it difficult, if not impos-
  sible, for him to see how hunters develop into farmers without them receiving
  some extra advantage from the environment.
     Property, the spatial use of resources, provides the focus for social action
  through involvement based on rights and obligations. If we just concentrated
  on the system of return, the use of resources in time, as Woodburn advocates,
  we might be tempted into some strange evolutionary arguments. For example,
               -
20            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

it might be argued that the !Kung would revert to a delayed system, if only they
were allowed to by the larger economic and political forces which surround
them. Such a view would deny them any active participation in their own
history and only requires that they seek some equilibrium in organization.
Hunters and gatherers are returned to that passive state where they are acted
upon by external forces such as climate or civilization. The members of such
societies are barely conceived as active social agents but rather as slaves to
nature. The societies they inhabit are ‘cold’ in terms of the possibilities of self-
generated change, relying instead on a push from outside. In this scenario the
‘hot’ societies emerge as those with agriculture and civilization. They are
peopled by ‘warm-blooded’ participants in the creation of history (Bender
1985:21).
  But putting such caricatures aside, this still leaves the problem of how and
why such dramatic social change took place. This is clearly Woodburn’s
concern. He has concluded that
delayed-return hunter-gatherer systems are, in a sense, pre-adapted for the development
of agriculture and pastoralism. They have the organization (the binding ties and the
social groups) which should make the development of an economy based on agriculture
or pastoralism easy when the techniques become available. (Woodburn 1991:57)
  Therefore it was among the now-vanished, unencapsulated, delayed-system
societies that such change occurred. In other words their success made them
disappear.
  Meillassoux also got out of this same problem by pointing to the North West
Coast societies, with their reliance on fishing, as the likely seed-bed from
which agricultural systems with their rights to tenure and property sprang
(1973:201). But like Woodburn, he does not explain why, in these windfall envi-
ronments, the foraging way of life is still dominant.


Simple causes

These studies point to the difficulties, if not impossibility, of establishing a
prototype from ethnography for immediately pre-agricultural societies and
then deducing an evolutionary trajectory. This, however, has not stopped
Johnson and Earle (1987:18) from presenting the !Kung and the Inuit as exam-
ples of two extremes in hunter-gatherer organization representing, respectively,
family level and local group organization. Prehistoric foraging societies from
Olduvai Gorge to the Middle Palaeolithic of the Dordogne are then fitted to
the demographic parameters of the !Kung and the Great Basin Shoshone.
Everything that happens in the Upper Palaeolithic was ‘impelled by a contin-
ued growth in population’ (ibid.:55). In fact they claim that population growth
is the primary determinant of all social change (ibid.:3). The intensification pre-
cipitated by such growth then produced local group-level societies, such as the
coastal Inuit or the interior Nunamiut. Therefore we are left with the view that
the open, composite systems are somehow ancestral and that foragers wait pas-
               Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                                 pA

sively for change to hit them, in the ‘unexpected’ guise of population growth,
rather than initiating it themselves. This last account of social change is clearly
unsatisfactory. The lesson of committing ethnography with a shovel (Wobst
1978) has not yet been fully absorbed into such evolutionist schemes.


Studies of Palaeolithic society: the origins of Band and complex societies
 While anthropologists wrestle with their contradictory typologies, archaeolo-
 gists have investigated two other concepts whose origin can be traced to such
 classifications. The first is Band Society (with initial capitals) which is regarded
 by Wobst (1974:v) as the underlying cultural system from which the specific
 cultural behaviour of particular hunter-gatherer populations emerges. The
 essential feature of Band Society is group closure and the appearance of boun-
 daries.? It relies on the model of demography and ecology put forward by
 Birdsell (1958, 1953) for Australian dialect tribes which depended for their exis-
 tence only on ‘competence in speech [and] mobility on foot’ (1968:232).
    The second concept is that of complex hunter-gatherers (Ames 1985, Hayden
 et al. 1985, Marquardt 1985, Shnirelman 1992), a description which increas-
 ingly includes several so-called Neolithic farmers (Bender 1985). The impetus
 for studying complexity among societies which for many years were regarded
‘as nothing more than primitive hordes came, on the one hand, from Service’s
 classification of some hunters as chiefdoms, and on the other from the evolu-
 tionary question — where did farmers come from? However, we should be aware
 that the potential for complexity must be regarded as a property of all modern
 foraging bands, whichever classification is preferred. The use of the term
 should not indicate, as Keeley (1988) implies, that these ‘complex’ hunters rub
 shoulders with ‘simple’ foragers.
    It is important to keep these concepts of bands, Band Society and complex
 hunter-gatherers separate. The purpose of reviewing these terms is that, as
 archaeologists, we can predict with some confidence that Band Society organ-
ization is almost certainly necessary        to produce material complexity.        As a
result, the concept of Band Society has been applied to the problem of explain-
ing major change associated with the Upper Palaeolithic (Gilman 1984, Mellars
 1973, White 1982).
   I shall now discuss each concept in turn.


Band Society and alliance
The band level of integration is by far the most frequent among known hunters and gath-
erers and must have been the characteristic, though perhaps not universal, form of social
organization during the Palaeolithic era. (Service 1971:47)

But where does this leave the origins of Band Society which Wobst identified
as a future major research question in ‘culture’ change, akin to the physical
emergence of humans or the origins of agriculture (1974:vi)?
                ¥
22,           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

Table 1.5. The six postulates of Band Society (Williams 1974).

° aspecies divided into social groups which are autonomous with respect to food
  supply or vital resources will exhibit territoriality
¢ given that food is shared within the family and that a sexual division of labour, with
  respect to hunting-gathering acitivities, exists, then territorial groups will tend to
  be patrilocally based
¢ social units in hunting-gathering societies are kinship units
* in hunting-gathering society, the kinship unit having maximal autonomy with
  respect to resources is the lineage band
e the lineage band is exogamic
* optimal band size is the minimal size in which marriage alliances can be
  maintained with all surrounding bands indefinitely



   We must first realize that Band Society is, like Service’s definition of the
patrilocal band (1971:64), a limited concept, dealing only with the residential
and territorial aspects of social organization. Six postulates are recognized
(Table 1.5). Williams (1974) examined these through a study of the Birhor from
eastern India combined with a computer simulation of the genetic implications
of the spatial structures of the marriage networks.
   The spatial consequences of these postulates will be explored further in
Chapters 2 and 3. Here I will only consider how this model has been used to
investigate the origins of the Band Society blueprint, from which the great
variety of ethnographically known band societies developed.
   Band Society is treated coterminously by Wobst (1976:52) with ‘mating net-
works which are closed to such an extent that the participating local groups
derive virtually all of their mates from the same set of personnel’; a view of con-
nubium, or system of marital exchanges, which Fox (1967:176) traces back to
Tylor (1881). Within the connubium there is exogamy to establish marital alli-
ances. As a result, ‘our Palaeolithic hunting-and-gathering bands . . . exchanged
women in order to live at peace with each other’ (Fox 1967:176).
   The emphasis on the concept of mating network (Wobst 1974) was deliber-
ate, since it supplied an analytical concept comparable to society, culture or
population which archaeology lacked but which it needed in order to under-
stand regional-scale processes (Wobst 1976:49). Moreover, these networks
could be investigated through the cultural transmission of stylistic elements as
personnel moved within the connubium following marriage. The use of the
model was comparable to Williams’ (1974) study of gene flow, except that arti-
fact styles, rather than alleles, provided the units of measurement.
   Closure was the key concept since this defined Band Society organization.
Thus network-specific styles, and their ritual underpinning which enforced
network loyalty, would be expected. These would be manifest at different
spatial scales (Wobst 1977) through the appearance of boundaries. The selection
pressure of the mating network was the context for differentiating between dif-
               Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                                   23

                                   hunting of seasonally
                                   migrant herd animals
                                               +
                                               +


                        +                                      a
                        +                                    higher
                co-operative hunting                       population
                         a                                  densities
                        +                                      +
                        +                                      Y
                importance of fixed                            +
                   hunting teams                             closer
                        +                                  neighbours
                        +                                       +


                                              +
                                              +
                                       closed connubia
                                              +
                                              +
                                              +
                                         style zones

           1.3 The development of closed networks and Upper Palaeolithic style
               zones according to Wobst (after Gilman 1984:Fig. 2).


ferent levels of information which were needed to maintain it. The messages
in such information acts concerned membership and affiliation.
   Wobst also demonstrated (1976:55) that mating-system closure produces
increased social expense and decreased reproductive success, due to a rise in the
costs of social interaction (Chapter 3). This principle, which the Kalahari
studies would support (Yellen and Harpending 1972, Lee 1976), establishes the
evolutionary trajectory:
Stylistic elements that may be taken to symbolize boundary processes between ethnic
groups and social group affiliation are altogether rare up to the middle of the last glaci-
ation. These considerations indicate that Band Society — and the closed mating system
as one of its operational expressions — may not even extend back to early Homo sapiens.
(Wobst.1976:54)
   Using the concept of Band Society, the historical sequence is therefore
expected to move from open to closed mating structures, from stating that ‘we
mate with everyone’ to recognizing that ‘we mate with members of this band
but not that one’.
   Gilman (1984:121) has provided a summary (Figure 1.3) of how Band Society
might have arisen, especially where co-operation between members of local
groups had become advantageous (Wobst 1976:55). This co-operation might
have been a response to the existence of herd animals that were worth co-oper-
ating to hunt. But, rather than tying such developments to specific ecological
               |
24          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

                                  improved technology
                                            +
                                            +
                                            +
                               fewer subsistence failures
                                            +
                                            t
                    Use     aaa   RST Dn        Xe      ae tert


                    1                                             +
                    1                                             +
              less need for                             population increase
            assistance from                                       +
              neighbours                                          1
                   fh                                             1
                   ft                                    more neighbours
                    1                                             +
                    1                                             +
             possibility of                                       +
             limiting social                                need to limit
              obligations                                social obligations
                   1                                              1
                   +                                              +
                   4                                              +
                     Bie ac ain ated            ra i    ee

                                           +
                                           1
                                   closed connubia
                                            +
                                            +
                                            1
                                    ritual/stylistic
                                   reinforcement of
                                  unstable solidarity

         1.4 The relation between technological improvements and social
             change during the Upper Palaeolithic revolution (after Gilman
             1984:Fig. 3).



settings, Gilman prefers to focus on the general social relations of production
(Figure 1.4) using the alliance theory of kinship structures (Barnard 1992, Fox
1967, Kuper 1988, Lévi-Strauss 1969) to account for the recruitment of labour.
As a result he highlights a major weakness of Wobst’s Band Society model,
which equates the social with the demographic. The mating network, although
an important component in social organization, is not a society, except perhaps
from an ultra-reductionist, sociobiological viewpoint. Indeed, primatologists
following Wrangham’s (1980) lead, which identified female-bonded social
organization as the key to understanding social behaviour (Foley and Lee 1989),
clearly distinguish between the mating system and social organization (Quiatt
and Reynolds 1993:51-2).
  However, there is a weakness in Gilman’s model of Band Society. In his alli-
ance theory Lévi-Strauss attached paramount importance to exogamic mar-
riage as the means by which integration of groups into a larger whole was
               Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                                   25

achieved (1969:480). His interpretation took as axiomatic that kinship orga-
nized, according to rules, the long-term exchange relations between groups.
  But marriage is only one form of alliance and groups are not necessarily the
only or logical units of society (Chapter 2). Other forms of alliance not based
on kinship involve individuals negotiating partnerships, friendships, gangs and
cliques based on age and sex. Alliances can be defined through affective,
material and symbolic ties; pots and partners, songs and feasts, love and aggres-
sion (Chapter 2).
  The variable structure of alliances, defined as an achieved social status based
to a large extent upon negotiation (Guemple 1972:56), has been explored else-
where for prehistoric foragers (Gamble 1982).
These negotiable alliances provide a means by which the viability of individuals and
local groups is achieved within a regional framework. A network of such alliances
defines an often diverse set of social relationships where circulation and exchange of
persons and goods establishes and maintains ties of variable commitment and duration.
(Gamble 1986a:54)

    The alliance network, negotiated by individuals, rather than the mating
 network with its emphasis on groups, provides a more comprehensive, larger
 unit for the analysis of Palaeolithic society. The boundaries to the alliance
 network may be closed as well as open (Gamble 1991b). The spatial scale of
‘such open alliance systems may be much greater than those of the connubium,
 thereby fulfilling both Wobst’s (1976) and Bender’s (1978) call for analytical
 units which are bigger than the on-the-ground group, since local variation is in
 part conditioned by regional and inter-regional processes of adaptation (Gamble
 1986a:54-62). Band Society is one way of expressing the network of social alli-
 ances which are involved in the analysis of Palaeolithic society.!°


Complex foragers
All societies at the band level of integration are foragers of wild food. Not all wild-food
foragers are at the band level, however. Along the Northwest coast of North America
were large populations of maritime peoples whose environment was so remarkably
bountiful that they lived in complex communities at the level of chiefdoms . . . The
Palaeolithic era thus may well have had some such forms of society in addition to bands.
(Service 1971:47)

The past twenty years has not borne out Wobst’s (1974:vi) prediction that Band
Society would become a major issue in the study of culture change. The inter-
est instead has been in the issue of how cultural complexity emerged (Koyama
and Thomas 1982, Price and Brown 1985a). Archaeologists have pursued those
chiefs among the bands (King 1978, Mueller-Wille and Dickson 1991).
   The Price and Brown volume Prehistoric hunters and gatherers: the emer-
gence of cultural complexity (1985a) is instructive in the way the problem is
framed. Complexity, which refers to that which is composed of many interre-
lated parts (Price and Brown 1985b:7), became a major factor in social life from
                ”
26            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

35,000 BP, the onset of the European Upper Palaeolithic, as shown by several
papers in their volume (Conkey 1985, Mellars 1985, Soffer 1985a). Wide geo-
graphical coverage points to the potential of all societies after the social revo-
lution of the Upper Palaeolithic to become complex. Whether this implies that
they were always surrounded by simple societies is not clear. It is more likely,
as Bender (1981) has put it, that there were always, in the long term, and at a
continental scale, shifting geographical centres of power and complexity.
   These centres of complexity are recognized in the archaeological record
through a checklist. The items are
              population density
              maximum settlement size
              permanent shelter
              permanent ceremonial grounds
              art styles
              differences in burials due to grave wealth, location and the energy
              investment in grave preparation (Brown and Price 1985:437).

   It could be argued that since a large number of hunting and gathering soci-
eties have some of these items, and all have art styles, then they are all complex
and hence the classification is redundant. This, I believe, is indeed the case, and
in Chapter 2 I will develop the argument that being complex can be assumed;
not only for the Upper Palaeolithic but for all the societies prior to this social
revolution. What matters is leading complicated social lives. Hence Brown and
Price’s conclusion that ‘the potential for social and cultural complexity resides
in hunter-gatherer economies’ (1985:436) is correct only if complexity is
defined in terms of items on their checklist. I would rephrase it to state that
economic and cultural complexity resides in hunter-gatherer social life. It is
here that the mobilization of resources and the involvement of actors in the
production of the material world are structured through their own negotia-
tions.
  On the positive side, and just as Constandse-Westermann and Newell are
trying to prolong its life, Brown and Price (1985:436) finally bury the use of the
band as a unit in an evolutionary typology. As archaeologists, their concern is
with culture change and complexity where
we intend to spotlight the variety of adaptations that characterize prehistoric hunter-
gatherers as well as to delineate some of the primary features of societal complexity.
(Price and Brown 1985c:xiii)

  They identify three themes: the intensification of food procurement; the
origins of sedentary communities; and the emergence of social inequality and
hierarchical organization. They provide a clear orientation to investigate these
topics:
We deal not only with the origins of such phenomena but also with relationships, that
is, how such aspects of human adaptation as settlement, population, subsistence,
exchange, conflict, and technology may be involved in the elaboration of society. (ibid.)
               Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                            D7

    Being social therefore emerges as part of their adaptive explanation (Price and
 Brown 1985c:Fig. 1.1). The appearance of complex social life will, it is argued,
 be tied to particular historical and economic circumstances and these will
 explain the variable cultural forms, both chronologically and geographically,
 that it takes.
    There is another way to look at this adaptive approach where the social forms
 part of the explanation. I have already discussed Layton’s (1986) view that it is
 involvement with and transactions in property which shape the long-term pro-
 cesses in hunter-gatherer society. He argues that social complexity will vary, in
 terms of inequality, if expressed through either subsistence goods or immate-
 rial knowledge involving ritual (ibid.:30). This would contrast the North West
 Coast and Arctic societies with those from Australia or the Kalahari. Variation
 in complex behaviour is not therefore necessarily adaptive but rather an emer-
 gent property of the way society is structured, a point explored in Chapter 2.


  Culture and two narratives

  If studying the evolution of society in the Palaeolithic is proving difficult, why
  not settle instead for the development of culture? By culture archaeologists
  usually mean the system of rules and symbols which provide the extrasomatic
* means of adaptation that humans have at their disposal. These are highly varied
  and as a result we have many different cultures. What has concerned anthro-
  pologists, however, is that beneath such myriad forms lies a set of simple uni-
  versal social principles. Their task is to strip away culture to reveal this
  underlying structure and then reassemble the parts to see how it was trans-
  formed. An appropriate analogy would be between an organism’s genotype
  (social structure) and phenotype (cultural expression). The former provides us
  with a nose, skin and two legs. The latter expresses this basic structure in terms
  of how big, what colour and how long they are."!
     Culture is also set up as an opposition to Nature. The familiar argument is
  that we have culture, animals do not. The possession of culture is therefore
  taken as our defining quality. It is what makes our adaptation extrasomatic
  since it exists outside us and is part of our social life as humans. It takes the
  form not only of ritual, custom and technology but also of skill, knowledge and
  information.
     The problem however with accepting this nature:culture juxtaposition is
  that once again it drops that interpretative curtain across the Palaeolithic
  (Gamble 1991a). The task then becomes one of determining when we became
  cultural (i.e. not natural) beings, what new capacities, for example language,
  this entailed, and whether the pace of change involved either a pre- or a proto-
  cultural stage. The concept of culture is therefore unhelpful to the study of the
  Palaeolithic unless the main aim is to examine our own definitions. The
  problem, which has been pointed out many times in anthropology, is that
  culture cannot be used to explain culture.
28              The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

   The current trend among primatologists and biologists is to adopt a continuum
approach to the study of human and non-human primate societies. In this view
culture is the means by which the social processing of information, vital to sur-
vival, is structured (Quiatt and Reynolds 1993:179). Culture regulates social
knowledge and interaction. It can change and can be transmitted. The informa-
tion it channels is subject to selection pressure. This selection is why we find pat-
terns in the Palaeolithic record, and also why we can find explanations for them.
Culture can be adaptive and exaptive, fit by reason of its form rather than
designed by history for some purpose (Gamble 1993a:5, Gould 1991, Gould and
Vrba 1982). It is hence patterned but with an unpredictable trajectory.
     But culture is not just information. It is a means of expressing social princi-
ples that concern the lives of individuals but it has no life of its own and cannot
be used as an explanation of the patterns we find in our data. Culture is not
something which was developed during human evolution but springs from the
active engagement of people in the business of living and interacting. In that
sense it represents a continuum between animals and humans, early and
modern hominids, ourselves and our ancestors. Culture varies between species
and through time because individuals call selectively on different resources to
sustain relationships and promote social projects (Chapter 2).


The worm becomes a serpent then a symbolic gesture

Two examples will point to the strengths and weaknesses of a cultural approach
to human social origins. They are two narratives with different perspectives on
the problem but with a shared concern to use the Palaeolithic record to struc-
ture their story.
   In a challenging account, Knight (1991a, 1991b) has argued that the evolution
of society depended upon the loss of female power. Culture in his thesis is an
expression of solidarity. Female culture was based on a collective sex strike
made possible through concealed ovulation and menstrual synchrony tied to
the signal rhythms of lunar cycles. In this way groups were formed from col-
lective action the purpose of which, Knight argues, was to motivate their
menfolk to organize hunting. On their successful return, meat was then
exchanged for sex. The cultural link was between the blood of the women and
the blood of the animals. The female sex strike constituted the first taboo and
set the scene for the use of blood as a powerful agent in cultural life. The basis
of symbolic behaviour with its substitute signs and referred meanings was
therefore established.
   Here then was the pre- or incipient cultural state. The revolution in the
Upper Palaeolithic which overturned this ancient pattern and made us fully
cultural beings is put down to ecological decline:
as the game herds diminished, as female-inspired collective hunting increasingly proved
unreliable, and as it became more and more advisable for people to disperse, women’s
solidarity would have begun to break down. (Knight 1991b:35)
              Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                            29

   Women lost their power over men because the animals betrayed them. The
ice ages took their toll on animal numbers, the success of hunters dwindled and
the women paid the price. The cultural state of female power based on common
ritual and collective action collapsed, but not before it set up the trajectory for
the world as we know it (ibid.:37). Out of this cultural past the notion that
blood symbolized female sexual solidarity survived. Raiding the rituals and
mythologies of the world, Knight (1991a) has made the case that male initia-
tion and myths concerning the stealing of power are resonances from the time
that women lost their power. This cultural exaptation is shown in the elaborate
dragon and serpent myths found in many of the world’s mythologies. These
legends are bound up with themes of fire, blood, birth and rebirth, marriage and
threats to marriage, masculine sexual potency and the origins of male ritual
power (Knight 1991b:44). By appropriating the symbolism which formerly
marked female power, the dragon-slaying Upper Palaeolithic men seized the
cultural basis for their own collective, group power.
   Such a bold narrative, even though it is so heavily dependent upon environ-
mental and sociobiological determinism to make its vision of culture work,
almost deserves to succeed. While I disagree with it in both essence and detail,
I nonetheless acknowledge that it is a compelling account which studies of
Palaeolithic society need, if only to show us that this is not what we want.
   Contrast this with my second narrative example, André Leroi-Gourhan’s Le
geste et la parole, originally published in 1964—5 and largely ignored outside
France until translated into English in 1993 as Gesture and speech. Leroi-
Gourhan is best known to archaeologists for his study of Palaeolithic cave art
(1968) and his pioneering studies of area excavations as at Arcy sur Cure (1961,
 1964) and Pincevent (Leroi-Gourhan and Brézillon 1966, Leroi-Gourhan and
Brézillon 1972). Gesture and speech is something else entirely, representing an
approach to the evolution of society and the study of human action that is
breathtaking in its audacity.
   The argument he presents is complex and I will return to it many times in
the chapters which follow. Although he rarely acknowledges it, he owed most
to Mauss’ (1936) study Les techniques du corps (the techniques of the body),
where it was established that techniques are first and foremost social produc-
tions (Lemmonier 1993:3). By uniting technical and social processes, Leroi-
Gourhan proposed a single approach to the study of the Palaeolithic. He
achieved this without once discussing culture as a concept. No longer, there-
fore, do we have to bemoan the lack of social data, as Childe did, because this
period seems so impoverished in relevant materials compared to those which
followed. Instead, as Leroi-Gourhan shows, we can fuse these concerns and
study the long-term trajectory of social change by studying the evolution of
techniques. Moreover, this fusion does away with the distinction between style
and function in artifact analysis (White 1993a:xviii). Society does not just reside
in the former as rules about identity and ethnicity but as social representations
literally embodied in the acts of manufacture, use and discard.
             ys
30           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

   Here then is a very different vision of social archaeology and an understand-
ing of culture. It is based on a concern with biology, form and growth. It deals
with the body as a source of value and the importance of rhythms which link
the varied operational sequences (chaines opératoires) that produce forms and
traditions of doing, what archaeologists would usually call cultures.
   In Leroi-Gourhan’s view of human evolution we have today arrived at the
place where the individual is now outdated. What matters is the species as the
infrastructure of humankind (1993:253). This point has been reached because
of the continuing externalization of human memory. As we go through time,
so new ways have developed to store cultural memories outside our bodies. The
result has been to change the way human societies were organized by changing
the structure of action.
We are again and again available for new forms of action, our memory transferred to
books, our strength multiplied in the ox, our fist improved in the hammer. (Leroi-
Gourhan 1993:246)

   Culture in the form of a network of symbols has come to replace the body as
the source of those rhythms which structure action. Organizing time and space
in this manner represents the evolutionary penchant of our species. The appear-
ance of advanced technology and robots is the culmination of the process since
the prospect is opened up of the artificial which can now socially reproduce
itself. Confidence for the future depends instead on ‘the view that the individ-
ual is infinitely socializable’ (1993:407) and that the individual’s relationship
with society can, as it always has in our past, be rethought.
   Here is a narrative which, while it has a quaint faith in progressive change,
nonetheless does deserve to succeed. Why? After all Leroi-Gourhan also has a
revolution, coinciding with the appearance of the graphic arts in the Upper
Palaeolithic, to account for the trajectory whereby memory has become
increasingly externalized. Such graphism established new rhythmic systems
and involved signs and words. A new language of forms was created, new ges-
tures and operational sequences (White 1993a:xix).
   It should prevail as an approach not because it gives us another grail — the
origin of graphism — to pursue, but more importantly because it reunites the
Palaeolithic with the rest of archaeology and history as a social project. In so
doing, it regards the long-term evolution of our species as part of the ongoing
investigation into our social behaviour as we rethink our relationship with
society.


Summary

There have been two uses of a social focus in Palaeolithic studies. The first,
associated with the study of human origins in Africa, has used the social as a
means to underwrite the multi-disciplinary effort. Human social origins have
provided a deductive goal and a research paradigm towards which, and by
              Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain                            31

 which, the observations from anatomists, geologists, archaeologists and a host
 of other specialists can be directed. Defining the proto-cultural platform from
 which we sprang has been a major aim.
    The second use has been directed towards the other end of the Palaeolithic
 timescale. Here the interest has been in the development of Band Society or the
 emergence of complex society as a component of modern humans. Here the
 social is the explanation rather than the research paradigm. Hence we have
 social (Stringer and Gamble 1993) and cultural (Knight 1991a, 1991b) revolu-
 tions which drove the changes seen in the broader human revolution (Mellars
 and Stringer 1989). This is regarded as necessary in order adequately to explain
 the record of the Upper Palaeolithic revolution (Gilman 1984:123), which is dif-
 ferent because it is marked by the appearance of style and the definition of
 time-space cultures. Symbolism and style are the basis for Conkey’s (1978:78)
 complex social geography which appears late in human evolution during the
 Upper Palaeolithic. The origin of this brave new world is believed, understand-
 ably, to require primarily a social rather than a cultural materialist explanation
 (Bender 1978:218).
    I have not set out in this chapter to choose between the various explanations.
 Rather I am interested in the conceptualization of the problem as Latour and
 Strum (1986) have insisted upon. In the accounts so far discussed it might also
‘be claimed that there is very little which is truly social. We have descriptions
 of the partial properties of a system, be these mating networks (Williams 1974,
 Wobst 1974, 1976) or technological systems (Gilman 1984). The study of the
 origin of Band Society, which ignores a wider view of its alliance networks, is
 therefore a study of group rather than individual dynamics and the prehistory
 of a particular type of institution. This institution exists in the present in two
 main forms (Service 1971, Woodburn 1991) which can be arranged in ancestral
 order. The social is the explanation since it is the explanation which deter-
 mines the order — did open systems lead to closed, or vice versa?
    Through its focus on social origins at either end of the Palaeolithic, this
 chapter has also highlighted how the period in between has received very little
 attention. What studies there have been have made little impact (e.g. Schmidt
 1936). This period between the dispersal of Homo erectus from sub-Saharan
 Africa and the Upper Palaeolithic revolution is usually only described in eco-
 logical and subsistence terms. The data from Europe are well suited to exam-
 ining change and stasis during half a million years, and maybe more, when the
 continent was peopled. But we can only explore the social life of these homi-
 nids in the middle if we have a more developed sense of what we mean by the
 social and society than that regularly used by Palaeolithic archaeologists.
              CHAPTER        2



              THE INDIVIDUAL,                   SOCIETY          AND
              NETWORKS




              Men make their own history, but they do not make it just as they please,
              they do not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves, but
              under circumstances directly encountered, given and transmitted from
              the past
                                                                     Karl Marx, 1869




Groups and individuals!
Social archaeology has concentrated on the study of groups and institutions.
These are variously classified in terms of cultures, traditions, systems, sub-
systems and civilizations. They most famously follow the evolutionary proces-
sion of band, tribe, chief and state (Service 1971). This approach to the study of
social institutions in prehistory has been successful for a very simple reason:
archaeologists already know what they are going to find. Those chiefdoms and
states, and their systems and sub-systems, are already defined before the
digging begins. Discoveries of shrines and longhouses, rich burials and exotic
raw materials, wall paintings and monumental sculpture can then be accom-
modated within existing classifications. The classic technique has been a
checklist against which archaeological discoveries are compared (Gamble
1986b). Nor does a one hundred per cent match have to be achieved. Prehistoric
cultures, like modern societies, are polythetic entities when it comes to their
cultural makeup (Clarke 1968).
   The individual has not been considered in these schemes. According to
Clark, only the cumulative results of group activities are preserved because the
actions of individuals are beyond the resolution of the Palaeolithic record
(1992,a:107). Mithen has effectively countered this view:
A good explanation in archaeology requires explicit reference to individual people going
about their day to day business. They need to be explicitly attributed with knowledge
of the world, a capacity to plan and make decisions, an ability to respond creatively and
intelligently to the challenges of their social and physical environment. (Mithen
1993a:396)

  He further argues that the social archaeology of the 1970s and 1980s, with its
emphasis on group adaptation, swamped prehistoric people with huge imper-
sonal, mechanistic forces such as ‘group selection’ and ‘population pressure’2

32
               The individual, society and networks                                     33
The absence of the individual from the Palaeolithic, and from prehistory gen-
erally, can be seen as a casualty of the ‘primitive society’ model (Kuper 1988)
with its emphasis on pre-existing institutions into which people are born and
so rendered powerless.
   There is agreement with this approach from another theoretical quarter.
Shanks and Tilley’s argument, derived from structuration theory, states that
the individual cannot be screened out of archaeological analysis. The individual is to be
conceived as knowledgeable and active and yet at the same time positioned in relation
to social structures and strategies, a trace within a structured social field. This means
that social relations cannot be reduced to interacting creative individuals. (Shanks and
Tilley 1987a:210)

   This issue of micro and macro scale, the individual and the group, has never
been adequately addressed in the discussion of Palaeolithic society. Such dis-
cussion needs to take place in the context of different ways to understand
society. On the one hand we have to avoid introducing individuals as analyti-
cal units which are simply ciphers, thereby replacing one abstract with another
(Wolf 1988:760), and on the other we cannot ignore the very obvious constraints
on individual action which are set by wider social structures.
   The first, a bottom-up approach, takes the individual as the starting point.
The second, or top-down approach, sees the group as dominant. In the former
model the individual plays an active role in performing society and its struc-
tures into existence. In the latter, society precedes and shapes the individual
through the power of its institutions. These opposed models are discussed
below. In order to illustrate how the study of Palaeolithic society would benefit
by shifting its focus to the bottom-up model I will draw on the similarities in
approach that are currently offered by the study of primate societies and struc-
turation theory. This leads to an examination of network analysis which pro-
vides a formal but flexible structure for bridging the micro and macro scale.
Because of the emphasis which network studies place on the individual, they
are appropriate for a bottom-up approach to social analysis. Particular attention
is paid to the resources and rules in these networks and which produce demo-
graphic patterns.


Two approaches to society
The ethologist Robert Hinde (1976, 1987) has described the difference between
two models of society. The distinction is fundamental but, as Hinde comments,
not mutually exclusive. In the top-down approach
human social structures can be viewed as the product of enduring relationships, organ-
isations and institutions which constrain individual behaviour, or as the outcome of the
behaviour of individuals who create the social world about them. The former structu-
ral view involves a high degree of abstraction from the real-life data, but provides a pro-
cedure for viewing societies as unities of interdependent parts and processes according
to principles of wide validity (Hinde 1976:14)
                Dd
34           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

while the bottom-up approach
starts from the individual, seeking for statements about the manner in which he
manages his relationships, and attempting to map the relationships in which he is
involved. (ibid.)

   This differentiation also involves two sometimes opposed anthropological
views of culture (Ingold 1994). The cognitivist approach is primarily an exer-
cise in classification involving mental representations of social structures
where the stability of culture is achieved through linguistic transmission. By
contrast, the phenomenological approach stresses the active engagement of
people with their environment. The rhythms and gestures of the body during
the performance of social life, the habitual actions of living (Leroi-Gourhan
1993:231-2), mean that social memory is passed on in non-textual, non-lin-
guistic ways (Connerton 1989:72). These distinctions are explored more fully
in Chapter 3.


Society as architecture, a top-down approach

In the structural, top-down approach, society is like a building, constructed at
some point in the past, used by present inhabitants but rarely altered. It is, if
you like, a community theatre peopled by groups where individuals are only
recognized by their institutional roles such as chief, big man or priest-king.
This has been the dominant model used by social archaeologists (Redman et al.
1978). They knew what they were going to find in terms of social categories
because they had a model that society precedes its members. In other words
individuals are born into an existing social framework. They enter into rela-
tionships which have already been determined by those groups to which they
are admitted by reason of birth. These relationships are coded in culture.
Consequently the study of social evolution emphasizes the points of transition
as well as the maintenance of institutions.
   The view that groups are paramount and underpin the structures of society
is derived from social anthropology. Among ‘primitive societies’, where formal
institutions were often difficult to define, the most important institution for
the anthropologist was the kinship group. This could also be broken down into
constituent institutions such as the clan, moiety, lineage, locus and family.
These institutions produced solidarity which permitted social life through the
operation of a collectivity of action, a widely held view most closely associated
with Durkheim (Ingold 1986a:227-30, Kuper 1988:118-20).
   The model appears to make good sense. Obviously a baby requires a long
period of parenting. It is introduced during childhood to the institutions of
society and grows into the norms and beliefs of group life. It is adapted,
designed by its history, to the group. The problem for social analysis is that the
individual becomes a demiurge, skilfully serving the will of the institution.
Creativity is largely denied.
               The individual, society and networks                                    35

 Society as an improvised script: a bottom-up approach
 Hinde’s (1976) second model of society stresses the individual rather than the
 group. In contrast to the view that society precedes is one where it is performed.
 Instead of being entered as a pre-existing structure, society is created through
 the actions of individual actors.
    Society in these terms is produced by interaction between individuals and
 creates overlapping fields of social relationships (Grénhaug 1978:120). Social
 structure is an abstraction derived ultimately from these interactions (Hinde
 1987). Society emerges from the many networks which are constructed by indi-
 viduals rather than containing them.
    With this perspective the insights of social theory become relevant since one
 of its goals is to combine the investigations about human behaviour from both
 micro-scale and macro-scale processes (Turner 1991:632). This combines the
 individual and the institution. The scale varies from a fleeting moment when
 individuals meet in the street to the long-term persistence of moral codes and
 international institutions.
    If individuals negotiate society then the networks of alliances they produce
 will not just be based on ties of kin or marriage. In addition there will be a
 wealth of partnerships involving relationships based on fictive kinship, trade,
.ceremony and friendship and enacted during visits, rituals, feasts and conver-
 sations. Ethnographic examples of this creativity are plentiful among foragers.
Kinship in Zhu [!Kung] society, rather than being a static straitjacket, is a dynamic key-
board on which individuals play variations on a theme of options. It is... up to the indi-
vidual to create and manage an effective social network. (Wilmsen 1989:180, my
emphasis)

   A Zhu regional band is a node within a kinship field wherein persons nego-
tiate their relationships to a wider polity (ibid.:117). An excellent example of
such choices is provided by Wiessner’s (1982) detailed study of hxaro trading
partnerships among the !Kung. These are primarily formed between relatives
but wind between camps with the result that very large networks of people
become linked. Interaction and choice are important in the construction of the
system. Among many foragers, fictive kinship, where a limited number of
names are used so that strangers can be included in ego’s network, are also
common solutions to the negotiator’s aim of constructing a network (Lee 1979).
   In his study of the Hill Pandaram in southern India, Morris concludes that
they ‘create their social life as they go along’ (Morris 1982:150). Each genera-
tion negotiates its own social system which is based on dyadic bonds of affec-
tion, in other words interaction between two individuals.
   In a very different environmental setting the involvement of individuals in
creating their social lives comes across clearly in Guemple’s account of the
Inuit of Belcher Island:
the kinship system is not an ascribed status system at all but a negotiable one .. . it
is also a system which rests upon a social metaphysic which implies that social
               ~
36            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

relatedness is a matter to be worked out by the participants in social encounter, and
that the major criteria to be used are first, that people must actively participate in the
system to be counted as kinsmen in a meaningful way, and second, that those who enter
the field of face-to-face relations must be treated as kinsmen whether genealogical con-
nexions exist to support the claim or not. (Guemple 1972:75, my emphasis}?

  Kinship, as Wilson observes (1988:36), is not an institution in the way that it
has normally been used to define primitive society. Instead it is a reservoir of
potential but vague connections which can form a social focus when required.
Bahuchet’s study of the Zaire Pygmies provides just such an example of rules
and choice. The rule is for patrilocal and virilocal residence (1992:247).
However, he found many examples where the son-in-law broke the rule by
staying in his wife’s camp rather than moving with her to his own. As a result,
choice, based on interaction and preference, made the residence pattern bi-
rather than unilocal as expected (ibid.:219).*


Primate societies

Studying the societies of monkeys and apes presents comparable difficulties to
the study of Palaeolithic societies. Primatologists can observe behaviour but
they still have to infer social life. They have no self-declared structure, in the
form of kinship or preferentially expressed social relationships, with which to
reconstruct primate society. They have no insight into the intentions of their
subjects, only observations concerning actions and, by studying sequences, the
opportunity to predict action in future situations. Palaeolithic archaeologists
can only study the static residues of past action. From these we infer behaviour
and social life.
   This being the case, it is interesting to observe the resolution of two concep-
tual issues in current studies of primate societies. These concern the units of
analysis and the characterization of society. Firstly, Quiatt and Reynolds
(1993:52) state that in studies of non-human primate social behaviour the indi-
vidual animal is necessarily the unit of observation and most likely the unit of
analysis as well. Secondly, the concept of primate society has undergone its
own transformation, paralleling the demise of ‘primitive society’ as docu-
mented by Kuper (1988).
   Strum and Latour (1987), Cheyney and Seyfarth (1990) and Rowell (1991)
have shown how the study of non-human primate social life now depends not
so much on new techniques but on a change in the concept of society. This has
involved moving away from the architectural metaphor based around group
behaviour and towards a performance model where negotiation through inter-
action plays a central role as individuals pursue their social agendas. Kummer’s
(1968) study of baboons and in particular Hinde’s (1976, 1987) model of social
structure have been particularly important. As summed up by Strum and
Latour,
               The individual, society and networks                                       /

               Table 2.1. A simple model of society (after Hinde 1976).

               heowe structure

               Relationships

               Interaction




If we grant that baboons are not entering into a stable structure but rather negotiating
what that structure will be, and monitoring and pushing all other such negotiations, the
variety of baboon society and its ill fit to a simple structure can be seen to be a result of
the ‘performative’ question. (Strum and Latour 1987:78)

    Such an approach had previously been conceptualized by Hinde as three tiers
 of interactions, relationships, and surface, or social, structure (Table 2.1).
    The model integrates micro- and macro-level processes and recognizes con-
 straints passing between each of the levels. Face-to-face interactions between
 individuals are identified as the basic elements of social structure, while rela-
 tionships are defined as a succession of interactions between two individuals
 (Hinde 1976:3). Relationships emerge from simple rules of interaction where
‘sociality is an emergent property derived from the interactions between indi-
 viduals (Foley and Lee 1996). Group structure, the highest level in Hinde’s
 scheme, can be described in terms of the nature, quality and patterning of the
 relationships by which it is constituted (Hinde 1976:3).
   The primates being studied are recognized as individuals with multiple rela-
 tionships. As Rowell points out (1991:258), it is the compromises between
 these varied relationships which lead to the structure of the group. Thus the
 different personalities of individuals, which are obvious to any primate watcher
 (and not just primates, most animals}, are incorporated into the model (Asquith
 1996). This allows a more fluid view of society to emerge, one based less on
hard-wired structure — a biological/genetic model of society — and more on the
highly variable behaviour used in the negotiation of social life. Social structure
in non-human primates therefore emerges as those aspects of the content,
quality, and patterning of social relationships that show regularities across
individuals and between social groups (Cheney and Seyfarth 1990).
   Hinde also stresses the temporal element in his model of society. Interactions
only last for a limited time-span while relationships have to be remembered,
picked up, reinforced. In short, the patterning of relationships in time has to be
understood by the animals (Hinde 1976:7) and this also applies to the macro-scale,
surface structure. In their study of the small-bodied East African vervet monkeys
(Cercopithecus aethiops), Cheyney and Seyfarth make this critical point:
what defines a relationship is not simply the behaviours themselves (grooming, hugging,
fighting etc.) but also the temporal relations among behaviours and the way each activ-
ity is carried out. (1990:176)

                gl
38           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

   In their study of vervet interaction these relationships are density dependent
and defined through offers of assistance. The way that interactions lead to alli-
ances and the number of these which can be managed and maintained provide
a measure of vervet social skills. Alliance occurs ‘whenever two individuals are
involved in an aggressive interaction and a third, previously uninvolved animal
intervenes to aid one of themsin attack or defense’ (Cheney and Seyfarth
1990:27). Vervet society is based. around a core of females, and alliances are
formed more commonly among female kin than with unrelated animals. As a
general rule intergroup alliances in non-human primates appear to be based on
propinquity (Cheney and Seyfarth 1990:299).


Agency, structure and the individual
There are many models of social theory (Turner 1991) but few, if any, have been
concerned with the Palaeolithic. From this vast array I have selected aspects of
structuration theory (Giddens 1984) to illustrate the convergence that exists in
methods and questions with the study of primate societies. Archaeologists
have already applied structuration theory to later prehistory and to the archae-
ology of modern humans (Barrett 1994, Gosden 1994, Shanks and Tilley 1987a
and 1987b). However, because of its core principles Giddens’ model is equally
appropriate for the exploration of Palaeolithic society. On the one hand he
insists on the importance of time and space for understanding social action, and
on the other he deals in a unitary way with problems of scale from the individ-
ual to the integration of systems.
   Giddens’ theory of structuration refers to the ‘structuring of social relations
across time and space, in virtue of the duality of structure’ (1984:376).5 What
he means by the duality of structure is that it is not something which exists
out there, external to the individual. Rather, structure is contained in action
itself, and action involves agency, the act of doing (ibid.:10).
   Agency leads us back to the individual. It applies to Moderns, Neanderthals
and Homo heidelbergensis since it is the capacity for action which is impor-
tant in social life. Such potential contradicts a pre-ordained structure, the top-
down approach, where a code which already exists determines how people act.
The critical distinction, as Godelier has remarked, is that ‘contrary to the other
social animals, human beings do not content themselves with living together,
they produce society for living’ (quoted in Bahuchet 1992:253).
   Giddens’ notion of duality, which rolls structure and agency up together
(1984:162), is in marked contrast to Durkheim’s dualism where social struc-
ture is separated from, and therefore exists outside, the individual. Social struc-
ture for Durkheim was just a negative constraint inhibiting the free initiative
of individuals. This pre-existing constraint produced coherent and consistent
social action through group solidarity and collective participation in ‘society’.
   Instead, a key point in Giddens’ theory is that structure is both constraining
and enabling. He constantly points to the duality of most social concepts but
              The individual, society and networks                                        39

Table 2.2. A hierarchy of interaction (after Goffman 1963:18).

Social occasion         -   Bounded by time and space. Named locales, architecture,
                            equipment and objects are often involved

Situation               —   The full spatial environment which begins when mutual
                            monitoring between individuals ends

Gatherings              —   Are located within the boundaries of situations and involve two
                            or more individuals in one another’s immediate presence
                            (=co-presence)



how in much of social theory only one element has been stressed. The discus-
sion of power is a prime example. Usually it is seen only as an authoritative
force, signalling the existence of conflict (Giddens 1984:257). But that is only
one face of power since, as Firth put it, ‘social structure does not merely impose
limits on freedom of action; it offers positive advantages to the individual who
conforms to its principles’ (1951:56). This conformity is a dialogue which starts
in childhood between the individual and the social organism (Leroi-Gourhan
 1993:228). The duality of structure stems from the fundamental opposition of
‘two elements, resources and rules. It is from these that the forms of social life
are fashioned. Life is not constraint free, as Marx famously pointed out in the
passage which opened this chapter, but neither is it just dominated by prescrip-
tive rules that determine the norms of behaviour through a pre-existing struc-
ture.
   Giddens provides the example of language (1984:170). We do not choose our
native language. We learn it and the system of rules which undoubtedly con-
strain thought and guide action. However, learning language also enables the
individual to expand those same cognitive and practical capacities and so
become an active, creative being. Rather than being simply adapted to speak,
the possession of language makes the individual exapted, fit by reason of its
form (Gamble 1993a, Gould 1991, Gould and Vrba 1982), to explore, negotiate,
create and perform society. Society stems from this duality and not from the
dualism which separates individuals from society in the group-structure
model.
   Appreciation of this point depends upon a further linkage of concepts, those
of social and system integration (Giddens 1984:142). Social integration is what
people do together. It covers the many and varied interactions that take place,
face to face, in what is termed co-presence (Goffman 1959, 1963). At this micro
scale of human action Goffman (1963:17) pointed out that co-presence com-
bines the richness of information flow with the ease of feedback between indi-
viduals. As a result this type of interaction has immense structuring
significance for the study of relationships, which he expressed as a simple hier-
archy (Table 2.2).
                  |
                  age
40              The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

   System integration is concerned with how the patterns of social integration
are extended in absentia (see below).
   The scales of social and system integration vary from the chance encounters
between individuals to the long-term persistence of moral practices and inter-
national organisations. They range in time from the fifteen minutes it took to
knap a Palaeolithic handaxe to the duration of the Solutrean over 3,000 years.
The spatial scales of interaction encompass the debris at the feet of the knapper
and the distribution of distinctive projectile points across France, Spain
and beyond of the Solutrean world. What marked the difference between
Palaeolithic societies was, as we shall see below, the resources — emotional,
material and symbolic — which were brought to these interactions, and the rules
—limits to network size and organization — which emerged from them, and with
which relationships were fashioned.


Central questions in social evolution

The conceptual approaches to primate and human social life briefly discussed
above provide a very useful framework and vocabulary of terms for conceptu-
alizing society. I have selected them not because of intellectual fashion but
instead because they deal with key issues in refocusing the study of Palaeolithic
society away from a top-down group approach where, as we saw in Chapter 1,
it has been languishing. The common issues in both approaches deal with the
individual as an active social actor; the importance of performance in the crea-
tion of social life by such actors; and the importance of personal interaction as
the context for the negotiation of social life.
   However, frameworks and vocabularies need questions which are relevant. I
can identify two major areas where primate and structuration studies of social
life touch on the long-term evolutionary questions which must be contained in
Palaeolithic data. These questions are, in simple terms,
            e   what happens, socially, when you leave a gathering?
and
            ¢   how did social life get so complicated?


The release from proximity

As soon as we move away from co-presence we encounter one of the principal
questions of social theory, which asks
how the limitations of individual ‘presence’ are transcended by the ‘stretching’ of social
relations across time and space. (Giddens 1984:35)

  The question is, quite literally, how can you be in two places at the same
time? If society is performed into being during face-to-face interaction, when
attention is at its highest, then how can a similar intensity be extended after
               The individual, society and networks                                       4]
your interaction partner has gone? Furthermore, how is it possible to conduct
a similar relationship with people you have never met and yet make your pres-
ence felt?
   Such a question has an obvious historical dimension. Moreover, it is highly
pertinent to the Palaeolithic where the media and mechanisms for this stretch-
ing appear at first glance to be both rudimentary and developing.
   This same question has also been identified independently by primatologists.
Rodseth (et al. 1991:240) emphasize the importance of uncoupling relation-
ships from spatial proximity in human rather than ape societies. They term this
very aptly the ‘release from proximity’. Quiatt and Reynolds (1993:141) discuss
a similar problem in terms of social cognition, where ‘going beyond’ the infor-
mation available is a hallmark of humans. Constructing social life through per-
sonal interaction is very obviously part of our primate heritage. Going beyond
that and having equally intense relationships with artifacts like sports cars or
pets (especially when no one else is looking) and the occasional ‘love-affair’
with a complex and unimaginable-in-detail entity like Greece or the Italian
Quattrocento is something that we do and which, I am willing to bet,
Ardipithecus ramidus almost five million years ago did not do. When people
went beyond the rules of social life set by the immediate resources of their own
bodies, voices and actions, is truly one of the Palaeolithic’s big questions.


Complex and complicated societies

The second question addresses the issue of performance. Here Strum and
Latour have drawn a useful distinction between human and non-human
primate performed societies. They recognize non-human primate society as
socially complex and human society as socially complicated. For example,
baboons live in complex societies and have complex sociality. When they construct and
repair their social order, they do so only with limited resources, their bodies, their social
skills and whatever social strategies they can construct. (Strum and Latour 1987:790)

   Baboons need social skills in order to enroll others in the actor’s definition of
what society is (Strum and Latour 1987:795), hence the performance nature of
the bonds in society. The body becomes an instrument for expressing and inter-
preting social value (Leroi-Gourhan 1993:Chapter 11). As a result, a baboon is
best described as a competent member in a social context, which is
a social actor having difficulty negotiating one factor at a time, constantly subject to the
interference of others with similar problems. (Strum and Latour 1987:790)

   The consequence is a limit to the degree of social stability since this can only
be achieved as a function of interaction intensity and the frequency by which
relationships, such as alliances in aggressive contexts, are produced.
   The human alternative introduces complication into social life. ‘Something
is complicated’, Strum and Latour argue, ‘when it is made of a succession of
simple operations’ (1987:791). They regard this as essential to producing greater
                  -
4),           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

stability. As well as the body and social skills, humans also use materials and,
most importantly, symbols to enforce or reinforce a particular view of ‘what
society is’. This has the effect of making social tasks less complex.
   These elements are essential to answer Giddens’ central question about how
social structure exists in absentia, how it is stretched beyond the limits of co-
presence. Simplification, by using symbols centred on people and objects,
allows a variety of factors to be held constant in any social context. As a result
the variable demands of social life can be sequentially negotiated one at a time
(Strum and Latour 1987:792-3).° The skilled practitioner in a complicated
society is therefore a specialist. She/he has the resources to effect time-space
distanciation, that stretching of social life beyond the practical limits set on co-
presence interaction by time, the body and space.


Networks and their components

The bottom-up approach that I am advocating for the study of social life in the
Palaeolithic requires a framework which can express interactions in time and
space. Without such a methodology the questions raised above will remain
unanswered. While structuration theory and primate studies provide a means
of conceptualizing the problem, neither is particularly interested, as archaeol-
ogists must be, in the role of objects, either as the means to investigate social
life or in their contribution as to how it is structured.
   I have found that network analysis provides such a framework to formalize
social concepts based on interaction and negotiation by individuals. Network
analysis specifically counters the group-centred approach to anthropological
and sociological analysis (Barnes 1972, Bott 1957, Maryanski 1993, Milardo
1992, Mitchell 1974, Turner and Maryanski 1991, Wellman and Berkowitz
1988). It is important to stress, however, that it is a form of analysis rather than
a theory of social action (Boissevain 1979:392, Mitchell 1974:282).
  In a network analysis individuals are creative, mobile nodes who form ties of
variable commitment, content and duration. An individual’s networks are con-
stantly changing but remain the minimum level at which social relations can
be investigated (Douglas 1973:89). The networks form a set of weblike contacts
which have been described elsewhere as overlapping social fields (Gronhaug
1978, Lesser 1961, Paine 1967). Society ultimately becomes a network of net-
works (Boissevain 1979:392), a continuum as indicated in Table 2.3.
  The following components of networks can be identified and need to be
examined briefly before turning to resources and rules.


The ties that bind

Individuals are knowledgeable social actors and the ties they create through
interaction both bind and bond. The relationships which individuals construct
(Table 2.1) are patterned by different forms of tie. Two in particular are impor-
              The individual, society and networks                                 43

              Table 2.3. A network model of society (after Boissevain 1968).

                        Society

                Institutional complexes

                        Groups

              Quasi-groups or non-groups

                 Interactional networks

                      Individuals



tant. Multiplex ties comprise several strands to a relationship forged between
two individuals, for example a sister or close friend. They are multiplex because
they are based on history and a variety of activities and contexts for perfor-
mance. The ties might include affinal, economic, affective and social strands.
The weave of the strands makes it likely that such ties will endure. By contrast,
uniplex ties characteristically involve a single-capacity link in a relationship.
Examples would include the social relationship with the greengrocer or bus-
driver. The quality of the tie does not necessarily depend on the frequency of
interaction. You may see your sister once a year at Christmas and the bus-driver
every day on your way to work.


Density and connectivity

Networks can be quantified to some extent through the density and connectiv-
ity of social ties which arise from interaction and ensuing relationships (Milroy
1987). The density of network ties examines the extent to which ties that could
possibly exist among individuals do in fact exist.’ A high-density network often
implies highly standardized values conditioning individual behaviour, while
low density is often correlated with strong individualism (Boissevain 1974,
Turner and Maryanski 1991).
   Centrality is a measure of accessibility. It is largely a function of the size and
structure of the network and is generally higher where density is lower. The
more central an individual the better able he/she is to bring about communica-
tion.
   Transitivity of ties refers to the degree to which there is a transfer of a rela-
tion between non-interacting individuals. If A knows B and B knows C, then in
a transitive tie A also knows C. High transitivity will result in high-density net-
works since the links which potentially exist are being fully exploited by
talking through friends of friends. Transitive ties also measure the reachability
of a network. This is defined as the number of links needed to reach a complete
                 -
44           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

stranger and be introduced to them via a network of friends and acquaintances.
The figure is surprisingly small. In populations ranging from 300,000 people to
2.00 million, only 3-5 links are needed to reach some randomly selected person,
via an individual’s multiplex network ties, and arrange for a personal introduc-
tion (Boissevain 1974, Jacobson 1978). These limited degrees of separation are
an example of transitivity and clustering of ties where an individual can act as
a broker (Turner and Maryanski 1991).
   The properties of network structure have been examined graphically for their
properties of density and connectivity (Figure 2.1). Information is one way
of measuring the output from different arrangements. For example, Argyle
(1969:309) discusses the structure of the network in terms of problem solving.
Using five persons arranged in circle-, chain-, Y- and wheel-shaped networks,
he reports Leavitt’s work which studied how the different structures affected
communication and hence problem solving. The circle was the slowest, made
most mistakes and needed the most messages. The Y pattern made the fewest
errors. Kapferer (1973) reports that the low-density wheel was the most effi-
cient network for solving problems based on sharing information. This was fol-
lowed by all-channel high-density and finally the circle.
   Table 2.4 quantifies the properties of different spatial networks (Figure 2.1).
Attention is paid to the extent and structure of the links that define them. The
table illustrates some of the consequences for high- and low-density networks
and the degree of centrality enjoyed by some nodes in some networks. One
outcome of such measures is to show how the different structure of networks
can influence the form of interaction particularly through the costs which
depend on location (e.g. Mandryk 1993, Wobst 1976). The consequences of
operating in either a low- or high-density network then become apparent. For
example, Steele (1994) has simulated patterns of dispersal using network ties
in three different lattice structures (Figure 2.2). This allows him to observe how
traits are culturally transmitted between nodes in these networks. The density
of ties determines how easy it is for a new trait to be adopted. He found that
the weaker ties in his Poisson network and the lower connectivity in his Low
Density network resulted in new adaptive traits spreading through the system
faster. On the contrary, the very high density pattern of ties in his Tribal
network produced its own internal resistance to the spread of new traits, thus
underscoring how such structures can enforce behavioural norms.


The effect of age on network structure
Network diagrams (Figure 2.3) with their ties and nodes are a useful descriptive
device to express either the movement of individuals down their time-space
paths (Carlstein 1982) or the flow of information and objects (Isaac 1972, Yellen
and Harpending 1972). Networks persist because individuals routinely travel
the same tracks as they create their social lives. But networks also change as
the individual grows older and achieves different positions within them. A good
    The individual, society and networks




    VAS
      All channel                   All channel
        & centre                    & no centre




        —
        ries
         Circle




                                   oars
                                   eae

                                   pk
                                    va
         Wheel                            Y¥2
2.1 Alternative network patterns using seven nodes and their
    information/resource flows (see Table 2.4).
46                The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

Table 2.4. Examples of variation in network structure. Density is calculated
according to Boissevain’s formula (1974).

                                    Ties and connectivity
                                                                         Number
                              Centre        Endto     Edgeto   Number    of ties in
                    Density   to edge       centre    edge     of ends   network

All channel         87        0             0         1        0         18
 (high density
 no centre)
All channel         80        1             0         1-2      0         15
  (high density
 centre)
Circle              33.3      0             0         1-6      0          ie
M chain             Di;       1-2           3         1-4      2          6
String              Pee       1-5           6         1-4      1          6
val                 20        1-3           1-4       1-2      3          6
vO)                 20        1             2;        1-2      3          6
Wheel                0        0             1         2        6          6
 (low density)




           2.2 Three model networks used in simulations of communication and
               dispersal patterns. From left to right, the Poisson network, the Low
               Density network and the Tribal network (after Steele 1994:Fig. 2).

example is provided by Wiessner (1982) where the number of negotiated hxaro
exchange partners among the !Kung changes with age and commitments (Table
2.5).
  It is not surprising that the greatest expansion of the hxaro networks occurs
when the San are looking for spouses for their children (ibid.:74).
              The individual, society and networks                              47




                                                               Xx
                                                               VAI
                    Anucleate              Intermediate            Nucleate

          2.3 The links and information flows between nodes which could be
              individuals or groups in open and closed networks (after Yellen and
              Harpending 1972:Fig. 15).


  This example points to some of the basic structuring of networks by age.
Obviously within this category individuals will build very different networks
which, as defined through the frequency of interaction, will vary in intensity
and duration. The standard deviations in Table 2.5 indicate such variation.


Sexual division of labour and network structure

 Howell (1988) comments on network differences between sexes among the
 !Kung. The women have shorter generation times, twenty-eight years as com-
pared to thirty-five years for the men (ibid. 1988:70-1). !Kung women obtain
 their social connections through marriage at a considerably younger age than
 their brothers and therefore their connectedness scores ‘peak early’. Men are
therefore much less likely to outlive their connections.
   An example of the importance of the division of labour on network structure
is provided by Maryanski and Ishii-Kuntz’s (1991) study of role segregation
among non-human primates. The study is based on Bott’s (Bott 1957, Kapferer
 1973) research into urban networks where she concluded that the density of
interaction in family networks, measured by the number of ties and their emo-
tional content, can explain the degree to which the roles of the sexes are segre-
gated. Maryanski and Ishii-Kuntz measured the strength of ties between the
sexes in non-human primates on a scale ranging from absent to strong. Their
table (2.6) reveals that network density is closely related to the pattern of dis-
persal. Close-knit (high-density) female networks prevail when males disperse,
and vice versa. When both sexes leave home then low density networks for both
males and females prevail (Maryanski and Ishii-Kuntz 1991:417).
   Maryanski and Ishii-Kuntz find support, irrespective of the reproductive
arrangement in non-human primates, for Bott’s main hypothesis, namely ‘the
greater the density of the network of at least one sex, the greater the level of
role segregation’ and, conversely, ‘the less dense the network, the greater the
degree of convergence in male-female roles’ (Maryanski and Ishii-Kuntz
1991:417).8 When the male and female dispersal patterns in Table 2.6 are
                =
48            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

              Table 2.5. Hxaro partners by age category (from Wiessner
              1982:table 3.1).

                                                                      Mean number of
                                                  Number of San       hxaro partners
              Age category                        interviewed         per person

                                                                      <             s.d.
              Adolescents                          6                  10            4
              Marriageable young adults            4                  16            5
              Adults with small children          oF                  13            if
              Adults with mature children         14                  24            8
              Old partially dependent adults       8                  ie)           6




Table 2.6. The density of network ties between the sexes in non-human
primates and its relation to role segregation (from Maryanski and Ishii-
Kuntz 1991:Table 1).

                                          Network density
                                              pattern
                      Dispersal at       oo
Roles                 puberty            Male        Female     Species

Highly segregated     Male               Low           High     Patas monkey
                      Male               Low           High     Geladas
                      Female             High          Low      Hamadryas baboons
                      Female             Medium        Low      Common chimpanzee
Medium segregated     Male               Low           High     Common baboons
Medium segregated     Male & female      Low           Low      Gorilla
Joint                 Male & female      Low           Low      Gibbons

Notes:
Role segregation between mating partners was measured with respect to (a) leisure
time spent together, (b) male involvement in child care, (c) shared maintenance
activities, (d) dominance.


compared with Steele’s simulations (1994:Figure 2.2), we see that male hama-
dryas baboons have a Poisson-type network, based on dispersal with low
density and some transitivity. The females on the other hand would have a
Tribal-style network based on very high, frequent interaction among all the co-
resident females.
  Finally, Table 2.7 compares the common chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) with
the smaller bonobo (Pan paniscus) and reveals very different sex-structured net-
works (see also Foley and Lee 1996, Foley and Lee 1989). The implication from
two such closely related species, with very similar sexual dimorphism as meas-
ured by weight, is that social structure is derived as much from history as from
             The individual, society and networks                            49

             Table 2.7. Variation in network density in two very
             similar species as measured genetically and by sexual
             dimorphism (Parish 1996).

             Common chimp                     Bonobo

             Females disperse                 Females disperse
             Females solitary with infants    Females form alliances
             [low-density networks]           [high-density networks]
             Multi-male alliances             Males solitary
             {high-density networks]          [low-density networks]
             Females 84% of the size by       Females 82.5% of the size
             weight of males                  by weight of males



the genes. So long as it does not affect reproductive success either pattern of
sex-based alliance is possible. But while this makes it difficult to specify the
ancestral hominid pattern for even more similar species — such as Homo hei-
delbergensis, Homo neanderthalensis and Homo sapiens — the implications for
network density remain constant.


Resources and network structure

Now that we have examined some of the components which make up networks
we can turn to the resources which generate particular structures. Turner and
Maryanski (1991:550) have discussed the content of networks in terms of three
interlinked resources: emotional, symbolic and material. These are available
for the negotiation of the social ties between individuals. Table 2.8 presents a
model of how individuals use the resources at their disposal for the purposes of
constructing society through a framework of personal and global networks.
   The emotional resources are those which create the high-density affective
ties among close kin and friends. They depend upon face-to-face contact and
frequent reaffirmation. It is from their intensity that the individual derives
security. The constraint on the size of the intimate network is that the number
of people with whom ego can interact at this intensity in order to achieve that
psychological state is limited. The embodiment of interaction, which makes
this network so distinctive, limits the relationships which emerge through per-
formance to no more than a small intimate circle. Grooming time, whatever it
involves, is a constraint for all primate intimate networks (Cheney and
Seyfarth 1990, Dunbar 1992a).
   Material resources can be illustrated by the exchange of marriage partners.
For example, Sahlins’ (1972:194—-5) distinction between generalized and
balanced reciprocity recognizes that the latter applies to alliance gener-
ated through marriage. On the contrary, generalized reciprocity has no counter-
              -
50             The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

Table 2.8. Changes in resources and the content of interactions and
networks.

                                         RESOURCES

               Emotional             Material/exchange        Symbolic/stylistic
               (Milardo 1992,        (Sahlins 1972,           (Wobst 1977)
               Boissevain 1968,      Valeri 1992)
               1974)


NETWORKS

INTIMATE       eeee                  Generalized    eee       °                          P
(5)            Significant others    Household                Immediate household            a

EFFECTIVE      eee                   Generalized 29°          ee                         R T
(20)           Colleagues, friends   Lineage/village sector   Friends, relatives         - WwW
EXTENDED       ee                    Balanced       °         eee                        nO
(100-400)      Friends of friends _‘Tribal sector             Target group               A R
                                                              socially distant           i *

GLOBAL         e                     Negative       e         e
(2500)         Neutral or            Intertribal sector       Non-target group
               antagonistic                                   socially very distant

Notes:
Filled circles indicate the relative use of each resource. The size of each network is
indicated in parentheses. The networks are described in Table 2.9.



obligation ‘stipulated by time quantity, or quality: the expectation of reciproc-
ity is indefinite’ (ibid.:194). This distinction is seen here as the difference
between intimate/effective and extended networks relative to an individual.
   The different relationships in these networks redefine the material resources
used to author them. Hence the same materials can change from being gifts to
becoming commodities between an individual’s effective and extended
network (Gregory 1982). As described by Valeri (1992:15), the transition from
‘buying’ to ‘gift-giving’ coincides with the creation of relatedness (Figure 2.4).
As indicated in Table 2.8, material resources are more important in both the
intimate and effective networks. But they will be very different in kind.
Voluntary sharing of food, equipment and raw materials may be common in the
former network. The latter will be dominated by the exchange of marriage part-
ners and the ritual consumption of food in social situations. Finally, negative
reciprocity — the attempt to get something for nothing — defines dealings with
the ‘other’ in the global network where social distance is so great that people
are strangers. The affirmation of alliance through exchange allows an individ-
ual to overcome otherness by bringing selected persons into his or her personal
network.
               The individual, society and networks                                    el

Table 2.9. A hierarchy of ego-based networks.

Intimate network has a high investment of genetic and emotional resources. It
provides the individual with ontological security that the natural and social worlds
are as they appear to be (Giddens 1984). A high level of face-to-face interaction is
involved.
Effective network deals with the logistics of daily life. These people are instrumental
for ego in his/her pursuit of reproductive, economic, political and social ends. Material
resources are an important means of creating bonds.
Extended network contains friends of friends who are known to ego and could be
brought into the effective network if required. Symbolic resources, organized through
style and material culture, are important when negotiating this network.
These three networks can be described as the Personal network which will vary in
scale and content of the social ties from individual to individual. The varieties of
negotiated alliance bond individuals within the personal network.
Global network is defined by ‘otherness’. It contains total strangers or at best casual
acquaintances. They can be reached, but in terms of alliance, built on interaction,
remain neutral to ego. This is because they are either never encountered (as in small-
scale foraging societies) or because there are limits to the numbers of people which
although encountered (as in a football crowd or on the underground) can be interacted
with and are not therefore the subject of further sustained negotiation. A feature of
urban rather than foraging societies, the means used to cope with such co-presence
would be an example of Goffman’s unfocused interaction (1963).




   The symbolic resources are, in human societies, expressed through material
culture. The information content of such expressions has traditionally been
analysed through the concept of style. Wobst (1977) pointed out that if infor-
mation contributed to survival then it would be under selection. Hence stylis-
tic behaviour follows rules and these can be assessed in terms of the target
population which was receiving the message (Figure 2.5). If people in such a
group were the subject of frequent, even daily contacts (friends and colleagues),
then coding and sending information stylistically was unnecessary. In her anal-
ysis of a restricted code governing such frequent interaction, Douglas (1973)
concludes that it is expressed in a poverty of ritual and symbolic/stylistic
resources. She makes the point that
The condition for a restricted code to emerge is that the members of a group should
know one another so well that they share a common backcloth of assumptions which
never need to be made explicit. (1973:78)
   Restricted code thrives upon face-to-face contact, embodied performances
and frequent interaction. The strong affective ties using emotional resources
are therefore negatively correlated (Table 2.8) with the presence of symbolically
organized resources expressed stylistically. Symbolic resources are dedicated to
the effective and especially to extended networks.
                 -
52,            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




                        ee
                     VILLAGE    SECTOR


                         ae
                     LINEAGE    SECTOR



                                                            a
                                                            ae

                                                Balanced          Negative
                                              Reciprocity       Reciprocity




                      TRIBAL
                       ee
                                SECTOR
                               eee    ee




                   INTERTRIBAL       SECTOR

         2.4 Reciprocity and kinship sectors, where the latter represent a
             hierarchy of integration with changing relationships expressed
             through exchange and gift giving. GR =Generalized reciprocity
             (after Sahlins 1972:Fig. 5.1).



  It is not my intention in classifying these networks and the resources that
define them to start a search for their archaeological correlates. My aim is to
provide a conceptual framework that expresses the selective pressure that all
the networks in which an individual participates exert on negotiation, affilia-
tion and reciprocity. In short, the sum of the networks affects decisions in all
aspects of an individual’s life. The social ties which form the networks both
bind and bond.


Rules to explain the size of networks
Two rules are important in limiting the size of networks:
           *    temporal, especially where affective behaviour involves grooming
                and language,
and

           *    cognitive, where our capacity to handle information     is seen as
                crucial
               The individual, society and networks                                     5S

                       Non-target group               5                Very distant

                           Target group                            Socially distant


                                 Close friends        3        Relatives


                                                      2
                                       Immediate          household


                                                      1
                                                   Emitter



                                          few stylistic messages,
                                             messages      known


                                         little stylistic behaviour,
                                     messages otherwise knowable

                                             messaging activity,
                                 potentially can receive & decode message
                         does not have much chance to encounter the message,
                                          cannot   decode the message

           2.5 The target groups of stylistic messages also form a hierarchy of
               integration which has implications for the design and display of
               visual culture (after Wobst 1977:Fig. 1).


Networks and time

Dunbar (1992a) has raised the important issue of time as a resource in negotia-
tion.
Even if a [primate] species has the cognitive capacity to manage all the relationships
involved in large groups, there may be circumstances under which the animals simply
do not have the time to devote to servicing those relationships through social groom-
ing. Relationships that are not serviced in this way will cease to function effectively; as
a result, the group will tend to disperse and the population will settle at a new lower
equilibrium size. (Dunbar 1993:687)

  Cheyney and Seyfarth’s (1990) study of vervet monkeys differentiated groom-
ing between individuals at intervals of 5-10, 10-15, 15-20, 20-25 and more
than 25 minutes. Dunbar (1992a) has shown how the amount of time per day
spent grooming increases with group size. As the latter increases so pressures
mount on individuals to form coalitions to counter harassment by other
members of the group. In the vervet example these coalitions are small
although total group size is large. In my terminology the vervet coalitions are
comparable to the intimate and effective networks (Table 2.8). This is where
alliances are negotiated in the context of cohesive group living.
                ¥
54               The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

Table 2.10. Selected predictions for average group size, and for home range
diameters for group sizes in the range 25-300, from Steele (1996:Tables 8.7
and 8.8).

                                 Average group size      Home range diameters (km)

                           Predicted from group size/    Primate        Carnivore
                           total brain and body weight   model          model

H. habilis s.s              91.3                         3.0-8.5        26.2-78.0
H. rudolfensis              74.7                         3.6-10.4       32.4-96.2
H. erectus                 107.6                         3.7-10.6       32,.9-97.9
Neanderthal earlya.m.      308.7                         3.6-10.5       32.6-96.8
H. sapiens                 ole                           3.8-11.0       34.4-102.2




   Among baboons the amount of time spent socializing varies between seven
and twenty per cent of their annual time budgets. This variation has not led to
appreciable differences in the social organization of these different populations
as shown for example in mean group size. Dunbar concludes (1992a:42) that the
major constraint is the amount of time that a baboon has to spend feeding.
   Devoting about 20 per cent of the day (2.4 hours in 12 hours of daylight) to
social grooming seems to be an absolute upper limit for non-human primates
(Dunbar 1993:688). Even with high grooming rates group sizes are small,
ranging between 30 and 40 individuals (ibid.:Figure 3). A human group size of
150 would, according to Dunbar’s regression equation, need a massive 42 per
cent of the total time budget to be devoted to grooming.
   This would only be a constraint if permanent group stability was the goal of
social grooming. Humans with their fission-fusion system which changes
group size and membership can lessen the problem by reducing the size of co-
resident groups. Alternatively, Dunbar argues, humans can use language as a
grooming substitute. In the vocal grooming hypothesis, developed with Aiello
(and Dunbar 1993), a relationship is claimed between group size and the size of
the neocortex (Dunbar 1992b, 1993, 1996). The neocortex, quite literally the
grey matter, is the ‘thinking part’ of the brain (Dunbar 1992b:473) and its expan-
sion in the past two million years is why we now have such large brains.
   Steele (1996) has extended this analysis and estimated hominid average group
size (Table 2.10). He achieves this by comparing known primate group size with
brain and body size. Moreover, by using body mass for the same comparative
sample (Grant, Chapman and Richardson 1992) it is also possible to calculate
hominid home range size according to either a primate or carnivore model
(Table 2.10). The figures show a consistent pattern for all the later species of
Homo and the archaeological evidence for these ranges is presented in Chapter
on
     Aiello and Dunbar argue that language provided a more efficient method of
              The individual, society and networks                                   55
servicing the interactions which produce stable relationships within these
larger groups (1993). It is a ‘cheap’ form of social grooming because several
people can be ‘groomed’ in the course of a single conversation, thereby saving
time. Moreover, information can be quickly exchanged about people not
present. Time does not have to be spent observing others. What is minimally
required is a concept of a relationship so that social information can be
exchanged. Finally, Dunbar is insistent that
The limit imposed by neocortical processing capacity applies only to the number of indi-
viduals with whom a stable interpersonal relationship can be maintained. This in no
sense commits us to any particular way of structuring those groups (e.g., via kinship).
(Dunbar 1993:692)


Networks, information exchange and the mind

Time is very important in limiting the size of the intimate and effective net-
works. It appears that cognitive rules govern extended and global networks.
The explanation for repeated demographic sizes (see below) relates to the capac-
ity of the individual to process and store information (Bernard and Killworth
 1973, Johnson 1982, 1978, Kosse 1990, Williams 1981).
   But what is an item of information? I would define it as whatever is required
to act as a knowledgeable agent in those interactions and encounters of social
life. As an act of communication the relevant information will relate to other
individuals and their interrelationships. What has to be exchanged, transmit-
ted and remembered as information is the differential use of the emotional,
symbolic and material resources which combined produce the rounded charac-
ters with which we interact.
   The cognitive view of memory divides the process of remembering into
short-term memory and long-term memory. Simon (1974) has identified the
transfer of information from the short-term memory to the long-term memory,
and its fixation there, as the key problem in understanding problem solving.
The short-term memory is very limited. Experimental tests have shown that
only some seven items, and perhaps as few as four, can be held in it. From there
it takes about five to ten seconds to fix information in the long-term memory
(Simon 1981:75). The ‘magic number’ of seven (Miller 1956) can be interpreted
as a psychological restriction (Bernard and Killworth 1973) on our capacity to
remember and integrate information.
   Since the short-term memory has a limit on what it can hold, the solution to
expanding memory has been to combine, or chunk, the information (Miller
1956, Simon 1981, 1974).? The term chunk, as introduced by Miller (1956), is
deliberately vague but helps us to make the important distinction between the
continuous stream of information (for example phonemes, words or sounds)
and a chunk of that flow which is identified with either a particular psycholog-
ical or social significance (Simon 1974:482).
   Using the concept of an information source, which varies in scale from the

                -
56              The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

individual to larger population units, Johnson (1978) has analysed the costs of
integrating increasing numbers of such units, with five to seven such units rep-
resenting a threshold in how information exchange is achieved. For example,
the model of forager territories predicts that each local group should have six
neighbours as this optimizes the geographical packing by reducing contact dis-
tances in a hexagonal lattice. When the number of actual boundaries are meas-
ured, as shown for example in Tindale’s maps of aboriginal Australia (1974), the
values are close to but less than the expected six contiguous neighbours.
Johnson puts this down to the lack of hierarchy in hunter-gatherer society
which, if available, would overcome the problem of integrating such informa-
tion sources.
   Elsewhere this has been discussed as a problem of scalar stress (Johnson 1982)
which recognizes that the problem is not the number of people which need to
be integrated, but rather the number of chunks or information sources. An
example from the study of small-group dynamics helps to make the point at the
level of individual interaction. Argyle (1969:231) showed that as the number of
people in problem-solving groups of three to eight people increased, so the
pattern of interaction changed dramatically. While individuals never, as we
would expect, contribute equally to the group, it is only when size increases to
five that a hierarchy of interaction occurs with one person emerging as a ‘leader’
in the sense of dominating the conversation. At the same time the other
members’ contributions decline dramatically and become much more equal.
The structure of such a gathering is therefore both created by the individuals
and influenced by the relationship which different numbers produce. It is an
example of integrating information sources through the emergence of an inte-
grating mechanism — in this case a leader.
   The organizational problem of increasing scale, Johnson argues (1982:394), is
a problem of communication stress where integration due to our own cognitive
abilities breaks down unless Miller’s magic number of five to seven chunks is
preserved. Therefore, as long as the numbers of people can be reclassified from
streets to towns to cities to nations, or from families to lineages to tribes, and
the hierarchies or spans of control introduced to integrate such units, then the
total number of people in the system can keep on growing. The psychological
restriction of seven units which Bernard and Killworth (1973) identify as the
control on group and sub-group size provides a sociometric example of this
same principle.
   According to Johnson (1982:392), increasing difficulties in communication
arise because the ‘potential exchange of information in group decision making
should be a function of maximum potential group interaction’. Maximum
interaction is where    every group member    interacts with every other group
member on a face-to-face basis. This seems a very long-winded and time-con-
suming way to reach a decision. It is unlikely to guarantee either a reduction
in conflict, because information is now equally shared, or better decisions,
because information will need to be constantly updated. The solution is to
              The individual, society and networks                             OY,

Table 2.11. /Kung group organization in terms of organizational chunks
(from Johnson 1982:Table 21.3).

                                             Units per group          Mean group
Group                Organizational chunks   Range   Mean             population

Dry season camp      Extended family         3-4     5                40.00
Rainy seasoncamp     Nuclear family          2-6     3.08             14.83
Extended family      Nuclear family          1-5     3.00             11.43
Nuclear family       Adult                   2-3     Pal dD            3.43
Social unit          Adult                   1-3     1.86              2.96




 provide spokespeople and reorganize the number of units by chunking
 (Williams 1981:248).
    Johnson (1982) provides an example of chunking which produces an amended
 organizational structure. The data come from Yellen’s (1977) study of !Kung
 campsites, where the numbers of people varied from a mean of eleven to one of
 forty for the larger camps (Table 2.11). However, Johnson’s analysis shows that
 the number cof chunks remained constant at around three units per camp. What
‘happens therefore is that larger aggregations of people are integrated by people
 camping not as nuclear families, as they do in the smaller camps, but as larger
 extended families.
   By increasing (chunking) the size of the units the communication stress that
 would be expected from an increase in numbers is compensated for, and aggre-
 gation can proceed without necessitating a formal hierarchy to achieve integra-
tion.
   These limits are explained by Kosse as the cognitive load which individuals
can carry when running a face-to-face network. This maximal unit is set by
Kosse as 500+100 people (Kosse 1990:291). However, we have already seen
through a network approach that although we may know the names of 500
people, we do not know all the relationships between them (see below, Colson
1978). Knowledge of relationships decreases through the personal network
from the intimate to the extended zones. As knowledge based on face-to-face,
regular contact declines, so this is replaced by the increased use of symbolic/
stylistic signalling.


The demographic size of networks
These resources and rules can now be put into context by examining the dem-
ographic size of the four networks defined in Tables 2.8 and 2.9. Since networks
using all three resources are common to all human societies, we can use data
based on network analysis in contemporary industrial, urban societies, supple-
mented by observations in traditional rural communities.
              -
58           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

Personal Networks

Intimate
In a cross-cultural study of western societies Milardo (1992:Table 1) discovered
that the number of people interacting at the highest intensity with ego ranged
on average from three to seven persons, with an overall mean of five. These
were people whom respondents categorized as important, those significant
others. Intensity is measured by the frequency of contact usually involving
face-to-face contact. In Milardo’s sample only 50 per cent of the people in these
networks were immediate kin, a point emphasized in a study of a Toronto
neighbourhood community (Wellman, Carrington and Hall 1988). This is
perhaps surprising given the argument of kin selection (Quiatt and Reynolds
1993) and where we expect greater cohesion between related individuals to
protect and promote their genetic resources. Rather, the important feature of
the intimate network is its stability and persistence rather than the genetic
capital it represents. This unit, which Williams (1981:249) calls a household,
does form a network for economic, social and political calculations in all soci-
eties. The high costs of creating the network, for example through parenting,
care giving and the demands of buddy-friendships, are only repaid if the social
bonds so created stand the test of time. The intimate network is above all a
security network, providing an individual with unspoken and unquestioning
support. This assurance contributes to the confidence and trust that the natural
and social worlds are as they appear to be to the individual (Giddens 1984:375).
The ties are therefore multiplex and high density. Multiplex ties comprise
several strands to a relationship forged between two individuals, for example a
brother/sister or close friend. They are multiplex because they are based on
history and a variety of contexts for their performance. They are high density
because the number of ties which could possibly exist between two individu-
als do in fact exist (Boissevain 1974, Milroy 1987, Turner and Maryanski 1991).

Effective
These are the people who provide the individual with material and emotional
assistance during the routines of daily life. Milardo (1992 :Table 2) found that
the average size of this network (which he called the exchange network) was
twenty persons and that kin members dropped to 40 per cent of the named
network (see also Cubitt 1973). The range of average network size in his eight
samples was from 10.05 to 22.8 people. Milardo noted considerable variation.
If 95 per cent confidence limits are placed around the means of the samples then
most individuals will, he suggests, have effective networks ranging from six to
thirty-four members.
   A classic example of the effective network can be found in Thrasher’s (1927)
study of Chicago neighbourhood adolescent male gangs. In a sample of 895
gangs, 90 per cent had fewer than 50 members while 60 per cent ranged in size
from 6 to 20 members. Thrasher explained the dominant gang size, or clique,
              The individual, society and networks                              59
by the necessities of maintaining face-to-face relationships. This interactional
basis set limits on gang size where what was said by one member of the group
could be heard by everyone. Fission took place when common experience,
maintained by a high intensity of interaction and performance, broke down
(Hare 1976:215).
   The effective network is less permanent and stable than the smaller intimate
network. The ties between individuals are both multiplex as well as uniplex or
single stranded. These multiplex ties are well illustrated by Damas’ (1972:24-5]
discussion of sharing practices among the Copper Eskimo. Their system of pig-
atigiit recognizes fourteen major divisions of the ringed seal which are shared
out among that number of partners. The successful hunter will on other occa-
sions receive a designated portion when one of his other partners makes a kill.
   Colson (1978) has shown among the Gwembe of Zambia how reasonably per-
manent coalitions of lineage mates usually ranged from ten to twelve persons.
Interactions with the dead were also part of these effective networks and for
that reason between eight and fifteen ancestral shades, who might intervene in
human affairs, were generally considered sufficient for each individual. When
combined, this would produce an effective network for the Gwembe of between
eighteen and twenty-seven people. Among the !Kung, Howell (1988) has esti-
mated that the combination of their demographic probabilities and kinship
rules results in some sixteen relatives per person.

Extended
This is the network of acquaintances and friends-of-friends. The ties that ego
has with people in this network will vary in terms of whether they are currently
active or passive. It will include people where interaction is a card at Christmas
as well as those who are met at the workplace or the local shops on a regular
basis. Most of the network ties will be uniplex rather than multiplex. The dif-
ference would be your interaction with a service provider, such as a shop assist-
ant, as compared with a close friend or relative.
   In particular the strength of transitive ties will be significant in shaping the
network. These ties measure the degree to which there is a transfer of a rela-
tionship between non-interacting individuals (Milroy 1987, Turner and
Maryanski 1991). The effective and extended networks are therefore distinc-
tive. Milardo (1992) discovered only a 25 per cent overlap in membership
between the extended and effective networks. Temporary coalitions may also
be produced from within the extended network, for example the fifteen-strong
work parties recruited among the Gwembe (Colson 1978), but these are short
lived and dependent upon context. Such coalitions could also include people
from the effective network.
   The size of the extended network is more difficult to estimate. The basis of
acquaintanceship and the category friends-of-friends is often vague and difficult
to define for the purposes of quantitative assessment. Milardo (1992:455) cites
Gurevich’s study of 27 volunteers who recorded everyone with whom they
                oad
60            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

interacted over a 100-day period. The average was 400 people but the range was
from 72 to over 1,000. Barth (1978:175) records a similar experiment over a 14-
day period where he interacted with 109 different people and his younger col-
league in the same period with 175. Boissevain (1968) calculated his extended
network to be 300 persons which is a figure that Colson (1978) suggests for an
individual in the Gwembe District.
   Bernard and Killworth (1973) have examined the structure of groups and sub-
groups in terms of the matrix of interactions between individuals. They con-
clude that a psychological restriction exists on the number of people or units
which can be integrated. They conclude with the hypothesis that ‘any group of
more than at most 140 elements must form its own sub-groups, and in so doing
produce its own formalised hierarchy to deal with this’ (Bernard and Killworth
1973:184). A link between a recurrent network size of 150 supported by bonds
created through language has been identified by Dunbar (1993:686). Larger
extended networks can be built by clustering ties as well as by using transitive
ties to overcome the psychological restrictions that lead to problems of integra-
tion and interaction.
   These estimates, while not entirely satisfactory for determining the size of
extended networks, do point to three conclusions. Firstly there is tremendous
variation in the size of networks between individuals (Killworth, Bernard and
McCarty 1984, 1990). This confirms the utility of network models rather than
group-based studies of society, since variation at the level of the individual
must be expected in the past and was the material for selective change.
Secondly, as Milardo comments, this tremendous variation emphasizes the
remarkable influence that the tiny intimate network of five persons has on an
individual’s decisions, security and network building in comparison to
the sheer number of people contacted in the routine business of daily living and the
breadth of opportunities they present or deny in terms of opportunities for social com-
parison, companionship and access to scarce resources. (Milardo 1992:455)

   Finally, we must conclude that only a finite number of ties can be effectively
forged. New ties can only be made by surrendering some and replacing them
with others (Wellman, Carrington and Hall 1988). Hence the effective and
extended networks will see a good deal of interchange and much less stability
in composition than the intimate network (Boissevain 1968:547).
   In summary, a figure of between 100 and 400 people represents the best
approximation we currently have of a person’s extended network. When added
to that person’s intimate and effective networks, the complete personal
network is of the order of 130 to 430, with an upper limit of possibly 1,000
people.

Global Network
While the three subdivisions of the personal network have finite sizes, the
global network, since it deals with the social category of ‘otherness’, is poten-
              The individual, society and networks                                   61
tially unbounded. More specifically, it represents opportunities for new ties to
be brought into the personal network. Some investigation of how individuals
in western societies operate networks at this scale has been undertaken to
assess the extent of reachability and hence recruitment (Killworth, Bernard and
McCarty 1984) and as we saw earlier, experiments show that only three to five
links are needed to arrange for a personal introduction with someone selected
at random (Boissevain 1974, Jacobson 1978). These limited degrees of separa-
tion are an example of transitivity and clustering of ties.
   But what of global network size at low population densities? Kosse (1990:278)
has identified a threshold of 2,500 which she regards as the upper limit on the
area-level adaptation (Hill 1978). This is supported by Wiessner’s estimate of
2,000 people in the !Kung hxaro trading system (1982) and by the mean figure
of 2,815 people in Constandse-Westermann and Newell’s survey of Band-level
linguistic families (1991, Newell and Constandse-Westermann 1986). At these
densities the likelihood of encountering anyone from the wider population,
apart from indirectly through trading partnerships, was remote until modern
communications appeared. Interestingly, Bernard and Killworth’s sociometric
study (1973:183) produced a figure of 2,460 as the maximum group size which
has some stability without a formalized hierarchy governing interaction.
   Beyond this unit, as in Alaska,
There are many stories of small groups of men hunting deep in the hinterlands suddenly
(and accidentally) encountering each other and having some very tense moments. First,
they would try to identify themselves to one another’s satisfaction. Failing that, the
result varied depending on the relative numbers and condition of the people involved.
If the groups appeared to be of equal strength, the tendency was for both sides to with-
draw, thenceforth to avoid each other. If one group was obviously stronger, violence of
some sort often followed. (Burch 1975:25)

  The lone seal-hunter, who went adrift on sea ice and could not identify
himself to the villagers where he washed up, was usually beaten to death (Burch
1975). In this way the limits to social interaction were primarily defined
through a principle of exclusion which had to be negotiated away (Mauss
1967:79).
  For those of us living in industrial societies our personal and global net-
works might appear unbounded thanks to unprecedented opportunities for
travel and communication. But it is a relative concept. Even with jumbo jets,
mobile phones and the Internet we cannot construct, even if we wanted to,
personal networks with all six billion people on the planet. Neither can an
individual among the Gwembe Tonga of Zambia build a personal network
with everyone in a neighbourhood of only 600 people (Colson 1978). Neither
is it likely that they would do so if the Internet and mobile phones were freely
available. As Colson discovered, the Gwembe may give the impression that
the 600-strong neighbourhood was bound up in a single network with a high
rate of interaction. For example, everyone was known by name by everyone
else. But,
62             The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

closer inspection of the evidence suggests that in fact they restricted intensive interac-
tion to a small fraction of those available to them, and handled contacts with the rest
as though they were members of the crowd or by a superficial courtesy which permit-
ted them to meet and pass on without further involvement. Such courtesy required rec-
ognition of an encounter rather than assignment of persons to roles or their treatment
as complete persons. (Colson 1978:153, my emphasis)

   This example underscores the resource of time in forming relationships
through interaction. The problem is not so much remembering people as
having time to service the relationships with the appropriate resources (Table
2.8). This dichotomy is nicely described by Colson as ‘people shock’ (1978:155),
experienced by her, and many anthropologists, working in communities which,
by western urban standards, are tiny but which are overpowering to us in a way
that the millions of people in New York are not. The answer is that the
Gwembe have a similar way of coping with a crowd as we do. Their equivalent
of staring straight ahead, talking if you have to about the weather and apologiz-
ing (if you are British) when someone steps on your foot, is contained in a com-
parable ritualized greeting ceremony (see Chapter 3).
   The important point is that knowledge of names may be one thing but the
ability to negotiate relationships through interaction is something else
entirely. We can remember a lot of names but negotiate comparatively few rela-
tionships, because of time constraints, at the level of the intimate and effective
networks. We are limited by the resources which define these two networks
from including more than a certain number of people within them. If these net-
works are to function by supplying us, as individuals, with ontological secur-
ity, defined as the
confidence or trust that the natural and social worlds are as they appear to be, includ-
ing the basic existential parameters of self and social identity (Giddens 1984:375)

then time has to be devoted to them since they require considerable expendi-
ture of emotional resources.
   What humans have developed, Colson argues, is unrelated to the size of our
global network within which we make our way. It is our ability to exclude so
that the intensity of interaction with those in our personal network is held con-
stant. This exclusion is directed by the rules governing interaction and the dif-
ferent resources which are available. Out of such interaction emerge
individuals who appear as rounded characters, capable of engaging our sympa-
thies and making demands which must be met (Colson 1978:151), for example
through generalized and balanced reciprocity and the mutual exchange of
visual information (Table 2.8).

Rules in action: hunter and gatherer magic numbers
These network sizes of 5 (intimate), 20 (effective) and 100-400 (extended) are
familiar in demographic studies of hunter-gatherers. Here they have entered the
literature as Birdsell’s ‘magic numbers’ (1958, 1968, 1976). These consist of
              The individual, society and networks                                63

            ¢ nuclear families of 5 persons
            ¢ a local group/minimum band of 25 with ranges of 20-70 people nor-
              mally associated with a named locality (Peterson 1986, Stanner 1965,
              Williams 1981:240, Wobst 1974:170)
            ¢ an effective breeding unit or connubium with ranges of between
              150-200 people, and where population numbers were of sufficient
              size to cope with any stochastic fluctuations in sex ratios, mortality
              and fertility (Howell and Lehotay 1978, Williams 1974, Wobst 1974)
            e the much-disputed dialect tribe, or maximum band, of 500 and with
              a wide range (Burch 1975, Constandse-Westermann and Newell 1991,
              Dixon 1976, Tindale 1974).
   The point about these ‘magic numbers’ is that they have become the demo-
graphic institutions of Palaeolithic hunter-gatherer society. They provide a
good example of the one-way, top-down approach to the study of society which
I have been arguing needs revising. The demographic patterns exist but do not
have to be interpreted as proof for a group based model of society.
   I contend that recasting these groups as networks, constructed by and centred
on the individual, as many anthropologists advocate (Bahuchet 1992:247,
Carrithers 1990, Guemple 1972:75, Morris 1982:150, Wiessner 1982, Wilmsen
1989:180), rather than on the institution of the kin group and the breeding pop-
ulation, provides a more flexible approach to key issues such as cultural trans-
mission (Steele 1994) and the formation of society. The approach also facilitates
cross-species comparison in social behaviour and network ties (Maryanski and
Ishii-Kuntz 1991, Maryanski 1996) where the relationships defined by emo-
tional, material and symbolic resources differentiate the extent of network
elaboration.


Summary

While Giddens may point out that ‘“Society” has a useful double meaning...
signifying a bounded system, and social association in general’ (Giddens 1984:
xxvi}, he also reminds us that in practice these boundaries are rarely specifiable
and that it is the variety and cross-cutting of social systems which is impor-
tant. This is one reason why I have used a network approach to help define what
we mean by social life in the Palaeolithic. However, the problem is knowing
where to start. One route is to proceed from the top down. This route supposes
that society exists as a structure. It is often presented through architectural
metaphors of construction and edifice. Once assembled, these societies are
then lived in, with people entering and exiting the building but having little
impact upon its design. A second route begins with the interactions between
individuals which is the scale at which social life takes place irrespective of the
size of that society or its material complexity. In a bottom-up approach these
actors then negotiate with each other and in so doing perform society into exis-
tence. Obviously the key point is persistence. How do any performances last
longer than those fleeting moments? How do they leave a trace which is then
64            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

built into higher-level relationships and the persistence of social forms?
The answer can be found in the dual nature of structure where action both
enables and constrains (Giddens 1984, Hinde 1976). Structure and interaction
are a two-way process. It is involvement with the world through social life, and
the compromises/constraints this activity holds, which makes the performa-
tive view preferable to the structural model that society somehow precedes us.
Society does not make us or vervet monkeys into social beings. First and fore-
most we are all social actors whose involvement with the world makes society
the rich, individual experience, that it is for all of us. It is only when the anthro-
pologist visits the !Kung, or the primatologist the chimps at Gombe, or the
archaeologist the ice age Dordogne, or the sociologist the neighbourhood gangs
of Chicago, that we feel the need to compare structures beyond the involve-
ment of people, and animals, in the immediacy of social life.
   I have proposed in this chapter that the way to carry these arguments into
the Palaeolithic, which traditionally has resisted the individual as an object of
analysis and where the rarity of social data is usually bemoaned (Chapter 1), is
to examine the rules and resources which organize interaction. This bottom-
up approach identified the recurrent sizes of an individual’s networks as depen-
dent upon temporal and cognitive constraints. These vary between individuals
but produce predictable outcomes in terms of the content of the ties which are
negotiated and the sizes of the resource-based networks. Now that I have exam-
ined the patterning in human interaction, we can proceed to examine a frame-
work for the study of social life in the Palaeolithic.
               CHAPTER        3

               A PALAEOLITHIC FRAMEWORK:
               LOCALES, RHYTHMS AND REGIONS




                                                            Why do I go into such detail?
               Because the charged atmosphere made every little thing stand out as a
               performance, a movement distinct and vastly important. It was one of
               those hypersensitive moments when all your automatic movements,
               however long established, however habitual, become separate acts of
               will. You take nothing for granted, absolutely nothing at all.
                                                                     Raymond Chandler
                                                                    The Long Good-Bye




I will argue in this chapter that investigating Palaeolithic society, rather than
Palaeolithic settlement, involves two levels of analysis, locales and regions,
which are linked by the rhythms of social technology. The strong spatial
emphasis reflects the contexts of interaction and the construction of social net-
works by individuals. These two spatial scales provide the methodological piers
in the bridge which has to be built between Palaeolithic data and the individu-
als and societies which produced them. They are spanned by a series of closely
linked concepts, which I refer to jointly as rhythms. These actions, fundamen-
tal to the concept of agency, are of course invisible to the Palaeolithic archae-
ologist. They consisted of operational sequences, movements along well
trodden paths and attention paid to others. Rhythms provide us with the con-
ceptual link between the dynamics of past action and the inert residues of those
actions. They have to be inferred from the artifacts left behind. They link the
action to the region, the individual to a wider social structure and ourselves to
the past.
   In this chapter, locales are discussed in terms of the archaeology of encoun-
ters, gatherings, social occasions and places (Gamble 1998). The regional scale
is supplemented by two further concepts: the landscape of habit and the social
landscape (Gamble 1993d, 1995b, 1996a). The discussion of rhythms draws
heavily on the insights of Leroi-Gourhan ((1966)1993) as well as on recent dis-
cussions of temporality and landscape (Gosden 1989, 1994, Head, Gosden and
White 1994, Ingold 1993, Pickering 1994).
   The purpose of introducing these concepts is to provide the missing vocabu-
lary for the investigation of social life, including change and stasis, during the
European Palaeolithic (Chapters 4-7).

           r                                                                          65
66            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




                                                NORTH    \   NORTH   %
                                               CENTRAL




           and above 1000 metres

                   400             600 miles
                 ed                 4
                                     71
                                    1000 km




         3.1 A regional model of Europe for the investigation of long-term
             survival strategies by mobile populations (after Gamble 1986a:Fig.
               wih


Palaeolithic settlement reviewed

This framework builds on an earlier approach where I identified three behavou-
ral domains — spatial, demographic and social — for analysing the Palaeolithic
record (Gamble 1986a). There I drew up a simple regional model with nine divi-
sions (Figure 3.1) to observe variation in behaviour that could be predicted from
the ecological structure of resources. At a continental scale this variation in
settlement can be related to latitude, longitude and relief. These unchanging
factors controlled continentality, growing season and hence the productivity of
resources within Europe. This was irrespective of the prevailing climatic con-
ditions, glacial or interglacial.
   Using this simple model it can be shown that at any one time Palaeolithic
settlement varied across the nine regions of the continent, not in terms of arti-
fact types, but rather in the density and frequency of occupation. There were
also changes during the Palaeolithic whose behavioural significance could be
traced not just through the appearance of art, new projectile points or knapping
           A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions             67
