             Wheel (spoke)      1          5
             Star burst         6          5             25




arrived brief, then interaction is accomplished with all members of an effective
network. Moreover this interaction is achieved in the normal course of travel
and the encounters that brings.
   The Middle Palaeolithic settlement data point to the transfer of raw materi-
als to locales where gatherings rather than social occasions took place (Chapter
3). No doubt survival and recovery of the evidence have reduced the number of
such locales. Furthermore, there would have been many more encounters
which are ‘unrecorded’ archaeologically. So, the implication is that Middle
Palaeolithic hominids regularly encountered one another within the lattices of
a small spatial framework where the distances between gatherings were a
maximum of between 5 and 10km.
   This conclusion does not support a case for random or even opportunistic
movement by individuals across the landscape. Mobility was patterned, as
might be expected. It does however emphasize the local character of the Middle
Palaeolithic networks which both constrained the use of resources and enabled
the rules of interaction to operate.
   The indications from the Upper Palaeolithic transfers for the structure of net-
works are rather different. The Aurignacian, for example, points to a high-
density all-channel structure as shown by Turq’s fall-off curves for Aquitaine
(Turg 1993:Fig. 2). These no longer present a simple fall-off in quantity related
to distance, but instead a directed pattern of transfers which were either provi-
sioning places or focusing on particular individuals in an exchange system.
This conclusion that Upper Palaeolithic networks were organized differently is
              The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 yearsago                      361

              Table 7.3. The frequency of technological modes found on raw
              materials which have been transferred more than 20 km from
              source (Féblot-Augustins 1997:figures 43, 47, 58, 65 and 66). The
              one Late Middle Palaeolithic locale with mode 1 is Zwolen in
              Poland. For key to modes see Table 5.14.

              >20 km distance            Widest        te ee Oden    ee   eG       ofee 8

              Late Middle Palaeolithic
              Western Europe                                                             ar
              Central Europe                      +                                      =
              Upper Palaeolithic
              Western Europe                      se      SP   Sr         +    +   +     4+
              Central Europe                      +                 aS    es       Niele


based upon the increased distances as well as the differences between locales
in terms of transfers (Table 6.18). There were larger distances between locales,
fewer of them and hence a reduction in the number of those archaeologically
invisible encounters. The case of the Aurignacian caves and open sites separ-
ated by 300 km in the north-central region is a case in point (Chapter 6). Finally,
the number of technological modes (Table 5.14) other than blanks and tools
(mode 8) which are found on materials transferred beyond 20km increases
markedly (Table 7.3). None of these changes was environmentally forced upon
the individuals concerned, although regional constraints continued to deter-
mine some aspects of the scale of the system as indicated by greatest distance
(Gamble 1986a:chapter 2, table 6.18).

Network densities
The mobility of individuals during the Middle Palaeolithic, as reconstructed
through raw-material transfers, is pointing to a fairly low density pattern for
personal networks. But one objection to this conclusion might be that distance
does not necessarily measure ties or connectivity between individuals. As we
saw in Chapter 2, we have other ways to maintain dense networks in absentia,
the obvious examples today being the letter and the telephone.
   The absence of such mechanisms makes the point that in these Middle
Palaeolithic systems distance is relevant for the negotiation of society through
the resources available to the individual. As individuals criss-crossed through
nodes and along the paths of a wheel or star-burst network, their effective and
intimate networks were frequently affirmed. People were available for negoti-
ation without assigning a special temporality to such action. These paths led
to opportunities of seasonal abundance and involved choices about movement
and the frequency of sojourns once gatherings were initiated. Such a network
is low density but represents a very satisfactory solution to problem solving
because information is readily pooled (Chapter 2:Tables 2.6 and 2.7).
362           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

   By comparison, the circle is a less efficient arrangement for disseminating
information since it requires more messages and there is the opportunity for
copying errors as they are transmitted down the line. The information is only
as good as the last person you heard it from. It may also be out of date before
you can act upon it since time and distance appear to have been greater between
such encounters and gatherings.
  However,    this circular, all-channel network      seems    to characterize   the
pattern of movement in the EUP. This is seen, in particular, in the very linear
movements of raw materials along the Rhine and Danube (Hahn 1987) and
across the Carpathians from southern Poland into Moravia (Djindjian 1994,
Féblot-Augustins 1997:Figures 107, 111, 121, 122 and 123, Kozlowski 1994,
Svoboda 1994a). These ‘tramlines’ are accentuated by the continental condi-
tions in the north-central and northeastern regions during the downturn to the
last glacial maximum. However the ‘tramlines’ are also there in southwest
France, as shown by the preponderance of shells in those locales which came
from the Atlantic coast during the EUP.
   But we have also seen (Chapter 6) that the transition from the Middle to
Upper Palaeolithic takes on a different character between the various regions.
In the Périgord, southwest region, there appears to be an increase in the number
of known locales during the EUP (Mellars 1973, White 1982), while in
Cantabria, and still within the same region, the opposite occurs (Straus 1992).
While it is difficult to control for different timescales in other regions, there are
strong indications (Chapter 6) that the EUP has fewer site inventories in the
north-central region. In parts of the northeast region, and in particular along
the major rivers of the central Russian and Ukrainian plains, the first major
occupation appears in the EUP and is markedly linear in character.
   No doubt climate played a part. As we saw in Chapter 6, a much clearer
archaeological picture emerges after 33 Kyr bp, a time of climatic downturn as
ice sheets began to build. As Kuhn (1995) has pointed out, this environmental
trend imposes a linearity on the transition which may be more apparent than
real;
   These differences suggest that one reason we have a more complicated
archaeological picture in the period before 33 Kyr bp (Table 6.5) is due to a
degree of structural incoherence in the regional networks. This incoherence
stemmed from alternative uses of the same resources to negotiate landscapes
of habit. It was not the case that wheel and circular networks represented two
different types of society, Neanderthal and Cré-Magnon, in competition with
each other, but rather that individuals from both anatomical populations were
defining such systems through different means (compare with Table 2.7).
Increasingly after 33 Kyr bp the high-density circular systems predominate and
the incoherence, from our perspective, in the archaeological regional patterns
is reduced.
              The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago             363

Social landscape

But is this evidence for the appearance of my second regional concept, the social
landscape? So far in this book I have maintained that the social landscape was
not found before the Upper Palaeolithic. This may seem nothing more than a
convenient adherence to a long-established division in the data. But I hope to
have shown by concentrating upon aspects of scale, distance and temporality
in the archaeological record that the division is justified. The rest of this
chapter explores the concept through regional case studies and the investiga-
tion of a social occasion, itself a property of the social landscape.
   The construction of social landscapes is also based on negotiation. This
involves the splicing together of landscapes of habit with the result that agency,
what individuals do, is further extended across time and space. I noted in
Chapter 3 that the social landscape has no spatial boundaries since wherever
people can go, there, potentially, lies the opportunity to construct a global
network.
   As a consequence, increased inter-regional variability in human creativity is
a hallmark of the social landscape. Such patterning is expected for the reason
that while the construction of these landscapes is potentially unlimited, in
practice the paths which connect and transcend the landscape of habit are
finite. The opportunity for cultural variety might be increased but attenuation,
where the meaning of such variety fades, is an important constraint on the
outcoine. Therefore, while the system has enormous opportunities for expan-
sion it also has boundaries based on the resources available to individuals to
build networks. I will therefore examine aspects of the social landscape that
address intra- and inter-regional variety and examine, where possible, the scale
at which it occurs.

Complex and complicated society
It may seem paradoxical that the transition between the Middle and Upper
Palaeolithic resulted in a loss of rather than an improvement in information
processing. This assessment would be based on the radial patterns of move-
ment. After all, the selective advantage of art and artifact style has been inter-
preted as an enhancement of information exchange (Gamble 1982).
   But the critical point concerns the information itself. Knowing more about
the world is not necessarily a route to evolutionary success. It may be a better
strategy just to produce more offspring, rather than to invest in fewer by using
expensively acquired information to minimize risk and so ensure their future.*
So, as we saw in Chapter 2, it is not bits of information but rather the chunks
into which they can be assembled that is significant. To become information
these chunks require signs and symbols to provide a code for action. In percep-
tual terms these can be visual and verbal as well as tactile and olfactory. In evo-
lutionary terms it is the externalization of information which such codes
364          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

permit and which allow it to serve as a representation of action irrespective of
whether it is communicated by language or through material culture.
  The categories created by chunking allow us to explore the possibilities of
an infinitely rich world of information based on movement and interaction.
Instead of dealing with each information source on a one-by-one basis, the
individual now groups and categorizes such sources into a variety of patterns.
Through the multiplication of such a process a social fabric is created, one
that is constrained by what went before but always open to novel interpreta-
tion.
   More information can therefore generate more ambiguity about appropriate
action which might be seen as the apparent loss in processing power. But this
is not a problem, if we recall the distinction, examined in Chapter 2, between
complex and complicated societies. In a complicated society the individual
aims to reduce ambiguity by performing sequences of simple operations.
Making beads (White 1993b, 1993c) is one such example. These are usually
referred to an external, symbolic code. Categories exist in a complicated
society. We act through them since we perceive them as information sources,
externalized as symbols. On the contrary complex society is performed by the
individual through the resources of the body alone. In the complex society the
process of perceiving information is slower. The individual alone is the infor-
mation source because individuals deal with each other, usually one at a time,
through interaction and the embodiment of gesture and technique.

Artifacts as people
There is a further aspect to this simple characterization between complex and
complicated hominid society. While both societies have intimate and effective
networks, only complicated societies have significant extended networks. It is
in this network that the chunking of information sources is most prevalent.
   In the intimate networks in both types of society the individual, as an infor-
mation source, is dealt with in a similar manner, as a function of affective
resources. The interaction time this entails is the defining characteristic of that
network and is part of our primate heritage.
   However, it is also possible to see a difference between the intimate networks
in complex and complicated societies which reiterates the point about power
as both enabling and constraining. In complex societies the constraints are
obvious and the opportunities for individuals to negotiate their own power rely
entirely upon embodied, affective resources. These factors still operate in com-
plicated societies. But here it must also be acknowledged that the intimate
network is touched by the categorization and externalization of action that
characterizes the extended network. Hence power is of a potentially different
order. It is no longer based solely on the rules and resources of the intimate
network alone, but is open to reinterpretation and the introduction of ambigu-
ity as it is affected by experience in a wider social world. It then becomes impor-
tant either to deny or to resolve such ambiguity and the contradictions it can
               The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago                    365

produce about these external signs. In this ambiguity lies the germ of what we
often understand by ritual.
   I have argued that in the Middle Palaeolithic artifacts were embodied as a
sequence of gestures and were, quite literally, extensions of the body. Therefore
such materials were also resources of the body for the performance of society.
Power in these societies was therefore an expression of these material relations
as they related seamlessly with the body and its actions and gestures. The dif-
ference with the Upper Palaeolithic is that here power was expressed through
a conscious play on ambiguity created by the material representation of the
body. Artifacts were no longer adjuncts to persons, meaningful only when
attached in acquisition, manufacture or use and linked in action by rhythms.
Artifacts now became personified since they represented either that person or
the existence of an extended network in absentia. When associated with social
occasions and the transformation of locale into place (Table 3.1), they formed
a substitute for co-presence that can be understood because they belonged to a
complicated, sequenced set of routines.


Use of regional space
It is therefore unsurprising that the archaeological entities of the Upper
Palaeolithic are both more understandable in terms of space and time and yet
more diverse. This leads us to a different appreciation of the entities in the tran-
sition.
There is both a level of affinity in the composition of [Upper Palaeolithic] assemblages
and a predictable character to the appearance of type fossils that is lacking in the earlier
Palaeolithic traditions. The type fossils in the Upper Palaeolithic do define some sort of
chronological position. They can act as a reference point for building culture historical
groupings. For example if you pick up a handaxe during fieldwalking the best you can
say is that it is earlier than 35 Kyr bp .. . However if you picked up a Font Robert point
it would be possible both to define its chronological position with some precision, just
by looking at it, and furthermore to infer the general characteristics of the assemblage
from which it came. (Gamble 1986a:248)

   The appreciation lies in deciding when such characteristics appear. Bosinski
(1982) regards this as a feature of the Middle Palaeolithic, while Mellars
(1992:39) places the appearance of such regionalization in the Late Middle
Palaeolithic, possibly after 60 Kyr bp. Idiosyncratic tools, such as triangular
bifaces in the Mousterian of Acheulean Tradition and, of course, leaf points
with Mousterian reduction sequences, as in the Altmtthlian, provide exam-
ples. Valoch presents a detailed review of such intra-regional patterning among
EUP assemblages and cultures in the Czech Republic (1995, 1996). This region-
alization coincides with an increase in the distances over which raw materi-
als were transferred (Féblot-Augustins 1993:table 2, Svoboda, Lozek and Vléek
1996).
   When compared to the Upper Palaeolithic we see that the chains of connec-
tion were now forged over much longer distances (Table 6.18). They involved a
366          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

greater diversity of items and were expressed in a number of ways as ornament,
raw material and stone tools as well as by technological modes (Table 7.3). In
the time-space patterning of the Upper Palaeolithic the information in these
representations undoubtedly became blurred and attenuated but still existed as
a basis for negotiation at some unspecified point in the future. But these chains
of connection were also diverse since the material and symbolic resources
which they used can be exapted to form an almost infinite variety. We are still
exploring this variety in our own social experiments.


Social landscape: case studies

The best way to examine the concept of social landscape is through case studies
of the extended networks which help define it. Furthermore, the Middle-to-
Upper Palaeolithic transition is an opportunity to examine variation in these
networks within the regions of Europe.
  It is therefore important to be clear about the entities which archaeologists
commonly use when studying this transition. Some of the definitions which I
have been using in previous chapters now need to be tightened up and com-
pared (Table 7.4).
  Assemblage — a collection of artifacts from a specific segment of an archaeo-
logical site (Laville, Rigaud and Sackett 1980:13-14).
  Industry — a distinctive complex or configuration of artifact types and type
frequencies that recurs among two or more assemblages (Laville, Rigaud and
Sackett 1980:14).
   Tradition — a group of industries whose artifactual similarities are sufficient
that they belong to some broader culture-historical block of technological ideas
and practices (Laville, Rigaud and Sackett 1980:14).
   Culture — a polythetic set of specific and comprehensive artifact types which
consistently recur together in assemblages within a limited geographic area
(Clarke 1978:490).
   Technocomplex — a group of cultures characterized by assemblages sharing a
polythetic range but differing specific types of the same general families of arti-
fact types, shared as a widely diffused and interlinked response to common
factors in environment, economy and technology. A negligible level of affinity,
perhaps 5 per cent or less, uniting the group in terms of shared specific types,
but a residual medium-level affinity, perhaps 30-60 per cent, uniting the group
in terms of type families (Clarke 1978:495).
   Of particular interest here is Clarke’s comment that cultures are associated
with a limited geographical area, since this is relevant to my argument for the
extension of networks through the use of symbolling. I will attempt to put
some figures to his definitions. His term technocomplex, which seems to know
no spatial boundaries (Gamble 1986a:10), has been widely used to describe
aspects of the Upper Palaeolithic (e.g. Hahn 1977). I would however subsume
the common factors of environment, economy and technology which Clarke
              The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago            367

Table 7.4. The use and correspondence of Palaeolithic terms (see Table 3.1).

Middle Palaeolithic    Upper Palaeolithic     Scale                      Networks
Assemblage             Assemblage             Locale                     Intimate

Industry               Industry               Inter-locale

Landscape of habit     Landscape of habit     Regional                   cages

Tradition              Culture                Regional                              |

                       Technocomplex          Inter-regional             Extended

                       Social landscape       Regional/inter-regional    Global




puts in his definition as part of the social. Therefore a technocomplex should
not be perceived as purely adaptive in a survival sense.
   While Clarke’s levels of affinity are difficult to measure, the use of techno-
complex obviously fills a need in the archaeological vocabulary for a term to
express broad similarity. Where the term is problematic is in its application to
both Middle and Upper Palaeolithic entities. Hence the Typical Mousterian and
the Gravettian could both be regarded as technocomplexes in the sense that
they are both ‘weak’ cultures. Significant differences then become submerged
in the desire to see common cultural responses at all times and places. The
landscape of habit avoids this problem and provides a way to assess differences
between archaeological entities while recognizing the roots of a common core
of evolutionary behaviour.

The size of regions
In order to support the claim that it is social extension which marks the tran-
sition to the Upper Palaeolithic, I need to be able to measure the entities listed
above. Moreover, I also need a baseline to assess the changes and analyse the
scale at which individuals regularly interacted. This can be supplied by esti-
mating the size of the nine regions (Figure 3.1). These give a range of regional
sizes (Figure 7.3), from 150,000km/? to more than 1,000,000 km”.

Demography
The other aspect of network size is the extent to which demographic patterns
varied across the continent. These have been investigated by Siman (1990,
1990-1). Using C14 and TL dates she has produced a cumulative curve for set-
tlement in three broad zones — the Mediterranean, periglacial and northern.°
She makes the assumption that the number of C14 dates acts as a proxy
measure of population numbers and continuity in regional settlement.
368          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

                                       WEST          CENTRAL             EAST


             NORTH                      400              800             1,000


             SOUTH


             MEDITERRANEAN              550


         7.3 The approximate sizes in thousand km’ for each of the nine regions.
             Due to the changes in regional size because of sea level change and
             ice sheet advance, these should be taken as guidelines only.


   When plotted, these data show reasonable agreement with the interstadial
data, leading Siman to conclude that population movements were controlled
by climatic changes (see also van Andel and Tzedakis 1996). In her analysis the
Mediterranean stands out as the most densely populated area of Europe in the
period after 40 Kyr bp when the number of dates becomes more reliable. This
conclusion can be supported by the artifact density and multiple horizon obser-
vations in many Mediterranean locales (Chapter 6). This can also be found in
the southwest region, which emphasizes the southward shifts of population,
either by migration or by extinction during the period after 33 Kyr bp.

Mousterian groupings: cultures or traditions:
It is difficult to plot the geographical extent of the major Mousterian traditions.
The problems are well illustrated by Beyries (1987:Carte 1), who has indicated
the distribution of the five variants widely recognized in France. The dominant
traditions are plotted for each of the major administrative districts, which are
roughly similar in area. Périgord and Bourgogne have four variants while
exactly half of all the twenty-two districts have two. Table 7.5 lists the number
of districts in which each variant is dominant.
   Ashton’s pioneering analysis (1983) also noted the widespread character of
the MTA in northern and central France and the southerly and Mediterranean
distribution for the Charentian. The MTA has the widest distribution. It is
found within France in both the northwest and southwest regions (Ashton
1983:Figure 1). It extends into Belgium (Ulrix-Closset 1975) and England (Roe
1981) and has a slight presence in Cantabria (Straus 1992). This suggests an
inter-regional distribution of c. 800,000km? over a minimum ‘life-span’ of 20
Kyr during the Interpleniglacial. I would be the first to admit that such esti-
mates are probably wildly inaccurate and no doubt mask a range of processes,
such as the ebb and flow of people in such a large area over such a long time
span. They are offered here to make the contrast with the Upper Palaeolithic
distributions.
             The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago            369

             Table 7.5. The occurrence of Mousterian
             assemblages as a dominant element in the
             twenty-two administrative subdivisions of
             France (Beyries 1987:Carte 1).

             Mousterian assemblages      Number of districts

             Typical                     12
             Charentian                   8
                Ferrassie                 1
                Quina                     2,
             Denticulate                  6
             MTA                         19



   If the extent of the MTA is difficult to determine, then the geographical dis-
tribution of the other variants is even more problematic for the simple reason
that they lack the single diagnostic artifact. Straus (1992:60) charts the chang-
ing views of Mousterian assemblage variation in northern Spain over the past
thirty years. Work by Freeman (1973) has shown that the numerically small
assemblages in Cantabria grade from those dominated by denticulate forms to
those where sidescrapers form up to two-thirds of the retouched tool category.
I reviewed earlier a similar conclusion reached by Dibble and Rolland (1992,
Rolland and Dibble 1990) for the Périgord assemblages. Tradition rather than
culture (Turg 1989, 1992b) is indeed the appropriate description.
   A similar conclusion can be drawn with the Middle Palaeolithic assemblages
from central (Bosinski 1967) and eastern (Gabori 1976) Europe. We have already
seen (Chapters 5 and 6) that assemblages are numerically small. There may be
distinctive artifact types such as the Micoquian bifaces, and Bosinski has used
these to define four regional variants.° These may be distinguished from other
groupings such as the Upper Acheulean (Jungacheuleen) on the northern Plains
(Bosinski 1967). But the degree of affinity between assemblages in these group-
ings is low, judging by citations in the literature which discuss them. The only
variant which Bosinski recognizes which can be defined through distinctive
artifact types over anything like a defined area is the Altmthlian with its char-
acteristic leaf points. This is centred on southern Germany and dated to the
Hengelo interstadial. But even this entity would have a very weak claim to the
title of culture as defined above, partly because the collections are so small
(Freund 1987).

Classifying the Middle Palaeolithic
A social taxonomy, employing terms such as tradition, can be claimed for the
Middle Palaeolithic, but a social typology cannot. The taxonomy exists because
technology then, as now, was integral to social action. Style and function were
united in the gestures of making and using, repairing and throwing away. We
370          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

should not be surprised to find patterns of similarity or aspects of symmetry
when making artifacts. These attributes of making are why the Middle
Palaeolithic can be subdivided. Similarities in technique and typology can be
traced over large distances (Gabori 1976:fig. 62). There were local ways of
making and there was stability in such behaviour for long periods of time and
across large areas. The Middle Palaeolithic was replete with social action and
we can examine the structure of Mousterian society, as we did above, through
the evidence for its component networks.
   But within the Middle Palaeolithic there were no cultures or technocom-
plexes as the terms have been defined above. Hence there was no material or
cultural typology of society as there has been with all societies in Europe since
the Upper Palaeolithic. From this time the process of making society has been
malleable and changeable across space and time rather than regionally
restricted. The finding that life was local, and where the principle of exclusion
predominated, is now transformed by the possibility of inclusion through nego-
tiation (Table 1.2 and Chapter 3). As a result social life has been driven in unex-
pected directions by alternative rhythms linking different scales of individual
agency and group action.
   By contrast what we call the Middle Palaeolithic, with its subdivisions such
as Mousterian or Micoquian, was a rolling tradition supported by the charac-
teristics of the landscape of habit which deals with local decisions. Variation in
the rhythms of social technology (compare Chapters 5 and 6) can be accounted
for by contingent factors such as regionality (Figure 3.1) and the mechanics of
cultural transmission. For example, the gestures routinely employed in making
artifacts were closely associated with individuals in local regions. These were
learned in the context of face-to-face gatherings defined primarily by the rules
and resources of the intimate and effective networks.
   A social typology depends instead on the extension of such traditions to form
cultures and technocomplexes. While the solutions to many problems such as
subsistence were similar, the effect of enhanced system integration through the
extended network produced a radical difference. In particular, style was now
divorced from actions integral to making and performing.
   Let me put it another way. The difference is an illustration, as is much of
hominid action, of what you do rather than what you think you should do. It
is the distinction, examined in Chapter 3, between a practical consciousness
which leads to routinized action in landscapes of habit and a discursive con-
sciousness which can make relational links between the domains of intelli-
gence (Mithen 1996).
   I see some similarity here with the distribution and form of Acheulean
bifaces from the Lower Palaeolithic. These could be regarded as elements in a
technocomplex which would link northern Europe to southern Africa along a
transect discussed in Chapter 4. The limited range of shapes is often put
forward as evidence for deliberate, conscious choice, while the symmetry in
manufacture is also regarded as an expression of mental skills indistinguishable
             The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago             371

             Table 7.6. Three divisions for the Early Upper
             Palaeolithic with median C14 age (Hahn 1993).

                                                         Median
                                                   N     Kyr bp

             Transitional technocomplexes          18    39
             including Bohunician, leaf points,
             Bachokirian, Uluzzian and
             Chatelperronian
             Earliest Aurignacian including        13    35
             GeifSenklésterle, Krems-Hundssteig,
             l’Arbreda and El Castillo
             Aurignacian I                         24    31.1



from our own. However, these attributes and their distribution do not to my
mind demonstrate a technocomplex. Instead it is a tradition of techniques
which are limited in the length of their chaines opératoires by the context of
cultural transmission and the social acts they represent. As discussed in
Chapter 4, the model of transferrable skills, mediated by local resources and by
the network of rules governing gatherings, is sufficient to account for either the
lack of variation or the amount of variability that we perceive, and whose sig-
nificance varies between archaeologists (Gowlett 1984, 1996, Noble and
Davidson 1996, 1993, Wynn 1988, 1989, 1993a, 1993b).
   However, between the Early Middle Palaeolithic (Chapter 5) and the Late
Middle Palaeolithic (Chapter 6) we do see regionalization in this pattern. This
seems unsurprising to me given the larger samples and better chronological res-
olution when compared to the Lower Palaeolithic (Chapter 4). In particular the
long stratified sequences in caves provide ideal material for a changing narra-
tive of assemblages and techniques.’ What is still striking, as I discussed at
length in the previous chapter, is that without such obvious sampling discrep-
ancies between the Late Middle and Early Upper Palaeolithic, the differences
in the archaeological record are significant in terms of the rhythms and social
technology they represent for both periods.

Arrival of the Aurignacian
This significance can be seen in the chronology of the transition between the
Middle and Upper Palaeolithic. Hahn (1993) has analysed the C14 dates for the
Early Upper Palaeolithic and late Mousterian. These fall in the time range
43-30 Kyr bp. Three major divisions are recognized in the EUP (Table 7.6).
  When plotted as isochrons (Hahn 1993:Figs. 3-6) for the entire continent two
patterns emerge.* The Late Mousterian, the transitional technocomplexes and
Early Aurignacian all have a meridional (north-south) pattern of isochrons
(Figure 7.4). In the first two cases the dates in the east are considerably older
yD      The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




                         Transitional Technocomplexes

     7.4 Spatial patterning of C14 dates in four technocomplexes at the
         Middle-to-Upper Palaeolithic boundary (after Hahn 1993:Figs. 3-6).
        The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago   373




0          50


                         Proto-—Aurignacian


                         a                    _————   ees




                      Early Aurignacian

    7.4 (cont.)
374          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

than in the west. The isochron fingerprints are remarkably similar, which
implies a very close in-situ association between the two groupings. In particu-
lar the 38-Kyr isochron is in a very similar position running from north to
south, from Denmark to northern Italy.’
   If viewed as evidence for in-situ change and the movement of peoples with
new technologies and culture, then the close-packed vertical lines in the centre
of Europe indicates that nothing was happening. Movement, if it happened at
all, would be in a north-south direction and hence against the ecological grain
of the Interpleniglacial continent (Figure 6.3). If taken as evidence for contem-
poraneity between late Mousterian and the small-sized transitional cultures,
such as the Chatelperronian or the Szeletian, then these maps support the case
that this did indeed occur in two areas centred on the southwest and southeast
regions. If regarded as evidence for Interpleniglacial technocomplexes, then the
isochron maps point to two such entities. One has a possible extent of 230,000
km? over a 2,000-year duration between 42 and 40 Kyr bp. The other extends
over possibly 850,000km/? and 5,000 years as measured from 43 to 38 Kyr bp
(Figure 7.4). These figures treat the distance from the locale with the earliest
date to the later isochron as the radius of a circle which, when calculated, pro-
duced the figures given above. They are of course very rough and ready, and
must be regarded as maximum figures. The former is of sub-regional scale
while the latter is larger than all but the northeast region whose limits are the
least defined (Figure 7.3). It is important to remember that much of these areas
would have been empty space, rarely if ever visited, as people moved about
their habitual business along established paths and tracks at the scale of the
landscape of habit.
   The contrast with the Proto-Aurignacian is dramatic (Figure 7.4). Instead of
a meridional pattern of isochrons there is a zonal distribution indicating very
rapid movement. The inclusion of locales such as El Castill6é and l’Arbreda in
this group puts the oldest dates for the Aurignacian in the west of the conti-
nent. The sample has a median of 35 Kyr bp and a degree of dispersion in the
inter-quartile range (Hahn 1993:Fig. 7) which indicates that the differences are
not significant. Hence, Straus (1989, 1993) reminds us that the east-west migra-
tion of the Aurignacian is not yet proved. Not even, according to Straus, if the
locales in Hahn’s Protoaurignacian and transitional industries are shuffled so
that, for example, the TL dates of 46 and 45 Kyr bp for Aurignacian levels in
Temnata cave in Bulgaria (Kozlowski, Laville and Ginter 1992) are added to the
Protoaurignacian.!°
   As Hahn (1993:78) reminds us, these C14 dates are estimates rather than real
values. The patterns produced do however allow us to identify which archaeo-
logical entities are more likely to be related to the movement of people. The
case could be made from the shape of these maps that the transitional techno-
complexes and the late Mousterian are in fact the same thing. What we are
seeing is the maintenance of networks and their elaboration through additional
items. The recent suggestion by Hublin (et al. 1996) that artifacts were
             The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago            375
exchanged between Neanderthals and anatomically modern humans at Arcy-
sur-Cure provides further evidence.
  Having identified movement we can discuss its network implications. The
slow movement can be described by Steele’s (1994) Tribal network (Figure 2.2).
Here there is resistance, due to network structure, to cultural innovation. By
contrast, in his Poisson network there is high transitivity of ties and leapfrog-
ging. The difference can be illustrated by comparing cutting your way through
a forest, where progress is slow (meridional), to swimming quickly with the
current (zonal).

Abandoning the northern plains and northern Italy
Considering all the advantages that the EUP, and in particular the Aurignacian,
is often supposed to bring, it is perhaps surprising that this does not include
occupation of large parts of the North European plain or indeed some areas
within the Mediterranean.
   There is occupation in the western part of the northwestern region during
the Aurignacian, for example at Paviland where a burial was associated with
possible Aurignacian objects (Jacobi 1980) and dated to 28 Kyr bp. At the same
time a number of distinctive stemmed points, collectively known as Font
Robert and belonging to the Perigordian V/Gravettian tradition, have been
found in England and at the Maisiéres canal in Belgium and eastwards into
Germany at Bilzingsleben (Otte 1981) and Salching (Wei miller 1987). Figure
7.5 shows them clustered in southwest France.
   However these occurrences are not on the North European Plain proper. This
lies in front of the central German uplands, where Bilzingsleben is located, and
continues into Poland and western Russia. Across this large area no EUP has
been found. Instead, settlement kept to the hills and to the oceanically tem-
pered climates of the west such as Britain. This is in contrast to the central
European loess locales of Moravia, southern Poland and Austria (Svoboda 1996).
The closest that occupation came to the plains is in the indentations into the
central uplands, such as the Kéln basin where the Aurignacian locale of
Lommersum (Hahn 1974) is found, or Breitenbach in the Thuringian basin
(Hahn 1977). Further east, settlement in the EUP was common along the Dnestr
and Desna rivers which form the western boundary of the Plain (Chapter 6).
   It is tempting to explain this absence by environmental factors. The worsen-
ing climate simplified the vegetation into zones. In so doing the ecological
mosaics which produced a diversified landscape with reliable resources were
removed. While this is an attractive scenario, the earliest Aurignacian (Hahn
1993) occurs during the OIS 3 Interpleniglacial with its suite of interstadials
(Chapter 6, Table 6.3) which, it might be expected, would encourage settle-
ment. After all, the Upper Acheulean locale of Salzgitter-Lebenstedt (Busch and
Schwabedissen 1991) apparently dates to the climatically severe Pleniglacial in
OIS 4 and is located near Hamburg on the German section of the North
European Plain.
376          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




         7.5 The distribution of Font Robert points (after Joris in Bosinski
             1995p).
   The Aurignacian is also very rare throughout Italy in the period 30-25 Kyr
bp. Mussi (1990:139) does not believe this represents a total abandonment but
rather that presence had dropped to such a level that archaeological visibility
is extremely low.

Moving into empty territory
The closely spaced, meridional trending isochrons (Figure 7.4) are a clear indi-
cation of empty or infrequently used space in the centre of the continent. We
saw in Chapter 6 that the numbers of Mousterian and EUP locales along the
Rhine and Danube of Germany were, during the Interpleniglacial, small in
number and generally small in assemblage size. Moreover the largest collec-
tions invariably come from caves and rock shelters.
   Just how sparse this occupation might be is demonstrated by Hahn (1988) and
Scheer’s (1993) work on the Achtal locales in southern Germany. Refitting arti-
facts reveals that cryoturbation was responsible for producing some of these
             The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago            377

multi-level sites. Once refitting has been carried out, the evidence points to a
single major occupation in the same caves. While such occupation may still
result from several visits, the numbers of artifacts deposited are small.
Furthermore, the refitting of stone artifacts between locales shows that in the
Gravettian one visit to the Achtal accounts for deposition in at least three of
its caves. It might be that in the period 29-21 Kyr bp the valley was visited by
a few individuals for a few months. While this says much for the ability of the
archaeological record to preserve ephemeral events, it nonetheless points to
minimal use of the area.
   This rarely visited, low population density area in the middle of the north-
central region may explain the early appearance of the Aurignacian at locales
such as the GeifSenklésterle. People were moving into empty hominid space,
or at least into a landscape which was rarely visited, as the rare leaf points of
Hengelo interstadial age in the Altmthl valley and along the Swabian Alb
testify (Freund 1987, Koenigswald, Miiller-Beck and Pressmar 1974). The lack
of any late C14 dates for either the Micoquian or Mousterian in this area sup-
ports the conclusion that this part of Europe was vacated during the Late
Middle Palaeolithic.

Co-residence in France
A very different situation can be found in the southwest region. Here the
Chatelperronian, found predominantly in this region, is sufficiently well dated
and has large enough lithic collections to be examined as a transitional
industry. Bordes (1968a), following Peyrony (1933), maintained that the
Chatelperronian developed directly out of the Mousterian of Acheulean
Tradition B. The distinctive curved, blunted backed points, or knives, in
Chatelperronian assemblages were, in his opinion, derived from the naturally
backed knives so common in the MTA B. The Chatelperronian in this scheme
was, at the key rock shelter of La Ferrassie in the heart of the Dordogne, the
representative of the first two stages of the Perigordian tradition. In Bordes’
scheme these early Perigordians were later displaced by the Aurignacians, as
evidenced by the upper levels at La Ferrassie. They then returned at a later date
to the Dordogne, depositing Perigordian industries II-VI (see Bordes 1973,
Laville, Rigaud and Sackett 1980 for full discussion).
   This view of a long but interrupted Perigordian tradition in the Dordogne has
generally been discarded. The link between the early and later Perigordian is
hard to substantiate. However, while this link has faded, the Chatelperronian
has become a well-recognized archaeological entity (Farizy 1990, Harrold 1989).
It is found interstratified with Aurignacian levels at Roc de Combe (Bordes and
Labrot 1967) and Piage (Champagne and Espitalie 1981). Geographically the
Chatelperronian extends only from Northern France to Cantabria (Chapter 6).
At St Césaire it is associated in level Ejop with an adult Neanderthal skeleton
(Leveque, Backer and Gilbaud 1993) and at Arcy-sur-Cure, layer Xb, with the
very distinctive bony labyrinth from a Neanderthal ear (Hublin et al. 1996).
378         The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




                          Bordeaux




                                              Toulouse




                                     4    Mousterian
                                     e    Chatelperronian
                                     O     Aurignacian
         7.6 The Neanderthal ‘pocket’ during the interpleniglacial in France
              (after Harrold 1989:Fig. 33.1-3).
          (a) Hengelo interstadial 38-34.5 Kyr bp

   Harrold (1989) has provided a detailed review of the composition of
Chatelperronian assemblages and compared them with the Mousterian and
Aurignacian. In his opinion these assemblages were the handiwork of
Neanderthals and developed rapidly from the local Mousterian in the Périgord
area (ibid.:705).
   What is quite clear is that the Chatelperronian co-existed with Aurignacian
assemblages. Figures 7.6a—c plot the distributions in the period 38-31.5 Kyr
bp.'! The absolute dates for the Aurignacian at Castill6 cave in Cantabria
(Cabrera-Valdes and Bischoff 1989) and l’Arbreda in Catalonia (Bischoff et al.
1989) are of course much earlier (Table 6.2). If added to the maps produced by
Harrold, they suggest that the Neanderthals were left alone in their Dordogne
pocket by incoming people who initially skirted around them. Although the
                The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago              379




                             Bordeaux




                                          e      Chatelperronian
                                          QO     =Aurignacian

            7.6 (cont.)
             (b) 34.5-33 Kyr bp early Wurm III



true ages (Chapter 6) are still somewhat in doubt, it is very possible that if the
Aurignacian is present in Cantabria and Catalonia by 43 Kyr bp it did indeed
provide a long-term selective context that produced the Chatelperronian
(Harrold 1989:705). As Farizy has remarked,
It is possible that as a result of external pressures, Neanderthal groups were able to
adopt or develop many features of distinctively Upper Palaeolithic culture. (Farizy
1990:325)

  The Chatelperronian is of course not all about curved knives with blunted
backs. It has evidence for bone and antler working (Leroi-Gourhan and Leroi-
Gourhan 1964) as well as a few pierced animal teeth and pendants at Les Cottés
and Grotte du Renne, Arcy-sur-Cure levels 9 and 10 (Farizy 1990:320, Harrold
1989:Table 33.8).
380         The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




                          Bordeaux




                                       e       Chatelperronian
                                       QO      Aurignacian
         7.6 (cont.)
          (c) 33-31.5 Kyr bp later Wiirm III


   The C14 dates now suggest, even though the Aurignacian ‘push’ into the
central Périgord may have been late (Figure 7.6c), that the conditions existed
within southwest France and northern Spain for imitation and emulation to
occur, as Farizy and Harrold both suggest. For example, there is abundant red
ochre in Chatelperronian deposits which may be associated with manufactur-
ing ornaments, as suggested by White (1993b, 1993c) for the Aurignacian
(Chapter 6). Hublin (et al. 1996) go further and tentatively suggest exchange of
artifacts between individuals from the two species.
   It is difficult to be precise about how long this co-existence lasted, but it
could minimally have been between 43-36 Kyr bp as indicated by the dates
from Castill6 and St Césaire. This imitation and exchange could extend to the
bone points, pierced teeth and pendants. Interestingly it does not seem to
extend to burials, as the evidence is inconclusive that the St Césaire remains,
              The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago                 381

while representing most of a skeleton, were deliberately buried (Defleur 1993,
Vandermeersch 1993).
  At Arcy-sur-Cure, Grotte du Renne level X and dating to the Hengelo inter-
stadial (Table 6.3), there is a structure with mammoth tusks, post holes and
hearths. The plan is circular with limestone plaques that formed a bench
(Farizy 1990:308). Leroi-Gourhan proposed that it was a roofed structure cover-
ing 12m? of the terrace at the entrance to the cave.
   It is difficult to interpret this and successive structures at Arcy, since full
details are not available. However, Farizy has noted a major change in the use
of space between the rich Mousterian levels in the Arcy caves and the
Chatelperronian levels.!”
The changes seem to relate rather to a different quality of life, in which the immediate
surroundings of the human groups — the habitation zone — was perceived in a totally dif-
ferent way. Analogous changes can be seen in the character of the lithic industries, in
which the forms of the tools appear to have a new, exclusive significance. (Farizy
1990:325)

   The structure to locales which is now evident, if not easily interpretable, has
also been found at St Césaire (Backer 1993). There were no post holes, benches
or mammoth tusks in the upper level Ejop but Backer’s spatial analysis
(ibid.:Figure 9.1) was able to identify two different disposal zones, as measured
by artifact composition, in an excavated area of c. 33m”. These distributions
fall either side of the rock shelter’s dripline.

The Chdatelperronian as a culture and a network
Straus (1993:xii) has sounded a sensible note of caution concerning the link
between Neanderthals and the Chatelperronian. Since St Césaire is the only
significant fossil we have,
we do not even know ‘who’ made the early Aurignacian of France, or, for that matter,
Cantabrian Spain, where in fact the distinctions among Mousterian, Chatelperronian,
and Aurignacian are somewhat blurred (ibid.)

   Given the minimum of seven thousand years of co-residence before the
Aurignacian ‘push’, his conclusion is correct. However, we can look at the
problem differently by considering it as a system of networks rather than an
association between a fossil hominid and a way of making stone tools.
   From this perspective the Chatelperronian identifies an area of resources in
the Périgord which in terms of biomass and seasonality were undoubtedly
denser and more predictable than in other areas. Such a structure of resources
was well suited to the wheel-shaped Neanderthal networks with high mobil-
ity, short residential stays and limited carrying of materials. As individuals
criss-crossed the terrain along known tracks and between preferred locales they
were assured of regular contact. As a result the intimate network could sustain
some   separation while an individual’s effective network could be rapidly
called upon. These people had language, which enhanced the transmission of
382           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

information about other individuals in the landscape. This model of individual
movement would suggest that if males and females dispersed then both sexes
would have similar low-density networks as measured by transitivity and ties
(Chapter 2). However, if the females did not disperse away from their natal ter-
ritories then we would expect them to have much denser and stronger networks
and the males correspondingly weaker ones. High-density female networks
will produce a situation where an effective network of females will be co-opted
to the task of protecting and parenting offspring. However if both sexes have
low-density networks the result should be shared parenting responsibilities so
that the intimate rather than the effective network has a more important role
for that essential activity.
   Can we therefore consider the Chatelperronian as a culture in Clarke’s sense
given above? Its elements are certainly polythetic in occurrence (Harrold
1989:Tables 33.7, 33.8). Ornaments are absent in most locales as are several fea-
tures of lithic production. However, what is available satisfies the criteria of
recurrence within a definable geographical area (Ashton 1983:Figure 2). Using
Harrold’s distribution maps as a guide (Figure 7.6a—c) I estimate the following
maximum areas:

Time range         Maximum area          Number of locales
37-34.5 Kyr        2.00,000 km?          3-4
34.5-33 Kyr        500,000 km?           14
   When compared with the size of regions (Figure 7.3), we see that the larger
corresponds to the size of the southwest region, a fact easily deduced from the
distribution map alone. This covers a minimum time span of 1,500 years. It
must be remembered that these estimates are only intended to contrast the
scale of these widely recognized archaeological units. They are not to be read
as Chatelperronian territories, only as an estimate of their potential range.
What we are examining is the ability to maintain a similar presence in absen-
tia through the use of common technological and stylistic gestures.
   By contrast, the Aurignacian appears to excel at extension, that ability to go
beyond the confines of face-to-face society and achieve wider system integra-
tion performed across a social landscape. How could this be? Let us suppose
that the rapid spread resulted from individual males constructing global net-
works while females had adopted the major task of parenting. As a result we
have a situation where an asymmetry existed in network structure which, as
we saw in Chapter 2, is commonly found among non-human primates.
Moreover, this asymmetry has repercussions for cultural transmission (Steele
1994), as it does for gene flow.
   Here then is a possible distinction between Neanderthal and Aurignacian
societies. It may also have involved different demographic parameters includ-
ing mortality and fertility rates (Zubrow 1989) but essentially the difference lay
in two ways for individuals to create networks within similar Pleistocene land-
scapes. This passes no judgement on which was better or worse. There were
               The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago               383

 Table 7.7. A comparison of networks for the early Upper Palaeolithic in
 southwest Europe. No judgements are made about the physical type
 responsible. Network model from Steele (1994), see Chapter 2.

                            Network                    Cultural
              Residence     density       Parenting    transmission     Network type

 Chatelperronian
 Males       Disperse       Low           Shared       Common           Low density
 Females     Disperse       Low           Shared       Common           Low density
 Aurignacian
 Males       Disperse       Low/high     Minor         Preferential     Poisson
 Females     Remain         High         Major         Preferential     Tribal


  however important consequences for the construction of power which, in the
  case of the Aurignacian, now occurred at a wider scale than hitherto had been
  the case. Power had a particular context since its source lay in the differential
  use of the three networks by which individuals sustained themselves. The
  expressions of power were no doubt as varied as they are in any social system.
  But we can now see how actions were differently empowered through the inter-
  actions and the networks which stemmed from them (Table 2.1). As a result
. individuals were both constrained and enabled in the scale and effects of their
  actions over others.
     If the Chatelperronian really is a transition industry, a Neanderthal social
  technology, then, as I stated at the outset of this chapter, it must be understood
  in terms of the transformation of power. The implication here is that cultural
  transmission in those extended networks will produce an advantage in terms
  of sourcing the social landscape with opportunity for individual agency. The
  model is summarized in Table 7.7.
     We would expect from this table that the items which are either imitated or
  exchanged and subsequently adopted are those which were available at encoun-
  ters and involved in the process of extension. Hence the pierced teeth and the
  ochre used to make ornaments (White 1993b, 1993c). These were the gestures
  exchanged. They were imitated by both males and females because there was no
  network barrier since the limits were set by the rules and resources of the intimate
  and effective networks. The ornaments which were produced were, however, dis-
  tinctively Chatelperronian and not pale imitations of Aurignacian forms.
     What was transmitted in return acted preferentially on the males since
  they were constructing fundamentally different networks from the females.
  Perhaps, as Soffer (1994:Figure 1) has argued, the latter were even being provi-
  sioned by the males. Therefore the network and the rules of encounter predi-
 cated a change in actions and gestures and a transition to new forms of power
 based on variety in the networks. Any asymmetry of power flowed from the dif-
 ferent networks now constructed by males and females.
384          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

A divided Iberia
The early arrival of the Aurignacian in Spain (Cabrera-Valdés 1993) has also
thrown open the question of the survival of the Mousterian in Iberia. The pos-
sibility has always been hinted at with C14 and TL dates consistently dating
Mousterian assemblages from southern Spain to between 20 and 30 Kyr bp.
These were usually dismissed as too young. But now the evidence is convinc-
ing that in southern Iberia the Mousterian persisted long after it had been
replaced in southern and northern Europe.
   Zilhao (1988, 1993) reviews the evidence from Portugal. Caldeirao cave is
important as it has a sequence spanning the Middle and Upper Palaeolithic. An
AMS date of 27.6+0.6 Kyr bp came from the top of level K which marks the
end of the Mousterian and the beginning of the Upper Palaeolithic. The artifact
collections are small but elsewhere at Columbeira similar dates for the
Mousterian have been obtained. Also at this time horizon is a possible
Aurignacian level at Pego do Diabo and a Gravettian assemblage from Vale
Comprido (Zilhao 1993:tableau 1).!°
   There are clearly complexities here which a small sample may be masking.
However, when the evidence from southern Spain is also included the pattern
becomes clearer. Here at Gorham’s cave, Gibraltar (Vega Toscano 1993), the
Aurignacian is dated by C14 to 28 Kyr bp. Following a study of the faunal and
sedimentological evidence from a number of locales, Vega Toscano (1993) puts
Carihuela V, Cueva Hora and Zafarraya, all three caves from southeastern
Spain, in the time bracket 26-30 Kyr bp (Figure 7.7). At Carihuela and Zafarraya
there are Neanderthal remains associated with typical Mousterian industries
(Garralda 1993). It is also possible that some of the Neanderthal remains asso-
ciated with Mousterian industries from the Gibraltar caves may also be late in
age.
   Zilhao (1993) provides a geographical assessment of these data. He proposes
that the Ebro formed a boundary up against which the rapid spread of the
Aurignacian stopped at 38 Kyr bp (Figure 7.8). He then tentatively suggests that
the Neanderthals continued in southern Iberia until being finally replaced
between 28-30 Kyr bp. Zilhao (1993:143) favours a rapid replacement at this
time rather than a slow transition during a long period of co-existence.
   How does a network approach add to this challenging scenario? If we
compare this situation with that for the Chatelperronian discussed above, two
factors emerge. Firstly, Iberia lacks a transitional industry comparable to the
Chatelperronian, the Uluzzian or the leaf points discussed in Chapter 6
(Cabrera-Valdés 1993, 1979, Fullola 1983, Zilhao 1988). Secondly, Iberia lacks
assemblages which imitate gestures within a chaine opératoire, in the way
revealed by the Chatelperronian ornaments.
   This observation suggests that we are dealing with different networks than
those in the southwest region north of the Pyrenees. Moreover, there appear to
be some limits to the scale of the extended systems in the Upper Palaeolithic.
In this respect it is noticeable that while Middle Palaeolithic locales are known
   The extension of social life 60,000—-21,00C years ago                                    385




7.7 Below the Ebro frontier. The landscape around Carihuela cave
    Spain, MW region, which formed a late Neanderthal refugium
    (photo by the author).




                             The      Ebro Frontier
                                   40000-30000              BP
            ¢
    eee,
                                 Ge       Se, Ls        2
                                          " Castillo
       peas              o                                       i    aes
        ee                                                                         ~

                hs   a
                                                                                  Arbreda
                                                                                Site:
        |


                                                                            a


                     i
                     \
                     4

       :epee                          Moustérien /
        eirao    c
                                                                     \
    (Abechiie Brava                                                   i
      |      %                                               CovaNlegra
            be
                                                              Ere
           here                    Carihuela                ‘i
                             4            _—o—.    le
                                   wane




7.8 A divided Spain. The Aurignacian zone lies in both the MW and SW
    regions (after Zilhao 1993:Fig. 7).
386           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

from the Meseta in central Spain (Vega Toscano, Raposo and Santonja 1994),
this area does not have any EUP evidence (Cabrera-Valdés 1993, Fullola 1979,
1983).
   We have already seen that the Mediterranean was possibly more densely pop-
ulated than other regions in Europe. The nature of the networks in Middle
Palaeolithic Spain, and especially those which flanked the Meseta in Portugal
and Andalucia, would have taken these larger numbers into account. The result
would have been smaller, more tightly knit networks with high densities. Since
there was no point of contact and no empty space for the EUP to move into, the
result was continuity. It is possible as climatic changes after 28 Kyr bp thinned
out resources in this region that the interstices in the networks opened up and
Upper Palaeolithic populations could now enter. The lack of imitation and of
so-called transitional industries supports Zilhao’s conclusion that replacement
was rapid.
   But let me put the question another way. Did the Neanderthals at Carihuela
cave in a divided Iberia (see above) have a social landscape? And if not, did their
Aurignacian and Perigordian contemporaries in Cueva Morin on the other side
of the ‘frontier’ have such a different social framework? At first glance the evi-
dence, as reviewed by Straus (1992), is not overwhelming for a vastly different
EUP in Cantabria. The transfers of raw materials are slight, portable art and
ornaments    are very rare.   Only the burials    at Cueva    Morin   (Freeman    and
Gonzalez-Echegaray 1970, Gonzalez-Echegaray and Freeman 1971, 1973) point
to something different. Straus sums it up:

The whole EUP in Cantabrian Spain constituted a long, irregular, and, in many domains,
gradual transition from Middle Palaeolithic adaptations to the ‘classic Upper
Palaeolithic’ adaptations . . Underway since at least 40,000 years ago, the changes in
the EUP were a mosaic. (Straus 1992:89)

   However, the links established through stone artifact styles key this area into
that wider Upper Palaeolithic world north of the Pyrenees rather than to the
Neanderthals south of the Ebro. The fact that this notional ‘frontier’ was not
marked by any increase in signalling such as burials, architecture or painted
caves strongly suggests that two very different systems were indeed juxtaposed.
Because they were so different there was no need for a demonstration of the
limits of the extended networks using symbolic resources within a social land-
scape. By the same token the Neanderthals had no need to draw a line to their
systems which operated regionally as landscapes of habit. Both systems were
exclusive, unlike those in the southwestern region discussed above. Here,
exclusion was complemented by the principle of inclusion, represented by the
use of symbolic resources to extend the ambit of social technology.
   And this is my point. Recognizing the social landscape does not depend upon
a glaringly obvious archaeological record of huts, hearths and art. The opportu-
nity to stretch those space-time bands still remains just that, an opportunity,
and not an inevitable outcome. In the same way, the ability to represent the
               The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago                387

 perceived world by carving ivory into the shape of the animal from which the
 raw material came does not mean that wherever ivory is found mammoths
 will be sculpted. Following the so-called creative explosion of the Upper
 Palaeolithic (Pfeiffer 1982) there are as many art- and ornament-poor regions in
 the world as there are those which command our attention as art rich. Power,
 in the negative sense of domination and replacement, is everywhere an option
 but not always an outcome. The Spanish case study provides a Palaeolithic
 example.


 Locales

  The social occasion (Chapter 3) is distinguished from the gathering by the mate-
  rials and associations it contains for the performance of social life. It is an exter-
  nalized environment to the extent that locales now become places through
  association and rhythms as creators of forms (Leroi-Gourhan 1993:309). The
  gathering, in my terminology, depends on nothing more than the attention that
  occurs in co-presence between social actors and their embodied artifacts. The
  social occasion has any number of artifacts but with the distinction that many
  of them are now disembodied gestures. Although separated in this sense from
  the performance of social life, they nonetheless have power and significance in
  shaping and creating it. Thus artifacts structure attention based on the sym-
_ bolic extension of people across time and space. The past is now used to orga-
  nize the future by making references between place, person and object not only
  when they are together but also when they are apart.


 Locales: Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov — a case study
 The well-known locale of Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov in southern Moravia, north-
 central region, provides an opportunity to examine the archaeological compo-
 nents of the social occasion/place. In particular these concern the attaching and
 detaching rituals which assist in the constitution of the locale as a place
 (Chapter 3). These rituals epitomize the symbolic resources used to create an
 extended network (Table 4.1). They invest locales with physical structures and
 associated temporal rhythms for cultural performance and future action.

 Setting and excavations
 The landscape of Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov is dominated by the Dyje river and
 the Pavlovské limestone hills which reach a height of 550m (Figure 7.9). The
 various locales, which have been investigated over almost eighty years, lie
 south of the river in the sharply rising terraces on the flanks of the hills. The
 limestone provides a calcareous environment which has assisted the preserva-
 tion of bone and other organic materials in the colluvial and loessic deposits.
    In its wider setting the Pavlovské hills are centrally located to important
 routeways. One hundred kilometres to the southwest is the narrow Wachau
388         The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




         7.9 (A) The surviving section of Dolni Véstonice I in the vineyards
             beneath the Pavlovské hills.

gorge, best known for the stratified Willendorf II site, providing access along
the Danube to Austria and southern Germany, while 150km to the northeast
lie the Moravian gates with easy access to southern Poland (Djindjian
1994:Figure 3).
   Systematic excavations began at Dolni Véstonice with Absolon. Between
1924 and 1938, he made major discoveries at site |of mammoth bones, lithics,
              The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago            389



     _




          7.9 (cont.) (B) Dolni Véstonice II, foreground, the western slope
              excavations and mammoth midden in the middleground and behind
              the modern village and artificial lake (photos by the author).

 sub-surface features, hearths and fragments of clay and ivory figurines. Among
these are two very well-known pieces (Figure 7.10), the internationally recog-
nized icons of the site. A female figurine modelled in clay was found in 1925.
Instead of a face she has a ‘hood’ with slanting cuts representing the eyes. In
 1936 a small ‘portrait’ head carved in ivory, also interpreted as female, was
excavated. Besides these were many clay fragments of small animal figurines
modelled in the local loess. Regrettably most of Absolon’s finds were destroyed
in 1945 when the castle where they were stored was set on fire (Klima 1954:5).
   Absolon started a tradition of plotting the horizontal distribution of material
in order to discover the size of the settlement. During the Nazi occupation of
the region, 1939-45, the emphasis changed. The excavations by Bohmers were
designed primarily to establish the stratigraphy and age of the sites. The
artwork was also much discussed as examples of Indo-German origins. During
the early years of the Cold War, 1949-56, archaeological investigations stuck
with politically neutral aspects of the site, primarily the soils and their rele-
vance to local stratigraphies (Tomaskova 1995:310). However, the work of
Klima during the 1950s, at Dolni Véstonice (Klima 1963, 1983) and at Pavlov
(Svoboda 1994c, 1994d, Svoboda, Lozek and Vléek 1996), re-established
Absolon’s settlement approach. This had the effect of confirming the interna-
tional status of the site as well as providing the opportunity to comment on its
prehistoric social organization through a study of the means of production
(Tomaskova 1995:312).
390          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




        7.10 Two icons of Dolni Véstonice. The clay figurine (a) was found in
             1925 and is shown three-quarters life size. The ivory head (b),
             shown full size, was excavated in 1936 (after Klima 1983:Figs. 3 and
             37).



Czechoslovak archaeologists are beginning to show that the great Palaeolithic loess
sites were more than temporary encampments: considerable settlements with the
oldest known buildings of man, inhabited by a numerous society over long periods. Such
works could only be undertaken by a society which had progressed towards organized
community life (according to certain evidence of a matriarchal cast), and which was
guided day by day by definite customs and unwritten laws. (Klima 1954:14)
                 The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago          391

                 Table 7.8. The chronological ordering of the
                 Pavlovian/Gravettian (Svoboda 1994e:Fig. 2).

                 Early Pavlovian             30-27 Kyr bp
                 Lower part of Dolni Véstonice I and II
                 Willendorf II level 6
                 Molodova V level 9
                 Evolved Pavlovian            27-24 Kyr bp
                 Middle and upper part of Dolni Véstonice I and II
                 Pavlov I
                 Milovice?
                 Predmosti
                 Willendorf II levels 7 and 8
                 Willendorf/Kostenki        24-20 Kyr bp
                 Milovice
                 Petrkovice
                 Willendorf II level 9
                 Spadzista street C2
                 Molodova V level 7
                 Kostenki I/1



_      Since 1985 rescue work in the loess brick pits around Dolni Véstonice, site
    II and excavations on its western slope and at site III have produced further
    important settlement and burial evidence (Klima 1995, Skrdla, Cilek and
    Prichystal 1996, Svoboda 1991). In 1986, 3km to the southeast of Pavlov
    village, mammoth-bone structures and a rich flint industry were found at
    Milovice (Oliva 1988a, 1988b).


    Chronology
    Svoboda provides a chronological summary (1994e:224) of the Gravettian cul-
    tures in Moravia, lower Austria, Poland, the Ukraine and Russia (Table 7.8).
    These are known as Pavlovian after the type site at the village of Pavlov, and
    consist of assemblages where burins generally outnumber all other classes of
    retouched tools. The later Willendorf/Kostenki culture is represented by shoul-
    dered knives/points that are found across an area stretching from the Don river
    to Moravia, the Austrian Wachau and southern Poland (Desbrosse and
    Kozlowski 1988, Praslov and Rogachev 1982, Soffer and Praslov 1993). This
    culture also contains evidence for houses constructed from mammoth bone,
    numerous storage pits, several of which were large enough to act as subterra-
    nean dwellings, as well as abundant female and animal carvings (Svoboda
    1994e:2.16).
      The excavations at Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov can be divided into these three
    chronological phases.'* However, the major use of the locale occurred during
392,                        The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

      127
                                                                                    AlN =48
                                                                                 [| DVI & PI
      we                                                                         Gi pvneovm

       8   —




gs
3
cae             A
3
E
<S)



Z,     4   —t




       2 4




       es                                               _4
                    24500      25000 +=.25500~=S   «26000 = «26500   ~=—S«27000~SS—27500   ~=S-28000
                                                         bp
                    7.11 Uncalibrated radiocarbon dates for various locales at Dolni
                         Véstonice-Pavlov, Czech Republic, NC region. The histograms use a
                         moving sum of 500 years with a span of 250 years.


the three thousand years of the Evolved Pavlovian. When the Groningen C14
dates for this period are plotted as a moving sum (Figure 7.11) they show
that the excavations in the west of the locale, Dolni Véstonice II and III, are
consistently older than the classic double site of Dolni Véstonice I and
Pavlov I.

Internal structure of the locale
During these three millennia settlement extended for almost 3 km between the
modern villages of Pavlov in the east and Dolni Véstonice in the west (Figure
7.12). Within the locale the excavated areas consistently lie between 200 and
300m ASL (Svoboda, Klima and Skrdla 1995:283) and form two main clusters.
   The archaeological evidence differs between these two areas (Table 7.9).
Dolni Véstonice II and its western slope (Klima 1995, Svoboda 1991) have
hearths, burials, abundant lithics and bone tools as well as evidence for refit-
ting (Svoboda, Skrdla and Jarosova 1993:Abb. 3).!° By contrast, Dolni Véstonice
I and Pavlov I, which lie less than 500m apart and probably represent part of
the same phase of occupation, have all of these aspects as well as thousands of
clay figurine fragments and a series of excavated features. These have been
described by Klima as semi-subterranean huts built on specially levelled plat-
forms terraced into the slope (Klima 1954, 1963, 1983, Svoboda 1994c, Valoch
1996). At Dolni Véstonice I, II and II western slope there are large concentra-
tions of mammoth bones. The origin of these as human or natural collections
              The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago             393




                                                  PAVLOV




                                              _   Archaeological
                                                  Locales


         7.12 The location of archaeological locales around the modern villages of
              Dolni Véstonice, Pavlov and Milovice which lie beneath the
              Pavlovské hills, Czech Republic, NC region (after Valoch 1995:Abb.
              1).


is still debated but the excavations did find artifacts and charcoal among these
densely packed bones.

Hearth skills
The fireplaces and kilns at Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov are a very noticeable feature
of the locale (Table 7.9). Bodies, artifacts, clay figurines, plant food and dwell-
ings are linked to them and, as we shall see, they provide a focus for perfor-
mance and social life. They are common at this locale as they are at most Early
394            The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

Table 7.9. The components of the Evolved Gravettian occupations, 27-24 Kyr
BP. in the Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov locale (Klima 1983, Svoboda 1991, 1994e,
1996, Valoch 1996).

                                    Dolni VéstoniceI       PavlovI   Dolni Véstonice II

Flexed burials                      DV III                 PI        DV XVI
Triple burial                                                        DV XIII-XV
Isolated human remains                                     +         a
Semi-subterranean huts              2.                     4-5?
Surface huts                        +                      +         3?
Storage pits                        0                      1         0
Mammoth bone midden                 +                                +
Thick ashy deposits                 +                      sus
Outside hearths                     +                      -         -
Kilns                               +                      ao
Fired clay objects                  ue                     mae       +
Pierced shell and teeth ornaments   +++                    +++       -
Representational art                +                      +++
Lunar calendar                                                       -
Ochre lumps                         +                      +         +
Predominance of raw materials       60-90%                 60-90%    60-90%
   from >100 km                                        ,
Fibre technology                                           4
Settlement duration                 Long                   Long      Short
Season of use                       2                      Winter    Winter
Fur-bearing animals                 +                      +         +
Reindeer as dominant herbivore      ao                     +         2
Plant food evidence                                                  ae


Upper Palaeolithic locales, both in caves and in the open air. It is therefore sur-
prising that at earlier Middle Palaeolithic locales such as Mauran (Chapter 6)
even the simplest hearth is usually lacking.
  Mauran is dated to between 35 and 45 Kyr bp on the basis of ESR while level
14 at Abri Pataud, also in the southwest region, is dated by conventional C14
to 33.3-34.2 Kyr bp (Movius 1977). A major difference between these nearly
contemporary locales is the hearths. At Mauran, the absence of spatial pattern-
ing is matched by the lack of hearths. There are burnt bones and a few charcoal
fragments which may be the traces of small ephemeral hearths (Farizy 1994:Fig.
127).
   Elsewhere well-built hearths have been found with Mousterian artifacts. At
Vilas Ruivas, an open Middle Palaeolithic locale in Portugal, a stone con-
structed hearth has been dated by TL to 54+ 12 Kyr bp (Vega Toscano, Raposo
and Santonja 1994). At the Grotte de Peyrére, Frechet, located at 825m in the
Aure Valley (Jaubert et al. 1992), the upper level dated by C14 to 42 Kyr bp has
a fireplace with charcoal, burnt bone and fire cracked stones.
               The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago            395

   These are generally single hearths. At the Abri Pataud the Aurignacian
hearths are common, very substantial and clearly defined. In level 14 there are
five and, for comparison, in level 11 seven with two shallow ‘pits’. These
hearths are large, sometimes over a metre long and up to 70cm wide (Movius
1977). They lack the burnt river cobbles that appear in the later Perigordian VI
of level 3 dated to 23 Kyr bp. This assemblage is the main occupation level in
the rock shelter. Its five large hearths packed with cobbles run parallel to the
back wall of the shelter and lie equidistant between it and a line of roof-fall
boulders. The spacing between the centres of these hearths is consistently 2m.
In level 11 five hearths also run along the shelter wall and the distances
between the hearth centres are smaller, ranging from 1 to 1.5m (Spiess
1979:231).
   Here are two very different techniques of hearth construction but in both
instances the hearths are aligned in a linear fashion. Binford has shown
(1983a:Fig. 98) that the spacings in level 3 could accommodate sleeping people.
Further variety is shown by the hearths in level 14 which Spiess describes as a
central focus occupation belonging to a different social configuration. What
this might be exactly is unclear. However his estimates of the length of time
these features were used suggests that those associated with linear rather than
central focus hearths may have lasted longer or involved more people (Spiess
1979:231).!7
   In his study of Le Flageolet level 5, Simek (1987) has emphasized how hearth
centred behaviour transforms the archaeological record. His analysis of this
EUP rock shelter in the Périgord points to a small-scale occupation, in both
time and personnel, with a single intensive activity area and a series of activ-
ity spaces containing a variety of evidence (ibid.:31).'* By comparison no such
defined patterning emerged from a similar spatial analysis of the Saalian-age
locale of Grotte Vaufrey (see Chapter 5).

Comparison by density
Excavations were extensive. Absolon dug an estimated 4,500 m? in three main
areas at Dolni Véstonice I. The later excavations, 1947-52, added a further 350
m2, most of which lay next to Absolon’s 1924-8 excavation but with an impor-
tant new trench 70m to the west (Klima 1963:Fig. 4). At Pavlov I an estimated
2,000 m2 was excavated, of which only some 300m? from the 1952-3 excava-
tions has been published (Svoboda 1994c).!? The rescue excavations at Dolni
Véstonice II and its western slope add up to a further 1,500m? (Klima 1995,
Svoboda 1991) divided into two main areas (Klima 1995:Abb. 33).
   In order to gain a further quantitative impression of the locale Table 7.10 pre-
sents the density data within the various archaeological complexes.
   The density figures (Table 7.11) are particularly high when compared with
those for other, earlier open locales (Tables 4.19, 5.18). When the density per m?
of all recorded stone, which includes tools as well as chips and debris, is plotted
(Figure 7.13), we see that only four locales from a sample of eighty in the earlier
     TqeL
        "/ ‘0y                    uostzvdur09
                                     fo  ay        paaoag    wvtWeavIs)
                                                                     ‘sa[voo]pe-LeIAM Tg 1D                                     JUTOC]                                +
                                                                                                                                                                   “AOTADG-AOIUOISZA
                                                                                                                                                                                SOIDIEPUT
                                                                                                                                                                                    OY}   SUTOIT oFOM
       quasaid
           Ing ou                  paluuvNbvUIITY)‘E96I “G66    PPOqoas
                                                                      ‘T66I ‘(9V661

                                                                                                                                          FUTOq              201w03sgAQ
                                                                                                                                                               TI                         TUyOd            201u03sgA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             T]
                                                        TU;OG         99TU0}saA
                                                                       ]                                      AopAeg
                                                                                                               ]                                                                                  ur1a}sa\
                                                                                                                                                                                                        adoys
                                                                                                                                 L-986I        L861                                                 JUSUIITIIIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                          S}TUN         AopAe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         J
                                                                      yiourmIepy          joyerdiamoyT
                                                                                                TS6T           €S6I         early
                                                                                                                               V               vary
                                                                                                                                                 q                   o=EV
                                     DAa1GO
                                       [         39AlqQ.
                                                   7         au0q      ysodap943        ysodap                   yoalqo
                                                                                                                  ;  |              vazeszsddn          yedseddn               I
                                                                                                                                                                            uediomo, G                 °          Y
(UI          poqeAeoxe             ISI          BZ            SOT                                   09           ZIG            129                 oZe                       8               OT ve                    86
   [eIO], aus                      7ET'se       6889          bSe'l             €08’¢               Ogs'el       vrl'6e         OLL'b1              CSE'PI          LS9'C               ZOT'T 98I'T S98'%              6L0'b
          payonojoy s[0o1/sapeTq 6ST'T          S8e           CL                661                 6S           vor'l          L6v                 L9v             eoT                 99    6€ 6S                    COT
    saI05                          cal          6T            v                 Se                  Ly                          ore                 6r1             61                  €1    +I St
             peyonojeruy) sayey/sepelq
                                   0L8          IZp           OTI               981                 este                        6eb'e               S9S'T           ple                 68r   Tes   SII‘
    sdryapue    sugep              ss6'tE       v00'9         LSI'T             ese’e               LeL’6                       vtS‘O1              11a             101’                Pes'T 10e'T €99'T
  :;UI S]O0}                        e8         61            Z0                                    66           69         Z0                 eT                                                  (a
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2     Ga    Tha
  :;UI $9109                        OT         v0             700                                  80                      S0                 v0                                         OT         60 OT
:Ur TP     9u0}s                    eet        e939          6TI                                  eecSo         POST       OCC                8se                                      79ZT
                                                                                                                                                                                        8           Y9IET V6IT 9Iv

  su0g s]oo}                ~             +             +                  =                 +            4               b0T                 £6               S                  (6          v            OI
  Tl?4s                     -             +             3:                 fs                +            +               b8I                 9IT                                 (al         val          SI
    PIdIoIgY}99}             ae           5S            +                  ae                se           3               ike                 OI                                  G
  party AeTO          [Te   seare     19L‘S<                                               [ye     svare Tee'l            961                 SvT                                 Z
   s1y9O sduiny             +             +             +                  +                 +            a               OT                  VET                                 81          Z            Sv
  9U015 sqe[s               -             “L            +                  +                 +            +                               +                                       v           v            6
                The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago                  397

 Table 7.11. Lithic density data for Late Middle Palaeolithic- and Early Upper
 Palaeolithic-age open locales (Allsworth-Jones 1990, Bitiri 1972, Bordes
 1968b, Bricker and Laville 1977, Chernysh 1961, Cziesla 1984, Hahn 1977,
 Jaubert 1993, Kind 1985, Klima 1963, 1995, Kozlowski 1974, Marcy et al.
 1993, Nicolaescu-Plopsor, Paunescu and Mogosanu 1966, Svoboda 1991,
 1994c, 1994d).

                                                              m?          Total   Density
 Site                         Layer    Archaeology   Region   excavated   stone   per m?

 Ceahlau-Cetatica I                    EUP           NE       220            15)   9aG7.
 Molodova V                   xX       EUP           NE       774            617   08
 Ceahlau-Bofu Mic                      EUP           NE       688            ee)
 Molodova V                   IX       WE            NE       774          1982)    1:7
 Molodova V                   VIL      EUP           NE       774          1,655   2.1
 Ceahlau-Dirtu                         BUE           NE       461          1,405   3.0
 Bistricioara-lutarie                  EUP           NE       210          1379    6.6
 Remetea-Somos I                       EU,           SE       302          2,056   6.8
 Ceahlau-Podis                         UP            NE       505          3,535    7.0
 Chabiague                             EUP           NW        42,           405   9.6
 Dolni Véstonice II           Midden   EUP           NC       105          1,354 12.9
 Cracow Spadzista B                    EUP           NC        91          1379a 152
 Kostenki 1                   I        EP            NE       612         12,000 19.6
  Lommersum                            EUP           NC        62          1,228 19.8
‘ Hénin                       S        MP            NW       175          3,500 20.0
 Dolni Véstonice II Area A             BOR           NC       671         14,770 22.0
 Kostenki 1                   Vv       |eONe         NE        46          1,300 28.3
 Sprendlingen                          EUP           NC        40          1,259 31.5
 Gohoud                                EOP           SW        39          1,350 34.6
 Dolni Véstonice Area B                EUP           NC       370         14,352 38.8
 Vedrovice V                           EWE           NC       120          4,946 41.2
 Pavlov I                              EUP           NC        98          4,079 41.6
 Serino South                          EVP           MC        60          2,619 43.7
 Molodova V                   VII      BUP           NE       774         44,947 58.1
 Lei@ote                               EUR           SW         18         1,070 59.4
 Corbiac                               EUP           SW       150          9,809 65.4
 Tambourets                            EUP           SW          8           542 67.8
 Mauran                                MP            SW        25          2,142 85.7
 Dolni Véstonice Object 1              EUP           NC        78          6,889 88.3
 Dolni Véstonice II                    EUP           NC        24          2,865 119.4
   Western Slope
 Dolni Véstonice I                     EUP           NC        16          2,186 136.6
   Western Slope
 Pavlov 1 Object?                      EVP           NC       217         39,144 180.4
 Pavlov 1                              EUP           NC        60         13,530 225.5
 Dolni Véstonice I Object 1            EGE           NC       151         35 309338
 Dolni Véstonice I!                    EUP           NC          8         2,102 262.8
   Western Slope
398                              The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

      1000                       —————                         ———                             =                  ae                                      =        =          ===                            =                                                               =

             ae                      ee                                                                                          =                                                                                                                 =                     =
                                                                                                                       a                                                      -                                                                    Lt


                             =                                                             2         °            °                                           a                       =
             —-                                        rn                                                 eos                                                                                                                                 0              =

                                                        a ®
       10)   — SS                             = —                       eae                                                                               es                               =                                      -
             ee                                                                                                            =                     ———                              a                                                                                  m       =
a             —                          —                                  ————                                               ———————                                                         eee                        *                        =
&            Se                                                         ==                               =            is                              w                —          zs                                      =o                  2
a                                —                                           =                               =                       —__—_—_,—*_*—                                         :                         oo
                        =a               ——                                            a                                   ,         ad        -                                                "    "                                    -
&3           a                                                                                                    &                                                              =                                                                 ®@ Cromer/Holstein
 5                2                                                                                                   .                      :                Se       cell   - ———                                  —
a       10   ——-        ==           a                 =           =   —          S=                 +——                   ao                SSS                         Se       eee                —e                                            i    Saale/Eem
=            ee                                                        an             an                              ee                                           ——————                                =                            =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ——_}                             and EUP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Middle
See
zc)
5   °
                         POR SO, SS
                                                                       fee
                                                                                                ae
                                                                                                 ae                        Leal
                                                                                                                                     jp                       is
                                                                                                                                                                  ae                                                          .                    © DV-Pavlov
a             7                          an                Os                    os ©
         eR                                                            eb                           eee                     e : ne                                     kes
                                                           .
          =a |                           ————————————                                                                                                     ————                                                                                                   :
             =                   iss               5                         ——                10                     ie                 =                is)           =a        :            20,                        i                   25                             30
                  L_|                        a                 _            ...                on                a.                  7           Ki           =                           z.                     =                a                         =

                  ia    Oo



       0.1                           =        aa                                  =                 oa                 =


                                                                                                                                Number of locales sampled


                  7.13 A log density plot of lithic density per m? from open locales (data
                       from Tables 4.19, 5.18, 7.10 and 7.11). A quantifiable increase can
                       be seen through time as the largest locales in each period change
                       from being gatherings to social occasions.


periods, and which included Early Upper Palaeolithic examples, produce den-
sities greater than one hundred pieces per m7’.
   Of the eleven samples from Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov, six register more than
one hundred pieces per m” and none has a density of less than ten pieces per m”
(Table 7.12).
   Comparable densities are found in other Gravettian locales in the north-
central region (Table 7.12). These emphasize quantifiable changes in the scale
of open locales after 33 Kyr bp.
   It is interesting to compare these locales with the major Gravettian assem-
blages in Germany, north-central region (Table 7.13), which mostly fall in
Montet-White’s ephemeral/medium group. As we saw with the Achtal data
(Chapter 6), these small assemblages, often from caves, emphasize the infre-
quent use of a region which, during the Gravettian, became increasingly mar-
ginal as a corridor between the Scandinavian and Alpine ice sheets.

Comparison by context: ritual and performance
But lots of stones do not necessarily make a social occasion, a conclusion I
reached for the Lower Palaeolithic (Chapter 4). Can the evidence from Dolni
Véstonice-Pavlov be interpreted as anything other than repeated gatherings
beside the Dyje river, comparable, say, to the late Middle Palaeolithic locale of
Mauran (Chapter 6)?
  I propose to examine this difference through two sets of rituals which are
               The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago                     399

Table 7.12. Settlement hierarchy in Gravettian open locales from the north-
central region (Montet-White 1988:362). These include settlements dating to
both the Evolved Pavlovian and the Willendorf/Kostenki culture.

Character of   |Number
settlement      of tools         Total stone             Locales

Ephemeral               10-30           100-300
Medium              200-1,000          1,000-10,000      Spadzista, Pushkari, Kadar, Lubna,
                                                         Petrkovice, Willendorf II 5-7
Extensive           >1,000             >10,000           Predmosti, Willendorf II 9, Dolni
                                                         Véstonice-Pavlov, Milovice



               Table 7.13. Assemblage size for selected
               Gravettian locales in Germany (Bosinski et al.
               1985:Abb. 56, Cziesla 1984).

                                                  Number
               Locale                    Type     oftools          Total stone

               Magdalena-Hohle           Cave       10               15
               Wildscheuer IV            Gave       40               180
               Bockstein-Torle VI        Cave       71
               GeifSenklésterle la/b     Cave       91
               Brillenhohle VI           Cave)    103
               Sprendlingen              Open     -110             1,259
               Mainz-Linsenberg          Open     114                775
               Weinberghohlen            Gave”    7331
               Brillenhohle VII          Cave     409




integral to the extension of action beyond the here and now. These are the
rituals of attaching to and detaching from social gatherings. Such greetings and
farewells would always have played a part in the creation of intimate and effec-
tive networks among hominids. They involved performances with gestures and
routine sequences. The distinction for the Upper Palaeolithic is that now they
involved other performances beyond the immediate attention of individuals. In
other words people did not have to be present to participate and to influence
action.
   The reason for concentrating on the performances associated with these
rituals is that they can be both mundane as well as special. They are part of
those landscapes of habit where we experience our lives in a largely unthink-
ing fashion. But they also involve punctuated events that mark those transi-
tions which establish the patterns of social reproduction and resolve the
ambiguities of much larger social cycles.
400          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




        7.14 A reconstruction of settlement object 2 found in 1951 at Dolni
             Véstonice I. This is sometimes known as the magician’s hut and lies
             some way from the larger winter huts (after Klima 1983:Fig. 30).
             KEY:
             Kiln
             Charcoal
             Ash
             Limestone blocks
             Bone
             Edge of artificial depression
             Post holes
             Stake holes
           CONNDARWNHeE



  The three performances I will discuss here relate to setting up home, playing
with fire and saying goodbye to the dead.

Setting up home
The locale was marked by clearing the ground. Platforms 4-5m in diameter
were cut into the loess sediments producing a shallow semi-subterranean base.
Post holes at Dolni Véstonice I suggest a covering (Figure 7.14). A hearth lies in
the centre while large stones and bones mark the edge of the circular construc-
tion (Svoboda 1991:Fig. 26). Alternatively, a ring of selected mammoth bones
               The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago            401

  was placed, as at Milovice, directly on the ground surface (Oliva 1988a:109) to
  form a space. Elsewhere at Dolni Véstonice II the size of the hearth in the third
  settlement unit, 3m X2m with a thickness of 40cm, points to several reoccu-
  pations. It was surrounded by scoops and holes, some of which probably carried
  posts for a small tent-like structure. The central ‘8’-shaped feature at Pavlov I,
  with four internal hearths, may in fact represent two small huts with two
  hearths apiece (Tomaskova 1994). The semi-subterranean feature is also well
  defined by the distribution of lithic and bone remains which are found outside
  rather than inside it.?°
     Setting up home therefore took a number of different forms. Firstly, there was
  the return to existing dwellings such as Milovice and Dolni Véstonice I where
  local materials had been used. These were either mammoth bones or wood
  from the pockets of spruce, pine and even some deciduous trees such as oak,
  lime, hornbeam and beech (Opravil 1994, Svobodova 1991) scattered in shel-
  tered locations within the dominant forest-steppe vegetation.2! These struc-
  tures had permanence. They survived beyond the lifetime of a seasonal
  gathering either as permanently occupied dwellings for some years or, as seems
  most probable, as facilities to be reused on repeated visits to the Pavlovské
  hills. The small size of the various dwellings (Figure 7.14) suggests small house-
  holds which repeatedly used this location. Occupation varied from several
  months to several days (Svoboda 1994d:75). The discovery of what has been ten-
_ tatively identified as a plant food ‘mush’ for infants at Dolni Véstonice II
  (Mason, Hather and Hillman 1994:53) provides some pointer to the range of
  ages present.”” Mixed age and sex is also indicated by the human remains scat-
  tered throughout the locale. A second style of homecoming involved the reuse
  of camping places. Poles for tents were carried to the locale with that purpose
  in mind.
     In both examples there would have been repairs and reconstruction; making
  things function and performing the rituals of attaching to the place with its
  memories and people. This performance involved the use of local and distant
  materials; mammoth bones washed together by the Dyje and flint transferred
  from southern Poland to make stone tools. It included materials already fash-
  ioned into artifacts, such as tent poles and varied elements of a fibre technol-
  ogy as revealed by textile/basketry impressions and possibly nets preserved in
  burnt clay (Adovasio, Soffer and Klima 1996, Soffer, Adovasio and Hyland
  1997).23 There were also other raw materials which were transformed at the
  locale. These included the local animals used for fur, food, tents and clothing
  (Musil 1994) as well as the Slovakian and Austrian radiolarites which were
  made into burins.

 Style and cultural contexts
 These performances of renewal were part of the attaching ritual to the locale.
 They provided it with that sense of place as the gestures which were used both
 created and recreated its history and continuing significance for the people.
402          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

   Style, the process which merges the locale with the region and which extends
people beyond the landscape of habit and into the domain of the social land-
scape, was present in many forms. Part of the style of the attaching ritual lay
in building and transforming. Another part had an older ancestry in hominid
society since it involved artifacts and objects. Making and display, in the
context of either killing or processing reindeer and fur-bearing animals such as
arctic fox, wolf and glutton, were part of the process of reaffirming the social
context of the locale. Negotiated style can be found in the shape of familiar,
highly charged objects such as the ventrally retouched pointed blade which is
found at Pavlov I, Predmosti and Willendorf II layers 5 and 8, but not in the
Dolni Véstonice assemblages (Svoboda 1994d:75). Style can be traced in the
similarity of more mundane-looking bone tools between Moravian sites such
as Ptedmosti and Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov (Klima 1994, Valoch 1982). It is there-
fore unsurprising that evidence for the long-distance transport of flint from
southern Poland and radiolarite stone from Slovakia and Austria is very
common (Svoboda 1994e:217, 1994d:71-2). These were more than just good
raw materials. They were social objects in their own right. They derived
meaning from the cultural context built up from many individual networks.
   The style of objects at these social activities of building, greeting, killing
animals and making things also presented an opportunity to pass on informa-
tion (Gamble 1982). But it was what the objects symbolized rather than what
they communicated visually that was important. They symbolized distant
hunting grounds, future encounters and other social occasions both in the life-
time of an individual and in the history that had shaped them. The context
which invested such objects with the force of individual agency resided in the
social landscape where the act of doing was stretched and extended across time
and space.

Playing with fire
People were now structured by what they did, what they brought to a locale
and how they performed. There was attention to the role of objects as indepen-
dent agents structuring action, while in previous eras it had been attention only
to other people. This change allowed attachment to social occasions and gath-
erings through the resources of the extended network. Previously, attaching to
gatherings had been negotiated solely through the resources of the intimate and
effective networks (Table 2.8) as at Bilzingsleben (Chapter 4) and Maastricht-
Belvédére (Chapter 5).
   But underlying all these networks is the notion that technical acts are also
social acts. Making a stone tool is not just about meeting a functional require-
ment. It is also about the involvement of the knapper in a wider world of nego-
tiation and creation and where the body acts as a reference for power and
meaning.
  In previous chapters I have elaborated upon a model of transferable skills
where the landscape of habit provides a framework to examine them. At Dolni
               The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago              403

  Véstonice-Pavlov the case can be made for these same skills as well as for place-
  specific skills - knowledge that is only relevant to that locale through a com-
  bination of physical resources and the social context for its production. The
  chaine opératoire associated with the use of loess in pyrotechnic displays pro-
  vides an example.
     The many thousands of clay pellets and figurine fragments (Table 7.9) have
  already been mentioned as one of the hallmarks of Dolni Véstonice I and Pavlov
  I (Klima 1983). Elsewhere at the locale they are very rare, while fewer than ten
  pieces are known from other evolved Pavlovian locales in Moravia. Vandiver
  (et al. 1989:1007) describe it as a ‘precocious Upper Palaeolithic soft stone tech-
  nology’. But it is noteworthy that the vast majority of the figurines are fragmen-
  tary (Soffer and Vandiver 1994:172).
     This observation led Vandiver (Soffer et al. 1993, Vandiver et al. 1989) to
  reconsider the entire process by examining the technological skills which were
  involved. They analysed the ceramic properties of the local loess from which
  the figures were roughly modelled. Their most important finding was that the
  loess at the two locales was suitable for firing in kilns. But unexpectedly they
  found evidence on many pieces of thermal shock — an explosive reaction which
  shatters clay when it is being fired. This could not be achieved with the local
  loesses unless the normal process of firing was changed (Vandiver et al.
   1989:1007). Thermal shocking was therefore intentional — something a modern
. potter would not contemplate. We can conclude that it was a recognized skill
  where the process of making and firing was the most important activity rather
  than achieving a durable final product.** It was the way the clay models
  exploded in the two kilns excavated at Dolni Véstonice I that mattered and not
  their future as long-lasting images (Figure 7.15). Perhaps the analogy is with a
  firework which may look very impressive as a rocket but its significance is as
  an exploding, temporary star-burst in the night sky.
     Therefore these were not Pavlovian Leonardo da Vincis, stumbling across
  pottery manufacture many millennia before it was required. Rather they were
  utilizing the properties of the loess as an active agent in a performance (Soffer
  et al. 1993:272). Soffer and Vandiver (1994) also note that the suitability of the
  loess differs between Dolni Véstonice I and Pavlov I, 500m apart, which sug-
  gests very place-specific skills. This was reflected in the location of the pyro-
  technic displays. At Dolni Véstonice I the kiln was 70m away from the main
  concentration, while at Pavlov 1 it lay within the settlement area.
     We may not be able to reconstruct who among the population of infants, chil-
  dren and adults was most involved, but we can point to the skills level and its
  association with a place. The act of making and firing these clay pellets and fig-
  urines could be for entertainment of young and old alike or, as Klima originally
  suggested (1963), indicative of a religious purpose. What it involved was build-
  ing a special feature (Figure 7.15), fuelling it and watching its contents explode.
  The dominant animal imagery in the shattered figurines may not be an expres-
  sion of hunting magic but equally an affirmation of the renewability of
404          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




                                 ‘f




        7.15 Two kilns from Dolni Véstonice I. The upper was found within
             object 2 (Figure 7.14) and more than 2,300 fired clay pieces were
             found within it. The lower was found in 1978, 40 m to the west. It
             is one metre in diameter, dug to a depth of 60 cm and surrounded by
             a horeshoe-shaped clay wall. It also contained fired clay figurine
             fragments (after Valoch 1996:Fig. 64; Soffer et al. 1993).


resources which were as unlimited as the loess in that place. It seems unlikely
that people went to the locale just to watch clay explode. But it is very possible
that it formed one of the memories of that place when they were far away from
the other people who also watched the pyrotechnics.

Goodbye to the dead
Burial provides an extreme case of a detaching ritual. We saw in Chapter 6 that
the evidence for Neanderthal burial had the sense of an adieu rather than an au
revoir. The latter might be expected with a true detaching ritual since it implies
meeting again in some other context. Such detaching, while admittedly
extreme, nonetheless allows us to examine a major difference in the use of
locales, with Doini Véstonice-Pavlov providing a further example of the place
as social occasion.
   The Gravettian is the key period for the study of Upper Palaeolithic burials
in Europe. Apart from the pseudo-morph at Cueva Morin in Cantabria
(Freeman and Gonzalez-Echegaray 1970) there is a lack of burials with early
Aurignacian artifacts.” In Europe complete skeletons older than 30 Kyr are,
with the possible exception of Combe-Capelle in France, exclusively
               The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago           405

Neanderthal (Quéchon 1976). After this date the picture changes dramatically.
Burials in open sites are found for the first time. Multiple burials are known of
which the largest is the ‘mass grave’ at Predmosti (Svoboda 1994a, Svoboda et
al. 1994) where up to twenty individuals, eight adults and twelve children, were
found by Maska in 1894 (Absolon and Klima 1977, Valoch 1996:Fig. 121).2° The
Pavlovian at this very rich multi-period site was later C14 dated to 26.8 and
26.3 Kyr BP.
   Another Pavlovian-age burial was found in 1891 in the Moravian city of
Brno.”’ It consisted of a male skeleton with a complex array of grave goods
(Jelinek, Pelisek and Valoch 1959, Valoch 1996:144-5). These included a
mammoth scapula, tusks, horse teeth and the ribs and skull of a woolly rhino.
There were also more than 600 Dentalium shells as well as two large perforated
stone discs and fourteen smaller discs carved in a variety of raw materials
(Jelinek, Pelisek and Valoch 1959:Taf. II and III). In amongst these items were
three carved ivory pieces, the head, body and left arm of a marionette (Figure
7.16). The head and body together measure 20.3cm in length and the thread
holes for the strings to attach the legs to the body are visible (Jelinek, Pelisek
and Valoch 1959:Taf. IV).
   Double burials from this period have been found more widely and include the
two children laid head to head in a grave among settlement debris at Sunghir,
northeast of Moscow (Bader 1967, Bader 1978). These are associated with ivory
beads sewn onto caps and clothing as well as with figurines and ivory spears.
Similar decorated clothing is common in the burials from the Grimaldi caves
situated on the border between France and Italy on the Ligurian coast (Figure
7 ay
   The documentation and dating of the Ligurian burials is not good but even
so they point to a recognizable tradition of Gravettian burial albeit in a cave
rather than an open context (Mussi 1986a, 1986b, 1988, 1992, Zampetti and
Mussi 1991). This applies to single and double burials (Table 7.14) as well as
to the triple burial at Barma Grande. Mussi (1986b:548-9) summarizes a
typical Gravettian burial in these caves as an adult male or adolescent, lying
in an extended position on their back or side and placed in an inner part of
the cave, close to the wall. The internment followed the axis of the cave with
the skull lying on the left and oriented mostly to the east. Graves were always
dug and sometimes stones were used to protect the corpse. Ochre, personal
ornaments and selected bone and flint implements were placed as grave
goods.
  The Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov material forms a comparable local tradition of
open-air burials which are characterized by
           ¢ repeated use of a locale for burial
           e multiple burials
           e extensive use of ochre, ornament and clothing

  Up to 1995 some thirty-four individuals ranging from isolated finds to com-
plete bodies have been found at Dolni Véstonice (Klima 1995). A further three
406        The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




      7.16 The three pieces of the ivory marionette from Brno, Czech
           Republic, NC region. The string hole drilled into the base of the
           trunk is shown at the bottom left (after Jelinek et al. 1959:Tafel IV).
       The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago          407




                      5

7.17 The positioning of ornaments and worked bone found in selected
     Gravettian burials from Grimaldi and elsewhere in Italy, MC region
     after Zampetti and Mussi 1991:Fig. 2).
    Key:
1-2 Grotte des Enfants, double burial 6 & 5
  3 Grotte des Enfants 4         6 Grotta Paglicci
  4 Baousso da Torre 1           7 Grotta delle Veneri
  5 Baousso da Torre 2
   -
408           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




         11                             i122                         13


      7.17 (cont.) The positioning of ornaments and worked bone found in
             selected Gravettian burials from Grimaldi and elsewhere in Italy,
             MC region (after Zampetti and Mussi 1991:Fig. 2).
      8-10 Barma Grande, triple burial 4, 3 & 2
         11 Barma Grande 5
         12, Grotta del Caviglione 1
         13 Grotta delle Arene Candide 1
              The extension of social life 60,000-21,060 years ago             409

Table 7.14. The Gravettian-early Epi-Gravettian-age burials (25-18 Kyr bp)
at the Grimaldi caves, Balzi Rossi, in Liguria (Mussi 1986a, 1986b, Oakley,
Campbell and Molleson 1971). The double child burial in Grotte des Enfants
is dated to after 14 Kyr bp (Mussi 1986a:95-6).

Grotte des Enfants=Grotta dei Fanciulli
  4        Single burial      Adult male
  5,6      Double burial      Old female, adolescent male/female
Grotte du Cavillon=Grotta del Caviglione
   1       Single burial     Adult male
Barma Grande
   1      Single burial       Adult male
  Digoee! Triple burial       Adult male, adolescent female, adolescent male/female
  5       Single burial       Adult male
  6       Single burial       Adult male (partially cremated)
Baousso da Torre
   1       Single burial      Adult male
  Ds       Single burial      Adult male
  3        Single burial      Adolescent male



major finds are known from Pavlov (Oakley, Campbell and Molleson 1971,
Valoch 1996). Six of these finds are complete bodies (Table 7.9). The three single
burials are all adults. The small gracile female, Dolni Véstonice III, is very
tightly flexed and was probably bound (Klima 1963, Trinkaus and Jelinek
1997).°8 The legs of Dolni Véstonice XVI are less firmly flexed but still appear
to have been bound (Figure 7.18). The female, DV III, lay under several
mammoth scapulae, one with cut marks (Klima 1963:Fig. 60), as did the poorly
reported male burial, Pavlov I (Valoch 1996:Fig. 126). The male, DV XVI, faced
the hearth, the same one which preserved the infant’s acorn mush, with his
knees 20cm from its edge. The skeletons are described as robust individuals
with healed traumas on their skulls and well-worn dentition.
   The triple burial lay, like Dolni Véstonice XVI, in a very shallow depression
rather than a grave. It is reasonably certain that the two outside individuals are
adolescent males. The sex of the central person, DV XV, is less clear due to a
number of pathologies (Klima 1988:834). These included scoliosis of the spine
with marked left curvature and a deformed right femur. She/he would have
limped on their right leg. The outside individuals have ivory and carnivore
canine pendants. The bodies lay in different positions: face up (Dolni Véstonice
XV), face down (Dolni Véstonice XIV), and with both arms extended (Dolni
Véstonice XIII) to touch the central person, Dolni Véstonice XV (Figure 7.19).
All three heads were covered in ochre as was the pelvic area of the central body.
Plenty of charcoal was found in the grave pit suggesting that the bodies had
been covered by branches, set alight and then quickly covered by earth to extin-
guish the fire since the bones were not burnt (Figure 7.20).
410          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




        7.18 Burial DV XVI excavated at Dolni Véstonice II western slope. The
             hearth lies at the centre of a small depression interpreted as a hut
             platform (after Svoboda 1991:Fig. 6).
             Key:
           A Shallow artificial depression with charcoal, small animal bones and
             artifactual debris including ochre and two Dentalia shells
      B &C   Clusters of lithics and bones
           D Hearth, with bowl-shaped base, consisting of charcoal, burnt loess
             and many limestone blocks. Lying across it is a large animal rib and
             carbonized plant food was found in it.
           E Hollowed pit containing bones of large and small animals, a pierced
             tooth, six Dentalia shells, ochre, bone and stone tools




   In the immediate area of the grave pit two fragments of a small limestone rod
with notational markings were found (Emmerling, Geer and Klima 1993, Klima
1995). The reconstruction proposes twenty-nine marks which are interpreted
as the notations for a lunar calendar month.” These are grouped in units of 5,
7, 7,5 and 5 which, if correct, would reflect changes in the moon’s brightness
as it goes through its waxing and waning cycle (Marshack 1972), a tangible
example of measured performance.
   The isolated human remains at Dolni Véstonice II show a strong linear pat-
terning (Klima 1995:Abb. 91). Seven finds, including two partial crania, extend
north from the triple burial in the western part of the excavation. A line of
small hearths and pits also follows the same orientation (Klima 1995:Abb. 33).
At Piedmosti, where cut-marked mammoth scapulae covered the bodies in the
‘mass grave’, Maska remarked that
              The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago       411




z              a        50            (17) 2-2] sfee] «[tee] 57]
    7.19 The triple burial from Dolni Véstonice II containing skeletons DV
         XIII, XV and XIV (after Klima 1995:Abb. 76).
          KEY:
      1 Burnt wood and stone tools
      2 Spreads and small pieces of red ochre
      3 Shell ornaments
      4 Human and pierced animal teeth, ivory beads
      5 Edge of depression

        aif
412           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe




        7.20 The triple burial from Dolni Véstonice II. In the foreground is
             skeleton DV XIII (Photo J. Svoboda).



an important circumstance should be mentioned: single human bones continued quite
frequently to the south and SE, outside the grave, together with mammoth, reindeer and
fox bones. (quoted in Svoboda et al. 1994:459)

  At Dolni Véstonice II similar deposits of animal bones including paws and
lower legs of wolf and large slabs of mammoth bones were also found leading
away from the triple burial (Klima 1995:65).


Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov: the social occasion and the place

These examples of attaching and detaching rituals helped create the Dolni
Véstonice-Pavlov locale as a place. This was achieved through people’s varied
involvement and experiences with that locale as a social occasion rather than
simply as a gathering or encounter (Table 3.1).
   But what, you may ask, allows us to identify this archaeological evidence as
a social occasion? The answer is straightforward. Social occasions can only be
investigated within the wider context of regional behaviour, here presented as
a social landscape for organizing action and providing meaning to life by
involvement with the world (Ingold 1993:155). The social occasion would not
exist as a context for action if networks never extended beyond the intimate
(Table 2.8). Neither would they have much impact if only the effective level
              The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago              413

was reached. At both these levels the attention and interaction supported by
gatherings and encounters would be entirely sufficient for social life. It is the
extension of social life through system integration (Chapter 2) and in particu-
lar its externalization in objects that marks the difference. It is therefore no sur-
prise that the elaboration of evidence, which I have reviewed here for regional
interaction, is matched at locales such as Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov by specific
evidence for attaching and detaching rituals. Moreover, the stay at the locale
involved at least one further heightened experience — the performance of
exploding life —- which fixed the place in the memories and minds of those who
created and lived in it.
   Let me continue this line of argument by returning to one of the central ideas
in this book — that social life is negotiated and varies according to the resources
— affective, material and symbolic — which individuals can mobilize to create
their surrounding environment (Chapter 2). The activities of attending and
attention are essential to such an interaction model and in the earlier periods
these aspects were both weakly developed and poorly preserved. The evidence
mostly amounts to knapping stone and making wooden artifacts. Skills were
transferable and non-specific from locale to locale within a regional framework
of landscapes of habit.
   Now consider the evidence for attention and attending, those rhythms of the
taskscape, at Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov. Not only do we have a vivid example
with the hissing, spitting, exploding clay creatures, but we also have in fire-
places and ochre two further sources of evidence for attention during interac-
tion.2° These two elements are linked at Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov. The flexed
male burial DV XVI lies facing a hearth, while the triple burial contains char-
coal, probably from a burnt covering of branches. The heads of all four individ-
uals in these two burials are heavily ochred. Attention is being drawn to the
face, the focus for interaction, greeting and recognition and with spoken lan-
guage the prime source of negotiation. Moreover, the association with fire
draws the social occasion into the domestic setting of the household, one
social/spatial context for the negotiation and performance of bonds in the inti-
mate and effective networks.
   It is assumed that the bodies of DV XVI and DV XV were clothed and these
corpses had ochre plastered over their pelvic areas (Svoboda and Dvorsky
1994:74-5). Drawing attention to the head and the groin of the dead with blood
red pigment in this detaching ritual echoed the archaeologically invisible
attaching ritual of birth and blood. Arrival and departure, attaching and detach-
ing to social life, had a shared symbolism. These rituals partitioned the tempo-
ral continuum. Cultural significance was drawn from the context and from the
temporality of action devoted to attention. People were attending to each other
and thereby making the activity social (Ingold 1993:159-60).
   With this perspective we can see that ochreing the groin area was not a
simple signal about sex or gender. By deliberately setting the bodies in fixed
positions and selectively daubing them, the living were instead emphasizing
414           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

temporal continuity but acknowledging its inevitable partitions. These disrup-
tions were seen in terms of arrivals and departures from social life. The Dolni
Véstonice-Pavlov burials were rituals of detachment from an enduring social
occasion. As such they indeed had the character of an au revoir rather than an
adieu because they affirmed the seamless continuity of the place as lived expe-
rience. The dead, as ancestors, now formed part of the extended network of the
living.
   The repeated act of digging at Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov is further evidence for
the character of the rituals of attaching and detaching associated with this
place. Ochre had to be dug from the ground. Digging was also the primary
rhythm, the sequence of gestures in a chaine opératoire (Leroi-Gourhan
1993:309), which created the forms of the hut platforms and the shallow graves,
as well as obtaining the loess for the pyrotechnic performances.
   The earth was permanently frozen below a certain depth which, judging by
the hut floor, might have been around 80cm.?! Here was a physical, cold limit
to their world. The boundary contrasted with the surface where action occurred
as people attended to each other, where fire transformed materials and built
structures kept out the elements. Fire released the properties in materials and
transformed them, through manufacture, into social objects. The isolated
bones, testament to the power of the body as a culturally significant object, lie
scattered across the spaces of daily life. Individuals, alive or dead, may have
been remote in time and place but they were not forgotten.
   Corpses were also materials to be turned into objects. In life the attention to
the face and the transformation of the body into a cultural object occurred by
decking it with pendants, clothes and tools. We can also trace the attention to
all these social objects by studying recurrent details. For example, the constrict-
ing belt that cuts into the hips of the clay figurines from Dolni Véstonice is
echoed in the bindings of the bodies, male and female, in the single burials.
   Finally, the archaeological evidence for the social occasion at this locale deals
with values of protection and preservation. The mammoth scapulae placed
over the bodies of P and DV III, as well as the brushwood covering on the triple
burial, are examples of protection. DV XVI has the protection of the hearth and
DV XV the gesture of the extended arms of DV XIII. The preservation of the
person as an object created by gestures and rhythms is assured. The temporal-
ity of this place was expressed in the rituals of continuity, with the resources
of the locale and with the ‘looking beyond’ to the landscape and the region. The
elision between absence and distance and the expression of the extended
network that has no practical limits is well demonstrated beneath the shelter
of the enduring Pavlovské hills.


Summary

The regions and locales of Upper Palaeolithic Europe were constructed differ-
ently to those which went before. The rhythms which linked action from the
               The extension of social life 60,000-21,000 years ago             415

  micro to the macro scale now drew on symbolic as well as material and emo-
  tional resources to create and channel agency. In this chapter I have examined
  the evidence for the existence of a personal network incorporating intimate,
  effective and extended networks (Table 2.8). The locale and region have been
  examined through the concepts of the social occasion and social landscape. In
  practice these terms are inseparable and form an unbroken stream of human
  action that results in the definition of locales as places (Table 3.1).
     But while the framework of social occasion/social landscape is new, the
  linking rhythms between the micro and macro scales remain the same. These
  are the chaine opératoire with its sequences of gestures and routinized habits,
  the paths and tracks which link individuals to each other and to locales, and
  the taskscape where attention by individuals to one another makes interaction
  culturally meaningful.
     What has changed with the Upper Palaeolithic are the societies which these
  rhythms produce. The objects and artifacts used in the performance of social
  life now have an existence independent from the bodies of the people who made
  and used them. These same artifacts now represent gestures which continue to
  live even though they are no longer animated by use or direct association with
  an individual. In the Lower and Middle Palaeolithic they contributed to the
  social integration of performance and people through face-to-face contact. For
  the first time they now serve the more complicated role of system integration
' beyond face-to-face interaction. Those moments which the objects define,
  those social occasions and places where the performance of life takes place,
  now influence individual agency. They emphasize a different order of tempo-
  rality in the creative power of individuals and the constraints imposed by wider
  structures.
     I have argued in this chapter that such symbolic involvement between the
  locale and region occurred, for the first time, in the Upper Palaeolithic. The
  extended network became a source of power and, through the global counter-
  part to this novel personal network, such categories as the ‘other’ were defined.
  Previously the scale of hominid society was limited by the effective network,
  with its scale predicated on the use of material resources. Life in such societies
  was local and based on the principle of social exclusion. The emphasis on
  material and emotional resources meant that individuals created their social
  lives from immediate resources. They traversed their landscapes of habit,
  which had well-known temporal rhythms of renewal.
     What we have seen in this chapter is the evidence for both social and system
  integration which goes well beyond the social universe that can be defined by
  an effective network with its emphasis on gatherings and landscapes of habit.
  I have examined in a series of regional case studies the difference which
  emerges between Neanderthals and Cré-Magnons when we look at the evi-
  dence for their co-existence. One consequence of these differences was the
  varied regional histories and the structure of power which these imply.
     In this sense power means nothing more than the greater involvement
416          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

between people and the ever-present resources of their surrounding environ-
ment. Once such involvement was current then the opportunities for cultural
diversity as those social landscapes and places are reinterpreted and recreated
were immense. Power in this sense was the opportunity for exploring the
potential of such diversity and harnessing it to individual social projects. Life
was no longer simply local but could now be both exclusive and inclusive in
terms of access to and closure of‘new and existing relationships (Table 1.2).
   At the level of the locale, the social occasion of Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov dis-
plays very different skills to those seen previously in such gatherings as
Bilzingsleben (Chapter 4) and Maastricht-Belvédére (Chapter 5). In particular,
at Dolni Véstonice-Pavlov place-specific skills are manifest in the creation of
structures, not only for the rituals of attaching and detaching from the locale
but also, in the case of the kilns, for the rituals which made the performance of
living there memorable. Like all skills, generic or specific, these were social.
However, in accordance with the extended network and the system integration
this allowed, these skills now drew on symbolic as well as material and emo-
tional resources to achieve that release from proximity (Chapter 2).
   Social life, as a result, was now truly complicated rather than simply
complex as discussed in Chapter 2. This does not mean that earlier periods
lacked power in their social networks. It is instead the case that the structure
from which power was derived differed in significant respects. Among these the
ability to externalize memory through the ascription of power to objects
remains the most telling. Since power resides in acts of association and in
attending to other individuals, this ability to transfer such contexts symboli-
cally created a personal network which now included people and objects. The
surrounding environment in the Upper Palaeolithic was now richly layered
with meaning and symbolically linked. Social occasions with rituals and
resources now structured the seemingly unfettered life of the Palaeolithic
person.
               CHAPTER        8


               THE PALAEOLITHIC                      SOCIETIES         OF
               EUROPE




               Human history is created by intentional activities
               but is not an intended project
                                                                      Anthony Giddens
                                                            The Constitution of Society

               Under the paving stones — the beach
                                                                         Student slogan
                                                                       Paris, May 1968



  I have now reviewed the evidence for social life during the Palaeolithic period
  in Europe. I am conscious that the continent I have drawn the data from, and
  the time frame of 500,000 to 21,000 years ago, are to some extent the filling in
’ the sandwich of human evolution. I have omitted early social evolution in
  Africa and stopped at the last glacial maximum after which the data increase
  geometrically in quantity. Moreover, on a Palaeolithic timescale it is a short
  step from there to plant and animal domestication and further exponential
  changes in human affairs.
     It has not however been my intention to present an overview of social evo-
  lution. My main concern has been to demonstrate how Childe’s judgement,
  still widely followed, that the reconstruction of Palaeolithic social life is
  doomed by the data was incorrect (1951:85). While Palaeolithic data have never
  been helpful in the way that pyramids, palaces, ball-courts and granaries most
  definitely have been to the social archaeologist working in later periods, it is
  not the evidence which is at fault. We have always had, relative to the knowl-
  edge of the times, high-quality and often well-dated evidence for all periods of
  the Palaeolithic and particularly from Europe. These data have always been
  available to examine intra- and inter-regional variation, which has been a
  rewarding framework for writing social narratives about the Minoans or the
  Romans. We now have more Palaeolithic data than fifty years ago but so, by
  comparison, does every other period. If we blame the data for the difficulties of
  investigating Palaeolithic society then we will always be running to catch up.
     It has been my aim in the preceding chapters to show that it has been the way
  we approach the investigation of Palaeolithic society that has doomed such pro-
  jects to failure. I deliberately stopped the analysis at 21,000 bp because at that
  point it does get easier in a pyramids and ball-courts sort of way. For a start

                                                                                   417
418           The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

there are many more data from all regions of Europe. The timescales are short
and we can examine in detail questions of recolonization (Housley et al. 1997)
and compare it, for example, to the wave of advance among later farmers (van
Andel and Runnels 1995). There is, apparently, abundant cave and mobiliary
art as well as more burials leading to the later cemeteries of the early
Mesolithic (Whittle 1996). The transition from studying ecological adaptations
to reconstructing social relations is smooth. Several global overviews bear out
this point (Gamble and Soffer 1990, Soffer and Gamble 1990, Straus et al. 1996,
Zvelebil 1986). But none of these Late Glacial advantages must deflect us from
the possibility of investigating much earlier Palaeolithic societies. We should
not judge the exercise as doomed because of the expectations of a social archae-
ology worked out with later, more varied materials.
   My point, however, is more fundamental for the pursuit of a social archaeol-
ogy. If, as I have argued here, we need to recast the way we approach the recon-
struction and understanding of society in the Palaeolithic, then we must
necessarily rethink many of the assumptions and approaches to social archae-
ology in the more recent periods. This has already been done in a number of
post-processual critiques (Hodder 1990, Thomas 1991, Tilley 1996). By adding
the Palaeolithic to such agendas there can be no turning back to the days of
social typologies and evolutionist accounts (e.g. Johnson and Earle 1987). [hope
that by bringing the Palaeolithic into such discussions we will now find many
new things to do with our painstakingly collected data than just talking about
calories and tool maintenance. I also hope that we will move beyond social
reconstruction as merely an assertion of what must have gone on during rituals
around open graves, against cave walls and in our ancestors’ heads. In other
words, we will move beyond the idea that their social life only resided in the
space between meals.
  What follows is intended as my personal summary of the issues which can
now be investigated. Here is a framework for new research with data that, while
theory laden, are still the assets for writing more interesting stories. The task
which faces us will not just be composing those narratives but also verifying
them.

The starting point

Wilson stated one of the ground rules for studying Palaeolithic society:
we must imagine H. erectus or early sapiens not so much as a blank upon which any
and all impressions can fall, but as a creature of immense but inchoate promise and
potential, whose problem is to devise from his capacities the instruments and means to
create specific modes of organisation that will enable survival. (Wilson 1980:41)

   The individual is presented to us as a creative but constrained agent rather
than a hominid cipher pre-programmed to produce Homo heidelbergensis
society. Wilson goes on to argue that the challenge which faces us is not the
detailed reconstruction of social forms. It is instead deciding upon the general
               The Palaeolithic societies of Europe                            419
  principle that made it possible for our ancestors to construct the varieties of
  social life comparable to our individual experience of the complex business of
  living (ibid.:54).
     The generalized principle I have pursued came from studies of both primate
  and modern societies. I returned to the individual rather than the group as the
  object of society and based social life upon the opportunities and rules which
  stem from interaction. I have stressed how it is involvement with the world
  and with others, summed up by the concept of agency, which marks this dis-
  tinction. This removes the goal of searching for the material remains of social
  institutions such as rank, religion, economies or bureaucracy. Instead we must
  examine the acts which arise from co-presence, the varied performances which
  are possible when the body is the prime form of social communication and
  power. We can also examine the changing role of artifacts and culture in such
  performances, especially when objects and other animals take on the traits of
  people. This extension of social behaviour results in the ‘release from proxim-
  ity’ (Giddens 1984:35, Rodseth et al. 1991:240) which is identified as the hall-
  mark of human social evolution.
     Rules and resources can be measured and predicted. Patterned outcomes
  result from interaction. These concern the use of different resources — emo-
  tional, material and symbolic — to create bonds of distinct intensity and impor-
  tance in an individual’s varied networks. The outcomes from such a bottom-up
‘ approach to social structure can be seen in the recurrent demographic patterns
  that emerge.


 The methods

 But the individual has always been regarded as a shadowy creature lost in the
 long corridors of Palaeolithic time. This view, expressed to me on many occa-
 sions, still strikes me as strange since it runs counter to our Palaeolithic data.
 There is more contact with the micro-scale world of individual action in the
 Palaeolithic than there is with the invisible face in the crowd at the Roman
 Colosseum. Why do we bother to piece-plot thousands of artifacts at Lower
 Palaeolithic excavations such as Boxgrove if we do not think we can get closer
 to individual action? Roe was right when he described such events as precious
 moments in time (1981:197). If we want to investigate Palaeolithic society
 through individual and group action we can devise methodologies which tack
 repeatedly between such fine-grained scales to the wider contexts of space and
 time where the data are often coarser (Figure 3.2). But even without such well
 preserved, freeze-frame moments, ‘the fact that prehistorians cannot identify
 individuals is no reason why they should ignore their existence’ (Clark
 1957:248).
   The methods need to bridge the micro and macro scales of human social life
 and social history. The middle-range theory advocated here has adopted
 the insights of Leroi-Gourhan (1993), who was particularly concerned to apply
420          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

ethnological approaches to archaeological contexts. The body as a source of
action and a reference for power lies at the heart of his analysis. The body pro-
duces patterns through movement and gestures applied to materials. It creates,
but it is also limited by physical constraints. The link between the locale and
the region, the micro and macro scale of social activity, is based on rhythms
involving performance and gesture. The key point which I have emphasized
continually is that technical acts:are at the same time social acts. It is involve-
ment with the world rather than analysis of the world which marks this out.
   Hence I have preferred a phenomenological definition of culture in this book.
The emphasis has been on the active engagement of people with their environ-
ment rather than the enhanced linkages between mental modules that a
cognitive, or classificatory, view of culture requires (Mithen 1996, Parker and
Milbrath 1993). In deciding on this emphasis I followed Dennett’s view that
‘the trouble with brains is that when you look in them, you discover that there’s
nobody home’ (1991:29). Brains need to be put into a context of action if we are
to understand the changes and selection they underwent. They cannot be the
main object of study by themselves if we are to avoid falling into a circular argu-
ment to explain social and cultural change. That context can only be supplied
by the creation of social life where brains are a part of the whole organism and
its surrounding environment. They are not in the driving seat plotting their
own destiny. It is for these reasons that I have distinguished culture from
society. Culture is an expression of that active engagement. It structures the
social processing of information through activities that involve rhythms and
gestures which encompass other people and materials. This processing is not
necessarily linguistic. Nor is it solely recorded in the style of artifacts. Instead
it is an outcome of attention, perception and movement without which social
life does not exist.
   This approach identifies two areas where we have hardly begun to investi-
gate Palaeolithic culture, learning and memory. These involve the cultural
transmission of information about how to act and how to control the body
during the performance of social life. Currently a strong tradition exists which
accounts analytically for change in the Palaeolithic. Here the emphasis is more
on training the mind to anticipate problems and to use culture as a means to
solve problems in a game against the environment.
   For example, the important discussions over planning depth by Binford
(1989:19) focused attention on the differences in organization between
Neanderthals and Cré-Magnons. This concept deals with variation in the
amount of time and technological investment between anticipatory behaviour
and the actions it facilitates. The outcome points to greater planning depth
among Cr6-Magnons who had more complex and varied tools ‘designed for use
in directly coping with the environment’ (ibid.:21).
   I now see this transition differently (Gamble 1995b). Planning depth and
anticipation are concepts which depend upon detachment from the world. Life
becomes compartmentalized for understandable analytical purposes. Specific
               The Palaeolithic societies of Europe                                   42.1

behaviours emerge and the individual starts to fade into the murk of an
imposed institutional-like framework.
   Clark was well aware of this danger when he reminded us that human fore-
sight does not imply that every time we engage in activities directed to our
future well-being we display this valuable quality. Instead ‘our planning is as
social as our sharing of memories’ (1989:431). Using the vocabulary of this
book, we are engaged with the world and evolve within its social networks
rather than outside them. Thus, Clark’s view about learning and memory as
applied to anticipation and planning sits more comfortably with the perspec-
tive from a less analytical tradition, here described by Brody living among
Athabaskan hunters:
To make a good, wise sensible hunting choice is to accept the interconnection of all pos-
sible factors, and avoids the mistake of seeking rationally to focus on any one consider-
ation that is held as primary. What is more, the decision is taken in the doing: there is
no step or pause between theory and practice .. . Planning as other cultures understand
the notion, is at odds with this kind of sensitivity and would confound such flexibility.
The hunter, alive to constant movements of nature, spirits, and human moods, main-
tains a way of doing things that repudiates a firm plan and any precise or specified under-
standing with others of what he is going to do. (1981:37)

    The course of action cannot therefore be predetermined since activity itself
 undermines any so-called plans. It is for these reasons that, as well as using the
‘rhythms of the chaine opératoire and paths and tracks, I have also developed
 Ingold’s notion of the taskscape. This concept of a mutual environment which
 surrounds individuals as they go about the business of living allows us to break
 out of the way of thinking that in the Palaeolithic all people did was adapt
 to the environment. These games against the environment, as McGlade
 (1995:115-16) has commented, place nature out there and so relegate the role
 of the social to specialists other than archaeologists. The taskscape with its
 emphasis on continual action and attention to others removes this unhelpful
 dichotomy. It still allows for selection on action but it also allows for that crea-
 ture of immense but inchoate promise and potential.


The earliest Palaeolithic societies in Europe: 500,000+ to 300,000 years ago
Europe was colonized late. The exact date is disputed but at some time between
one and half a million years ago hominids are found in regions along the north
Mediterranean and throughout all but the northeastern parts of the continent.
The archaeological record changes very significantly after 500,000 years ago.
This suggests that there is still a great deal to be discovered about the process
of early colonization and that we should cease to treat it as an event with a fixed
date.
   L attribute the process of colonization, the late date and the earlier evidence
from the Mediterranean rather than southern and northern Europe to social
factors. The first Europeans had purpose in that they undertook intentional acts
422          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

within socially constituted contexts. However, it was never their intention to
colonize Europe. That was a consequence of changes and organization within
their social lives. What we can be clearer about are the skills which they
brought to the negotiation of these social lives — the face-to-face interaction in
a complex society. These skills were generic to hominids throughout those
parts of the Old World then occupied. These skills dealt with rituals of attach-
ment to locales and attention to other people. The body was the prime resource
for individuals to perform their version of society and to engage others in their
projects. The resources which they used depended upon the conversion of pat-
terns of attention, grooming, caring and parenting into emotional ties. Such a
basis for society required frequent reaffirmation, close contact and affective
responses. Learning was vertically transmitted from one generation to another
in contexts supported by these emotional ties. The result was the faithful
copying of gestures and responses structured by these affective bonds nego-
tiated face to face. Repetition and redundancy are therefore expected in their
technical acts. The memory of the relationships was long lasting because the
performance of the bonds was contained in the muscle-memories of gesture and
action enacted between individuals and learnt by successive generations.
   The intimate bonds in such complex societies were elaborated through the
use of material resources to build effective networks. At this level co-operation
existed as the outcome of practical action. It was not a planned activity or a
new piece of behaviour. We do not need to look for the origins of such behavi-
our since it must have been part of the social legacy from the last common
ancestor five million years ago. But while we do not have to be surprised by evi-
dence for co-operative behaviour, we do need to recognize that the form it took
was constrained by the networks which supported it. Therefore, co-operation
at this time depended on co-presence and the negotiation of social relationships
using embodied resources.
   The archaeological evidence has well-preserved locales which show very
little formal structure. There are patterns as people came and went, and these
can now be examined as sets of gestures which followed the attaching and
detaching of individuals to and from gatherings. Searching for explanation
solely in terms of functional or practical survival misses the information con-
tained in the data. A very great variety of individual action resides here pre-
cisely because the taskscapes of these individuals did not involve the regular
movement of materials. Individuals usually built the next gathering from mate-
rials at hand rather than in hand. They must have carried babies, clothing, food
and raw materials but only if these confirmed, through movement over dis-
tance, those intimate and effective bonds performed in locales.
   The scale of movement is consistently small, as studies of raw materials
show. The landscape of habit rather than the social landscape contained these
people. As a result life was local and the principle of exclusion dominated rela-
tions beyond those negotiated in intimate and effective networks.
   These micro and macro scales and the rhythms which supported them con-
               The Palaeolithic societies of Europe                             42.3

 ditioned the patterns of cultural transmission. While these people no doubt
 added verbal accompaniments to their social performances, such utterances
 acted as an attention device rather than as an organizing principle. In the same
 way making objects was an important social act, defining individuals by what
 they did, rather than necessarily by what they made. But the outcomes are suf-
 ficiently standard to show that learning gestures and rhythms of action with,
 and away from, others produced a vertical pattern of cultural transmission that
 was heavily determined by the rules of face-to-face interaction. I cannot say
 whether males and females had different networks and even if they did there
 would have been great individual variation. But this is a question for further
 investigation. To sum up: they had lives of great variety within a small social
 neighbourhood of possibilities.


 Neanderthal complex society: 300,000 to 27,000 years ago

  Individual variation provides the basis for change in biological as well as cultu-
  ral systems. The locus for any selective developments resided in the effective
  network since here was the opportunity for negotiating more varied ties based
  upon a wide range of resources. This network differs from the intimate in the
  strength of the bonds which an individual forges. Thus ambiguity and alterna-
  tive interpretations of performances are introduced into social relationships.
. An individual’s intimate network is limited by time and numbers. But the
  quality of the ties which bind its members is such that relationships are more
  often than not unquestioned, unanalysed and hence unambiguous. The effec-
  tive component of an individual’s personal network has far more possibilities
  for competition, negotiation, creativity and hence ambiguity. The most
  obvious archaeological example of this occurs within the landscape of habit
  where raw materials start to be transferred over greater distances and in more
  altered states. After 300,000 BP chains of connection were extended in all
  regions of Europe. It was no longer necessary to see a gesture for its outcome,
  the artifact, to have significance. Therefore, the objects individuals produced
  now carried the potential to represent the act. The difference lies in making
  these away-from-body performances simpler, if not in execution then at least
  in meaning. They had a system of communication dedicated to social relations
  but it did still not act as one means of stretching relationships across time and
  space.
     The skills they employed were generic to being a hominid rather than
  specific to place and the construction of a social landscape. But in some
  instances we can see a move in the direction of such specific skills. For
  example, a greater degree of inter-regional variation can be found as well as
  more complex routines and longer chaines opératoires.
     Greater co-operation in hunting has been suggested by some for this
  period but is not surprising, reflecting only the larger scale of effective net-
  works which individual Neanderthals achieved. Much is made at this time of
424          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

pre-determined flint working, the levallois technique, and further planning to
secure prime-aged animals. But as we saw above, such anticipation was only
possible due to the networks that individuals lived in and which extend their
ambit of action. These changes in the acquisition, manufacture and use of
resources, be they stone or animal, do not measure changes in complexity.
Instead they reflect the latent properties of social relationships to change the
necessity for resources.
   This assessment of novelty in the archaeological record of the Neanderthals
stems directly from the social approach I have taken in this book. Moreover, it
has an important repercussion for evolutionary models. It is often stated that
our bodies are under darwinian selection whereas our culture is open to
Lamarckian development (Gould 1996:219-22). This is true to the extent that
culture represents ideas which are transmitted and accumulated outside the
body. We can therefore speed up and direct the course of cultural change in
ways which we cannot where biological evolution under natural selection is
concerned. Nowhere does this seem more so than with the manufacture and
design of artifacts.
   However, this may not always be the case and for a simple conceptual reason.
The lamarckian view of cultural change proposes a separation of object and
person to justify a progressive view of cultural development. Thought is applied
to objects in a very rational way so that spears become more accurate, huts
warmer, nets tougher, and technology lighter and more portable. Directed
problem solving, similar to anticipation and planning depth discussed above, is
essential to the structure of learning and memory that leads to cultural evolu-
tion in a material sense.
   I would contend that in this period there was no separation between object
and person. Such detachment remained a latent possibility rather than an
acknowledged act integral to social performance. Objects still needed to be ani-
mated by gestures to have significance. When they were used in the perfor-
mance of social life they formed part of the mutual environment which
surrounded the individual, the taskscape. What was being learnt and remem-
bered were the gestures and rhythms of individuals rather than the accumu-
lated products of history and the innovations which marked breakthroughs in
survival. These were not bright ideas to be worked on or adapted to changing
circumstances. The pace of change in the Palaeolithic was not slow because the
number of people and minds were so few (Clark 1957:249) and hence the like-
lihood of new ideas limited. Instead it was because of the use made of resources
to define social life in the intimate and effective components of an individual’s
personal network. The vertical transmission of knowledge, concerning chaines
opératoires, tracks and taskscapes, and which occurred as individuals moved
between locales within regions of varying sizes, greatly reduced the options for
new solutions to be selected.
   These Neanderthal societies, the product of large-brained hominids,
equipped with language to talk about themselves, alive with gestures and incor-
              The Palaeolithic societies of Europe                             425
porating objects, were, for all that variety and creativity, still exclusive, local
and complex. Theirs was a most successful hominid society. Well matched to
the longer rhythms of the ice ages and interglacials, they drew on renewable
resources to perform social lives of subtle differentiation.


Transition and complicated Cré-Magnon society: 60,000-21,000 years ago

The stretching of social relations across time and space, the release from our
primate heritage of proximity, marks the development of complicated social
life (Strum and Latour 1987). Paradoxically for any progressive view of change
in the Palaeolithic, the archaeological record becomes simpler, more under-
standable, at this point. It is possible, for example, to describe consistently the
time-space dimensions of archaeological cultures. This is partly due to an
increase in the variety of material culture to include ornament and display.
Furthermore, locales were now invested with association and meaning. They
not only hosted gatherings but also became social occasions and places. At the
macro scale these locales were structured within a social landscape, whereas
previously it was the landscape of habit alone which described action at this
scale. Objects became people and the externalization of memory and action
was possible due to the extended component of the personal network and the
global network this immediately defines.
   However, we should not assume that such understanding results from the
fact that we are now investigating people-like-us, modern humans in both limb
length and network skills. We must reject the impulse to raise the curtain at
this moment on the first act of civilization. Human society did not start at this
time, associated with new objects and the colonization of new lands (Gamble
1993a). We have not reached the first rung on the evolutionist ladder of bands,
tribes, chiefs and states.
   The European evidence indicates a gradual transition to the replacement of
Neanderthal people. This is emphasized by over 15,000 years of contact and co-
existence between Neanderthals and Cr6-Magnons in some parts of the continent.
   But rather than seeing this replacement as an absolute change — a new type
of society to match a new type of hominid — we see instead that its roots lie
deep in the effective and intimate networks, our hominid heritage. The use of
materials as symbolic resources in an individual’s extended network of nego-
tiated ties was foreshadowed in the gestures which made handaxes. The even-
tual use of artifacts as symbols, be they handaxes or carved horses, is an
exaptation, available for use by reason of their form rather than designed by
natural selection for that purpose (Gould and Vrba 1982). What makes them
symbols is their contribution to integrating and structuring what people do
when they are separated. In the same way the gestures involved with attaching
and detaching from gatherings and locales formed an existing rhythm for the
elaboration of ritual based on symbolic performance rather than material and
emotional resources alone.
426          The Palaeolithic societies of Europe

   Away from the structure that flows from co-presence, attention and percep-
tion new resources are required if, on the one hand, ambiguity and incoherence
are to be avoided and yet, on the other, the richness and creativity of social life
are to be preserved. Here is another example of the two sides of power.
Extension comes at a price; social life must become complicated, reduced to
simpler sequences of actions. The selective pressure for such change works on
the variety which each individual possesses biologically, historically and cul-
turally. The context for selection lies in the overlapping networks within
which individuals find themselves; those constraints and possibilities which
are inherent in a full personal and global network. These forces place demands
on time, attention and the decisions about allocating resources. Instead of
learning and memory being transmitted vertically there is now the possibility
of horizontal transmission. The effect was dramatic. Rather than the familiar
gestures, which empower an individual as an active social agent, being passed
between parent and child and within intimate, or at most effective networks,
they can now skip horizontally between networks (Cullen 1996:425). In a ver-
tical system faithful reproduction of sequences and rhythms is expected.
Culture and the individual are in the same evolutionary boat, so neither rocks
it. Stasis and gradualism are expected. But in a horizontal system such a benign
relationship need not exist. That curious alchemy takes over where culture
begins to negotiate us as much as we use it to moderate our lives. Extended net-
works can be used by individuals to negotiate their social position as well as
those of others who are bound into their intimate and effective spheres. Faithful
transmission gives way to asymmetrical power relations that now fall along the
lines of age, sex and genealogy. In particular, the principle that life was local
and access exclusive to the overlapping personal network of a small demo-
graphic unit has changed. Now life can be both exclusive and inclusive through
the extension of social life and the creation of an individual's global network.
Power, in the sense of harnessing and enhancing the lives of others to a partic-
ular symbolic performance, now takes on a simpler but more familiar aspect.
It replaced that same enhancing and harnessing based on the affective and
material resources used by Neanderthals.
   The Palaeolithic societies of Europe provide an opportunity to observe, in
some detail, the variable outcomes of social interaction over a period of some
500,000 years. I have not attempted a full explanation of why the extended net-
works developed late in human evolution. But I hope that by examining a
model for Palaeolithic society and a method for applying it to Palaeolithic data
we can now move in that direction. To attempt such a big question without
considering the societies either of the late glacial in Europe or from further
afield would run into accusations of parochial answers to a world inquiry.
However, what I hope to have shown is that with a social perspective we can
begin to move beyond reconstructions of Palaeolithic people as either stomach-
led or brain-dead. We can raise the curtain on a much more interesting past.
              NOTES




Chapter 1: Pulling aside the Palaeolithic curtain
1 No anthropologists contributed although Raymond Firth had been involved in
   planning the conference.
Zz I will not review here the so-called revisionist debate in hunter-gatherer studies
   (Barnard 1992, Schrire 1984, Wilmsen 1989). While I agree completely that con-
   temporary foragers are not and never can be analogues of prehistoric societies,
   I nonetheless concur with Wilmsen’s comment (1989:352) that accepting the
   revisionist critique does not mean ‘that nothing useful to the study of human
   evolution can come from investigating certain aspects of San culture, but only
   those aspects of knowledge and technique employed in foraging itself are rele-
   vant to a study of foragers. Furthermore, unless one insists that there is, after
   all, a Palaeolithic residue in San-speaking populations, there is no reason to
   single out these peoples for such investigations’ (1989:352, my emphasis).
   Following Birdsell (1958), the amount of rainfall is used to measure this gradi-
   ent.
   Richards (1987:306-31) provides a very useful survey of the literature on social
   evolution and reminds us that ‘Historically, [social evolution] has been one of
   those issues which perennially attract discussion from widely differing direc-
   tions, while being the clear province of no particular discipline at all. The
   upshot is that until the last decade or so, for all the spilt ink, it is hard to iden-
   tify a coherent body of cumulatively developing scientific or academic litera-
   ture on the subject. Too often what we have is a final chapter in which the
   author of a text unwinds, following the hard scientific slog, and waxes philo-
   sophical about the human condition’ (ibid.:207).
   What is striking is the way these arguments, derived from so many strands of
   evidence, are often presented. Several authors provide imaginative accounts of
   what it was like on those East African savannahs (see in particular Fox
   1967:175-80, Gamble 1993a:108-12, Humphrey 1983:48-55, Isaac 1976:483-5,
   Reynolds 1966:446-50) in order to reconstruct social relationships. These
   stories bear many points of similarity as they search for a fresh twist to the evo-
   lutionary tale. The form they take is partly determined by the fact that they are
   dealing with descriptions in ecological, or immediate time (Gamble 1993a:36-—7)
   to describe a great conflation of data from many hundreds of thousands of years
   and often widely separated in space.
   The other works were Freud (1913) Totem and taboo, Dawkins (1976) The
   selfish gene, and Trivers (1978) The evolution of reciprocal altruism.
   Another British social anthropologist, Radcliffe-Brown (1952) did give limited
   support to the study of social evolution although he was more inclined to con-
   sider it as conjectural history. This view has been followed by most of his British
   students (see Ingold 1986a).

                                                                                    427
428                  Notes to pages 17-36

8 Similarities can be seen with Gardner’s (1966:406) division of hunting societies
   into refugee societies under intercultural pressure (e.g. the !Kung and Paliyans)
   from powerful neighbours, and insular, unpressurized societies (e.g. the Tlingit
   and Walbiri).
   Constandse-Westermann and Newell (1991, Newell 1984, Newell and
   Constandse-Westermann 1986) have reassessed population numbers among
   North American hunters and gatherers. They propose two types of society,
   labelled Band level and Tribal level but which, confusingly, both contain bands
   and dialect tribes. Their argument is that population densities which would
   support endogamy and group closure (i.e. Band Society) are only found in Tribal-
   level societies (1991:Table 1). These are the Tribes discussed in Service (1971)
   and which are normally associated with food producing.
10 Constandse-Westermann and Newell claim that these Band Society models
   have failed to appreciate the existence of two levels of social organization
   among hunters and gatherers (1991:110); the Band and the Tribe. Steward and
   Service considered a division into composite and patrilocal bands, which has
   been the starting point for much of the previous discussion. Tribes were gener-
   ally equated with food producers. However, Newell and Constandse-
   Westermann (1986) maintain that during the European Mesolithic there was a
   gradual development from Band to Tribal level, that is from open to closed
   mating networks associated with tribes within the Tribal level which are dis-
   tinguished by dialects. A population density of 0.1 person per km? is, according
   to their ethnographic survey of 256 North American populations at or near first
   contact, an important but not sufficient threshold for this transition. The
   problem with their model is that it advances us no further towards an under-
   standing of what a prehistoric hunter-gatherer society might be. Social struc-
   ture for them is nothing more than a table of demographic and linguistic units
      (ibid.:259-60).
11] The traditional anthropological approach to this distinction was succinctly
    expressed by Gellner, ‘the idea was that a tribal society has a certain structure
    or organisation, each part of which imposed such pressures and sanctions on the
    individuals within it as to ensure that they behaved in a way that in turn sus-
    tained that structure, and so on for ever, or at any rate for quite a long time’
    (Gellner 1985:135). The anthropologist’s task was to investigate these struc-
    tures. The varied cultural expressions that these structures took were regarded
      as unimportant. Culture was a distraction and regarded as trivial. As Gellner
      put it, ‘structure was whom one could marry; culture was what the bride wore’
      (ibid.:136).

Chapter 2: The individual, society and networks
 ] An earlier, and shorter version of the models presented in Chapters 2. and 3 can
   be found in Gamble (1998).
 2 I would also agree with Mithen (1993a:394) that just because we cannot always
   observe individuals in the Palaeolithic record we should not reject them as an
   analytical device. Scientists have used such concepts as the unconscious, the
   gene, the atom or the molecule long before they had the opportunity to observe
   them directly rather than some proxy effect of their actions.
      This view is supported by Damas (1972:50) who sees kinship among the Copper
      Eskimo as a charter for potential alliances.
      See Kuper (1988:241-3) for further examples of how kinship models determined
      what anthropologists saw and what they chose to ignore.
              Notes to pages 38-88                                                 429

 5 I can highly recommend J. Turner’s (1991) discussion of Giddens and many
   other social theorists.
 6 Unfortunately Strum and Latour (1987:Figure 1) go on to develop their model of
   complicated social life by rather uncritically using the concept of primitive
   society which Kuper has warned against (1988:243). They regard hunter-gath-
   erers, agriculturalists and industrial societies as differentiated by an increasing
   level of material and symbolic means to construct society. This finds expres-
   sion in the ability to organize others on ever vaster scales. However, I do not see
   such implications for subsequent social evolution within their concept of com-
   plication. A similar view to Strum and Latour’s can be found in Maryanski and
   Turner (1992), where the elaboration of social structure by horticultural soci-
   eties puts people into a ‘social cage’ that violated our ancestral (i.e. hunter-gath-
   erer) genetic tendencies.
   Kephart (1950) calculated the possible number of relationships which can exist
   within a group. When 5 are in the group then 90 potential relationships exist.
   This figure rises to 7,133,616 with 15 group members.
   They conclude that the modern socially mobile, middle-class family is analo-
   gous to the monogamous gibbon — a lack of strong ties and reduced role segre-
   gation, a conclusion supported by Milroy’s (1987) study where social mobility
   was found to correlate with low-density personal networks.
   As Miller’s title The magical number seven plus or minus two declared, seven
   was his original figure although he was careful not to make exaggerated claims
   for it. Simon (1974:487, fn.2) recast the magic number as five chunks which
   could be stored in the short-term memory.


Chapter 3: A Palaeolithic framework: locales, rhythms and regions
 1 This aspect of embodiment has been studied by Chance and Larsen (1976) where
   different primate social organizations are supported by varied attention struc-
   tures.These are primarily hedonic (rewards and approval in return for display),
   agonistic (bound with threats), centric (individual surrounded by others) and
   acentric (individuals in a group continually divide their attention between
   themselves and the objects of the environment). See Wilson (1988:20) for dis-
   cussion.
  Binford’s specific point is that increasing dependence on hunting, which is
  inescapable with increasing latitude, will result in kinship playing less of an
  organizing role in spatial patterning. Security, rather than risk, selects for the
  social relationships and camping patterns that ensure hunting success. The
  contrast is between youth (endurance) and age (knowledge). When combined
  they provide the best strategy against failure. Since the old men have already
  passed their knowledge on to close kin, the camping arrangements do not
  follow the kinship pattern and camp mates during the winter are chosen for
  other reasons.
  Gilbert Ryle referred to this as knowing-how (Heidegger's position) and distin-
  guished it from knowing-that which represents the cartesian tradition of phi-
  losophy (Magee 1987:258).
  White (1993a:xxi) points out that Derrida refers to him in his Grammatology.
asFor Europe these include Bird (1981), Féblot-Augustins      (1993, 1997), Féblot-
  Augustins and Perlés (1992), Floss (1994), Geneste (1991, 1988a, 1988b), Kuhn
  (1995, 1992), Lebel (1992), Pasda (1994, 1996a, 1996b), Perlés (1992), Rensink
  (1993), Roebroeks, Kolen and Rensink (1988), Svoboda (1994a), Turg (1988,
  1990, 1992a, 1993}, White and Pettitt (1995). For South America, Africa and
430                Notes to pages 90-105

      Australia see Bar-Yosef (1991), Féblot-Augustins     (1990), Franco (1990, 1991,
      1994), Hiscock (1984], McNiven (1990), Potts (1988, 1993).
      None of these distances relates to migration distances (Rowley 1985) but
      instead to the expected movement of individuals through their social systems.
      However, this is possibly not a hominid feature alone. Rowell (1991) has dis-
      cussed the difficulties which face primatologists when studying a small part of
      an open social system whose extent is largely undetermined. She reviews the
      evidence, such as it is, for a population-wide element in animal social structure
      and concludes that ‘sociality at and above the group level among animals is con-
      cerned with and determined by place’ (Rowell 1991:267). The difficulty of
      detecting such an element is put down to Hinde’s (1976) observation that each
      level of social organization among primates has emergent properties which are
      not deducible from the lower level.
      The importance of larger-scale social units, such as the social landscape, has
      been discussed by Hill (1978) in terms of area-level adaptations. These regional
      adaptations, revealed through a study of linguistic exogamy, ‘are highly signifi-
      cant clues to the existence of systematically maintained long-distance contact
      networks in which we must see phenomena like refugee movements and tres-
      pass as systematic rather than as accidents or failures of the local level of adap-
      tation’ (Hill 1978:9, emphasis added).


Chapter 4: The first European societies 500,000-300,000 years ago
1 This corresponds to the end of the Olduvai magnetic reversal event at 1.66 Myr
  BP (Aitken 1990).
y A distinction is made between the Lower and Middle Pleistocene, which are rec-
  ognized internationally at particular geological sections, and the early and
  middle Pleistocene where correlation to these type sections is not possible but
  which through extrapolation can be assumed. Hence in this book Lower and
  Middle Pleistocene refer to the Brunhes/Matuyama boundary, an absolute
  marker, while archaeological sites dated to the early and middle Pleistocene are
  assigned a relative position within this standard chronology.
  Fifty years after the classic Alpine synthesis of Penck and Briickner (1909),
  Zeuner (1959:80) summarized the situation that locally the Mindel glaciation
  was often, though sometimes not by much, more extensive than the Riss. Their
  classic scheme of four glaciations, Gtinz, Mindel, Riss and Wiirm, separated by
  three interglacials, has now been abandoned as the ice-age framework in favour
  of the continuous record from the deep-sea cores which indicates many more
  glacial episodes during the Pleistocene.
  Roebroeks and Kolfschoten point out, however (1994:492), that locally the
  maximum advance can contradict this pattern. In parts of the Netherlands the
  Saale moraines are more extensive while in Russia those belonging to the Dnepr
  glaciation can exceed the Oka. This supports Zeuner’s earlier comment on the
  often comparable extent of the Riss and Mindel glaciations and reminds us that
  ice extent is controlled by many factors.
  In the Alpine scheme of Penck and Brtickner this would be part of the Mindel
  gravels (Sibrava 1986:chart 1). Shackleton (1987:187) describes OIS 12 as ‘an
  exceptionally large glaciation’ whose oxygen isotope values are only matched
      by OIS 16.
      Cromer IV is put by Zagwijn in OIS 11 (1992:figure 9), although this is too late
      if the succeeding Elsterian is to be correlated, as most believe, with OIS 12. I
      therefore prefer correlating Cromer IV with OIS 13 as seems to be the case at
      Boxgrove.
                  Notes to pages 105-19                                               431

    Abies cannot tolerate very low winter temperatures and prefers cool summers
    with high rainfall (Zagwijn 1992:590).
    Shackleton, using isotopic evidence, characterizes OIS 11 as the warmest inter-
    glacial in the last 1 Myr and notes that it follows a major faunal extinction event
    (1987:187).
    The evolutionary transition from Mimomys to Arvicola marks the boundary
    between the Biharian and Toringian faunas. The oldest example of Arvicola is
    found in the Cromer IV deposits from Karlich G in Germany (Roebroeks and
    Kolfschoten 1994:494).
 10 These are assigned to the early arvicolid form, Arvicola terrestris cantiana.
    Species with rootless molars are believed to have an evolutionary advantage in
    that the accelerated tooth eruption permits intensive wear so that more abra-
    sive plant material can be included in the diet (Koenigswald and Kolfschoten
     1996:214).
   Lil In broad terms Cordy’s division reflects the transition from Late Biharian to
       Toringian faunas. In the former Arvicola terrestris cantiana is found with
       species such as Talpa minor (a mole) and Trogontherium cuvieri (a giant beaver).
       This would include the faunas from Miesenheim I, Karlich G, Mauer, Boxgrove,
       Westbury sub Mendip and Sprimont. The Toringian faunas with an advanced
       arvicolid (Arvicola ssp A and B) are found with a more modern mammal fauna
       at Swanscombe and Bilzingsleben (Koenigswald and Kolfschoten 1996).
   12 The geographical origin of the woolly mammoth/woolly rhino fauna of the
       Upper Pleistocene has been traced by R-D. Khalke (1994:tab. 1) to Asian taxa
       with some elements from the Nearctic (horses and wolves) and Aethiopian (ele-
       phants and hyena) faunal provinces.
Pi ee: For example musk ox and leopard, beaver and reindeer in Mediterranean France
       at the site of Caune de |’Arago, sol G (Lumley 1979:39).
   14 This is level CXCA in unit 6 of the Cagny section (Antoine and Tuffreau
       1993:figure 3).
   15 Assuming preservation to be in a band 300 m wide in front of the cliff, then
       potentially some 9km/? of in-situ middle Pleistocene landscape may be pre-
       served.
   16 At an even wider scale further absolute dates have recently suggested that the
       age of the Java fossils is in the order of 1.8 Myr (Swisher et al. 1994). This would
       of course make them comparable in age to the earliest Homo erectus finds in
       East Africa. As a result serious consideration is now being given by those who
       accept these dates to the suggestions from Groves (1989) and Clarke (1990) that
       Homo habilis rather than Homo erectus was the hominid which first left Africa.
   Lf This material was also critically examined and the various claims debated at a
       European Science Foundation workshop held in Tautavel in November 1993
       (Roebroeks and Kolfschoten 1995).
   18 Genuine artifacts have been accepted by Raynal, Magoga and Bindon (1995:141)
       from Soleihac-Centre (MW region). The tephrostratigraphy, which is to be pre-
       ferred to the palaeomagnetic dates from the site, indicates an age of 0.5-0.6 Myr
     BP.
 19 I have a copy of Hazzledine Warren’s elegant paper (1914) which he annotated,
    as follows, in 1948 when sending it to F. E. Zeuner, ‘This paper needs revision
    of wording, but criticism has found no error of fact, and I confirm the conclu-
    sions.’
 20 Often quoted in textbooks.
 21 Not everyone agrees with the OIS 13 age for Boxgrove preferring a later age
    based upon isoleucine epimerization in non-marine molluscs which provides a
    relative chronology (Bowen et al. 1989).

                  -
432           Notes to pages 121-46

ae I was able to inspect these items thanks to the invitation of Dr J. Gibert and
     Professor M. Walker. In my opinion there is no reason to regard them as hominid
     artifacts (see Roe 1995).
23 A guild is defined by the resources it uses and not by the methods by which they
     are procured. Hence, human hunters and hyenas belong to the same guild as
     long as their main subsistence focus is on ungulates (see Stiner 1994).
24 Supporters of the long chronology still need to address the question of why the
     threshold of archaeological visibility is so low for finds which they accept as
     older than 500 Kyr BP (see Gamble 1995a).
pas) There is no evidence for a further alternative, namely storage and/or increasing
     procurement rates through technological improvements.
26 One of the urgent tasks which now faces environmental approaches to the
     Middle Pleistocene is the quantification of the spatial structure of these land-
     scapes — locally, regionally and for the entire continent. Furthermore, we need
     to agree from which end of this spatial framework we will begin the investiga-
     tion of hominids as colonizing animals.
2G This terminological house-cleaning can also be seen in northern France with
     the rejection of the term Abbevillian as a chronological indicator (Tuffreau and
     Antoine 1995) and the rejection of collections of geofacts among the archaeo-
     logical material from the Iberian peninsula (Raposo and Santonja 1995).
28 Ohel (1979) claimed that the Clactonian was merely an early stage in the knap-
     ping process of the Acheulean, although at the time his view gained little cre-
   dence, as the commentaries on his article reveal.
29 Earlier disagreements between geologists and archaeologists over the age of
   High Lodge delayed its publication for several years. The artifacts were seen as
   simply too advanced for the geological age which was being proposed.
30 Débitage is often translated as waste but this is misleading. Much better to
   retain the French term ‘cutting from’ with its close association to the technique
   of knapping rather than passing judgement on the value of one flake (a tool) over
   another (a waste flake). Kuhn (1995:81) appropriately calls it ‘stone butchery’.
31 Geneste (1991:Fig. 1) elaborates these differences further by drawing a distinc-
   tion between ramifying and scalariform reduction sequences.
32 Neither is recurrence restricted to levallois sequences. For example, Kuhn
   (1995:169) has commented on the existence of recurrent sequences in Italian
   Pontinian assemblages where the local raw materials are small pebbles and
   where classic levallois is rare (ibid.:47).
33 White’s study of the Hoxne flake material (pers. comm.) shows that in the
   Lower (ovate) industry 67 per cent of all flakes were made on fresh nodules. In
   the Upper (pointed) industry 69 per cent of all flakes were made on derived flint
   pebbles.
34 The elephant skull was found in level Al. Above this in the topmost, Alpha,
   level at the site some 2,000 stone artifacts and 800 bones of elephants, fallow
   deer and bovids were found. The shaft of a human femur was found in the in-
   situ sediments which cover the alpha level (Belli et al. 1991).
35 Applying the Hadza site-size:carcass-size regression, rhino and mammoth, to
   Bilzingsleben, would result in larger areas still since both weigh >1,000kg.
36 Gaudzinski (et al. 1996) comment that at Karlich Seeufer the evidence for a con-
   nection between the numerous wooden and faunal remains and the stone arti-
   facts cannot be demonstrated. The eight elephants were accumulated over a
   long period of time.
37 There are claims that some of the wood at Torralba is burnt (see James 1989).
38 The date of La Polledrara is still preliminary but is broadly Holsteinian in age,
             Notes to pages 148-88                                              433

   including OIS 12 (478-303 Kyr BP), and therefore comparable to other Italian
   ie sites such as Notarchirico, Fontana Ranuccio and Torre in Pietra (Mussi
   1995)
39 The association of wild cat and leopard with musk ox and reindeer in
   Mediterranean France (Table 4.13) makes this an extraordinary and very inter-
   esting faunal community.
40 Schwarcz (et al. 1988) have published dates of 185 Kyr and 210 Kyr BP for the
   cultural layer.
4] Nests of pebbles possibly rafted in with seaweed are common at Boxgrove
   (Roberts pers. comm.).
42 A fourth, adult, individual has recently been reported (Mania 1995:92).
43 Homo heidelbergensis, previously referred to as archaic Homo sapiens (Stringer
   1981), forms a variable but distinct regional group. It includes the Atapuerca,
   Steinheim, Swanscombe, Bilzingsleben, Arago and Petralona remains. Stringer
   (1981:12, 1984) sees no evidence for Homo erectus-grade fossils in Europe.
44 More recently, Mania (1995:92) describes zone V as follows: ‘an oval paved area
   with a diameter of 9m. It consists of pebbles and bone fragments of nut to fist
   size. There were no objects found lying on top of this paved area.’ Excavations
   since 1986 have extended the area.
45 Svoboda (1987) has compared the small-sized, non-biface stone industries from
   Bilzingsleben, Arago and Vértesszollés.
46 Recent reviews by James (1989) and Rigaud (et al. 1995) have concluded that
   while fire was present on many of these sites it was not controlled. Recent
   claims for a stone-lined hearth and fire-altered rock from Menez-Drégan in
   Brittany (Monnier 1994), dated by ESR to between 350-500 Kyr BP, need to be
   treated with caution until the full results are published.
47 I chose this shelter since it has, at least by eye, the most convincing shape.

Chapter 5: Neanderthal societies 300,000 to 60,000 years ago
 1 The local, i.e. European, evolution from ‘archaic’ Homo sapiens (=Homo hei-
   delbergensis) to Homo neanderthalensis is supported by the recent finds of
   complete crania from Atapuerca, Sima de los Huesos (Arsuaga et al. 1993:536).
   The dates help dispense with interpretations that two, or even three, climatic
   cycles are represented in the Swanscombe sequence (Conway, McNabb and
   Ashton 1996).
   Similarly ‘young’ dates obtained for Bilzingsleben (Harmon, Glazek and Nowak
   1980) and Vértesszéllés (Schwarcz et al. 1988) should also be rejected. On a more
   positive note, for many years the age of the travertine site of Ehringsdorf, in
   eastern Germany, was bitterly contested with ages ranging through what would
   now be OIS 5e, 7 and 9. U-series dates have now sorted the dating out to most
   people’s satisfaction. The lower travertine at the site is OIS 7 in age (Blackwell
   and Schwarcz 1986).
   Dansgaard (et al. 1993:Fig. 1) identify twenty-four interstadials between the last
   glacial maximum in OIS 2 and the end of OIS 5e. The seven interstadials
   referred to by Behre (1989) are those of longest duration which can be reconciled
   with pollen horizons.
   Interstadials are distinguished from interglacials by the comparatively weak
   response of arboreal taxa, especially deciduous species, to ameliorations in
   climate.
   It seems clear that the Amersfoort interstadial should now be seen as part of the
   Brorup (OIS 5c) interstadial.
434             Notes to pages 188-260

 7 Guiot (et al. 1989:313) also make the case that ice formation was initiated
   during these forested sub-stages OIS 5a and OIS 5c, indicative of a cold but
   humid continent.
   Quaternary scientists are now wondering why the present interglacial seems
   apparently so stable by comparison with OIS Se.
   The site of Mikhajlovskoe on the lower northern Donets river is cautiously
   regarded by Hoffecker (1987:277) as last interglacial in age.
   Hoffecker (et al. 1991:117) report that absolute dates from the site are inconsis-
   tent and so cannot resolve this problem.
      Locht (et al. 1994) have not ruled out an OIS 6 age until absolute age estimates
      can be obtained. Roebroeks and Tuffreau (1994) place it in OIS 6.
      Two other early European sites have produced ochre, Becov in Czechoslovakia
      and Ambrona in Spain (Roebroeks 1988:40).
      A blade is defined as a flake which is at least twice as long as it is wide.
      Named after the Paris suburb where it was first recognized as a knapping tech-
    nique.
    The thickness of level VIII varied between 20 and 80cm.
    ‘With two intersecting surfaces of lateral and distal convexity, one serving for
    the preparation of the striking platform, the other for the flaking of the éclat
    préférentiel’ (Tuffreau and Antoine 1995).
    See Arts and Cziesla (1990) for a comprehensive bibliography 1880-1988 of refit-
    ting studies.
    The exaggerated claims for the great age of Korylevo, a site claimed to be of
    Cromerian age, are widely regarded as unreliable (Ranov 1991).
    This intensification is a feature of the archaeological record of the Mesolithic
    where populations of northern Europe coped with a much reduced animal
    biomass and a succession of forest environments (Gamble 1986c). This model
    has also been applied to questions of global colonization (Gamble 1993a).
    These are red deer, horse, steppe ass and wolf.
    Wallertheim is dated to OIS 5d and equivalent to level C in the current excava-
    tions (Conard et al. 1995a). Gaudzinski’s (1992) analysis of Wallertheim B1 is
    based on the 1928 excavations at the site by Schmidtgen. Recent work by
    Conard (et al. 1995a, et al. 1995b) has uncovered further levels and a correspond-
    ingly varied taphonomic and faunal history for the site.
22 The photograph of the spear resting under an elephant rib is the only published
    record (Thieme and Veil 1985:Abb. 3) to support the killing scenario favoured
    by most archaeologists. Iwould encourage them to undertake some experimen-
    tal work on the efficacy of a 281-cm-long stick, which has an average thickness
    of only 2.5 cm, in killing a 4-tonne elephant with a clean hit as is often implied
    (M. Roberts pers. comm.). Experiments by Frison (1989) using spears tipped with
    Clovis projectile points to penetrate elephant hide showed how important it
    was to have a stone projectile point as part of the weapon system if you are going
    to behave like a ‘big-game’ hunter. Of course hunters can be sneaky and wait for
    the animal to bleed to death!
23 Contemporary does not necessarily mean same day or even same year but that
    the artifacts were deposited during the same climatic conditions that would
    have affected all visits to this locale.
24 The dating of Biache to a very late OIS 7/early OIS 6 age is based on TL dating
    and environmental indicators (Tuffreau and Sommé 1988:118-19)
v0) The dating of the Lazaret level is far from secure. Level III of stratigraphic unit
    c lies above the beaches which are dated absolutely to 200-300 Kyr BP and
    beneath the stalagmite floor with dates of 114-66 Kyr BP. This suggests an OIS
    6 or late Saalian-age date (Valensi 1991).
              Notes to pages 263-309                                              435

26 Co-operative behaviour is found to a varying degree among all social mammals
   where, as with chimpanzee or lion hunting, it is normally tied to their equiva-
   lent of the intimate network.

Chapter 6: The rhythms of social life, 60,000-21,000 years ago: the transition
from the Middle to Upper Palaeolithic in Europe
  1 The recent extraction of ancient DNA from the Neander Valley skeleton, pos-
    sibly 50 Kyr old, and its interpretation as similar to but significantly distinct
    from the DNA of modern people is powerful evidence for the supporters of pop-
    ulation replacement (Ward and Stringer 1997).
    See Stringer and Gamble (1993:Appendix 1) for fuller listing.
    Dansgaard et al. (1993) place Denekamp at c. 35 Kyr BP which is not in agree-
  WON
    ment with C14 dated pollen profiles (Behre 1989). The interstadial stages 5, 6
    and 7 in the Greenland core should instead be correlated with Denekamp while
    stages 8-11 are equivalent to Hengelo. These discrepancies point to the need for
    a fully calibrated system.
    The problems of pollen profiles in cave sediments have been discussed by
    Turner and Hannon (1988). Percolation of pollen through the limestone joint
    structure and then through the sediments makes interpretation extremely haz-
