African Civilizations


This major new revised edition of African Civilizations re-examines the physical
evidence for developing social complexity in Africa over the last six thousand
years. Unlike the two previous editions, it is not conﬁned to tropical Africa but
considers the whole continent. Graham Connah focuses upon the archaeological
research of two key aspects of complexity, urbanism and state formation, in ten
main areas of Africa: Egypt, North Africa, Nubia, Ethiopia, the West African
savanna, the West African forest, the East African coast and islands, the Zim-
babwe Plateau, parts of Central Africa, and South Africa. The book’s main
concern is to review the available evidence in its varied environmental settings
and to consider possible explanations of the developments that gave rise to it.
Extensively illustrated, including new maps and plans, and offering an extended
list of references, this book provides essential reading for students of archaeology,
anthropology, African history, black studies, and social geography.

g r a h a m c o n n a h is Emeritus Professor of Archaeology at the University of
New England, Australia, and a visiting fellow at the Australian National Univer-
sity, Canberra. His earlier book Three Thousand Years in Africa (1981) won the
Amaury Talbot Prize. Other publications include The Archaeology of Benin
(1975), The Archaeology of Australia’s History (1993), Kibiro: The Salt of
Bunyoro, Past and Present (1996), Transformations in Africa (1998), Forgotten
Africa: An Introduction to Its Archaeology (2004), also translated into German,
French, Italian, and Portuguese, and Writing about Archaeology (2010). He was
awarded the Order of Australia in 2000 for his contributions to African and
Australian archaeology.
African
Civilizations
An archaeological perspective

third edition

Graham Connah
Australian National University
32 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10013-2473, USA

Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.

www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107621275
© Graham Connah 2016
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2016
Printed in the United States of America
A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Connah, Graham, author.
African civilizations : an archaeological perspective / Graham Connah, Australian National
University. – Third edition.
     pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 978-1-107-01187-8 (Hardback : alk. paper)
1. Africa, Sub-Saharan–Antiquities. 2. Africa, Sub-Saharan–Civilization.
3. Prehistoric peoples–Africa, Sub-Saharan. 4. Excavations (Archaeology)–Africa,
Sub-Saharan. I. Title.
dt352.3.c66 2016
9670 .01–dc23 2015032522
isbn 978-1-107-01187-8 Hardback
isbn 978-1-107-62127-5 Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
of URLs for external or third-party Internet Web sites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such Web sites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.
In memory of Nora Fisher McMillan
Contents

    List of ﬁgures page viii
    Preface and acknowledgements xi

 1 The context 1
 2 Origins: social change on the lower Nile 17
 3 The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa 43
 4 Sudanic genesis: Nubia 69
 5 Isolation: the Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands 111
 6 Opportunity and constraint: the West African savanna 149
 7 Achieving power: the West African forest and its fringes 185
 8 Indian Ocean networks: the East African coast and islands 221
 9 Cattle, ivory, and gold: social complexity in Zambezia 260
10 Central Africa: the Upemba Depression, Interlacustrine Region, and
   Far West 299
11 Settlement growth and emerging polities: South Africa 330
12 What are the common denominators? 347

    References 355
    Index 399




                                                                        vii
Figures

1.1  Location of the areas discussed in this book page 13
1.2  Approximate chronology of the areas of social complexity discussed in
     this book 15
2.1 Principal archaeological sites and places on the lower Nile 20
2.2 One side of the ‘Cities Palette’ fragment 24
2.3 Plan of the Middle Kingdom town of Kahun 25
2.4 Plan of the Middle Kingdom fortress of Buhen 26
2.5 Reconstruction of part of the New Kingdom city of El-Amarna 27
2.6 Plan of Deir el-Medina village at Thebes 28
2.7 Plan of the Fatimid city of al-Qahira, founded in AD 969 29
2.8 Wooden model of a peasant ploughing with oxen 31
2.9 Two Giza pyramids: Menkaure’s in foreground, Khafre’s in
     distance 33
2.10 Plan of part of the Graeco-Roman city of Berenike 38
2.11 Main trade routes during the Roman period in the Indian Ocean 40
3.1 Principal archaeological sites, places, and people in North Africa 45
3.2 Plan of the Punic city of Kerkouane, Tunisia 50
3.3 Plan of the Large South Baths at Timgad, Algeria 52
3.4 Plan of the central area of the Roman city of Sabratha, Libya 54
3.5 Plan of the Roman city of Thamugadi, Algeria 55
3.6 Plan of the Islamic city of Qsar es-Seghir, Morocco 57
3.7 Silver denarius of Hadrian, commemorating visit to Africa 60
3.8 Reconstruction of a Roman olive-press, southeast of Tripoli 61
3.9 Marble portrait head of Septimius Severus, from Djemila, Algeria 64
3.10 Arabic inscription from Durbi Takusheyi, northern Nigeria 67
4.1 Principal archaeological sites and places on the middle Nile 71
4.2 Plan of Kerma during its ‘Classic’ period 79
4.3 Upper part of a stone statue of Taharqa, from Pnubs, near Kerma 83
4.4 Plan of Meroë, in Sudan 85
4.5 Meroitic ‘Upper Town’ of Hamadab, near Meroë 87
4.6 Plan of Tomb 95 at Ballana, Egypt 91
4.7 Plan of Arminna West, Egypt 94
4.8 Cross-section of castle-house at Kulubnarti 95
4.9 Pastoral scenes on two bronze bowls from Karanog, Egypt 97
5.1 Principal archaeological sites and places in Ethiopia and Eritrea 113

viii
                                                                       Figures

5.2    Inside the temple at Yeha, Ethiopia 119
5.3    Stelae 3 and 6 at Aksum, Ethiopia 122
5.4    Plan of the ‘Dongur Mansion’ at Aksum 127
5.5    Plan of Matara, Eritrea, showing Aksumite urban layout 128
5.6    Beta Giyorgis, one of the Lalibela rock-cut churches, Ethiopia 131
5.7    The castle of Emperor Fasiladas, Gondar, Ethiopia 132
5.8    Glass goblet from a tomb in the Gudit Stelae Field, Aksum 139
5.9    Aksumite bronze coin of Armah, with Christian cross on reverse 140
6.1    West African environmental zones showing major yam cultivation 152
6.2    Principal archaeological sites of the West African Holocene 156
6.3    Plan of Dakhlet el Atrous I, Mauritania 158
6.4    Plan of Jenné-jeno, Mali, showing growth 159
6.5    Plan of Building Sequence 6, at Tegdaoust, Mauritania 163
6.6    Magnetogram of the settlement at Zilum, north-east Nigeria 166
6.7    Plans of the Kano city walls, Nigeria, showing phases of growth 168
6.8    Elite burial in Tumulus 5, Durbi Takusheyi, northern Nigeria 171
6.9    Precolonial trade routes and commodities in West Africa 182
7.1    Plan of the site of Bono Manso, Ghana 193
7.2    Plan of the site of Asantemanso, Ghana 194
7.3    Plan of Abomey, Bénin, showing royal palaces 196
7.4    Plan of the city walls of Old Oyo, Nigeria 197
7.5    ‘Bronze’ casting of an Oni of Ife 199
7.6    Plan of Ife city walls, Nigeria 200
7.7    Shaft containing mass sacriﬁce, Benin City, Nigeria 201
7.8.   Ground plan of Ogiamien’s House, Benin City, Nigeria 202
7.9    Earthwork enclosures in the Benin City area 204
7.10   Plan of the burial at Igbo-Ukwu, Nigeria 207
8.1    Principal archaeological sites on the East African coast and islands 223
8.2    Principal archaeological sites in the Lamu Archipelago, Kenya 226
8.3    East Africa in the Eurasian and African world system 227
8.4    Plan of Gedi, Kenya, showing two construction phases 233
8.5    Plan of Shanga, Kenya 235
8.6    Plan of Takwa, Kenya 237
8.7    Examples of Triangular Incised Ware sherds 241
8.8    Antananarivo, Madagascar, in the 1850s 244
8.9    Section through the Small Domed Mosque, Kilwa 248
9.1    Distribution of Zimbabwe- and Khami-style sites 263
9.2    Principal archaeological sites in Zambezia 268
9.3    Stonework in the Hill Ruin at Great Zimbabwe 273
9.4    Great Zimbabwe: the Maund Ruin 275
9.5    Commoner housing at Great Zimbabwe 276

                                                                             ix
Figures

9.6    Plan of Great Zimbabwe showing stone structures and daga huts 277
9.7    Zvongombe South, Zimbabwe, reconstructed layout 280
9.8    Plan of Khami, showing stone structures and daga huts 283
9.9    Spatial analysis maps of Zimbabwe sites 291
10.1   Principal archaeological sites in Central Africa 301
10.2   Archaeological sites in the Upemba Depression,
       Democratic Congo 307
10.3   Early Kisalian burial at Kamilamba, Democratic Congo 309
10.4   Principal archaeological sites in the Ugandan Interlacustrine
       Region 312
10.5   Plan of earthworks at Bigo, Uganda 314
10.6   Plan of Ntusi, Uganda 316
10.7   Traces of fourteenth- to ﬁfteenth-century circular houses at Ntusi 317
10.8   Axes and other iron artefacts in burial, Corisco Island, Equatorial
       Guinea 319
10.9   Ceramic head from Luzira, near Kampala, Uganda 326
11.1   Distribution of stone-walled settlement units on the South African
       Highveld 332
11.2   Types of stone-walled settlement units on the South African
       Highveld 335
11.3   Settlement unit at Molokwane, North-West Province, South
       Africa 338
11.4   Centre of the settlement of Marothodi, North-West Province, South
       Africa 342




x
Preface and acknowledgements

I started to write this book in 1983, with previous editions appearing in
1987 and 2001 and a Japanese translation in 1993. Any book that originated
so long ago and has remained in print for so long will become seriously out of
date, but this is particularly the case for a publication about later African
archaeology, which has seen an enormous increase in research activity in
recent years. I am therefore very grateful to Cambridge University Press for
the opportunity to provide a third edition. In doing so, I feel it essential to
stress two points. First, people are sometimes unconvinced about the newness
of new editions, but this really is a new edition and I hope that it will assist
those who have ignored the second edition and continued to cite the outdated
ﬁrst edition. Second, preparing a new edition of a book will inevitably be
constrained to some extent by the thinking that inﬂuenced its original content
and form, in this instance many years ago; the only way to prevent this is to
write a completely new book.
  Failing this, what is new about this ‘new’ edition? First, it is larger and
covers the whole continent, not just tropical Africa, like the two previous
editions. This has meant the addition of three completely new chapters, on
Egypt, North Africa, and South Africa. Although the book is consequently
longer, the extra chapters could only be added by also shortening some of the
chapters that already existed. In addition, those chapters have required
considerable additions to include recent research, and as a result parts of
some of them have been substantially rewritten or subjected to numerous
smaller changes. Inevitably this has resulted in the deletion of older source
material, wherever it could be replaced by newer information. This has
included the replacement of some illustrations, as well as the addition of
new ones. The whole process has taken more than three years but I remain
concerned about recent publications that might have been missed; in spite of
the Internet, accessing sources remains one of the main difﬁculties for the
writers of syntheses. However, as far as possible, I have tried to include a
representative sample of recently published material. I hope that not too
many people will think that I have ignored their work.
  Second, although this does not pretend to be a theoretical study, there are
inevitably theoretical implications in the way that its subject matter has been
treated. As with previous editions, it has been my intention to examine the
archaeological evidence for emerging social complexity in Africa,

                                                                             xi
Preface and acknowledgements

particularly the evidence for urbanization and the formation of states. These
subjects have a very large literature, particularly concerning social theory,
and in the previous editions I tried to outline the most signiﬁcant of the
relevant ideas in the opening chapter. Given the main purpose of the book,
however, which is to ask of the physical evidence how we know what we
think we know, it is impossible to give adequate space to theoretical matters,
and in this new edition I have further compressed the relevant material as
well as updating some of its more important aspects. One review of the ﬁrst
edition was headed ‘Complex societies made simple’ and I have never been
able to decide whether this was intended as an insult or a compliment.
Whatever the case, is it a crime to attempt straightforward explanations of
complex data?
   In attempting those explanations, the book continues to emphasize geo-
graphical and environmental matters, but sociopolitical aspects are now given
greater attention than formerly. The changes in human societies that led to the
development of cities and states were clearly inﬂuenced by many external
factors, but in the end it was changes in the societies themselves and the way
that they organized themselves that were of greatest importance. Such changes
took place in many different ways and sometimes did not happen at all. There
is no magic formula to explain their occurrence or absence, and old explan-
ations involving social evolution and the emergence of so-called civilization
have ceased to be adequate. Unfortunately, archaeology is often insufﬁciently
informative on these matters, and our understanding is compounded by the
variety of ways used by different researchers to extract meaning from the
evidence that is available. It is to be hoped that as time passes, the picture will
become clearer.
   So many colleagues have assisted in my work on this and previous editions
that it is impossible to thank them all here. Instead, the text is heavily
referenced to the sources used, and the captions of the illustrations acknow-
ledge the origin of those that are not my own or that have been redrawn.
Great efforts have been made to obtain permission to reproduce copyright
material where necessary, and in cases where copyright holders could not be
contacted, usually because of the passage of time, the author would like to
hear from them and offers his apologies for the omission. Some line drawings
have been updated by Andrew Stawowczyk Long and/or myself, but I remain
grateful to Douglas Hobbs, who did the initial work on many of them long
ago. Finally, as for previous editions, I remain greatly in debt to Beryl
Connah, whose continuing support and encouragement has been vitally
important.




xii
                                             Preface and acknowledgements

  In the meantime, a whole generation of Africanist archaeologists has grad-
ually departed the scene, leaving a legacy of research on which a younger and
more numerous generation can build, and one that increasingly includes
African scholars as well as those from many other parts of the world. I wish
them all well in their future endeavours.

                                   Graham Connah
                                   School of Archaeology and Anthropology
                                   Australian National University
                                   Canberra




                                                                         xiii
Chapter 1
The context


Africa is huge; it is so big that you can put the United States and Australia into
it and still have a bit left over. It extends from about 37 north to about 35
south and has an altitudinal range from depressions that are below sea level
to mountain peaks that exceed 5,000 metres. As a result it has an incredible
diversity of environments. It contains some of the driest deserts in the world,
and yet has three of the world’s major rivers: the Nile, the Niger, and the
Congo. Some of the hottest places on earth are in Africa, and yet there
are glaciers on its highest mountains. There are steaming rainforests and
dry savanna grasslands, low-lying river valleys and high plateaux, extensive
deserts and gigantic lakes, mangrove coasts and surf-pounded beaches. This
is only an impressionistic picture of the very large number of differing environ-
ments in the African continent. In reality the major zones merge into one
another, resulting in an even greater variety of conditions that have been
further complicated by climatic variation through time.
   For at least 2 million years, human beings have been learning how to get the
best out of the kaleidoscope of African environments. Those environments
have not determined what men and women could do, nor could the latter
ignore the environments in which they have lived. Instead there has been a
dynamic relationship between the two, in which people have sought to turn
to their advantage the opportunities offered by each environment and to come
to terms with its constraints. First as hunters, gatherers, and ﬁshers who
gradually intensiﬁed their exploitation of available resources, then as pastor-
alists and cultivators, and eventually as city-dwellers, artisans, and traders,
men and women have continued to interact with their environment, retaining a
remarkable variety of strategies for doing so.
   Archaeology is a major source of information about Africa’s past.
Documentary sources for African history are limited: their coverage often
chronologically patchy and geographically fragmented. For large areas of
Africa, particularly tropical Africa, their time depth is restricted to the last
century or two. A uniform divide between prehistory and history does not
exist on the African continent: some peoples and places, such as Pharaonic
Egypt and Aksumite Ethiopia, developed writing several millennia ago; others,
such as Benin City and Zimbabwe, lacked a written record until recent times;
still others, such as Borno and Kongo, had contemporary accounts for a short
period in the past, after which there is virtual silence. In addition, many of the

                                                                                1
African Civilizations

documentary sources that do exist are based on the observations of outsiders
who did not always understand what they observed or were prejudiced in
their assessments. Such documentary evidence that does exist is often invalu-
able, but Africanist historians have also given considerable attention to oral
sources of history. However, it seems unlikely that oral sources can throw
much light on periods more than, say, 500 years ago. Indeed, Jan Vansina
(1973: xiv) thought that 250 years was often the maximum. In these circum-
stances, scholars interested in Africa’s past have turned to a variety of other
information sources. Thus, art and architectural history (Garlake 2002)
and linguistics (Blench 2006) have contributed useful information, as have
ethnographic and anthropological investigations. In addition, other disciplines
have been of assistance, such as investigations of animals and plants in the
past, including genetics (van der Veen 1999; Blench and MacDonald 2000).
Relevant research has also included ethnoarchaeological studies, in which
archaeology is employed to examine contemporary societies in order to test
interpretations applied to societies in the past.
  Archaeologists have spent a lot of time over the last few decades arguing
about the nature of archaeology (Renfrew and Bahn 2008). Basically the
subject is concerned with the study of the physical evidence of past human
activities, in order to reconstruct those activities or at least construct what we
think they might have been. This, it is hoped, will enable us to understand
the undocumented past or to increase our understanding of inadequately
documented periods of the past. Archaeological evidence, however, has its
own strengths and weaknesses, and we are still learning ways of gaining the
maximum reliable information from it. Its greatest advantage is that it enables
us to examine things that were actually made and used by people in the past
and allows us to investigate the impact that those people had on their environ-
ment. We can discover what human beings actually did, not merely what they
or others said that they did. The main disadvantage of archaeological evidence
is that it almost always reﬂects only part of the activities of past men and
women. The differential effects of human behaviour, of climate and soil
chemistry, and of subsequent disturbance by either natural or human agencies
cause most archaeological evidence to be rather like a jigsaw puzzle from
which two-thirds of the pieces are lost, whilst many of the rest have the picture
worn off or corners missing. These strengths and weaknesses of archaeological
evidence can be seen in this book. On the lower and middle Nile, in North
Africa, and in the Ethiopian Highlands we have the remains of cities often
built of stone or earth, which have clear indications of centralized authority,
so that archaeological investigations have added greatly to what is known
from documentary sources. In contrast, archaeology has contributed much less
information for Central Africa, where urban settlements were constructed

2
                                                                      The context

mainly of grass, wood, and other organic materials and occupied by people
who did not express their identity in more permanent building materials and
did not create written records. Unfortunately, however, archaeological
evidence has another drawback: it results from human endeavour, and archae-
ologists (just like other people) tend to vary in the effort that they expend
on different problems. Thus it is easy to search for settlement sites in the
open grasslands of the African savanna but difﬁcult to do so in the tangled
undergrowth of the rainforest. Similarly, it is easier to locate the sites of stone
ruins than those of timber buildings and it is easier to excavate mud-brick
structures than those of pisé. As a result, African archaeological distribution
maps tend to show the distribution of archaeological research, rather than that
of archaeological evidence.
   Despite these problems, archaeology has powerful research potential. No
longer merely concerned with studying artefacts, archaeologists have turned
their attention to the study of human behaviour and its change through time.
This is as it should be, for over a long time scale it is probably they, increas-
ingly along with geneticists, linguists, and others, who can throw much light
on when and how and why human societies changed in the way that they did.
This book, for instance, attempts to assess how much archaeology can tell us
about two aspects of the development of social complexity in the African
continent: the growth of cities and the appearance of states. The purpose
is not to dispute with historians or social anthropologists or sociologists
or geographers, who have their own ideas and have developed a number of
explanatory theories, but to evaluate the archaeological data and to determine
what it has to contribute to the debates on these issues. In doing this, it will
also become apparent that future archaeological ﬁeldwork will need more
sophisticated research designs than has sometimes been the case in the past.
   For most of the time that human beings have been in Africa, they scavenged,
collected, hunted, and ﬁshed for their food, and there were few of them,
widely scattered across the landscape. Nevertheless, archaeological evidence
(Phillipson 2005) suggests that from about 200,000 years ago people were
adapting to virtually all the varied African environments. Subsequently, it is
likely that the size of some groups increased and that overall population levels
rose. This probably led to pressure on food resources, which during the period
between about 18,000 and about 7,000 years ago caused intensiﬁed exploit-
ation strategies, such as the harvesting of grass seeds, the use of specialized
ﬁshing equipment, and possibly the management of wild animals. These
changes occurred at various dates during this overall period, in parts of what
is now the Sahara, in parts of the Nile Valley, and in some areas of the East
African savanna. It seems likely that they then led to the development of food
production, which occurred in the northern half of Africa by about the sixth

                                                                                 3
African Civilizations

millennium BC. Thus Africans have been farmers for less than half of 1 percent
of their history, but the development of farming has had a major accelerating
effect on the evolution of human culture and on social organization. The
domestication of sorghum, millet, teff, African rice, wheat, barley, yam, and
a host of other plants, plus the domestication of cattle, sheep, and goats,
resulted in larger human populations, greater densities of population, and a
growth in human sedentism. The development of food production in Africa
arose from both indigenous experimentation and inﬂuences from South-West
Asia. The evidence indicates that much of the plant domestication was
an African achievement and that some cattle were probably domesticated in
Africa, unlike sheep and goats whose domestication apparently resulted
from Asiatic initiatives. It is in the context of African farming that most
subsequent cultural changes in the continent must be seen.
  One of the most important of these changes was the adoption of iron
metallurgy, which in most of Africa took place from about the middle of the
ﬁrst millennium BC or somewhat earlier and greatly improved the efﬁciency
of tools and weapons. Copper and copper-alloy metallurgy pre-dated iron
metallurgy but was mainly practised in the lower and middle Nile Valley and
North Africa. So great was the impact of the adoption of iron on both the
means of production and the means of destruction during the last two millen-
nia in Africa that archaeologists have tended to emphasize it and to overlook
other matters. The period has been called ‘the African Iron Age’, terminology
that is difﬁcult to apply chronologically and that distracts attention from other
important changes that were occurring in some African societies. It seems that
over the last 5,000 years or more there was a rapid growth of interaction
between human groups. This was probably brought about by a combination
of population growth, increasing sedentism, ecological diversity, and an
uneven distribution of resources. Certain animal and plant products, salt,
copper, iron, and other commodities were increasingly exchanged between
different population centres, and it was into such exchange networks that
long-distance trade, both within and outside Africa, was eventually able to
tap. At the local level, such intergroup dependence encouraged a complex
interaction between individual settlements, so that some became larger and
more important than others and in time came to control other settlements in
their immediate region. At the same time there was increasing specialization
and social stratiﬁcation amongst the people living in the larger settlements. In
certain instances, elite groups within hierarchical societies gained control of
crucial resources, which became the basis of their political domination of the
rest of the population in their region. It could have been in some such manner
that there emerged in parts of Africa the cities and states that were the
principal manifestations of social complexity and that form the subject of this

4
                                                                       The context

book. These developments ﬁrst took place in the lower and middle Nile Valley
and in Africa north of the Sahara, but they also occurred in tropical Africa,
particularly during the last two millennia. This book is an archaeologist’s
attempt to explain how and why this came to be the case.
   In retrospect, many of the earlier attempts at such explanation now seem
simplistic and even naïve, a range of theories from each of which its propon-
ents claimed understanding could be gained. There was almost a competition
to produce a theory that would explain everything. More recently this some-
what mechanistic, formulaic approach has been replaced by treating the
subject as one aspect of cultural evolution, seen not as a step-like series of
changes, as was once thought, but as a process varying in tempo and pattern
from region to region and characterized by socioeconomic multicausality
(Feinman and Manzanilla 2000). Nevertheless, some scholars considering
the origins of cities and states as global phenomena still saw them as compon-
ents of what they called ‘the emergence of civilization’, generally concentrating
on West Asia, Pakistan–India, China, and Central and South America, with
Egypt the only part of Africa given attention (Daniel 1968). The reason for this
was the essentially nineteenth-century concept of ‘civilization’, which to
Gordon Childe and many of his generation, principally trained in Greek and
Roman classical history, implied the existence of writing (Childe 1957: 37).
This was a Eurocentric view, in which civilization was deﬁned by the extent to
which other societies conformed to nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century
European ideals. The use of the word ‘civilization’ in the title of this book is
therefore intended to be provocative, to remind readers that Africa had its own
‘civilizations’. However, after Childe the concept of civilization continued to
attract prescriptive deﬁnition, although this became broader as time went on
(e.g., Kluckhohn 1960: 400; Renfrew 1972: 11; Redman 1978: 218–20). In
general it was thought that civilization implied cities, and vice versa, and this
led to a debate about the deﬁnition of the word ‘city’, in which a list of ten
criteria by Childe became inﬂuential (Childe 1950: 3, 9–16). The latter
reﬂected the circumstances of city development and state formation in South-
West Asia and, like Childe’s deﬁnition of civilization, were of limited value in
other parts of the world. As with the word ‘civilization’, subsequent attempts
to deﬁne the term ‘city’ became increasingly generalized (e.g., Sjoberg 1960;
Mumford 1961: 85; Redman 1978: 215–16). Nigerian geographer Akin
Mabogunje reviewed ‘the functional specialization theory of urbanization’,
pointing out that it was essential that functional specialization take place under
three ‘limiting conditions’: the existence of a food surplus to feed the specialists,
the existence of a small group of people able to exercise power over the food
producers and ensure peaceful conditions, and the existence of traders and
merchants to provide raw materials for the specialists (Mabogunje 1968: 35).

                                                                                   5
African Civilizations

He deﬁned urbanization as simply ‘the process whereby human beings congre-
gate in relatively large number at one particular spot of the earth’s surface’
(Mabogunje 1968: 33). The process of state formation, in his opinion, origin-
ated in the necessity to defend urban centres against external aggression,
resulting in the extension of control over neighbouring cities (Mabogunje
1968: 37). However, by 1981 Adams would comment: ‘Urbanism, to be sure,
denotes no set of precise, well understood additional characteristics for societies
so described’ (R.McC. Adams 1981: 81).
   Implicit in these attempts at deﬁnition was a concern with process, that is to
say: how did cities develop, how did states emerge? It has been these questions
that have increasingly attracted attention, resulting in a large literature. Inves-
tigations have concentrated on what has been called ‘the rise of complex
society’, and there has been a tendency to separate the study of urbanization
from that of state formation. Indeed, the rise of the state has been seen as
central to the emergence of ‘complex societies’, which some anthropologists
would prefer to call ‘stratiﬁed societies’ or ‘pluralistic societies’. There has been
much discussion of ‘the anthropology of political evolution’ (e.g., Claessen and
Skalník 1978; Cohen and Service 1978; Claessen and van de Velde 1987;
Eisenstadt et al. 1988; Claessen and Oosten 1996), but the emphasis has
tended to be on theoretical considerations, and much of the evidence used
has been drawn either from historical sources or from ethnographic and
anthropological observations. For example, much attention had been given
to the role of ‘chiefdoms’ and the ways in which they could have developed
into states; Flannery (1999) drawing on ethnohistorical sources from Africa,
Madagascar, Inner Asia, and Hawaii to examine the interaction of ‘process’
and ‘agency’ in such changes. Nevertheless, it has been difﬁcult to relate such
theories to archaeological evidence, although Jonathan Haas (1982) attempted
to do this, and Roland Fletcher (1995) constructed a theory of urbanization on
a similar basis. In addition, Trigger (2003), Maisels (2010), Lull and Micó
(2011), and Smith (2012) have adopted a comparative approach in which
more attention has been given to the archaeological aspects of complex
societies.
   Haas presented a state-formation theory that could be used in the interpret-
ation of archaeological data. He deﬁned a ‘state’ as being ‘a society in which
there is a centralized and specialized institution of government’ (Haas 1982: 3)
and examined the ways in which scholars have attempted to explain the
emergence of such societies. He grouped these explanations into two schools
of thought (Haas 1982: 15): the ‘conﬂict’ school (e.g., Fried 1967) and the
‘integration’ school (e.g., Service 1975). Instead, Haas suggested a theory
‘introducing major integration elements into a broadened conﬂict model’
(Haas 1982: 129). Examining the main theories for the emergence of state

6
                                                                      The context

societies, he identiﬁed three groups (Haas 1982: 132–52): (1) warfare theories
(e.g., Carneiro 1970); (2) trade theories, either interregional (e.g., Rathje 1971)
or intraregional (e.g., Wright and Johnson 1975); and (3) an irrigation theory
(Wittfogel 1957). Haas argued that in spite of differences between them,
‘All the theories begin with stratiﬁcation and outline alternate ways by which
certain members of a society may gain differential access to basic resources’.
He observed, ‘This differential access is based on control over the production
or procurement of the resources in question’ (Haas 1982: 150–1; emphasis in
original). It is that control, according to Haas, that gives rulers power. Subse-
quently, Flannery and Marcus (2012) have also emphasized the creation of
inequality as an important factor in state formation. In addition, others have
recognized the importance of power in the development of social complexity
(e.g., Earle 1997; Maisels 2010). Haas understood power to be the capacity to
oblige somebody else to do something that she or he would not otherwise do,
through the application, threat, or promise of sanctions (Haas 1982: 157).
He identiﬁed nine variables that could be used to measure power in social
relationships and demonstrated how each of these could be recognized in the
archaeological record (Haas 1982: 159–71). Redeﬁning the word ‘state’ in
terms of power, Haas called it ‘a stratiﬁed society in which a governing body
exercises control over the production or procurement of basic resources, and
thus necessarily exercises coercive power over the remainder of the population’
(Haas 1982: 172).
   Although Haas attempted to relate some of the anthropological ideas about
state formation to archaeological data, he made little mention of African
states, drawing his archaeological evidence from Mesopotamia, China,
Mesoamerica, and Peru. Like many anthropologists who have written about
state formation theory, he restricted his discussion to what have been called
‘pristine’ states. These are states that arose so early or in such isolation that
there can be no question of their being inﬂuenced by other states, as might
have been the case with what have been called ‘secondary’ states. Thus, Haas
ignored the archaeological evidence from African states, presumably because
he considered them to be ‘secondary’ in origin, even excluding the early
Egyptian state on this basis. It seems strange that so much theoretical work
has gone into attempting to understand ‘pristine’ state formation when most
states were inevitably ‘secondary’ in their origins. Barbara Price (1978: 161)
commented on the limited theoretical treatment of the secondary state, and
Renfrew referred to the idea of a division into ‘pristine’ and ‘secondary’
‘civilizations’ as ‘unacceptably diffusionist’ (Renfrew 1983: 17). Renfrew
thought that ‘to understand the origins and development of any civilization’,
it is necessary to look at its local conditions: at subsistence, technology, social
system, population pressures, ideology, and external trade. Yoffee (2005) also

                                                                                 7
African Civilizations

argued for a broader treatment of social change in the past. This is the
approach adopted in this book, because although state formation theory and
urbanization theory are important, it is also important to examine the arch-
aeological evidence for the conditions that gave rise to states and cities, as
Pauketat (2007) has insisted.
   Anthropologists and historians have advanced various hypotheses to
explain the development of states in Africa. Historian John Lonsdale reviewed
the historiography of the subject (Lonsdale 1981) and identiﬁed the following
hypotheses: (1) imposition by an autonomous will, (2) conquest, (3) demo-
graphic pressure, (4) a managerial basis of power, (5) long-distance trade,
and (6) drought. These hypotheses were not seen as mutually exclusive;
Lonsdale accepted that combinations of them might be used in an explanatory
role in particular instances. Nevertheless, he stressed that most of these
hypotheses originated at a time when there was relatively little known about
African state formation. Lonsdale thought that three things had subsequently
become apparent. First, state formation was a very slow process: ‘frequently
botched and started again’, so that ‘the decay and fall of kingdoms is as
important a process as their rise’. Second, a great deal more had become
known about the politics of state formation and state collapse (for the latter,
Tainter 1988; Yoffee and Cowgill 1988). Power seems to have been decentral-
ized in early kingdoms with their kings acting as mediators rather than
autocrats. State emergence involved centralization of that power, and this
was achieved by coercion, not by consensus. Third, it was more useful to
explain the rise of particular states in terms of local politics, rather than
to hypothesize about ‘the idea of the state’ and the diffusion of political ideas
(Lonsdale 1981: 172–3).
   Physical evidence is needed to test the theories concerning urbanization and
state formation, but so limited is our knowledge of the later archaeology of
Africa that ethnohistorical and historical evidence also need to be considered.
The danger here is that we might ‘allow the ethnographic present and the
historically constructed past to exercise tyranny over our perception of past
human behaviour’ (Fletcher 1995: 212). Because of an uneven geographical
distribution of excavations and other ﬁeld researches, there have been rela-
tively few general archaeological studies concerned with the origins and devel-
opment of cities and states in Africa, and older contributions are of limited
value. However, an early contribution to the general archaeological literature
was Peter Garlake’s The Kingdoms of Africa (Garlake 1978a), which was
noteworthy for the author’s insistence on the indigenous evolution of African
states, although he also stressed the importance of external trade, whereby a
small group could monopolize not the resources but the outlets by which they
could be converted into a useful surplus.

8
                                                                   The context

  Although it gave little attention to archaeological evidence, there was also
Richard Hull’s book African Cities and Towns before the European Conquest
(1976). Relevant to the present discussion were parts of the book concerning
the origins of cities and towns and their decline and disappearance. Hull
identiﬁed ﬁve main urban types, assuming that major function explained
origin but emphasizing that most cities and towns served a combination of
such functions. The types were: spiritual and ceremonial centres, commercial
centres, centres of governance, centres of refuge, and ‘cities of vision’ (Hull
1976: 120–1). Hull also outlined what he saw as the prerequisites for the
growth of cities and towns in Africa: government had to be sufﬁciently
developed to exert control over the agricultural surplus; leaders had to have
enough power to demand labour from their people for the construction of
public works; specialist craftsmen had to be present; and government had to
have an ideological power base (Hull 1976: 2). For decline and disappearance,
Hull suggested four main causes: environmental deterioration, collapse of
political superstructure, revolt of peripheral cities against the mother city,
and external military invasion (Hull 1976: 114–16).
  Other publications relevant to the archaeology of cities and states in Africa
include: Augustin Holl, West African Early Towns (2006); David Phillipson,
African Archaeology (2005); Thurstan Shaw et al., The Archaeology of Africa
(1993); and Joseph Vogel, Encyclopedia of Precolonial Africa (1997). Another
source is The Oxford Handbook of African Archaeology (2013), edited by
Peter Mitchell and Paul Lane. Chapter 48 in that book, by J. Cameron Monroe
(2013: 703–22), entitled ‘The archaeology of the precolonial state in Africa’,
provides a useful summary. Parts of The Civilizations of Africa by Christopher
Ehret (2002) are also relevant, as are some of the papers in African Archae-
ology edited by Ann Brower Stahl (2005b). Furthermore, three essays of my
own consider speciﬁc aspects of the subject (Connah 2000a; 2000b; 2008). In
addition, there are historical studies: Roland Oliver, The African Experience
(1993); John Iliffe, Africans (1995); John Reader, Africa (1997); and Anderson
and Rathbone, Africa’s Urban Past (2000).
  When examining the archaeological evidence, a discrepancy becomes appar-
ent. According to historical sources, there was a greater number of cities and
states in Africa than the archaeological literature indicates. Fage and Verity’s
An Atlas of African History (1978) shows numerous cities and states in its
maps of which little or nothing is known archaeologically. What about the
early second-millennium AD state of Kanem east of Lake Chad, for instance,
of which the capital Njimi has never been found? Or what about the sixteenth-
century state of Kongo with its capital Mbanza Kongo, thought by Leo
Africanus to have had a population of about 100,000 people (Africanus
1896: vol. 1, 73)? Virtually nothing is known about its archaeology, either.

                                                                              9
African Civilizations

These examples illustrate the two main reasons for the patchy state of arch-
aeological knowledge on this subject. First, there is the problem of the
archaeological visibility of the sites (Connah 2008). At the one extreme, a
long-established, partly stone-built, commercial centre like Kilwa (Chittick
1974), and at the other extreme, a short-lived, grass-built, centre of governance
like the Bugandan capital at Rubaga, visited by Henry Morton Stanley in 1875
(Stanley 1878: vol. 1, 199–202). The second of the main reasons for the patchy
state of archaeological knowledge is the uneven distribution in space and time of
archaeological ﬁeld research in Africa. Comparatively large amounts of excav-
ation and ﬁeldwork have been carried out, for instance, on settlement sites
of the last three millennia along the Sudanese Nile, but, in contrast, relatively
little such work has been done, for example, on the Mozambique coast. These
two problems of archaeological visibility and uneven ﬁeld research frequently
compound one another. Clearly, only the most intensive ﬁeld investigations will
reveal sites of low archaeological visibility.
   A consequence of the patchy state of archaeological knowledge concerning
cities and states in Africa is that any discussion of the relevant archaeological
evidence might give a distorted picture. However, Chandler and Fox (1974)
produced a series of maps of African cities at intervals between AD 1000 and
1850 mainly based on historical sources. Although the distribution of cities
does not necessarily indicate the distribution of states, these maps do reﬂect the
geographical distribution of cities and states indicated by the archaeological
evidence. Thus they show that the main areas of urban development were: in
the Maghreb of North Africa, along the lower Nile in Egypt, on the middle
Nile in the Sudan, in West Africa along the southern edge of the Sahara, in the
West African rainforest west of the lower Niger River, and on the Ethiopian
Plateau. They also record urban centres on the East African coast, on the
Zimbabwe Plateau, around the lower Congo, and in the Lake Victoria area. So
the archaeological evidence does produce a geographical pattern comparable
to that derived from historical and ethnohistorical evidence. It is this that has
prompted the choice of subject matter for most of the substantive chapters of
this book.
   Some of the implicit assumptions in this book require examination. For
instance, how are the terms ‘city’ and ‘state’ to be understood in this speciﬁc
context? Some authors have written of ‘cities’ in Africa (Hull 1976) and
‘kingdoms’ (Garlake 1978a) or ‘states’ (Fage and Verity 1978). Others have
accepted the existence of the West African ‘empires’ of Ghana, Mali, Songhay,
and Kanem-Borno. The question is whether such terms accurately describe
African realities or merely reﬂect the inﬂuence of European historiography.
Studies of more recent African societies by anthropologists and ethnographers
suggest that larger settlements in Africa occurred in a variety of forms,

10
                                                                     The context

differing in character and scale, and that African polities tended to lack the
autocratic, centralized, and bounded forms that the words ‘kingdom’ and
‘empire’ suggest. Perhaps the use of such terms resulted partly from a post-
colonial reaction by scholars seeking to legitimize the African past in a global
context, attempting to show that in certain respects Africa was like Europe.
Indeed, they might have had some justiﬁcation, for the cities and states
of Medieval and Early Modern Europe were not always the autocratic,
centralized, and bounded entities of popular Eurocentric imagination.
   In an introductory essay to her edited book Beyond Chiefdoms (1999),
Susan Keech McIntosh provided an important perspective on the subject of
sociopolitical complexity in Africa. She pointed out: ‘The initial establishment
of supralocal organization in sub-Saharan Africa more likely took the form of
a central ritual authority, lacking any signiﬁcant political power or particular
economic advantage’ (S.K. McIntosh 1999: 23). She also remarked: ‘It is quite
common to ﬁnd in African segmentary states a pattern of power counterpoised
between a king and either associations (such as secret societies or cults with
titled elders) and/or a council of lineage heads’ (S.K. McIntosh 1999: 15).
Other factors, such as religious afﬁliation, ethnic/linguistic identity, clan mem-
bership, age-grades, craft guilds, and trade obligations, can also play a part in
limiting an African ruler’s hierarchical authority implied by the term ‘state’.
Indeed, on the subject of urban origins, Roderick McIntosh argued that in
some cases a heterarchical, horizontal sociopolitical structure existed, rather
than a hierarchical, vertical one with control of surplus, visible stratiﬁcation,
and public monuments (R.J. McIntosh 1999; 2005). Also Ann Stahl ques-
tioned the progressivist and evolutionist assumptions in much that has been
written about the appearance of aspects of social complexity, such as urbanism
and states, in Africa. She recommended ‘research strategies that can help us
rethink how we perceive variability in time and space’ (Stahl 1999: 46). Terms
less loaded with meaning than ‘city’ and ‘state’ are needed for examples of
uncertain character; ‘large settlement’ and ‘polity’ might be preferable.
Roderick McIntosh observed: ‘As archaeology matures we will look more
inclusively at the full range of processes by which complex society emerged’
(R.J. McIntosh 1999: 63).
   One aspect of urban living, to which archaeologists need to give more
attention, is sanitation. The informal disposal of human bodily waste becomes
a serious problem as the density of settlements increases. Archaeological
evidence of attempted solutions, in the form of latrines, drains, soakaways,
and sometimes water supply, has been identiﬁed in some African regions and
periods but is apparently absent from others. Inevitably, this raises the ques-
tion of whether some excavators have failed to identify such evidence. Possibly
the subject has been regarded by some scholars as not worth their attention,

                                                                               11
African Civilizations

and yet the provision of such facilities, or the lack of them, is relevant to
evaluating the technology of an urban society, as well as having signiﬁcant
social and health implications. Nevertheless, archaeological evidence for
African sanitation has not yet received the attention afforded to that of
Mohenjo-Daro, for example, in Pakistan (Jansen 1989).
  The chapters that follow are a series of case studies, whose choice has been
dictated by the availability of archaeological evidence as well as historical
and ethnohistorical evidence. Chapters 2–11 examine the main areas of arch-
aeological evidence by grouping that evidence both geographically and
chronologically (Fig. 1.1). Thus, Chapter 2 discusses the earliest instance of
African social complexity: the Pharaonic state and its settlements along the
lower Nile. The later states and settlements of North Africa are then examined
in Chapter 3. In previous editions of this book, these regions were excluded,
although it was acknowledged that they inﬂuenced to varying extents the
developments that took place in the Sudanese Nile Valley, the Ethiopian
Plateau, and the West African savanna. The intention was to look at the cities
and states of tropical Africa, because they were regarded as comprising a
logically coherent group. In contrast, North Africa and Egypt have long had
such diverse connections with the Mediterranean and South-West Asia that it
seemed legitimate to exclude them from a study of the African evidence. This
reﬂected a long-standing tendency for Africanist scholars to focus on what
they called ‘sub-Saharan Africa’, conveniently beheading the continent in the
process. More recently it has been realized that discussions should be set in
a continent-wide, and even global, context. Peter Mitchell’s book African
Connections: An Archaeological Perspective on Africa and the Wider World
(Mitchell 2005) has inﬂuenced this new orientation. Mitchell’s book is a timely
reminder that although connections between different societies are sometimes
not represented in their material cultures, they might still be indicated by
‘shared ideas and beliefs’ (O’Connor and Reid 2003a: 3). The widespread
dispersal of religious ideologies is a major example, but physical evidence for
other aspects of culture such as the board game of mancala, played in both the
Roman world and over much of Africa, is another example that is relevant
here (Townshend 1979; de Voogt 2010).
  However, most Africanist archaeologists have only limited knowledge of
the archaeology of North Africa and Egypt, particularly of the latter with its
enormous number of publications. Therefore, Chapters 2 and 3 in the present
book are superﬁcial compared with other chapters, but they have an essential
role as contextual material. Moving on, Chapter 4 discusses the evidence from
the middle Nile for the cities and states of Kerma, Napata, and Meroë, perhaps
the ﬁrst of such developments in tropical Africa, and also considers the
evidence for the successor states of Christian Nubia. This is followed in

12
                                                                               The context




Fig. 1.1 Location of the areas discussed in this book. 1: North Africa (Chapter 3);
2: Lower Nile (Chapter 2); 3: West African savanna (Chapter 6); 4: Nubia (Chapter 4);
5: Ethiopian Highlands (Chapter 5); 6: West African rainforest (Chapter 7); 7: Interlacustrine
Region (Chapter 10); 8: Upemba Depression (Chapter 10); 9: The Far West of Central Africa
(Chapter 10); 10: East African coast and islands (Chapter 8); 11: Great Zimbabwe and
related sites (Chapter 9); 12: South African sites (Chapter 11). Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.




                                                                                          13
African Civilizations

Chapter 5 by an examination of the evidence for Aksum and Christian
Ethiopia. The scene is then changed to West Africa, and Chapters 6 and 7,
respectively, look at what archaeology has to tell us of the cities and states of
the West African savanna and of the West African rainforest and its fringes.
Chapter 8 takes us across the continent again to examine the archaeological
evidence for the cities of the East African coast and islands, including
Madagascar. In contrast, Chapter 9 considers the evidence from the Zim-
babwe Plateau and related areas in the interior, and Chapter 10 focuses on
the Upemba Depression and the Interlacustrine Zone, in Central Africa, also
discussing evidence from further west. Chapter 11, like Chapters 2 and 3,
is new to this third edition. Both previous editions excluded the southern
extremity of the continent, because the book was limited to tropical Africa.
Chapter 11 considers the appearance of large settlements and centralized
polities on the South African Highveld and in adjacent areas during the second
millennium AD, particularly during its later part. Finally, Chapter 12 discusses
possible common circumstances in the examples of social complexity that have
been examined in the previous chapters.
  The subject matter of this book is limited to the last ﬁve and a half millennia
of Africa’s past (Fig. 1.2) but prior to colonialism and decolonization. For
some parts of Africa the last two millennia or so have often been called ‘the
African Iron Age’, but such technoepochal terminology has little explanatory
value and obstructs rather than aids understanding (Connah 1998b: 5–6).
Certainly the period concerned was one of substantial technological change,
but there were also profound economic and social changes, which it is the
purpose of this book to investigate. This investigation consists of the examin-
ation of the relevant archaeological evidence for social complexity in Africa.
That evidence consists of the material remains of larger settlements and of the
culture of their occupants, together with inferences about the relationship of
such settlements to the populations of their hinterlands and to the resources
available in those hinterlands. In assessing this evidence, it is important to ask
how we know that a particular archaeological site represents the remains of
a city and how we are able to assume that the area around it constituted a state
controlled either from that or from another city. We can also compare the
picture that emerges from the archaeological evidence with the picture that
can be reconstructed from ethnohistorical or historical evidence. At the very
roots of our enquiry, however, are basic questions around which the whole
discussion revolves: how and why did cities and states emerge in Africa?
In particular, what factors led to their development in some parts of the
continent but not in others? These questions allow us to assess, principally
using archaeological evidence, both the theoretical explanations of anthro-
pologists like Haas (1982) and the explanatory hypotheses advanced by

14
                                                                           The context




Fig. 1.2 Approximate chronology of the areas of social complexity discussed in this book,
arranged in the order of its chapters, numbers 2–11 at left margin. D., Danangombe
(Dhlo Dhlo); F.W., Far West; G.Z., Great Zimbabwe; H.V.S., Highveld settlements;
M., Mapungubwe. Note how the earliest examples are to the north, becoming progressively
later to the south. Drawn by Andrew Stawowczyk Long.



Africanist historians (Lonsdale 1981). In attempting such an assessment,
the approach is based on that advocated by Renfrew (1983: 17), discussed
above (p. 7). The archaeological evidence for each group of African cities
and states is investigated from the point of view of geographical location,
environmental conditions, subsistence, technology, social system, population
pressures, ideology, and external trade. Whatever the weaknesses of the
archaeological evidence for the emergence of cities and states in Africa, it
can increase the time depth of our understanding of these processes and test

                                                                                      15
African Civilizations

and ﬂesh out our historical sources, where such sources exist. The archaeo-
logical evidence reveals a remarkable diversity of both urbanism and state
formation in Africa’s past, suggesting that a world-wide reappraisal of these
aspects of social complexity might be required – a reappraisal that should
at last pay proper attention to the physical evidence from previous African
civilizations.




16
Chapter 2
Origins: social change on the lower Nile


The earliest example of social complexity in Africa was along the lower valley
of the River Nile. Some of the ﬁrst indications have been found at Hierakon-
polis, on the west bank of the Nile in southern Egypt, where extensive habita-
tion and cemetery sites date to the fourth millennium BC. This and other sites
suggest that social changes were already taking place amongst the formerly
dispersed agropastoral people of the region. Local elites were emerging, and by
about 3000 BC there is evidence for the First Dynasty of Pharaonic rulers of
‘Ancient Egypt’. This polity has long occupied a special place in Western
consciousness, both scholarly and public. Pharaonic Egypt has been regarded
as one of the great ‘civilizations’, as an almost mythical construct and treated
as separate from the overall study of Africa’s past. However, archaeologists
are now considering Egypt in its African context, for example, O’Connor and
Reid (2003b) and Exell (2011), but for a long time this was not done. It was
insisted that Egypt during the last three millennia BC demanded extensive
archaeological investigations, but until the middle of the twentieth century
the rest of the continent was given far less attention. Consequently, the
capacity for Egyptology to shed light on the processes leading to social
complexity, in Africa and elsewhere, has sometimes been overlooked. This is
unfortunate because the Egyptian evidence has great comparative value.
  That evidence is exceptional in three ways. First, the climate and environ-
ment of the Nile Valley and its surrounding deserts have resulted in the
survival of a range of organic materials rarely encountered in archaeological
contexts elsewhere in Africa. Second, the monumental expression of social
order by ancient Egyptians has left extensive physical evidence in the form of
pyramids, tombs, temples, statues, and other structures that have dominated
scholarly attention. Third, the development of writing, of which there was
already an early form by about 3300 BC (Davies and Friedman 1999: 36–7;
O’Connor 2011: 143–7), means that there are substantial documentary
sources, particularly for later periods, as well as archaeological evidence.
These factors have resulted in a massive quantity of data that has affected
much of its interpretation. The Ancient Egyptians recorded their history in
terms of the reigns and dynasties of their rulers, the latter numbered from one
to thirty. This has been presented as a sequence lasting three millennia, a
chronology originating from the work of a third-century BC Egyptian priest
called Manetho. The sequence comprises the Early Dynastic Period, the Old

                                                                             17
African Civilizations

Kingdom, the Middle Kingdom, the New Kingdom, and the Late Period, the
second and subsequent of these being separated from each other by three
Intermediate Periods of sociopolitical instability (Baines and Malek 2000;
Shaw 2000). This sequence provides the longest and most detailed historical
account in any part of Africa but has tended to encourage a conservative
approach to the archaeological study of Ancient Egypt.
  In contrast, during recent years there have been attempts to look at the
evidence more objectively and to ask either new questions of it or old questions
in new ways. We have a relatively detailed picture for much of the time
occupied by the mature Pharaonic state, characterized by periods of central-
ized power that alternated with periods of sociopolitical fragmentation, what
Kent Flannery (after Henry Wright) called ‘cycling’ (Flannery 1999: 4–5).
However, it is the earliest periods, generally referred to as the ‘Predynastic’,
that have the greatest capacity to throw light on the processes that led to the
emergence of social complexity in Egypt. Thus, Barry Kemp devoted a third of
his book Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization to the foundations of the
state (Kemp 1991) and David Wengrow (2006) traced relevant social trans-
formations from 10,000 to 2650 BC, ending his investigation near the point
where studies of Ancient Egypt have often begun.


Geographical location and environmental factors
Without the River Nile, Ancient Egypt would have been desert. As now, in
most places there was little rainfall, in some areas virtually none, with an
average monthly maximum temperature in June and July of 34C (for Cairo,
at present) and high evapotranspiration. However, the Nile, one of the world’s
great rivers, was fed with water from the Ethiopian mountains and from deep
in equatorial Africa. Once a year, usually without fail, it ﬂooded a narrow strip
of land on each side as well as other nearby low-lying areas. This not only
saturated the ground but also left fertile silt lying on top. Each year, after the
ﬂoodwaters had receded, highly productive agriculture ﬂourished on the irri-
gated land each side of the Nile and in the Nile Delta where the river entered
the Mediterranean Sea. The main crops were emmer wheat and barley, plus
lentils, chickpeas, vegetables, fruit, sesame, and ﬂax. Livestock included cattle,
sheep, goats, pigs, pigeons, ducks, geese, and bees. During the Pharaonic
period, as is still the case, Egypt was the gift of the Nile, and the Nile was
the gift of Africa. The river supported agricultural production that yielded a
large surplus, able to support a complex society with a dense population.
It also abounded in ﬁsh, reeds that were used in construction and matting,
and papyrus that provided writing materials. In addition, wild game beyond
the valley margins remained a hunting resource for a long time. Furthermore,

18
                                     Origins: social change on the lower Nile

the Nile provided transportation from one end of this long narrow country to
the other. With the prevailing wind blowing from the north and the river
ﬂowing from the south, boats could sail in one direction and drift or be rowed
back. In this way bulky commodities and heavy raw materials could be moved
and relatively easy communications could be maintained between different
communities (Fig. 2.1).
  With abundant food in most years, Ancient Egypt was a land of plenty with
a good transportation system. Yet each side of the narrow occupied area,
usually so close that it could be seen from the banks of the Nile itself, there
was desert, appearing to shut off this land of plenty from the outside world.
Also the Mediterranean Sea to the north and rocky cataracts in the Nile to
the south seemed to enclose Egypt from those directions. However, Ancient
Egyptians not only learnt to exploit the mineral and other resources of the
surrounding deserts but also traded with their southern neighbours along
the Nile in Nubia. In addition, trade was developed with people in the Levant
and with others as far away as Mesopotamia with its emerging city-states. The
Sinai Peninsula provided early contacts with those regions; by the late fourth
millennium BC the domestication of the donkey and its use as a pack animal
facilitated growing interaction with the southern Levant that acted as a funnel
for commodities from further aﬁeld (Wengrow 2006: 36, 136). In the third
millennium BC, maritime trade, particularly with Lebanon, became more
important; Egypt was supplied with the timber that it lacked, mostly cedar
that was used in boat construction (Wengrow 2006: 148). This combination of
resources, from both the Nile Valley and further aﬁeld, continued to beneﬁt
Egypt for many centuries, in spite of changes. After the Pharaonic period,
Egypt’s geographical position and its environment remained advantageous, in
turn under Persian, Ptolemaic, Roman, Byzantine, and Arab rule. To Imperial
Rome it was an important source of grain; in the late ﬁrst millennium BC
Alexandria became one of the world’s intellectual centres; by the early second
millennium AD al-Fustat (under modern Cairo) was one of Africa’s wealthiest
cities; and Egypt has continued to provide a link between Africa and the
Mediterranean, South-West Asia, the Red Sea, and the Indian Ocean. It was
not for nothing that Napoleon sought to occupy it at the end of the eighteenth
century AD or that Germany made it a strategic objective during World War II.
Post-Pharaonic Egypt can contribute to an understanding of subsequent state
and urban development in the rest of Africa, just as Pharaonic Egypt helps
us to understand their origins.
  Geographical and environmental advantages relevant to the Nile are dis-
cussed in greater detail in Chapter 4, on Nubia, although concerning the valley
south of Egypt. However, there were also constraints on human occupation in
both areas. In Egypt, a major problem was the very river that gave it life: not

                                                                            19
African Civilizations




Fig. 2.1 Principal archaeological sites and places on the lower Nile mentioned in the text.
Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.




20
                                      Origins: social change on the lower Nile

only was it a perennial source of river-borne diseases but in some years its
ﬂood could fail and in other years be so high that settlements and farmland
were swept away. Crops and livestock could be lost and famine could threaten.
Such events resulted from short-term climatic oscillations, but changes over
longer periods were of greater signiﬁcance. Thus the increasingly dry condi-
tions in much of the Sahara from about the fourth millennium BC (Hendrickx
and Vermeersch 2000: 35) must have had an impact on the Egyptian Nile
Valley, as people were forced out of the desert into its margins, including the
Mediterranean coast to its north and the Sahel to its south. It is surely
signiﬁcant that it was at about this time that signs of social complexity
appeared in Egypt, as its resources and those of its margins and oases attracted
more and more people (Hassan 2002: 323).


Sources of information
Historical evidence
There is information on social and political organization in Egypt over the last
six millennia, particularly for the Pharaonic period. Both documentary and
archaeological sources throw light on the emergence and vicissitudes of the
Ancient Egyptian state and on the character and role of its cities. A variety of
written material exists, both in hieroglyphs used for formal purposes and in
more rapidly written scripts such as hieratic and the later demotic (Baines and
Malek 2000: 198–201). Much of this is on papyrus, which the dry environ-
ment has often preserved, but there are also many inscriptions on other
materials, particularly stone. In conjunction with large numbers of painted
and/or carved depictions, these written sources show how the Ancient Egyp-
tians saw themselves and how they represented their past. Inevitably such
evidence requires critical interpretation, and this has generated a vast amount
of scholarship. Consequently, the development of writing in Ancient Egypt has
provided us with a picture of past society unparalleled in the rest of Africa for
that period. We have the names of real people and descriptions of actual
events; we are also provided with a detailed chronology of impressive length.
   Surviving documentation includes monumental and funerary inscriptions;
administrative records; correspondence; religious and ritual material; astro-
nomical, medical and mathematical texts; narrative ﬁction; poetry; and writing
for everyday purposes. Collectively, these sources provide valuable informa-
tion on the character of Pharaonic society; concerning the New Kingdom, for
example, even the details of private life can be reconstructed (Meskell 2002).
The documentary sources indicate an abundant agricultural surplus in most
years, supporting a complex society with a dense population, amongst whom a

                                                                              21
African Civilizations

substantial number of people appear to have been at least partly literate. There
is written evidence for government ofﬁcials, priests, craftsmen, artists, scribes,
soldiers, merchants, and many others, as well as for the numerous farmers who
produced the food. Documentation reveals a hierarchical state headed by an
absolute monarch with both secular and sacred authority, the Pharaoh, and a
government that became increasing bureaucratic as time passed. People lived
in cities, towns, and villages and on estates. There was a complex religious
ideology concerning both life and death; the central role of religion contributed
to Ancient Egypt’s long survival, by encouraging social and political cohesion
in spite of periods of instability and collapse. A concept of right order pro-
duced a society that appears to have been conservative, although there were
changes as time passed.


Archaeological evidence
Much can be learned from the extraordinary amount of archaeological evi-
dence, particularly for Pharaonic Egypt. Famously, this includes massive
public works such as pyramids, numerous temples, and statues and other
stone sculptures of rulers and gods, often with associated texts. It has been
suggested that the construction of the pyramids functioned as an ‘economic
engine’ that drove the Pharaonic state. The sheer size of each of these monu-
mental building projects involved the collection and redistribution of resources
on a massive scale, in order to support the necessary workforce and specialists.
Of the largest of the pyramids it has been claimed that, especially during the
Old Kingdom, they served as ‘a major catalyst for . . . the development of
Egypt as one of the world’s ﬁrst true states’ (Lehner 1997: 9). Building on such
a scale would have required complex organization efﬁciently directed, indicat-
ing the existence of a powerful centralized state. In addition to these monu-
mental structures, there were many other tombs and burials whose level of
sophistication reﬂected the hierarchical character of that state, as did the large
number of informative wall paintings within some tombs. Inevitably, it has
been pyramids, other tombs, and temples, often constructed in stone, and the
numerous sculptures and paintings, which have attracted the greatest attention
from archaeologists. As a result, the latter have usually been preoccupied with
elites and state ritual, although there is now a growing interest in the rest of the
Ancient Egyptian population. One consequence has been that until recently
relatively little attention was given to the archaeology of Pharaonic settle-
ments. Indeed, at one time it was thought that Ancient Egypt was a case of
‘civilization without cities’ (Wilson 1960), a belief now ﬁrmly rejected (Trigger
2003: 120). It was also presumed that most of the evidence for urbanization
was buried beneath Nile sediments or covered by modern occupation and that

22
                                        Origins: social change on the lower Nile

excavation would be difﬁcult because of ephemeral building materials, loose
spatial organization, and royal residences that shifted periodically.
   Nevertheless, there is archaeological evidence for the development of urbanism
as well as for the emergence of the Egyptian state. Although the Predynastic
period is principally known from burials, both the process of urbanization and
the rise of the state can be traced in the character and location of the cemeteries
(Wilkinson 1996: 86–8). In addition, there were villages clustered along the Nile,
and by about 3500 BC there were large settlements at Hierakonpolis, Koptos,
Naqada, and Abydos, all in Upper (southern) Egypt. These appear to have been
sprawling, low-density settlements, in contrast to later walled, brick-built towns
of higher population density. Subsequently, Ancient Egyptian towns and cities
seem to have developed for various reasons: as administrative, cult, or craft
centres; as military bases; or as a combination of several of these. Their ties with
agriculture remained strong because it usually formed their main resource base.
Inevitably, they competed with one another for assets, and during the Predynas-
tic period this must have led to some centres and some individuals gaining more
wealth and political power than others. By the late fourth millennium BC there
were a number of such centres of power, controlling limited areas and headed by
elite ﬁgures with both secular and sacred authority. It was out of their continuing
and apparently violent rivalry that the Egyptian Dynastic state emerged about
3100 BC (Kemp 1991). An indication of this centralizing process is provided by
the so-called Cities Palette (Kemp 1991: 50; Wengrow 2006: 209), a fragment
of a stone cosmetic palette that appears to depict seven walled cities under
attack, presumably by a locally powerful early ruler (Fig. 2.2). A similar repre-
sentation of a city under attack is present on the Narmer Palette from Hiera-
konpolis; it also shows Narmer, wearing the crown of Lower Egypt, inspecting
ten decapitated prisoners; on the other side of the palette, wearing the crown of
Upper Egypt, he is about to strike a prisoner (Wengrow 2006: 42–3).
   Archaeological investigations have provided information about the layout of
Pharaonic cities and other settlements. An early example is the Old Kingdom
mortuary-cult ‘town’, attached to the Valley Temple of King Sneferu of the
Fourth Dynasty at Dahshur (Kemp 1991: 148). Possibly occupied by only a
hundred people, already there are indications of planning in its layout. Indeed,
the Middle Kingdom town of Kahun, also known as Lahun, attached to the
pyramid of Senusret II, is evidence of orderly planning by central authority
(Fig. 2.3) and has been estimated as capable of containing a population of
about 5,000 (Kemp 1991: 149–57). Such state control is particularly evident in
the case of the Middle Kingdom fortress of Buhen, just north of the Second
Nile Cataract in Nubia, on what was then Pharaonic Egypt’s southern frontier
(Kemp 1991: 168–72). Although military considerations were clearly of pri-
mary importance in its plan, it was in effect a fortiﬁed town that probably had

                                                                                 23
African Civilizations




Fig. 2.2 One side of the ‘Cities Palette’ fragment, depicting seven walled towns under attack
by animals symbolizing the monarchy and wielding hoes. It is presumed that the palette,
which dates to about 3000 BC, celebrated victories in the expansion of the kingdom of
Hierakonpolis and that it provides evidence for early state development on the lower Nile.
From Kemp 1991: 50, ﬁg. 16.


a large population (Fig. 2.4). More important, however, was the New King-
dom city of El-Amarna, constructed for ‘the heretic king’ Akhenaten and
named Akhetaten, for which population estimates vary between 20,000 and
50,000 (Kemp 1991: 269). This short-lived city has been extensively excavated
over many years, providing information on both its layout and on the lives of
its inhabitants (Fig. 2.5). The spread of house sizes indicates a society grading
from poor to rich without any major gaps, the great gulf being between the
residents as a whole and the ruler and his family (Kemp 1991: 298, 300). In
contrast, layout details of the major cities of Memphis and Thebes are limited
because of their lengthy occupation, although ironically the entire plan of the
craftsmen’s village of Deir el-Medina (Fig. 2.6), near Thebes, has been revealed
by excavation (Meskell 2002: 42). However, the layout of the later city of
Alexandria, during the Ptolemaic and Roman periods, is known (Lloyd 2000:
406). It demonstrates the continuity of urbanism in Egypt, as also do the even
later Islamic cities of al-Fustat and al-Qahira (Fig. 2.7) from the seventh to
twelfth century AD (Kubiak 1987; Raymond 2000).
   Not only are the archaeological sites of Pharaonic and later Egypt informa-
tive; they have also yielded enormous quantities of cultural material of a

24
                                           Origins: social change on the lower Nile




Fig. 2.3 Plan of the Middle Kingdom town of Kahun, of which part has been lost to
cultivation. An early example of orderly planning by central authority, it was attached to
the pyramid of Senusret II (c. 1842–1837 BC) to house the workmen who built the pyramid
and the priests and others responsible for maintaining the cult of the dead king. After Kemp
1991: 150, ﬁg. 53.


variety unmatched in many other parts of the world. This includes pottery,
stone vessels, basketry, clothing, footwear, furniture, a great range of metal-
work, tools, weapons, jewellery, cosmetic objects, children’s toys, board
games, symbolic and religious items, and many other artefacts. There are also
the remains of boats, including one that is 43.3 metres (142 feet) long, dated to

                                                                                        25
African Civilizations




Fig. 2.4 Plan of the Middle Kingdom fortress of Buhen, an example of urban planning for
the military. This was constructed by Senusret I (c. 1918–1875 BC) to protect Egypt’s
southern border. From Kemp 1991: 170, ﬁg. 60.


slightly before 2500 BC, found in a pit adjacent to Khufu’s pyramid at Giza
(Lehner 1997: 119). Even earlier boats have been found in the boat-grave
cemetery at Abydos, which has provided evidence of the world’s oldest sewn
planked hulls by the fourth millennium BC (Ward 2006). Such boats not only
were used on the Nile but could also be dismantled for overland transport to
the Red Sea, where they enabled participation in maritime trade.

26
                                           Origins: social change on the lower Nile




Fig. 2.5 Perspective reconstruction of part of a residential area in the New Kingdom city
of El-Amarna. This was a new city, founded by Akhenaten (c. 1353–1336 BC) and
abandoned soon after his death. It is one of the few Pharaonic Egyptian cities to have been
extensively excavated. After Kemp 1991: 295, ﬁg. 98.



   In addition there are the remains of food and plants. This great range of
evidence has survived because of the dry climate but also because of Pharaonic
Egyptians’ concern that their afterlife should be a continuation of their real
life. Their tombs were frequently furnished with everything to achieve this; the
Eighteenth Dynasty tomb of Tutankhamun is the most famous example.
Amongst these items are models mainly of wood, which provide details of
everyday life during some periods. These depict a wide range of individual
activities, such as brewing beer, cooking, grinding grain, and milking a cow.
They also show group activities, such as ploughing with oxen, butchering,
workers in a granary, sailing and rowing boats, soldiers marching, and a cattle
census being taken (Tooley 1995). Add to these a variety of other funerary and
religious artefacts and it is apparent that a detailed picture of Pharaonic
Egyptian life can be reconstructed, suggesting how much archaeological

                                                                                       27
Fig. 2.6 Plan of Deir el-Medina village near Thebes, in the Nineteenth and Twentieth
Dynasties (c. 1292–1075 BC). This New Kingdom settlement housed scribes and workmen
who constructed the royal tombs, and their families, close to the Valley of the Kings. The site
has provided useful information about living conditions at the craftsman level of society.
From Stead 1986: 8, ﬁg. 6. Egyptian life, The Trustees of the British Museum, London.
                                           Origins: social change on the lower Nile




Fig. 2.7 Plan of the Fatimid city of al-Qahira, founded in AD 969, showing three periods of
city walls. This city was situated on the site of modern Cairo and excavations have shown
that it was much larger than seen here. This plan is from a coloured original in which
Gawhar’s Walls were yellow and do not show here; they enclosed a smaller area than the
later walls. Badr al-Gamali’s Walls were red and can be seen mostly parallel to Salah ad-
Din’s Walls, which were in black. Circled numbers 1, 2, 3, and 4 are the locations of
archaeological excavations conducted from 2001 to 2014. After Pradines 2015.
Reproduced by permission of Stephane Pradines.
                                                                                       29
African Civilizations

evidence must have been lost from many contemporary societies in other parts
of Africa. However, in the case of Ancient Egypt, perhaps it is human remains
that provide the most signiﬁcant evidence, especially those preserved by mum-
miﬁcation. Ideas about an existence after death resulted in great care being
devoted to mummiﬁcation and burial, for many lesser people as well as for
rulers and elites (Spencer 1982). This preservation of human tissues now
provides medical research with unique information on diseases from the third
millennium BC to the ﬁrst millennium AD (Lambert-Zazulak 2000). Even
animals and birds were mummiﬁed at times, providing valuable research
material for zoologists. The practice of human mummiﬁcation continued into
the Roman period, and by then a realistic portrait of the more wealthy
deceased was set into the head of the mummy case, probably painted during
the prime of life (Peacock 2000: 433).
  Because of the importance of Ancient Egypt for understanding state emer-
gence and the development of urbanism during the last few millennia BC, the
above discussion concentrates on that period, reﬂecting the major emphasis in
archaeological research and publication over many years. However, documen-
tary and archaeological evidence from Egypt during the ﬁrst and second
millennium AD is also of signiﬁcance to the study of increasing social com-
plexity in some other parts of the African continent.


Subsistence economy
Mixed agriculture provided the base of the Ancient Egyptian economy and of
the economies of periods succeeding it (Baines and Malek 2000: 190–2). The
main crops were wheat and barley, but a variety of vegetables, fruit, and other
plants including vines were also grown. Not only were the seasonally inun-
dated banks and basins of the Nile Valley highly productive in most years, but
large parts of the Nile Delta also contributed to a food surplus, of which grain
was routinely stored in silos, some controlled by the state. Ox-drawn ploughs
were in use (Fig. 2.8), as well as hoes, and the shaduf, a human-powered,
pivoted, weighted beam, was used to raise water to extend irrigated areas. In
later times water was also lifted by the saqia, an ox-driven waterwheel, but this
does not seem to have been introduced until early in the second millennium
AD. Although arable agriculture provided the most important part of subsist-
ence, particularly in the form of grain, large numbers of cattle, sheep, goats,
pigs, and poultry were raised. Nevertheless, it is signiﬁcant that the staple diet
for lower-status Egyptians consisted of bread and beer, the latter made from
partially cooked barley bread mixed with water to produce a gruel or soup.
This was not very alcoholic but it was highly nutritious, more of a food than a
drink (Kemp 1991: 120). Cattle were milked and milk products contributed to

30
                                        Origins: social change on the lower Nile




Fig. 2.8 Wooden model of a peasant ploughing with oxen, 43 centimetres long. From
a Middle Kingdom (c. 1975–1640 BC) tomb. Drawn by John Pratt after Stead 1986,
front cover. Egyptian life, The Trustees of the British Museum, London.

some diets, but for most people meat was probably limited and from small
stock, beef being mainly eaten by the elite. Fish from the Nile seem to have
been widely consumed, but hunting in the desert margins gradually became
limited to elite sport (Baines and Malek 2000: 193).
  Agricultural production depended on the labour of large numbers of peasant
farmers and remained so until the late second millennium AD. It provided the
bulk of the revenue that supported the Pharaonic Egyptian state and the later
polities of the Nile Valley. In Ancient Egypt, apart from oxen for ploughing,
donkeys to help with transport, and some mechanical assistance for raising
water, it was human sweat that underpinned subsistence, provided by a rural
population that was subjugated by a divine monarchy and a controlling
bureaucracy. Although horses were introduced to Egypt as a result of the
Hyksos invasion and swiftly adopted during the early Eighteenth Dynasty
(Wilkinson 2011: 257), they seem to have been restricted to elite sport and
to military use for pulling chariots. Camels, although thought to have been
present earlier, became important only during the ﬁrst millennium BC (Blench
2000: 316). Chickens appear to have been introduced to Egypt by the second
millennium BC (Dueppen 2011: 145), but the general impression of Pharaonic
agriculture is one of conservatism. It seems that the subsistence economy
of Ancient Egypt consisted of a highly productive arable and pastoral agricul-
ture, whose very strength discouraged innovation. It was not until the ﬁrst

                                                                                    31
African Civilizations

millennium AD, and particularly the early second millennium AD, that a range
of new crops was introduced that broadened Egyptian agricultural practices
(van der Veen 2011: 231).


Technology
Both documentary and archaeological evidence indicate an extraordinary
diversity of technical skill in the Pharaonic state (Lucas and Harris 1962; Shaw
2012). Extractive industries were amongst the most important, including
quarrying for building stone, some of it very hard (Lehner 1997: 206–7),
and mining for gold, copper, and semi-precious stones. Boats on the Nile
and sledges on land were used to transport quarried stone (Lehner 1997:
202–5), often in large and heavy pieces, to building sites, where the quality
of masonry and construction was generally high. In addition, stone was much
used for sculptures, particularly of pharaohs, gods, and historic events, and
ﬁne work was produced, often on a massive scale. Inscription-cutters demon-
strated their ability on many of the buildings, monuments, and sculptures.
Mud bricks were made and used, especially in less important buildings. There
was a very wide range of manufacturing (Stead 1986: 36–45; Baines and
Malek 2000: 194), including metals, wood, pottery, textiles, boat-building,
salt, jewellery, paint and varnish, papyrus and ink, glass (mainly during the
New Kingdom), and many other materials. Surveying, engineering, and archi-
tectural skills were highly developed, as were the mathematical and astronom-
ical knowledge that underpinned them (Lehner 1997: 212–14). Medical
knowledge was present (Majno 1975: 69–140) and an ability to write facili-
tated both intellectual and practical endeavours, although the extent of literacy
amongst society as a whole is uncertain (Baines 1983: 584). In addition,
the technology of warfare was given considerable attention; in the second
millennium BC, for instance, the Egyptian use of the horse-drawn chariot in
battle was highly effective, as were bows and arrows for many centuries
(Baines and Malek 2000: 202–3). Some domestic industries were organized
on a semi-industrialized scale (Baines and Malek 2000: 195), such as bread
and beer making, butchering, wine making, the production of honey, and the
manufacture of cosmetics.
  The range of technology in Egypt seems to have increased from the ﬁrst
millennium BC onwards, including a greater use of iron in a metallurgy
previously based on copper and later on bronze. Nevertheless, the diversity
of technology that existed during the main periods of the Pharaonic state is
most impressive. Clearly, functional specialization had attained a remarkable
level, well able to support a complex society of both primary producers and
urbanites that was normally controlled by a powerful, centralized, autocratic,

32
                                          Origins: social change on the lower Nile




Fig. 2.9 Two of the Giza pyramids: Menkaure’s in the foreground, Khafre’s in the distance.
Fourth Dynasty (c. 2520–2472 BC). Photograph by author, 1984.

and bounded state. What is most remarkable, however, is that this apparent
technological sophistication actually depended on simple technology. Indus-
tries seem to have had relatively little mechanical assistance; for example,
during earlier periods even wheeled vehicles were unknown. Instead, technol-
ogy relied heavily on manual skill and sweated labourers whose willingness
must at times have been doubtful. It is also apparent that an intellectual
capacity for problem solving enabled many tasks to be successfully accom-
plished that might otherwise have been impossible. The Giza pyramids are still
impressive even today (Fig. 2.9), although they were the product of what, in
modern terms, was a limited technology. They are notable examples of
achievement by sheer human endeavour. Like the subsistence economy of
Pharaonic Egypt, however, so successful was its technology that conservatism
became deeply ingrained (but see Shaw 2012), and it is arguable that Ancient
Egypt ultimately failed to keep pace with the changing world around it.


Social system
Pharaonic Egypt was an autocratic society in which the ultimate source of
power was a ruler with both sacred and secular authority (Wilkinson 2011).
Supporting that authority was a large priesthood, a literate bureaucracy, and
an eventually professional army, all three of which gained increasing inﬂuence

                                                                                       33
African Civilizations

within the state as time went on. During the three millennia that the Ancient
Egyptian state existed, there were periods of political weakness and even of
disintegration, but there were also periods when the central government was
strong and when the state extended its control into adjacent territories in
Nubia and the Levant. The Egyptian population was stratiﬁed into a hierarchy
headed by the ruler and his family, with an elite consisting of priests, govern-
ment ofﬁcials, and army ofﬁcers. Below them were craftsmen practising a wide
range of skills, merchants who contributed importantly to the economy, and
soldiers who later were professionals. At the bottom of society was a very large
peasant class, mostly of subsistence farmers who supplied the state with food,
in the form of taxes, and provided corvée labour on government mining,
quarrying, and construction projects (Meskell 2002: 13). Government could
demand such labour in lieu of taxes, because in theory all land belonged not to
the farmers but to the pharaoh, although in practice much of it was actually
the property of temples or of members of the elite. In addition, there were
slaves, seemingly captives from foreign wars. Wilkinson (2011: 364) has
painted a grim picture of life for the bulk of the Egyptian population, with a
lifespan of about thirty-ﬁve years (Meskell 2002: 13 gives thirty-six years),
afﬂicted by diseases, and kept ‘in a state of permanent penury’ by an oppres-
sive government and upper class who expended enormous resources on
making sure that they themselves lived and died luxuriously. It is hardly
surprising that desperate peasants, determined to have a share of the country’s
undoubted wealth, robbed many royal and elite tombs during the course of the
state’s existence.
   During the eighteenth century AD, Jean-Jacques Rousseau wrote about what
he called ‘the social contract’, an unwritten agreement between government
and the governed that beneﬁtted both (Rousseau 1966). In Pharaonic Egypt,
this contract depended on the people’s fundamental beliefs in a range of gods
with whom the pharaoh could commune on behalf of the country as a whole.
This, it was believed, would ensure that the Nile ﬂooded at the right time and
to the right level and that there was peace and stability within the country. In
return, particularly the lower classes laboured to do the pharaoh’s will.
Through the long course of Ancient Egyptian history, this situation varied
considerably, but it is apparent that slowly the contract failed. Droughts,
famines, succession problems, instances of weak leadership, political inﬁght-
ing, and external attack all contributed to this failure, as did the poor treat-
ment of many ordinary Egyptians by the state. Usually overtaxed and often
underfed, any resistance by the lower classes to the state was likely to be met
with violence: beatings, imprisonment, even death were the tools of a repres-
sive system. As Maisels (2010: 173) has written: ‘State formation in Egypt was
clearly a product of violence’, and violence was often a major element in

34
                                       Origins: social change on the lower Nile

ensuring the state’s continuity. The Ancient Egyptian passion for written
records has provided ample evidence that for the majority this was not the
golden age that some have subsequently thought it. Yet those same records
provide exceptions: although primogeniture within the royal family theoretic-
ally determined Pharaonic succession, nevertheless some pharaohs had humble
origins and achieved power partly by personal ability; there were even
instances when women governed in their own right and others where they
were highly inﬂuential within the state.
   Overall, it is astonishing that the Pharaonic state survived so long and was so
frequently able to remake itself after periods of failure. It was based on a
society characterized by extreme inequality; particularly during its later
periods it seems that its frequently corrupt and violent government neither
knew nor cared about the plight of many of its people. There must always be a
question of whether such a society can endure, but in the case of Ancient Egypt
it managed to do so for a very long time.


Population pressures
For Pharaonic Egypt, Kemp (1991: 10) stated that by the time of the late
New Kingdom the total population ‘had probably not exceeded 4 to 5
million’. In Roman Egypt, for which documentation is much better, Peacock
(2000: 444) estimated a total of 4.75 million, of which 1.75 million lived in
towns. These ﬁgures are modest by modern standards, but living conditions
were very different from those of the modern world. Given the limited
cultivatable land in the Nile Valley, although augmented by that in the
Nile Delta, and given a limited agricultural technology, it is possible that
Ancient Egypt did near its maximum carrying capacity in years of low
Nile levels when famine threatened. Nevertheless, it is apparent that com-
pared with neighbouring regions in most years it offered both a bountiful
environment and a strong economy that attracted migrants. The Asiatic
Hyksos, the so-called Sea Peoples, Libyans, Persians, Greeks, Romans, and
Arabs were amongst these. Eventually, migrant inﬂow led to both political
change and ethnic change and very likely caused population pressure. Indeed,
at a much earlier date, the origins of the Pharaonic state might be seen
as partly the consequence of an increasingly crowded upper Nile Valley, as
climatic deterioration drove in people from the fringing deserts (Hassan
2002: 323). Lehner (1997: 7) gives an estimated population for Egypt when
the Giza pyramids were built, in the third millennium BC, of 1.6 million,
compared with 58 million in AD 1995. He is of the opinion that Khufu’s
pyramid could have been built by teams of 25,000 men, each team working
three-month stints for twenty years (1997: 224). That such workforces

                                                                               35
African Civilizations

could have existed is indicative of a sizeable population. Another indication
that this was probably the case for much of Ancient Egypt’s history is the
treatment of those who transgressed: this was a totalitarian state very ready
to use violence on its population, even death when thought appropriate.
Life, it appears, was cheap, suggesting that the population was thought
sufﬁciently large to accommodate such measures of control. Furthermore,
an indication that life was expendable is the incidence of human sacriﬁce
at an early date, particularly in the late fourth to early third millennium
BC (Bard 2000: 71). Overall, it seems likely that population pressure was a
characteristic of Ancient Egypt, given its limited area, but that relatively
high productivity counterbalanced this in years when the Nile inundation
was normal.


Ideology
Ancient Egyptian ideology centred on the unifying role of an absolute ruler,
the pharaoh, as opposed to the chaos that could result from political and social
division. It was the divine ruler’s obligation to see that the Egyptian concept of
right order prevailed. So strongly held were these ideas that even during
periods of internal dissension or external threat, as Wilkinson (2011: 405)
has stated, ‘the sheer weight and antiquity of Pharaonic beliefs had a tendency
to win through in the end’. These beliefs involved numerous gods and god-
desses with a variety of functions, some of the deities local, some venerated
throughout the country. Ra, Amun, Horus, Osiris, and Isis were amongst
the more important, but there was great complexity in religious ideas, which
also changed as time went on (Baines and Malek 2000: 212–14). Large
numbers of temples and their priests ensured that appropriate religious cere-
monies were observed, in the process gradually becoming a powerful element
in state infrastructure. Thus religious ideology played a major role in the
functioning of the Pharaonic state, as is evident from the virtual revolution
that occurred when Amenhotep IV, Akhenaten, attempted to change the state
religion during the later fourteenth century BC (Wilkinson 2011: 279–300).
The power of tradition was such that, after his death, his successors speedily
reverted to previous practices. Ancient Egyptian ideology was more than
religion, however; there was also a fundamental conviction that Egypt was
the world, that it was superior, different from the inferior places and peoples
who lay beyond the deserts to east and west, beyond the Nile cataracts to the
south, and beyond the sea to the north. As Egypt came to play a greater
commercial and political role in the region around it, this idea inevitably
weakened. Although lip service continued to be paid to long-held traditions,
the desecration and plundering of the tombs of their predecessors by some

36
                                      Origins: social change on the lower Nile

later rulers (Wilkinson 2011: 395–7) was indicative of a cynicism that would
eventually contribute to the dissolution of the Pharaonic state. That state had
depended on a powerful ideological base; when its constituent beliefs failed, so
did the state.


External trade
Pharaonic Egypt’s location in a major alluvial valley, watered by the annual
inundation of the Nile, provided food and some resources but lacked other
raw materials, particularly minerals. However, as already discussed (p. 19),
Egypt’s geographical position enabled it to obtain these by trade or intimi-
dation from Nubia to its south and from the eastern Mediterranean and
South-West Asia to its north. Its commercial activities also extended into
the surrounding deserts and, by transporting dismantled boats across the
desert (Ward 2006), also along the Red Sea perhaps as far as the region of
modern Eritrea. The Nile provided access deep into the African interior,
with both waterborne transportation and overland routes that cut across
some of the bends in the river. Gold, ivory, ebony, animals and animal
skins, incense, and other African exotica were the main attractions to the
Egyptians. Sinai gave land access to the Levant, and Egyptian shipping
enabled heavy commodities to be transported relatively easily by sea.
Wood, copper, possibly tin, silver, precious stones, wine, and oil were
obtained, in exchange for gold, linen, grain, and, particularly in later
periods, even papyrus (Baines and Malek 2000: 20). Trade connections also
introduced to Egypt new elements of material culture, especially during the
Second Intermediate Period, such as bronze, new crops, the horse and
chariot, composite bows, and new musical instruments. Although Ancient
Egypt could provide many essentials, nevertheless trade with surrounding
regions was vital to its economy; the increasing importance to Egypt of
access to the resources of those regions partly explains its imperial ambi-
tions during the New Kingdom. Pharaonic Egypt’s decline as an inter-
national power during later periods occurred at the same time as a decline
in its international trade.
   Ancient Egypt was a nonmonetary economy; coinage was adopted only in
the late ﬁfth century BC, when the Athenian currency was introduced as
the monetary standard (Wilkinson 2011: 452–3). Therefore, for most of
its earlier history, commercial transactions in Egypt used barter but, as
Kemp (1991: 248, 250) explains, this was not as crude as it might seem.
It depended on a system in which everything ‘had a value, expressed in
various units which coincided with quantities of certain commodities’. This
might appear an inefﬁcient method of exchange, but it was clearly adequate

                                                                             37
African Civilizations

because it survived for a long time. However, by Ptolemaic, Roman, and
Islamic times a more complex economic system had developed, which sup-
ported a more extensive external trade.
  Light has been shed on this by archaeological investigations at the Ptolem-
aic and Roman port of Berenike (Fig. 2.10), of the third century BC to ﬁfth
century AD, on the Egyptian Red Sea coast (Cappers 2006; Sidebotham and




Fig. 2.10 Plan of the main part of the Graeco-Roman city of Berenike, a port on the
Egyptian Red Sea coast. Darker features are building remains, lighter rectangles are
excavation cuttings. Contours are at 0.5-metre intervals. After Cappers 2006: 52, ﬁg. 4.3.
Reproduced with permission of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology, University of
California, Los Angeles.


38
                                      Origins: social change on the lower Nile

Wendrich 2007). Archaeological evidence from the Roman (ﬁrst to third
centuries AD) and Islamic (eleventh to ﬁfteenth centuries AD) ports at Quseir
al-Qadim on the same coast is also highly informative (van der Veen 2011).
Situated in a coastal desert, to which food had to be transported from the
Nile Valley and water from possibly as far, the extremely dry conditions at
these sites have preserved a wide range of archaeological materials, including
botanical remains. From Quseir al-Qadim the latter included ninety-ﬁve
plants important to the economy, providing direct evidence of long-distance
seaborne commerce and of the introduction of South and South-East Asian
crops into Egypt and neighbouring areas. Like Berenike, Quseir al-Qadim
was a transit hub, situated at the Red Sea end of the shortest land route to the
River Nile, down which imports were passed to Alexandria and on to the
Mediterranean world and Western Europe. During the Roman period, black
pepper from India was the most important of the traded commodities, and
contemporary authors conﬁrm its frequent use in Rome. It continued to be
important in Islamic times, but the evidence from Quseir al-Qadim shows
that many other spices were also handled by then, including ginger, turmeric,
cardamom, fagara (a medicinal fruit from China or the Indian subcontinent),
and betel nut. In addition, the evidence for introduced crops amongst the
remains from Islamic Quseir al-Qadim include citron, rice, cotton, lime,
banana, aubergine, sugar cane, and taro. Huge potential proﬁts from the
Indian Ocean trade were a major reason for the existence of these ports,
although the risks involved were substantial. In Islamic times there was also
the added incentive of an ability to supply food, sourced from the Nile
Valley, to pilgrims going to or returning from Mecca across the Red Sea.
Other archaeological evidence from Quseir al-Qadim includes Roman ship-
rigging artefacts of wood and fragments of Islamic ship timbers, two of the
former being of teak, which is likely to have come from India. Furthermore,
participation in the Indian Ocean commerce during Islamic times is indicated
by the presence of Indian resist-dye textiles, Chinese celadon, and Thai
ceramics. In addition, details of that commerce during both periods are
available from documentary evidence. As indicated by the botanical evi-
dence, Egypt appears to have developed substantial trading contacts with
both South and South-East Asia by Roman and Islamic times (Fig. 2.11).
Indeed, maritime trade on the Red Sea and beyond was probably already
active at an earlier date. At the end of the seventh century BC, the Saite ruler
Nekau II (of the Twenty-sixth Dynasty) had started to dig a canal between
the Nile and the Red Sea, which the Persian king Darius I completed in 497
BC. Subsequently, it seems to have silted up, but this ﬁrst attempt at a Suez
Canal indicates how important the Red Sea trade must already have been to
Egypt (Wilkinson 2011: 451).

                                                                             39
40




     Fig. 2.11 Main trade routes during the Roman period in the Indian Ocean and related regions. This map indicates the extent to which Northeast and
     East Africa were in contact with other parts of the world. It is an important reminder that even the Africa of two millennia ago should not be
     considered in isolation. From Cappers 2006: 12, ﬁg. 1.1. Reproduced with permission of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology, University of
     California, Los Angeles.
                                        Origins: social change on the lower Nile

Conclusion
The archaeology of the Egyptian Nile Valley has frequently been studied
divorced from the rest of Africa (Exell 2011). Similarly, the archaeology of
the rest of Africa has usually been perceived as isolated from that of the lower
Nile. This situation can impede an understanding of state formation and the
emergence of urbanism in Africa as a whole. An opportunity is lost, not only to
investigate the earliest example of these processes in Africa, but also to trace
their vicissitudes over the course of many centuries. Pharaonic Egypt and
subsequent polities are richly documented by both historical and archaeo-
logical sources. They show how, in the long term, states and cities can emerge,
ﬂourish, dwindle, collapse, and form again, in a sequence that can recur as
political, economic, and social conditions change and as cultures and ideas
change. These complicated processes are easier to trace in the Egyptian past
than in that of much of the rest of Africa, where the available evidence is often
limited and restricted to shorter periods. To write about ‘the rise and fall of
Ancient Egypt’ (Wilkinson 2011) is surely to oversimplify a situation in which
such complex societies do not actually ‘fall’ but change into something differ-
ent as the world around them changes. In the case of Ancient Egypt, it is
apparent that religious beliefs and cultural practices were so strongly held that
they limited the capacity for change until the country came, in turn, under
Persian, Ptolemaic, Roman, and Arab control. It is a ﬁtting reminder that
culture is dynamic, not static, and that people who actively try to ‘preserve’
their culture are in the end imperilling their future, a danger that still exists in
the modern world.
   The succession of polities in the lower Nile Valley also permits an analysis of
the circumstances in which they developed, disintegrated, and formed again.
The major factor in the case of Egypt seems to have been its strong agricultural
base, capable of producing surplus food not only for local consumption but
also for export to surrounding, less fortunate lands. A second factor was the
extraordinarily versatile technology that is so richly documented in the arch-
aeological evidence. Although limited by its dependence on manual energy and
skill, with little mechanical input, its achievements are amongst the most
impressive examples of functional specialization from the premodern age. To
this should be added the third factor, a social system that provided an enduring
element within the state and its settlements. Ancient Egypt was a dictatorship,
a totalitarian state based on a stratiﬁed society in which the individual did
what he or she was told, at the risk of physical punishment or even death.
It seems likely that this situation was partly the product of the fourth factor,
population pressure particularly during periods of low Nile level. Labour and
life were cheap; the former could be expended extravagantly on public works


                                                                                 41
African Civilizations

of monumental scale, and loss of the latter was part of the price of political and
social stability and order. Of fundamental importance for the continued
survival of such an autocratic society was the ﬁfth factor: a powerful state
religion. In a situation where the ruler communed with the gods, or was even
perceived as one of them, to disobey was not only treason, it was also sacrilege.
Religious belief was only one element, however, although probably the most
important, in an ideology that insisted that everything was for the best as it
was and that it was vital that it continue. Literacy and education appear to
have been socially limited, and for the mass of the population it was vital
to believe that the sun would rise tomorrow and that the river would ﬂood at
the right season and to a desirable level. Lastly, the sixth factor is that of
external trade: it is clear that this was of great importance to Ancient Egypt.
It provided raw materials not available in Egypt itself and, along with highly
productive agriculture, formed a major part of the Egyptian economy.
   This analysis of the circumstances of states and cities in the lower Nile Valley
provides a template for understanding comparable phenomena in other parts
of Africa. It also serves as a reminder that Africa was never isolated in the past
and should not be studied as if it was. Egypt was a part of Africa, as it still is,
and was positioned ‘at the bridge between Africa and Asia, the tropics and
the temperate zone’ (Baines and Malek 2000: 20). It is vital to understand the
implications of this if one is to understand Ancient Egypt. Equally, it is vital
to understand Ancient Egypt if one is to understand Ancient Africa.




42
Chapter 3
The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa


North Africa is situated between the Sahara Desert and the Mediterranean Sea,
between an inhospitable environment discouraging travel and one facilitating
extensive maritime contacts. Consequently, it has long tended to look to the
north rather than to the south, constituting a frontier zone for the rest of
the African continent. Excluding the lower Nile Valley, North Africa’s habit-
able coast to the east is so narrow that in places the desert reaches the sea, but
the coast broadens in the west into cultivable plains and still further west there
are mountains separating it from the desert. Climatically, North Africa belongs
with the Mediterranean, with hot dry summers and mild winters when most
of the modest rainfall occurs. Culturally, the region has been a meeting place
for people from the Levant, Greece, Rome, Europe, and Arabia and the
indigenous Libyans. As a result, North Africa has played a role in the history
of Europe as well as in that of Africa. The Mediterranean has been the link,
providing relatively easy movement for traders and migrants and a frequent
focus for armed conﬂict. Commencing early in the ﬁrst millennium BC, a series
of colonial and indigenous settlements developed that included urban commu-
nities and indications of state development. These were technologically sophis-
ticated societies, at least partly literate, that constituted early examples of
African social complexity, not as early as its development in the Nile Valley
but still preceding that of most of the rest of Africa. As such, North Africa was
eventually to stimulate changes in other parts of the continent, particularly in
the Sahel beyond the Sahara and in adjacent regions.


Geographical location and environmental factors
North Africa extends from the lower Nile Valley to the Atlantic coast of
Morocco. In terms of modern political geography, it includes western Egypt,
Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco. In Egypt and Libya the settled zone is
mainly restricted to the coast by the Sahara, but in Tunisia, Algeria, and
Morocco a variety of different environments, including those of the Atlas
Mountains that rise to more than 4,000 metres, have provided greater oppor-
tunities for human settlement. Extending almost 3,700 kilometres from east to
west, the geographical and environmental diversity of the region is striking.
Average monthly temperatures in coastal Tripoli range from 14C in January
to 28C in August but can be much higher in the desert and its margins.

                                                                               43
African Civilizations

Indeed, a temperature of 58C, recorded in 1922 at El Azizia in north-west
Libya, has been claimed to be the highest in the world. In contrast, winter frosts
can occur inland and the highest of the Atlas Mountains are snowcapped.
Rainfall also varies wildly, from as much as 1,200 millimetres a year in the
coastal mountains of the west to as little as 200 millimetres in the semi-desert
that forms the southern limit of most human occupation. In addition, rainfall is
unreliable in many areas and evapotranspiration high. Consequently, water
availability is a problem in much of the region; irrigation is often necessary;
and extensive areas are of limited use. Nevertheless, parts of North Africa
have long supported a highly productive agriculture; depending on local condi-
tions, different areas have grown a variety of crops. Pastoralism has also been
important, particularly in the mountains and the semi-desert. Furthermore,
much of the Mediterranean coast is well provided with harbours, and ﬁshing
has been another important source of food. Although North Africa has its share
of human diseases, its varied environments have long been generally conducive
to settlement, as repeated colonial immigration has demonstrated.
   Any consideration of the geography and environment of North Africa must
include the Mediterranean Sea, as well as the lands that form its southern
shore (Fig. 3.1). As the largest inland sea in the world, the Mediterranean has
long been a means of contact between people, particularly those of its coasts.
This has been made possible by its winds and currents and frequently calm or
relatively calm seas. Although violent storms can occur, refuge in a safe
harbour is often possible. Early seafarers with limited maritime technology
and navigational knowledge could sail much of the Mediterranean without
losing sight of land (Aubet 2001: 169). Currents and winds also inﬂuenced
the selection of sailing routes, for which the islands of Cyprus, Malta, Sicily,
Sardinia, Ibiza, and the south-eastern coast of Spain provided ports-of-call
(Aubet 2001: 182–5). In addition, the geographical conﬁguration of the
Mediterranean coasts meant that Greece and Italy, with Sicily, were within
relatively easy reach of North Africa. Furthermore, the Straits of Gibraltar
gave access to the Atlantic coasts of Morocco and south-western Spain; a
minimum of 14 kilometres of sea separated North Africa from the Iberian
Peninsula; and people could walk from the coast of the Levant to Egypt.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
A substantial amount of historical documentation exists for the last three
millennia in North Africa. The societies responsible for the emergence of
urbanization and the development of states in this region were all literate

44
     Fig. 3.1 Principal archaeological sites, places, and people in North and West Africa mentioned in the text. 1, Gadir; 2, Qsar es-Seghir and Tangier;
45   3, Lixus; 4, Al-Basra; 5, Fez; 6, Algiers; 7, Mzâb; 8, Djemila; 9, Thamugadi; 10, Timgad; 11, Hippo Regius; 12, Utica; 13, Carthage (Tunis);
     14, Bulla Regia; 15, Althiburos; 16, Thugga; 17, Kairouan; 18, Kerkouane; 19, El Djem; 20, Mahdiyya; 21, Sabratha; 22, Oea (Tripoli); 23, Lepcis
     Magna; 24, Ghirza; 25, Ptolemais; 26, Cyrene; 27, Garamantes (Old Jarma); 28, Kissi; 29, Durbi Takusheyi. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.
African Civilizations

to some extent, and also Greek, Roman, and other writers recorded the
activities of North African communities. External observers were sometimes
prejudiced or poorly informed, and some documentary materials was written
after the events they recorded, based on earlier sources that have not sur-
vived. However, inscriptions principally on stone and coins are also informa-
tive and often well dated, particularly for the Roman period.
   It appears to have been Phoenician seafarers and traders, from the coast of
what is now Lebanon, who inaugurated signiﬁcant social change in North
Africa. By the end of the second millennium BC their activities had extended
throughout the length of the Mediterranean and they had founded trading
colonies at Gadir, on the Atlantic coast of south-west Spain, and at Lixus, on
the Atlantic coast of Morocco. Their principal motivation seems to have been
the acquisition of metals, particularly silver, copper, gold, and tin, for all of
which there was a substantial demand in South-West Asia. In addition, polit-
ical and population pressures in their homeland could have initiated what
became a widespread diaspora. As time went on, they also founded colonies in
other places, including Malta, Sicily, Sardinia, Ibiza, southern Spain, and along
the North African coast, selecting locations suitable as staging points on their
long voyages and as potential trading centres. Utica, in Tunisia, was perhaps
the earliest African colony; nearby Carthage was founded in 814 or 813 BC
(Aubet 2001: 159–65). Subsequently, Carthage was to become a major urban-
ized state, whose rivalry with the rising power of Rome led to the three Punic
Wars of the third and second centuries BC, culminating in the destruction of
Carthage (Hoyos 2010). This was one of the major conﬂicts of the Ancient
World and received attention from a number of Greek and Roman writers, but
surviving Carthaginian written sources are limited. Nevertheless, the Phoen-
ician alphabet, in which the Carthaginian language, Punic, was written, has
been claimed as ancestral to the later alphabets of the Western World, and
Punic continued to be written during the Roman period in North Africa and
survived in a spoken form even longer (Lancel 1995).
   A little later than Carthage was the Greek colony of Cyrene, according to
tradition founded in 631 BC, which became one of the principal cities of the
Hellenistic world and gave its name to the Roman province of Cyrenaica,
established in 74 BC. This city developed further during the Roman period but
appears to have declined after an earthquake in AD 365. The Cyrenaican city
of Ptolemais, which also had Greek origins and was probably founded in the
seventh century BC, survived longer and was occupied during the Hellenistic,
Roman, and Byzantine periods, and after the Arab conquest of AD 643
(Kraeling 1962; Kenrick 2013).
   Following the destruction of Carthage, North Africa was gradually
absorbed into the growing Roman Empire, although it was not until the

46
                                    The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

early third century AD that the Roman occupation of North Africa was
completed. Documentary sources are numerous but patchy, mainly because
North Africa was on the edge of the Empire and attracted relatively little
attention from Roman historians. The spread of Christianity during the Late
Roman period led to an increase in written sources, although those by Bishop
Augustine of Hippo Regius and others tended to be dominated by religious
issues (Sears 2011). Overall, the documentary sources show a Roman North
Africa that consisted of numerous towns and cities, together with associated
areas of rural settlements, estates, and farms. A productive agriculture
developed from Carthaginian times, with a surplus of grain and some other
commodities being exported. Silphium, an indigenous strong-smelling plant
now extinct that was used in Greece and Rome for culinary and medicinal
purposes, was also exported, as was garum, a sauce that was made from the
entrails of salted ﬁsh and considered a great delicacy. Particularly productive
was the region that now forms the northern part of Tunisia. South-west of
Carthage, rebuilt during the Roman period, was an extensive wheat-growing
district, and the grain shipments to Rome from here and other parts of North
Africa became extremely important. The Roman army, in the form of the
Third Augustan Legion, provided security, particularly along the vulnerable
southern frontier. For four centuries or more North Africa became an
integral part of a huge area with similar political institutions, economic and
social organization, and culture. At least ofﬁcially there was even a common
language, in the form of Latin, although Punic and Libyan languages and
cultures survived.
  Gradual changes occurred in North Africa during the course of the late
third, fourth, and early ﬁfth centuries AD, particularly associated with
the growing importance of Christianity (Sears 2007). Then, from AD
429 to 533 the Vandals, a Germanic warrior group, gradually occupied
North Africa, leading to some socioeconomic decline but mainly replacing
the ruling elite, with little change for the indigenous people (Clover 1993).
Nevertheless, the Vandal invasion was ‘the beginning of the end of Roman
Africa’ (Mattingly 1994: 215). Byzantine rule from Constantinople replaced
that of the Vandals during the sixth century AD but appears to have been
tenuous, as is apparent from the relative ease with which the Arabs overran
North Africa during the seventh century (Christides 2000; Kenrick 2009:
6–8; Kaegi 2010).
  There are numerous written sources for Islamic North Africa, in Arabic,
Greek, and Latin, but many of them are of later date than the periods they
describe (Christides 2000: 71–7). In some ways Islamic North Africa was
the successor to Roman North Africa, although cities became less important
than rural areas, which were characterized by a fragmented society of

                                                                            47
African Civilizations

Libyan tribes. However, some cities survived and some new ones were
built, such as a capital for what was now called Ifriqiyah, a city that was
founded in AD 670 at Qayrawan (Kairouan) in central Tunisia. Islamic
society also adopted the Roman culture of public baths, which had ﬂour-
ished in Roman North Africa but was largely abandoned in Medieval
Western Europe (Yegül 2010). Furthermore, during the Fatimid period in
North Africa and Egypt in the tenth to twelfth centuries AD, art and
architecture attained some of the highest standards in the Islamic world
(Bloom 2007). It was as traders, however, that the inhabitants of Islamic
North Africa made their greatest contribution to African history. During
the Roman period there had been trade with people in the Sahara; the
Garamantes of the Fezzan, who occupied oases south of Tripoli, partici-
pated in this, and there is growing evidence of its importance (Wilson
2012). It was this trade that enabled Garamantian urban growth and
incipient state development in the hostile environment of the central
Sahara during the late ﬁrst millennium BC and early ﬁrst millennium AD
(Mattingly 2013; Mattingly and Sterry 2013). Furthermore, it was the
foggara irrigation of the Garamantian settlements that, in turn, made those
trading activities possible. Nevertheless, the extent to which such trade
penetrated the desert to the south of the Fezzan is uncertain (Mattingly
2011); it appears to have consisted mainly of relay exchange, rather than
exchange across the breadth of the desert. It was North African Arab
traders who eventually conquered trans-Saharan travel by the use of camels
as pack animals (Bulliet 1975). Capable of carrying loads of 150 to 200
kilograms each (Gauthier-Pilters and Dagg 1981: 110), they can cover
30 to 40 kilometres a day and can voluntarily go without water for up to
10 days and for longer if browsing on plants with a high water content or
in cooler weather (Wilson 1984: 151, 173). They can eat thorny plants that
other animals avoid and have large soft feet adapted to walking on soft
sand, although liable to injury on stony surfaces. The main problem with
camels is that they are susceptible to trypanosomiasis, not usually spread by
tsetse ﬂies as with other domestic animals but by other biting ﬂies (Wilson
1984: 122–7). The single-humped camel was probably domesticated in
southern Arabia, where desert Arabs learnt how to overcome problems of
management. Introduced to Roman North Africa, they were used to pull
ploughs and carts, but by the fourth to sixth century AD camel caravans
were in use, as indicated in a stone carving from a tomb at Ghirza, in
Tripolitania (Mattingly 1994: plates 59 and 61). Able to cover long dis-
tances in the desert, Islamic North Africans were to have a major impact on
the peoples south of the Sahara, spreading their religion and inﬂuencing the
development of trade and urbanization.

48
                                     The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

Archaeological evidence
There is plentiful archaeological evidence for the state and urban develop-
ments in North Africa that are recorded in historical sources. In spite of its
destruction and later rebuilding by the Romans, the outline of the city of
Carthage during the pre-Roman period is known. Excavation has uncovered
housing as early as the eighth to seventh centuries BC and evidence of metal-
working, dye production, and the making of ﬁne pottery (Aubet 2001:
218–26, ﬁgure 48). The latest phase of the Punic city, in the second century
BC, was carefully planned, with streets crossing at right angles and stone
houses of several storeys. Shops and workplaces seem to have been mixed
with domestic accommodation, and buildings were provided with washrooms
and had cisterns and pipes for the supply of water and soakaways and other
pipes for waste water and sanitation (Lancel 1995: 152–72).
   Early cemeteries have also been investigated; their grave goods included
gold jewellery and items of ivory thought to have been carved in Carthage as
early as the seventh century BC (Lancel 1995: 70–6). Particular attention
has been given to the tophet, a cemetery reserved for the burial of infant
cremations from about 700 to 146 BC. This yielded more than 20,000 urns,
the earlier ones containing the remains of foetuses and premature or newborn
(probably stillborn) babies and later ones those of infants up to three years
old. There has been debate over claims by some hostile ancient writers that
child sacriﬁce was practised in Carthage and at other Phoenician sites, and
some archaeologists have thought that the tophet burials at Carthage and
elsewhere are evidence of this. However, it is possible that the tophet was
merely a burial place reserved for very young children, who were not buried
in cemeteries with adults. Death from natural causes has seemed the most
likely explanation, in a society that probably had a high infant mortality,
particularly in an urban environment where the very young would have been
the most vulnerable to infection (Aubet 2001: 250–6). Nevertheless, argument
on this subject has continued (Smith et al. 2011; Schwartz et al. 2012; Smith
et al. 2013; Xella et al. 2013).
   Because of the role of Carthage in maritime trade and as a sea power, with its
location commanding the narrowest part of the Mediterranean between North
Africa and Sicily, its two interconnected harbours are particularly interesting.
Enclosed from the sea and entered by a narrow channel, they consisted of an
outer commercial harbour and an inner military one. Excavation has shown
that the inner harbour, which was circular, was ﬁrst constructed in the late
third or early second century BC, although subsequently rebuilt during the
Roman period. On an island in the centre of the Punic inner harbour was a
circular stone building that provided covered storage for at least 30 warships,


                                                                              49
African Civilizations

and up to 140 others could have been berthed around the perimeter of the
harbour (Hurst 1979; Lancel 1995: 176–8).
  Carthage was the most important of pre-Roman Punic and Numidian cities
in the western part of North Africa. Thugga and Kerkouane (Fig. 3.2), both in
northern Tunisia, are other examples of pre-Roman urbanism. Also important




Fig. 3.2 Plan of the Punic city of Kerkouane, Tunisia. After Sears 2011: ﬁg. 1.5.
Redrawn by Andrew Stawowczyk Long.


50
                                    The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

is Althiburos, in western Tunisia, where survey and excavation has thrown
valuable light on Numidian settlement during the ﬁrst millennium BC
(Sanmarti et al. 2012). Furthermore, the cities of Sabratha, Oea, and Lepcis
Magna, which became important during the Roman period, had Punic origins.
Sears (2011: 13–30) has stressed both the development of urbanization and the
emergence of states before the extension of Roman control over North Africa
began in the second century BC. Nevertheless, it was the incorporation of
North Africa into the Roman Empire that resulted in the most substantial
archaeological evidence of both urbanization and centralized state authority in
North Africa (Sears 2011: 32, map 2, 121, map 5). The physical remains are
amongst the most impressive to have survived above ground from the Roman
world. This is because Roman North Africa was one of the wealthiest and
most populated parts of the Empire; following political and economic decline
during the subsequent Vandal and Byzantine periods, population densities in
Islamic North Africa were lower and urban centres either shrank or were
abandoned. This situation contrasts with places that continued to be import-
ant urban centres, such as Carthage, which has remained occupied since
Roman times and is now part of Tunis, and Oea, which lies under the modern
city of Tripoli.
   The archaeological record for Roman North Africa provides a remarkable
picture of both urban and rural life during a period of more than 400 years.
In conjunction with the documentary record and with inscriptions and
coinage, it is possible to reconstruct much of the history of the region.
Numerous urban centres existed, particularly in parts of Tunisia and Algeria,
ranging from large to small, as well as country villas, farms, frontier defences
such as forts, and roads. Collectively, these sites provide abundant evidence
for a state infrastructure that was complex, sophisticated, and prosperous.
Its essentials also survived for a remarkably long time, even when in apparent
decline during the late Roman, Vandal, and Byzantine periods. Most
buildings were constructed in stone, often in ﬁne masonry; principal city
streets were paved and provided with drainage systems. Of central import-
ance in each Roman city was the forum, as a meeting place, often with a
basilica where courts took place and a curia where the town council met. In
addition, cities seem to have competed with one another in their construction
of monumental public buildings. These usually included temples, an amphi-
theatre for spectacles and public punishments (the one at El Djem, in Tunisia,
could seat 30,000 people), a theatre for dramatic performances, one or more
monumental arches, and, for a few cities, a circus for chariot races. As time
went on, they also included public baths (such as the Large South Baths at
Timgad, in Algeria, Fig. 3.3), the usage of which became a major part of
Roman culture in North Africa as elsewhere in the Empire (Yegül 2010).

                                                                             51
African Civilizations




Fig. 3.3 Plan of the Large South Baths at Timgad, Algeria. From Yegül 2010: ﬁg. 59,
after Krencker, D. et al. 1929.


To supply the baths with water and to meet other requirements in urban
centres, aquaducts were also constructed, sometimes bringing water from
considerable distances. In addition, there were statues of gods or civic
leaders, marketplaces and shops, and, in coastal cities, harbours. The imper-
ial government was the ultimate authority, controlling security, taxation, the
administration of law, and other matters of importance, but many of the
decisions about urban planning seem to have been made by the individual
cities. This was in spite of a tendency to adopt general Roman models, such

52
                                      The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

as orthogonal layouts in which streets met at right angles. Most often it was
members of a city’s administrative or commercial elite, or the city itself, that
ﬁnanced monumental building projects. This was a means of establishing
prestige within the urban community; in order to ensure that such generosity
was not forgotten, it was often recorded in inscriptions, in Latin and Punic,
which provide information about urban history. Another source of such
history is the cemeteries or necropoleis located on the edges of many cities,
with some of the burials marked by monumental tombs with inscriptions.
  Many public and private buildings display evidence of prosperity, such as
ﬁne carving, richly decorated mosaic pavements, or wall paintings, often
informative on a variety of subjects. Matters of more personal concern were
also attended to. In the Seaward Baths at Sabratha, there is a hexagonal
communal latrine with seats placed over a drain around three sides of the
marble-faced room and with a channel in front of the seats providing clean
water for washing oneself (Kenrick 2009: 58, ﬁgure 18). Latrines were often
associated with bath buildings because both needed water; the Large Baths at
Djemila, in Algeria, for instance, featured a facility that could accommodate
twenty-two to twenty-four people (Yegül 2010: 142). Similar comforts were
probably present in private houses also; in a villa at Bulla Regia, in Tunisia, for
example, is a two-hole latrine in a small closet with a decorative mosaic ﬂoor
(Manton 1988: 125–6: illustration 72). This subject needs to be seen in the
context of sanitation in the Roman world as a whole, for which Scobie (1986)
has provided a detailed study. In North Africa every effort seems to have been
made by the elite to make life pleasant for themselves, and even less fortunate
people beneﬁtted to some extent from the thriving economy.
  There was variety in the layout of North African Roman cities and also
changes that occurred over the centuries. In earlier times they often lacked city
walls, which were added at a later date, indicating changes in security. One of
the most impressive cities was Sabratha, a large, afﬂuent city on the coast of
Libya (Fig. 3.4), with a layout contrasting, for example, with Thamugadi, a
small inland city in Algeria (Fig. 3.5). There were also changes to North
African cities caused by the adoption of Christianity; Late Roman Carthage,
for instance, had sixteen known churches within and outside its walls. Subse-
quently, Vandal occupation of North Africa for a century seems to have
contributed little to the archaeological record, although the following Byzan-
tine period did see a small revival of cities and the construction of new city
walls, the restoration of old churches, and the building of new ones (Kenrick
2009: 7–8).
  The invasion of North Africa by Muslim Arabs in the seventh century
introduced a different culture to the region. Although it became less urbanized
than it had been during the Roman period, new capitals were built at Kairouan

                                                                                53
African Civilizations




Fig. 3.4 Plan of part of the central area of the Roman city of Sabratha, Libya. After
Kenrick 1986: ﬁg. 123.



in the late seventh century and at Mahdiyya in the early tenth century, both in
Tunisia. In addition, new state structures emerged from the confusion that
followed the invasion, the most signiﬁcant being controlled by the Aghlabid
dynasty during the ninth century and by the Fatimids during the tenth to

54
                                        The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa




Fig. 3.5 Plan of the centre of the Roman city of Thamugadi (Timgad), Algeria, in the
third century AD. From Sears 2007: ﬁg. 14.


twelfth centuries. The latter period was one of outstanding cultural achieve-
ment (Bloom 2007), but, as with subsequent periods in the region, it has not
received much archaeological attention. Principal cities included Fez, Tangier,
Algiers, Tunis, Kairouan, and Tripoli, but continuing occupation has made
their archaeological investigation difﬁcult. From the eleventh century there
were also the remarkable cities of Mzâb, in the harsh Algerian Sahara, each
constituting a separate city-state (Jaabiri and Yahia 2000).

                                                                                       55
African Civilizations

  For a detailed excavation of an Islamic city, it is necessary to look at the site
of the small city of Qsar es-Seghir, on the Moroccan coast. Located near the
narrowest part of the Straits of Gibraltar, it was only 22 kilometres from the
European shore. It was, in succession, a conduit for people and commodities, a
frontier fortress, and a colonial outpost. Occupied in turn by Muslim North
Africans and Christian Portuguese, it was the scene of interaction between
Africa and Europe. The settlement seems to have originated in about the eighth
century AD and continued until about the fourteenth century when Islamic
southern Spain approached its end (Redman 1986).
  Qsar es-Seghir was a planned city, its circular layout conforming to an
Islamic ideal supposedly represented by early Baghdad (Fig. 3.6). Less than
3 hectares in area, it was enclosed by a mortared stone and ﬁred-brick wall,
about 1.8 metres thick and 8 metres high. The wall had twenty-nine towers
and three fortiﬁed gates. Within the city wall was a roughly rectangular
layout of relatively wide streets, with a congregational mosque, a public bath
building, and a market. These were constructed in stone and ﬁred brick; the
building of which most survived when excavated was the bath building. This
was an impressive structure, with a changing area, a cold room, a warm
room, and a hot room. The ﬂoors were paved with bricks or tiles. There was
also a room containing a furnace, from which hot air circulated beneath the
ﬂoor of the hot room. Adjacent to the building was a well. The complex is a
reminder of how much Islamic society had inherited from the preceding
Roman world.
  Much of the remaining space within the city wall was ﬁlled with houses of
stone and ﬁred brick; a small number were outside the wall. The houses were
rectangular in plan, with windowless exteriors and a single entrance from the
street through a bent-axis corridor. Within each house, the rooms were ranged
around a central court and included living/sleeping rooms, a kitchen, a storage
space, and a latrine. The latter emptied into an underground drain, which fed
into a drainage system under the middle of the adjacent street; each house also
had a well. Although many houses were of only one storey, some had a second
storey reached by an internal stairway. Material culture at Qsar es-Seghir was
simple: most of the pottery was wheel-made but undecorated, sometimes with
a clear lead glaze on the interior. Much of it was probably locally produced,
but there were also decorated ceramics that were mostly imported from
elsewhere in North Africa and from Islamic Spain. Iron was used for weapons,
tools, and nails, and items of personal adornment were made of bronze or
brass, sometimes coated in silver or gold. Bone and ivory were made use of and
glass vessels were used but rare. A few Islamic coins of gold, silver, and copper
were also found. Some people seemed wealthier than others but not to any
great extent. Partly this might be because of Islamic restraint in display but

56
                                         The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa




Fig. 3.6 Plan of the Islamic city of Qsar es-Seghir, Morocco. After Redman, 1986: ﬁg. 3.2.


more likely it is because Qsar es-Seghir was a small city of workers and traders,
with a maximum population of only 1,200 to 1,300 inhabitants.
  Islamic Qasr es-Seghir came to a violent end in the ﬁfteenth century, when a
Portuguese army, equipped with cannon, attacked it. Renamed Alcacer Ceguer,

                                                                                       57
African Civilizations

the city became part of a Portuguese expansion into northwest Africa that
eventually included Tangier and several ports along the Atlantic coast. As
such it was a fortress city, with modernized fortiﬁcations, a garrison of soldiers,
and a population that was predominantly male. Eventually, the greater proﬁt-
ability of its more distant overseas interests led Portugal to abandon North
Africa. After ninety-two years the Portuguese left Qsar es-Seghir, ﬁrst destroying
many of its buildings and some of its fortiﬁcations to discourage reuse of the
site, which was never reoccupied.
   The Portuguese city was different from the preceding Islamic one. Although it
retained the circular plan, its defensive walls were reduced in height and
broadened at the base, as well as surrounded by a deep ditch. Five bastions
were also built, three of them around the former city gates; the one closest to the
sea became a fortiﬁed citadel. These modiﬁcations were designed to make the
city more easily defended against cannon ﬁre and to enable the efﬁcient use of
cannons and ﬁrearms against attackers. The street layout seems to have
remained much as it had been but with more open spaces at the ends or
intersections of streets, most of which were paved with cobbles. The mosque
was turned into a church and subsequently rebuilt. The old market disappeared
and the public bath building became a prison or arsenal. The houses in the
Portuguese city also differed from the Islamic ones, although in many cases the
earlier buildings were reused. Their plan was usually linear, with rooms that
were increasingly private as one moved away from the largest one, to which an
often decorative front door gave access. Many houses were also the location of
commercial activities and were not as well ﬁnished internally as the Muslim
houses had been. Although still built mainly of stone, they lacked the latrines
and drains of the earlier houses; fewer houses had their own wells, as public
wells in the city were also used. Many houses were subdivided as time went on,
probably because of a growing population, which might have reached about
1,000 people. The Portuguese occupants seem to have had more personal
possessions than their predecessors. Most of the pottery was imported from
across the Straits of Gibraltar, much of it glazed tableware, and later there was
even some Chinese porcelain. There were many metal objects, mainly of iron, as
well as numerous items of personal adornment of bronze, silver, and gold. Glass
vessels and bracelets were common and coins were more numerous than they
had been during the Islamic period. Collectively, the evidence suggested a three-
tier hierarchy, consisting of a large number of people of relatively modest means,
a small number who were rather wealthier, and just one who was richer than
anyone else, reﬂecting a typical military community.
   The pre-ﬁfteenth-century archaeological evidence from Qsar es-Seghir
provides an important example of North African Islamic urbanism. It should
be considered together with other Islamic urban sites in Morocco, such as

58
                                     The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

Al-Basra, to the south of Qsar es-Seghir. This was the site of another walled
city, mainly occupied in the ninth and tenth centuries AD but abandoned by
about the thirteenth century (Redman 1983; Benco 2004). Al-Basra has also
been set in its regional context in a study of the political economy and
settlement systems of northern Morocco (Ennahid 2002).


Subsistence economy
During the last three millennia the people of North Africa have mainly depended
on mixed agriculture to exploit the variety of environments in the region,
including desert, where the oasis cultivation in the Fezzan was particularly
impressive (Mattingly 2011; 2013; Mattingly and Sterry 2013). Different areas
have been important for cereal cultivation, particularly wheat and barley, or for
the production of olive oil, wine, dates, fruit, vegetables, and honey. Cattle,
sheep, and goat pastoralism have also contributed to subsistence, particularly in
the mountains and the semi-desert. Limiting factors of water stress and high
temperatures have often been ameliorated by irrigation, so that during some
periods North Africa became a major exporter of food. In addition, access to a
long coastline has enabled ﬁshing to contribute signiﬁcantly to human subsist-
ence. Inevitably, subsistence in the region varied throughout the long period
considered in this chapter, ﬂuctuating with economic conditions and the level of
security. However, Punic, Greek, Roman, Vandal, Byzantine, and Arab colon-
ists saw North Africa as a food source capable of generating considerable
wealth, as well as supporting its own people. The latter peaked at perhaps
3 million inhabitants late in the second or in the third century AD, although
the number is thought to have fallen by the seventh century (Kaegi: 2010: 64).
However, during the ﬁrst and second centuries AD, North African grain exports
fed Rome, the capital of the Empire, providing enough for eight months of each
year, some half a million tons (Manton 1988: 108). In addition, agricultural
exports included massive quantities of olive oil, but also wine and other com-
modities. Signiﬁcantly, a second-century AD coin of Hadrian depicts a personi-
ﬁcation of Africa holding a cornucopia in one hand, a symbol of plenty
consisting of a goat’s horn overﬂowing with ﬂowers, fruit, and corn. In the
other hand the ﬁgure holds a scorpion, suggesting perhaps an acceptance of the
counterbalancing constraints of the African environment (Fig. 3.7).


Technology
Throughout the relevant time there was a sophisticated level of technology in
North Africa, comparable to that of the contemporary Mediterranean world
in general. There is abundant evidence of skilled craftsmanship in stone, wood,

                                                                              59
African Civilizations




Fig. 3.7 Silver denarius of Hadrian commemorating his visit to Africa in AD 130–131.
On the reverse is a personiﬁcation of Africa wearing an elephant skin head-dress and
holding a cornucopia and a scorpion. ‘Africa’ at this time consisted of the Roman province
of Africa Proconsularis, approximately equivalent to modern northern Tunisia and
northeastern Algeria. From Manton 1988: ﬁg. 14.

ferrous and nonferrous metal, pottery, and other materials. Building of both
domestic and public structures frequently attained high standards, particularly
during the Roman and Islamic periods, and boat construction was already well
developed in the Punic period, with both warships and merchant vessels
playing an important role in Carthaginian history. Engineering was also
competent, as evidenced by the harbours at Carthage in the ﬁnal centuries
BC and by the aqueducts and other facilities for water supply during the
Roman period. Similarly, the harbour and lighthouse at Roman Lepcis Magna
(Sears 2011: 37, ﬁgure 2.1) are evidence of a capacity to plan and complete
large construction projects. Also in the Punic and Roman periods, urban
drainage and sanitation were attended to, and in Roman North Africa both
urban and rural road building were important. In addition, there are indica-
tions of urban planning in most periods. Dye and garum were manufactured
and olive-oil production was organized on a semi-industrial scale, as indicated
by the remains of stone olive-presses (Fig. 3.8) and by large numbers of
amphora used in the transport of oil or wine. However, perhaps the most
impressive of the surviving evidence for technological expertise in Roman
North Africa is the work of stonemasons and sculptors and the makers of
mosaic pavements, the latter depicting scenes from daily life as well as myth-
ology (Dunbabin 1978). Punic ﬂooring included what the Romans called
pavimentum Punicum, made up of terracotta fragments set in mortar (Hoyos
2010: 85, 221), perhaps the inspiration for the later but different potsherd

60
                                        The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa




Fig. 3.8 Reconstruction of a Roman olive-press, based on remains at Hinshir Sidi Hamdan,
southeast of Tripoli. From Kenrick 2009: Fig. 77.


pavements of West Africa (p. 198). Another Carthaginian innovation was the
threshing-cart, known to the Romans as the plostellum Punicum (Hoyos 2010:
221), and it appears that Punic agriculture, which included the use of the
plough, was generally sophisticated. Wheeled vehicles were in use until the
third century AD, when they were mainly replaced by camel transport; the
Carthaginians had horse-drawn chariots and in Roman North Africa carts
were pulled by horses, oxen, or camels, as also were ploughs (Bulliet 1975: 17,
137–40). Finally, North African states from the ﬁrst millennium BC to the
second millennium AD minted their own coinage.



Social system
North African society remained hierarchical during the many centuries dis-
cussed in this chapter, although the character of its social structures varied
through time. For the Carthaginians and the Hellenized people of Cyrene,
mercantile success and consequent wealth were often the basis of political
power and entry to a governing elite consisting of privileged families.
In Roman North Africa the situation was similar, but its leaders were subject

                                                                                     61
African Civilizations

to the superior authority and ﬁscal control of imperial Rome. Nevertheless,
social integration of Punic and other local people with colonial settlers and
their descendants makes it difﬁcult to decide the extent of ‘Romanization’ in
North Africa. During the Vandal period there was monarchy based mainly
on oppression of the population, and much the same was the case in indigen-
ous states and tribal areas during the overall period considered here. The
relationship of mobile pastoral tribes outside the settled areas with the urban
and rural communities was complex and variable. The Byzantine period
restored a diluted version of the earlier Roman situation, but the subsequent
Arab rulers were essentially successful military leaders, their descendants, or
their rivals. Common to all these periods, however, was an urban element
within society, ﬂuctuating in importance but consisting of cosmopolitan
citizens on whom the ruling elites depended. City-dwellers included a wide
range of socioeconomic groups, amongst them religious leaders, traders,
skilled craftsmen, artisans, servants, labourers, and slaves. There was also
an educated, literate component within many North African cities, and in
the Roman period some cities were essentially military in their character,
functioning as legionary bases or as settlements for army veterans. Urban
government, at least in the Roman period, depended on populism as well as
legal sanctions, as indicated by the number of public baths, amphitheatres,
theatres, circuses, temples, and other facilities that were constructed for the
beneﬁt of citizens. However, North African cities have to be considered in the
context of the rural economies that supported them. The greatest numbers of
cities were situated in the agriculturally most productive regions, and each
city had a close relationship with its surrounding countryside. Many of the
urban elite owned country estates, which are particularly well known from
the Roman period. Agricultural wealth was based on the labour of a large
population of rural workers, who included slaves and who were at the
bottom of the social pyramid.


Population pressures
North Africa has been called ‘the wealthiest region of the western half of the
[Roman] empire in the ﬁrst few centuries [AD]’ (Kaegi 2010: 65). This con-
trasts with the relatively impoverished and thinly populated condition of many
areas observed by visitors in the late second millennium, leading some to
suggest climatic deterioration as an explanation. This is now thought not to
have been the case; instead, it appears to have been skilled land management,
particularly of water in marginal areas, that underpinned past agricultural
success, most notably during the Roman period. In contrast, many subsequent
Arab settlers seem to have been more interested in pastoralism in the

62
                                     The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

semi-desert interior than in the cities and farmlands of the coastal regions
(Kenrick 2009: 10). Although North Africa was a land of urban centres in
Carthaginian, Roman, and later times, it is the number of Roman cities and
towns, their density in more fertile areas, and their presence even in drier areas
that is most impressive. Northern Tunisia and northeast Algeria had the
greatest density, but urban centres also occurred from the Atlantic coast to
Tripolitania, the latter supporting two of the best-known cities, Sabratha
(Kenrick 1986) and Lepcis Magna. Subsequently, cities appear to have become
less numerous but the rural settlements that supported them continued to be
important. Statistics are absent but it seems likely that the overall population
declined after the third century AD. At its peak, there must have been consider-
able pressure on land, especially the more productive land near cities. Such
land generated a great deal of wealth, particularly on large agricultural estates
that were often the property of absentee landowners and worked by slaves.
There is abundant archaeological evidence for this wealth in cities such as El
Djem, in present-day Tunisia. Crowded housing in the excavated portions of
some cities, particularly in the later Roman period, suggests population pres-
sure also existed in urban environments, especially among citizens of lower
socioeconomic status. Furthermore, beyond the settled areas, at the margins of
the desert, there must also have been population pressures, with attempts to
control the seasonal movements of pastoralists by frontier forts, fortlets, and
strategically located barriers. In addition, during the later Roman and subse-
quent periods, many farms were fortiﬁed, indicating insecurity probably
brought on by competition for resources. Considering the marginal constraints
of North Africa, located between the sea and the desert and limited further by
mountains to the west, it seems probable that population pressures did exist at
times.


Ideology
Religious beliefs were important throughout the communities of North Africa
during the periods considered. They varied with ethnic, cultural, linguistic, and
ideological identity. Carthaginian religion, with its origins in the Levant, had
its own distinctive deities, comprising a very large number of gods and god-
desses of whom the goddess Tanit and the god Baal seem to have been the most
signiﬁcant. Hostile Greek and Roman writers were critical of Carthaginian
beliefs, particularly regarding child sacriﬁce, concerning which the evidence
remains ambiguous. It is nevertheless clear that their religion was of major
importance to the Carthaginians for the well-being of their state in both peace
and war. In contrast, the Greek colony of Cyrene reverenced traditional Greek
deities and others of the Hellenized world. Similarly, the Roman colonists

                                                                               63
African Civilizations

honoured Roman gods, although there was also a broadminded acceptance of
cults from other places, such as Isis and Serapis from Egypt and Mithras from
Persia. However, it was the state cult of the Emperor (Fig. 3.9) that was most
important: ‘It kept the peoples of the Empire together and sacriﬁces and
libations had to be observed as homage before ofﬁcial functions and other
important occasions’ (Manton 1988: 128). This is testimony to the central
importance of religious ideology in the maintenance and extension of state
authority. It is signiﬁcant that North African Christian martyrs, in the third
and early fourth centuries AD, were persecuted because of their refusal to
sacriﬁce to the Emperor; it was their disloyalty to the state rather than their
religious belief that was judged criminal. Nevertheless, by the fourth century
Christianity had practically taken over North Africa, where it appears to have




Fig. 3.9 Marble portrait head of Septimius Severus, from Djemila, Algeria. Images of this
sort must have been important in the cult of the Emperor, particularly in the case of this
emperor, who was a North African, born in Lepcis Magna. From Manton 1988: plate 13.


64
                                    The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

spread more quickly than it did in other parts of the Empire, and early in the
century it was accepted by the Emperor Constantine as the state religion. Its
divisive inﬂuence continued, however, with bitter and often violent disputes
amongst Christians between Catholics and Donatists and with the later
Vandal attempts to impose Arianism. The social and political tensions that
resulted inevitably contributed to the ultimate collapse of Roman North
Africa. Continuing dissension amongst Christians weakened even the sixth-
century Byzantine reassertion of state control. The success of the Arab inva-
sion of North Africa during the seventh century seems to have owed as much
to the cohesion of their Islamic faith as to their military superiority, and
Christianity appears to have collapsed rapidly. However, in its turn, Islam
also became divided by conﬂicts and schisms, especially those between the Shia
and Sunni sects. The story of religious ideology in North Africa shows how
such beliefs can contribute authority and cohesion to a state or, equally, cause
dissension that leads to state disintegration.


External trade
With its long Mediterranean coastline providing seaborne access to some of
the most remarkable urban and state developments of the last three millennia,
external trade was of great importance to North Africa for much of this time
(Fulford 1989). Indeed, external contact must have had great antiquity, as
indicated by ivory from African savanna elephants that reached southern
Portugal by the ﬁrst half of the third millennium BC (Schuhmacher et al.
2009). The very foundation of Carthage and other Phoenician settlements in
the late second to early ﬁrst millennium BC was the product of a wide trading
network. An important part of this comprised the Mediterranean and Atlantic
coasts of southern Spain and northwest Africa (Serrano 2011: 21). It is
apparent that both Carthage and the later Roman colonies owed much of
their economic success to their export capacity, particularly of agricultural
products. Grain and olive oil appear to have been the largest exports, but wine,
garum, and other commodities were also traded. In addition, wild animals
were sent from Africa to Roman amphitheatres, as attested archaeologically by
a late third-century AD Sicilian mosaic showing an elephant being loaded onto
a ship (Manton 1988: 40). Exported animals also included lions, leopards,
hippopotami, rhinoceros, giraffes, and even zebras; some of these must have
come from the African interior. Slaves were another important export; it has
been estimated that between 250,000 and 400,000 new slaves were required
each year to maintain the slave workforce of the Roman state. Amongst these
were Africans, many of them probably supplied by the Garamantes of the
Fezzan to Mediterranean traders (Fentress 2011: 66, 68). Ivory, from both

                                                                             65
African Civilizations

elephant tusks and hippopotamus teeth, was another important export, as
were various African exotica, such as animal skins and semi-precious stones.
Previously, Carthaginian trade had also included decorated ostrich-egg shells
(Lancel 1995: 218–20) and similar commodities. Furthermore, it is possible
that North African merchants were already handling West African gold in
the fourth century AD, considerably earlier than was previously thought
(Garrard 1982; MacDonald 2011).
   This raises the question of Saharan trade prior to its major development
beginning late in the ﬁrst millennium AD. This has often been dismissed as
unlikely because Roman material, for instance, appears not to have penetrated
south of the desert, in contrast to the way that it reached far beyond other
frontiers of the Roman Empire. However, there are indications that inter-
change over short distances could have taken some commodities across the
Sahara in both directions, perhaps in a relay of exchange along the trade
routes. With doubtful exceptions, Roman coins do not seem to have reached
south of the desert, but it is unlikely that they would have been acceptable in
societies unfamiliar with their use and possible that any remaining there would
have been melted down for their metal content. From a later date, Arabic
coins are similarly rare south of the Sahara in spite of the substantial trade
that is known to have developed by then. Nevertheless, Roman trade
goods did reach the Garamantes, in the Fezzan (Mattingly 2011: 54–5), and
the Tomb of Abalessa, in the Hoggar. In addition, carnelian and glass beads
and woollen textile fragments from burials at Kissi, in Burkina Faso, as
well as the ﬁrst appearance of donkeys, horses, camels, and chickens south
of the desert, are further indications of pre-Islamic trans-Saharan contact
(MacDonald 2011: 76).
   It seems likely, therefore, that North African exports to or across the Sahara
already included two commodities that were later to become of importance –
beads and textiles – but there were also ﬁne ceramics and other prestige goods.
As for the main imports of the Roman cities and rural estates of North Africa
itself, they must have comprised a wide range of consumer goods from the
Mediterranean world, many of them appropriate to the afﬂuent lifestyles of
the elite. Similarly, the later Arab settlements absorbed substantial imports,
although mainly from the Islamic world. Throughout the long period reviewed
in this chapter external trade was clearly well developed. The resulting
‘connectivity’, deﬁned as ‘the frequency and velocity of connections between
cities or regions’ (Dowler 2011: 2), has been of the greatest importance in the
inﬂuence of North Africa on its surrounding regions and that of the surround-
ing regions on North Africa. As a frontier, North Africa has contributed both
to the Mediterranean world and to the African world to its south, in the latter
case particularly during the Islamic period, as shown for example by the

66
                                         The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa




Fig. 3.10 Arabic inscription and frieze on copper-alloy bowl from a ﬁfteenth- to sixteenth-
century burial at Durbi Takusheyi, northern Nigeria. Haase 2011: ﬁg. 2, p.103. Drawing by
Michael Ober, Römisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum (RGZM). Reproduced by
permission of Detlef Gronenborn, RGZM).

Arabic inscription (Fig. 3.10) on a copper-alloy bowl from a ﬁfteenth- to
sixteenth-century AD burial at Durbi Takusheyi, in northern Nigeria (Haase
2011; Gronenborn et al. 2012). Indeed, North African Islamic trade also
penetrated far to the north, so that two Barbary lions reached the Royal
Menagerie of England during the thirteenth to ﬁfteenth centuries AD, as
shown by their skulls that were excavated from the moat of the Tower of
London (Barnett et al. 2008).


Conclusion
The inﬂuence of the states and cities of North Africa on other parts of the
continent has sometimes been overlooked. Scholars who were specialists in
North African history and archaeology have regarded Africa south of the
Sahara as not their concern; those who studied the regions south of the desert
have usually had little knowledge of lands to its north. Nevertheless, it has
long been acknowledged that the Islamic societies of North Africa had a
profound effect on many people in the West African savanna, particularly
during the second millennium AD. Traders and others from across the Sahara
stimulated commercial activity, the emergence and growth of cities and
states, the spread of the Islamic religion, and the adoption of limited literacy.
Gold, ivory, slaves, and spices travelled north with the camel caravans;
salt, copper alloys, beads, cowries, textiles, and other manufactured products
travelled south.
   What is less clear is whether such trade existed before the advent of the
Arabs in North Africa, even if only on a much smaller scale. The accepted
view has been that it did not or was virtually nonexistent. Gradually, however,
this is being challenged, and there are indications that there was increasing
trans-Saharan contact at least by North Africa’s late Roman period. Possibly

                                                                                       67
African Civilizations

this had existed even in Carthaginian times, but relevant evidence is very
limited. Nevertheless, the notion of the Sahara as an impassable barrier does
need to be reassessed; given the moister climate of the Early Holocene there
must have been a long-established mobility within this enormous region and in
its margins before the subsequent development of drier conditions.
   Nor was the Mediterranean a frontier in any exclusive sense; rather, it was
a vibrant interactive zone that brought North Africa into continual contact with
people to its north, including Greece, Rome, and southern Spain, and to its east,
including Egypt and the Levant. With a variety of highly productive agricultural
environments, sophisticated technology, organized social hierarchies, functional
specialization, a substantial population, a series of religious ideologies to legit-
imize the sociopolitical status quo, and a substantial export potential, North
Africa has often been a major attraction to outsiders. Clearly, the Phoenicians
thought so, and the Greeks, Romans, Vandals, Byzantines, and Arabs. Of the
people who exploited its beneﬁts, it was surely the Vandals, from central
Europt, whose presence was most remarkable. As a frontier, North Africa seems
to have been highly permeable.




68
Chapter 4
Sudanic genesis: Nubia


Other than Pharaonic Egypt, some of the earliest evidence for urbanization
and state formation in Africa was along the middle Nile, in the region called
Nubia. One of the best-known examples was Meroë, located about 200 kilo-
metres north-east of the modern city of Khartoum, in Sudan. Mentioned
as early as the ﬁfth century BC by Herodotus (Powell 1949: vol. 1, 121), its
antecedents lay in Napata and Kerma, the latter dating back to before 2000
BC, and it was succeeded by the kingdoms of Christian Nubia, which survived
until the early second millennium AD, and by Islamic states that existed until
recent times (Welsby 1996; 2002; Edwards 2004; 2007; UCL 2013).
  At the beginning of the twentieth century, scholars attributed such develop-
ments to the inﬂuence in turn of Pharaonic, Ptolemaic, Roman, Byzantine,
and Islamic Egypt, located to the north of the area. Later the emphasis was
changed to one that stressed the indigenous character of Nubian achievements
but acknowledged the contributions made to them by northern cultures.
William Adams, the author of a 1977 monograph on the archaeology of this
area, described Nubia as ‘the transition zone, between the civilized world
and Africa’ and entitled his book Nubia: Corridor to Africa. According
to Adams, the importance of this narrow corridor through the barren land
of Nubia arose from the fact that it was for long the only dependable route
across the great barrier of the Sahara Desert, a major road into the heart of
Africa. The African interior contained resources much coveted by the outside
world – gold, ivory, and slaves – but also other mineral, animal, and vegetable
products (Adams 1984: 40). These could be tapped via the Nubian corridor.
However, with the development of Red Sea shipping from the ﬁrst millennium
BC onwards, and of trans-Saharan camel caravans during the ﬁrst millennium
AD, the middle Nile Valley gradually lost its signiﬁcance as a major world
trade route. That role was ﬁnally destroyed by the expansion of maritime trade
around Africa’s coasts in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries AD.
  Both archaeological and documentary evidence support the idea of Adams’
trade corridor, and the growth of cities and states was centred on it. This
suggests that this part of Africa can provide us with an example of trade as
a major stimulus towards the development of social complexity. Perhaps so,
but these developments took place at the interface of considerable cultural
contact, of which trade was only one element, as Adams indeed stressed.
People are very likely to meet one another in corridors.

                                                                            69
African Civilizations

  Corridors, however, usually lead somewhere, and archaeologists have
debated the extent to which the culture of the inhabitants of the middle Nile
Valley might have inﬂuenced the rest of Africa. At one extreme, Sayce thought
that ‘Meroë . . . must have been the Birmingham of ancient Africa’ (Sayce 1911:
55). At the other extreme, Trigger (1969) complained about ‘the myth of Meroë’
and Shinnie (1967: 167) pointed out that ‘not a single object of certain Meroitic
origin has been found away from the Nile to the west’. Indeed, in the ﬁrst edition
of this book (Connah 1987) it was suggested that the Nubian corridor was
a cultural cul-de-sac, an interpretation also advanced by Alexander (1988).
However, such a view implies only a passive role for Nubia, suggesting that it
was a mere receiver of cultural inﬂuences rather than also an initiator of cultural
changes. It also reﬂects a former research emphasis on Lower Nubia, the
narrow, desert-enclosed part of the Nile Valley north of the Second Cataract,
and the relatively little attention given to the valley further south and its rainfed
wadis and savannas. As Edwards (1996: 5) put it: ‘Meroe, and indeed Kerma
before it, should be seen as the early examples of a long and enduring tradition
of Sudanic kingdoms.’ Edwards subsequently expanded this view in his
2004 book The Nubian Past, and similarly Fuller (2003: 183) stressed the
‘distinctive Sudanic system of power’ in Meroitic society. Whatever the external
inﬂuences, Nubia should be seen as a Sudanic genesis of social complexity.


Geographical location and environmental factors
The Nile is a very long river that runs from the Lake Region of East Africa to
the Mediterranean Sea, passing through a number of contrasting environ-
ments, some of which are amongst the driest in Africa. Because it ﬂows
through so much arid country for much of its length, the river and its narrow
valley have played an important role in human history. Ancient Egypt was,
as Herodotus called it, ‘the gift of the river’ (Powell 1949: vol. 1, 111) but if
this was true of the lower Nile, it was also partly true of the middle Nile, the
subject of this chapter. This is the land of the Nile cataracts impeding naviga-
tion, a series of rocky, swift rapids. Most of the cataracts are conventionally
numbered from one to six: the First Cataract just south of Aswan, in southern
Egypt; the Sixth Cataract a little north of Khartoum in the Sudan. It is this long
and narrow strip that for the last 2,000 years or so has been known as ‘Nubia’
(O’Connor 1993: xii), although the location of its southern limits has varied.
In this discussion, the ‘middle Nile’ will be that part of the Nile Valley between
Sennar on the Blue Nile south of Khartoum, and the First Cataract at Aswan,
in the north (Fig. 4.1). However, in addition to the river valley, it is essential to
consider the land to its east and west, particularly in southern Nubia, which
does receive a little seasonal rain.

70
                                                                Sudanic genesis: Nubia




Fig. 4.1 Principal archaeological sites and places on the middle Nile mentioned in the text.
(Some place-name spellings vary.) 1, Kalabsha; 2, Sabaqura; 3, Ikhmindi; 4, Maharraqa;
5, Sheikh Daoud; 6, Karanog; 7, Aniba; 8, Qasr Ibrim; 9, Arminna West; 10, Tamit; 11, Abu
Simbel; 12, Ballana; 13, Faras; 14, Debeira West; 15, Buhen; 16, Kasanarti; 17, Jebel Adda;
18, Qustul; 19, Debeira East; 20, Meinarti; 21, Duweishat; 22, Kulubnarti; 23, Amara;


                                                                                        71
African Civilizations

   The climate of the more northerly parts of the middle Nile is an extreme
one. At Wadi Halfa, in the northern Sudan, the mean daily temperature
between May and September is about 32C, but the temperature nearly
always exceeds 38C during the day and may reach above 49C. However,
from November to March it is comparatively mild, with temperatures that
can occasionally drop almost to freezing. Between Aswan and Dongola, that
is to say in the northern half of the middle Nile region, it almost never rains.
In contrast, the southern half of the region has a well-deﬁned wet season of
eight to ten weeks, in July and August, although the actual rainfall is very
limited, increasing from north to south from about 25 millimetres at Dongola
to about 180 millimetres at Khartoum. Another climatic factor of importance
is wind, which blows steadily from the north for the whole year, resulting
in considerable accumulation of desert sand, particularly on the west bank
of the Nile, where it has constantly encroached on both settlements and
ﬁelds. However, with the exception of the reverse bend between Abu Hamed
and Debba, it has also made upstream navigation possible on the river,
just as the direction of the current has facilitated downstream navigation
(Adams 1977: 33–5).
   The vegetation of the middle Nile region varies from total desert in the north
to acacia desert scrub in the south (Andrews 1948: 34). The most important
part of the environment, however, is the River Nile itself, rising more than
3,000 kilometres to the south and bringing to Nubia both the water and soil
that are necessary to sustain human settlement. Most vegetation maps are of
too small a scale to show details of the vegetation of the long river littoral, so
narrow that in places it is a mere few hundred metres wide or is absent.
However, date palms (Phoenix dactylifera) are common, really domesticated
trees but so numerous that they look like part of the natural vegetation. Other
trees also grow along the river littoral, the most important being the dom palm
(Hyphaena thebaica), various acacias, and the tamarisk. Most of the rest of the
vegetation consists of cultivated plants, but halfa grass grows wherever it can
ﬁnd moisture, and when the river is low a fringe of papyrus reed can be found
in some places at the water’s edge (Adams 1977: 37–8).
   Environments vary along the Nubian Nile because of its geology. From
Khartoum to Aswan, the river ﬂows alternately over Nubian sandstone and
basement complex (mostly granite). As a result, there are six geographic


Caption for Fig. 4.1 (cont.) 24, Ferka; 25, Sai; 26, Seddenga; 27, Soleb; 28, Sesebi; 29, Kerma
and Pnubs; 30, Argo; 31, Kawa; 32, Kurgus; 33, Old Dongola; 34, El Kurru; 35, Jebel Barkal;
36, Sanam; 37, Nuri (sites 34–7 constitute Napata); 38, Meroë; 39, Hamadab; 40, Shendi;
41, el Hobagi; 42, Wad ben Naqa; 43, Musawwaret es-Sufra; 44, Naqa; 45, Soba; 46, Jebel
Qeili; 47, Sennar. After Adams 1977 with additions. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.


72
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

subdivisions of the middle Nile (Adams 1977: 21–33), their boundaries mostly
consisting of the main cataracts of the river where it crosses from one geo-
logical formation to another (Fig. 4.1). In general, sandstone areas have
supported farming settlements but granite areas have not. To the south there
is semi-desert grassland beyond the river littoral and therefore pastoralism.
Within the Shendi Reach, the furthest south, lay the heartland of the Meroitic
state, including the city of Meroë itself. To the north of the Shendi Reach lies
the Abu Hamed Reach, a region of barren granite with low productivity,
which extends to the Fourth Cataract and seems never to have been an
important area for settlement. Between the Fourth Cataract and the Third
Cataract lies the Dongola Reach, with potentially cultivable land on both sides
of the river. This reach saw the earliest developments of complex society on the
middle Nile: both Kerma and Napata were situated there. From the Third
Cataract to the (unnumbered) Dal Cataract is the Abri-Delgo Reach, import-
ant during the Egyptian (New Kingdom) colonial expansion, in the second half
of the second millennium BC. Further north is the Batn el Hajar, a name
meaning ‘belly of rock’, appropriate for this bare granite landscape, extending
from the Dal Cataract to the Second Cataract. Last of the geographic subdiv-
isions is Lower Nubia, stretching from the Second Cataract to the First
Cataract. Now almost totally submerged beneath Lake Nasser (in Egypt; its
southern part, in Sudan, is called Lake Nubia), it was formerly moderately
prosperous. In spite of the virtual absence of rainfall, archaeological evidence
suggests that at times this was a signiﬁcant area of settlement and that its
proximity to Egypt gave it an important role as a cultural contact zone.
   In the middle Nile region, cultivation of seasonally inundated or irrigated
land, in recent times, produced sorghum, barley, beans, tobacco, lentils, peas,
watermelons, maize, some wheat, and other plants. Animal husbandry was
important, mainly involving cattle, sheep, goats, and donkeys. Chickens,
pigeons, ducks, and dogs were kept, but horses and pigs were rare (Trigger
1965: 19–22; Adams 1977: 54). Little of the native fauna seems to have
survived to later historical times, although ﬁsh remained an important
resource. At ﬁrst a primary source of ivory, ostrich eggs and feathers, skins,
and even live animals for the Egyptian trade, Lower Nubia in particular
gradually became merely a pipeline through which these passed on their way
north.
   A longer-lasting Nubian resource consisted of minerals, including copper,
ﬁne-grained igneous rocks, and, most important, gold. Gold was scarce but
occurred widely, particularly in the desert to the east of the Nile Valley.
Another resource of importance throughout most of the history of the region
was slaves. Even with this commodity, however, as time went on Nubia
became the pipeline rather than the source. It seems that the indigenous

                                                                             73
African Civilizations

resources of Nubia were less important than those that it obtained from
further south (Adams 1977: 41–3).
   A constraint on human settlement in the middle Nile was the level of the
river itself, whose height in the ﬂood season could be too low for irrigation or
so high that ﬂoodwater swept away both settlements and cultivable alluvium.
There were also long-term ﬂuctuations in the average level of the Nile, such as
Adams (1977: 242) hypothesized to explain the apparent virtual abandonment
of Lower Nubia during the ﬁrst millennium BC. This region, he claimed, was
reoccupied only at the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium AD, with the advent
of the saqia, the ox-driven water wheel, which could raise irrigation water
to greater heights than were possible with the man-powered shaduf – although
subsequently it appeared that the abandonment might have been overstated and
the saqia not introduced until about the fourth century AD (Edwards 1996:
80–1, 91; Welsby 1996: 156; Edwards 2004: 202–4). Another constraining
factor was the availability of arable land, of which three sorts existed: seluka
land, saqia and shaduf land, and basin land (Trigger 1965: 19–21). Seluka land
was situated on the ﬂoodplain and was inundated each year when the river was
high. When the level fell, the land could produce a crop without further
watering, and its exploitation was therefore an example of ‘recessional cultiva-
tion’, which is discussed elsewhere (p. 153). In contrast, saqia and shaduf
land consisted of relatively small areas that had to be watered mechanically
but could be cropped almost continuously. Basin land, although of importance
in Egypt, was more limited in Nubia, and consisted of land lying in natural
depressions adjacent to the river, into which ﬂoodwater overﬂowed or was
channelled by a canal.
   The life-giving waters of the Nile brought suffering to the inhabitants of
Nubia also. Schistosomiasis, a water-borne disease that is common in much
of tropical Africa and is caused by a blood ﬂuke that lives in freshwater snails,
is prevalent in the Nile Valley. The ﬂuke gains entry to the human bloodstream
usually through breaks in the skin and then attacks the liver and other organs.
Another afﬂiction associated with water is onchocerciasis, or river blindness,
caused by ﬁlarial worms transmitted by the minute ﬂy Simulium damnosum
(Manson-Bahr and Apted 1982: 166). Malaria, tuberculosis, and trachoma
are other diseases along the middle Nile (Adams 1977: 40–1).
   A further constraint on settlement has been the depredations of human
beings themselves. The middle Nile Valley has suffered numerous military
invasions from its north, and the nomadic pastoralists of the adjacent deserts
have repeatedly harassed the sedentary farmers along the river, particularly
after desert nomads adopted the camel; evidence from Qasr Ibrim indicates
that it was in the Nile Valley by the early ﬁrst millennium BC (Rowley-Conwy
1988). Nevertheless, it seems that desert pastoralism was so important to the

74
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

riverine economy (Edwards 1996; 2004) that it was essential for people within
the valley to control or coexist with those from outside it. This must have been
a strong incentive to more powerful political organization and to greater social
complexity.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
Understanding of early cities and states in the middle Nile region is based on
historical documentation and archaeological data. Except for the Islamic
period of the second millennium AD, the timespan is too great for oral
tradition to contribute. Adams (1977: 66–70) identiﬁed six groups of histor-
ical sources.
  The ﬁrst consists of Egyptian texts in hieroglyphic and hieratic. These cover
the period from the ﬁrst half of the third millennium BC to near the end of the
second millennium BC, but contain little about Nubia. The second group
comprises Nubian hieroglyphic texts of the Napatan period, from the eighth
to about the fourth century BC. Written by Egyptian scribes in the Egyptian
language and in hieroglyphics, these also contain little about Nubia and throw
no light on contemporary Nubian language. Consequently, when in later times
Nubians developed their own Meroitic alphabet, they left texts that are difﬁ-
cult to understand because their language bears no recognizable relationship to
any other language (Welsby 1996: 190; Edwards 2004: 176–9). Used from
about the second century BC to about the fourth century AD, Meroitic writing
can be read, but the language of the writing cannot be fully understood (e.g.,
Trigger 1973). The third group of historical sources are writings by classical
authors. One of the earliest was Herodotus, who visited Egypt in the ﬁfth
century BC. Other classical writers also contributed information on Nubia,
but these Greek and Latin texts are the view of the outsider, written from
hearsay evidence. Knowledge of the region appears to have been limited: the
Nile Mosaic at Palestrina near Rome, of the late second century BC, shows
‘the landscape of lower Nubia combined with the fauna of upper Nubia’
(Meyboom 1995: 50). The fourth group, that of ecclesiastical histories, is also
limited in value. Several church historians wrote about the conversion of
Nubia in the sixth century AD to Christianity, but their accounts conﬂict
depending on their doctrine. Also, the information that they give is mainly
concerned with the ﬁrst century of Christian Nubia, because subsequently the
Arab conquest of Egypt cut off contact with the rest of Christendom. The ﬁfth
group consists of Arab sources. The most important is the fourteenth-century
geographer al-Maqrizi, whose writing also preserves part of a tenth-century

                                                                             75
African Civilizations

ﬁrst-hand account of Nubia. Again, these sources represent the views of
outsiders and they are conﬁned to the ﬁrst half of the second millennium
AD. The sixth group is records by European travellers in the Early Modern
period. Their value is limited for the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, but
several eighteenth-century travellers wrote about Nubia; much of this material
belongs to the nineteenth century.
  Thus there are nearly 5,000 years of historical documentation for the middle
Nile. The documentation has three weaknesses: ﬁrst, the further up the Nile
one goes, the less informative it is; second, the texts provide only an intermit-
tent recorded history; third, most of the documentation was written by visitors
to Nubia, attempting to understand what they saw or were told.


Archaeological evidence
In such circumstances archaeological evidence has a vital role to play, although
studies of ancient Nubia have suffered from historical bias. Archaeological
research commenced at the beginning of the twentieth century with the work
of Reisner, Firth, Grifﬁth, Garstang, and Wellcome, to be followed until
1958 by others (Adams 1977: 78–80), but there was a tendency for excav-
ations to be tomb, temple, and palace–oriented and for much of the detailed
information never to reach publication. Only with the international archaeo-
logical campaign of the 1960s, made necessary by the construction of the
Aswan High Dam and the creation of Lake Nasser/Nubia (Hassan 2007),
did there develop both an interest in the excavation of settlement sites and a
substantial archaeological literature.
  Some of the earliest archaeological sites relevant to the origins of cities and
states in the middle Nile region are Egyptian rather than Nubian. They represent
two main periods of colonial expansion, ﬁrst during the Pharaonic Middle
Kingdom, and second during the New Kingdom. The ﬁrst of these expansions
belonged mainly to the Egyptian Twelfth Dynasty of the ﬁrst quarter of the
second millennium BC and resulted in the construction of a series of forts in
Lower Nubia, most of them clustered around the Second Cataract (Adams
1977: 175–83; Edwards 2004: 91–4). Buhen is the best known of those that
have been excavated. It consisted of a series of mud-brick fortiﬁcations built
on a massive scale, enclosing a small town (Emery 1965: 149). This was not
the ﬁrst Egyptian town at Buhen, for during the Fourth and Fifth Dynasties of
the Old Kingdom, around the middle of the third millennium BC, there was
already a sizeable town surrounded by a stone wall (Adams 1977: 170–4). It has
been assumed that the Middle Kingdom forts were constructed in order to
protect Egypt’s southern frontier, but Adams suggested that they were primarily
intended to protect and control the commerce of the Nile Valley (Adams 1984).

76
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

  During the Pharaonic Second Intermediate Period, which lasted from the end
of the ﬁrst quarter of the second millennium BC to the middle of that millen-
nium, Egyptian political control of Lower Nubia seems to have weakened
and the Second Cataract forts might have been abandoned. However, the New
Kingdom, of the second half of the second millennium BC, saw a new colonial
initiative by Egypt that extended Egypt’s dominion further up the Nile than
ever before, or indeed ever again until the conquests of Mohammed Ali early
in the nineteenth century AD.
  Egyptian authority was established to at least the Third Cataract, and
evidence of the most southerly Egyptian presence is provided by inscriptions
at Kurgus, between the Fourth and Fifth Cataracts (Edwards 2004: 105). The
Middle Kingdom forts were restored, and new fortiﬁed towns were built in the
Abri-Delgo Reach and in the Dongola Reach. In time, the military character of
Egyptian settlement diminished and the building of temples replaced that
of fortresses. During the period as a whole, however, colonial settlements of
importance grew up particularly in the Abri-Delgo Reach and included such
towns as Sai, Amara, Soleb, Seddenga, and Sesebi (Delgo). Further south, in
the Dongola Reach, there was less Egyptian colonization but towns developed
at both Kawa and Napata, possibly to control the Meheila Road, a desert
route that cut across the great bend of the Nile in this region. Most remarkable
of the New Kingdom temples in Nubia is that of Abu Simbel in Lower Nubia,
but another of importance was constructed far to the south at Jebel Barkal,
where the Temple of Amon, founded by the Egyptian Pharaoh Rameses II,
later became the ideological centre of the indigenous Napatan state. New
Kingdom colonization of the northern parts of the middle Nile terminated
towards the end of the second millennium BC, probably because of growing
political problems in Egypt. The colonial domination of parts of Nubia by
Egypt was over, but its consequences for the people of Nubia were to be long-
lasting (Adams 1977: 217–45).
  Egyptian involvement in Nubia had already elicited an indigenous Nubian
response by the Second Intermediate Period. It was at this time, about the
middle of the second millennium BC, that the Nubian kingdom of Kerma was
at the climax of its development in the period known as the Classic Kerma.
Prior to that, its emergence can be traced back for about 1,500 years through
the Middle Kerma and the Early Kerma to its indigenous origins in the
Pre-Kerma before 3000 BC (Bonnet 1990; 1992). That its roots included a
substantial pastoralist element is apparent from the sheep and cattle remains
with some of the Kerma burials, and MacDonald (1998) suggested that the
sociopolitical changes indicated by the Kerma evidence originated in what he
termed the ‘Mobile Elites’, of the African savanna and Saharan margins, from
4000 BC onwards. Nevertheless, Kerma reached its high point at a time of

                                                                             77
African Civilizations

Egyptian weakness during the Second Intermediate Period, when the Second
Cataract forts might have been abandoned, and it disappeared at the time of
Egypt’s colonial expansion during the New Kingdom.
   Although there was dense Kerma settlement as far south as the Kawa region
(Smith 2003: 88), the most important archaeological evidence comes from
Kerma itself, a complex of sites situated on the east bank of the Nile at the
northern end of the Dongola Reach, one of the more fertile regions of the
middle Nile. Excavations at Kerma by G.A. Reisner, in 1913–16, concentrated
on an extensive cemetery containing several thousand graves (Reisner 1923).
A number of these were covered by burial mounds, or ‘tumuli’, as the excav-
ator called them. Of these tumuli, eight were unusually large, the largest being
about 91 metres in diameter. Like the smaller examples they contained burial
chambers, but in the case of the three largest the body of the mound had an
internal structure of mud-brick walls. Part of this structure consisted of a
corridor running across the mound, with other walls at right angles to it. In
the main chamber, the principal burial lay upon a bed, accompanied by
weapons and personal possessions. Other human bodies, whose attitudes
suggested that they had been sacriﬁced, took up the rest of the space. A far
larger number of sacriﬁces lay in the transverse corridor, and later subsidiary
burials, some also accompanied by human sacriﬁces, had been inserted in
many places between the walls. In Tumulus X, where the main chamber had
been long ago robbed, Reisner found 322 sacriﬁces in the sacriﬁcial corridor,
and estimated that there had originally been as many as 400 before disturb-
ance by tomb robbers (Reisner 1923: Parts I–III, 312). Such evidence suggests
a highly centralized political authority, and it seems justiﬁable to claim Kerma
as the earliest state in tropical Africa.
   Excavations by Charles Bonnet more recently have shed additional light on
Kerma (Bonnet 1990; 1992; 1997; Bonnet and Valbelle 2014). A greater
chronological range of burials has now been examined, and because the dry
climate has preserved bone, leather, hair, and feathers, a remarkably detailed
picture of Kerma society can be reconstructed. For instance, a life expectancy of
thirty-one years has been calculated for those who died naturally, although
those who were sacriﬁced were generally younger than this, and some individ-
uals lived until they were eighty years old. In addition, the remains of an
extensive and long-lasting settlement have now been uncovered (Fig. 4.2).
Mainly of rectangular houses of mud-brick or wood, this has provided evidence
of an elaborate system of fortiﬁcation consisting of a mud wall with projecting
rectangular towers and a ditch. As time passed there were substantial changes
in the plans and layout of structures within the settlement, and both stone and
ﬁred brick were used in the defences. Overall, it seems that this early urban
development grew up around a sanctuary that evolved through time into a

78
79
     Fig. 4.2 Plan of Kerma during its ‘Classic’ period, about the middle of the second millennium BC. After Bonnet 1990: ﬁg. 30.
African Civilizations

massive mud-brick temple, known as the Western Deffufa. This is a solid
rectangular mass of mud-brick, measuring about 27 by 52 metres at the base
and originally probably far exceeding the height of 19 metres that has survived
to modern times (Reisner 1923: Parts I–III, 21–40). The structure has no internal
chambers, only the remains of a narrow, winding stair that must have led to its
top. Excavations by Bonnet, however, have shown that it was not originally a
solid structure but a temple with interior chambers that were later ﬁlled with
brickwork, while at least twelve phases have been distinguished in its masonry
(Bonnet 1992: 613–14). A similar but smaller structure, known as the Eastern
Deffufa, is situated in the cemetery about 4 kilometres to the east of the
settlement and appears to have been an outsized mortuary chapel (Reisner
1923: Parts I–III, 122–34). Attached to one side of the Western Deffufa was a
building from which Reisner excavated more than 500 mud sealings of Egyptian
type, which had been afﬁxed to various containers. There were in addition many
fragments of items of Egyptian manufacture and assorted raw materials. This
led Adams (1984: 51) to suggest that this was a trading depot, but the discovery
by Bonnet of a bronze workshop in the same place, and the argument of
Lacovara (1991) that some of the Egyptian material was in the process of
being recycled, makes it more likely that this was merely an activity area.
  Bonnet’s excavations have also shown that by the ﬁrst half of the second
millennium BC the Kerma settlement contained a very large circular building
of wood and mud-brick that was at least 10 metres high, probably with a
conical roof. Clearly an elite structure, its apparent similarity to much later
audience chambers recorded ethnohistorically in other parts of the continent
emphasizes the African character of the Kerma development. It contrasts with
a rectangular residential or administrative building and with an Egyptian-style
temple, both dating towards the end of the Kerma sequence and located
a kilometre away (Bonnet 1992). By this time the Egyptian New Kingdom
might have taken control of the area, but it seems that prior to this Kerma had
already attained urban status and become the capital of tropical Africa’s ﬁrst
identiﬁable state. David O’Connor had no doubt about this, referring to
Kerma as ‘the earliest city in Africa outside of Egypt’ and concluding that
‘the social complexity and the advanced degree of political centralization
evoked in the city and cemetery of Kerma would seem to be those of a state,
not a complex chiefdom’ (O’Connor 1993: 50, 55). An indication of the
demographic processes involved in the formation of this early city and state
has been provided by stable isotope analysis of human skeletal material from
Kerma burials, suggesting that a signiﬁcant portion of the population might
have originated elsewhere (Thompson et al. 2008).
  The extent of Egyptian inﬂuence in Kerma has become doubtful. For
instance, Bourriau (1991: 135–6) has shown that whereas Kerma pottery that

80
                                                         Sudanic genesis: Nubia

occurs in Egypt during the Eighteenth Dynasty is ‘tableware or cooking
pottery’, indicating the presence of Nubians, the Egyptian pottery found at
Kerma in the Classic Kerma period consists of ‘jars for the storage and
transport of commodities’ that are not ‘sufﬁcient evidence for the presence of
Egyptians’.
  New Kingdom colonization apparently brought Kerma to an end, but when
that in turn declined, the next indigenous Nubian development was that of
Napata, a kingdom that arose on the Dongola Reach during the ninth century
BC (Shinnie 1996: 95–105; Welsby 1996; Edwards 2004: 112–40). This
kingdom, usually known as the Kingdom of Kush, was focused until the fourth
century BC on an area extending downstream from the Fourth Cataract for a
distance of 24 kilometres. It is the whole of this district that is referred to as
Napata, and it includes major cemetery sites at El Kurru (Dunham 1950) and
Nuri (Dunham 1955), a cemetery and temple sites at Jebel Barkal, and a
cemetery, temple, and town site at Sanam (Grifﬁth 1922). After the fourth
century BC, the political focus of Kush seems to have moved south to Meroë
on the Shendi Reach of the Nile, although the relationship of Napata and
Meroë is still not fully understood. Napata seems to have had its origins in the
power vacuum left by the end of Egyptian colonial domination towards
the close of the second millennium BC (Morkot 2003). As already mentioned
(p. 77), Egyptian New Kingdom colonization had led to the growth of a town
at Napata and to the construction of a temple of Amon at Jebel Barkal. With
the end of Egyptian control, it seems that power fell into the hands of local
rulers who, with the sanction of the priests of Jebel Barkal, went on to control
much of Nubia and, in the eighth and seventh centuries BC, Egypt itself which
they ruled as the Twenty-ﬁfth Dynasty (Bonnet and Valbelle 2006). Subse-
quently, Napata became of less importance, but its culture seems to have
remained imitative of that of Pharaonic Egypt, although displaying Nubian
characteristics. Signiﬁcantly, Napata was still important to the later rulers
of Kush, located at Meroë, who continued to be crowned there and to build
temples there. Indeed, it is possible that some of the latest Napatan burials
were of rulers whose capital had already been transferred to Meroë.
  Archaeological evidence for the Napatan state is mainly limited to the sites
already mentioned. The cemeteries at El Kurru, Jebel Barkal, and Nuri have
been interpreted as ‘royal’ cemeteries, and it is from El Kurru and Nuri,
excavated early in the twentieth century by Reisner, that much of our infor-
mation comes. All three cemeteries are characterized by tombs covered by
small, steep-sided pyramids, almost certainly inspired by New Kingdom
examples such as those at Aniba in Lower Nubia (Shinnie 1996: 100), and
mummiﬁcation was practised. In addition, temples at Jebel Barkal and Sanam
have been excavated, and in a number of other places there are the remains of

                                                                               81
African Civilizations

temples constructed by Taharqa, one of the Nubian rulers of Egypt (Fig. 4.3).
Nevertheless, there is little known about Napatan settlement sites, in spite of
what appears to have been a large town at Sanam, which might have been
the principal population centre of Napata. Thus, although hieroglyphic
inscriptions from excavated tombs have enabled a substantial reconstruction
of the Napatan dynastic sequence (Welsby 1996: 207–9), we have relatively
little information about the social and economic organization of the people
that these rulers governed. Adams (1977: 293) was of the opinion that this
was not a ‘complex, urbanized society’, but Kendall (1991) has since identiﬁed
a Napatan palace building at Jebel Barkal; it is also possible that there was a
walled town at El Kurru (Welsby 1996: 148). Furthermore, Napata was at
the terminus both of the Bayuda Road, the land route to Meroë, and of the
Meheila Road, the land route to Kawa and Argo, which possibly, with
Seddenga further to the north, were also Napatan settlements of importance.
Napata, it would appear, must have been a major staging point in the trade of
the middle Nile (Edwards 2004: 139).
   As Napata declined, Meroë rose to prominence, and in its case there is
abundant archaeological evidence suggesting both urbanization and state
development. Meroë seems to have been of particular importance during the
ﬁrst century AD, but it probably extended from before the fourth century
BC to about the fourth century AD. Excavations at the site of Meroë itself
have indeed indicated that its earliest building level could have belonged to the
eighth century BC or perhaps even earlier (Török 1997: Part I, 15–20). Like
Napata, Meroë seems to have been a Nubian response to the world to its
north. For Napata, it was Pharaonic Egypt that was an important cultural
inﬂuence; for Meroë, it was Ptolemaic Egypt, which was part of the wider
Hellenistic world.
   Archaeological evidence for the Meroitic period includes the remains of large
settlements, of which Meroë itself is the most important. Situated on the east
bank of the Nile, some 200 kilometres downstream from modern Khartoum,
Meroë has suffered a chequered archaeological history. Forgotten until its
rediscovery at the end of the eighteenth century AD, parts of the site were
‘ransacked’ by Ferlini in the 1830s (Adams 1977: 295), and early in the
twentieth century parts were excavated at separate times by Budge, Garstang,
and Reisner. Only Reisner’s work was conducted in an adequate fashion, and
even his excavations had to be published posthumously by Dows Dunham.
The extensive excavations by Garstang were unscientiﬁc and remained largely
unpublished, until Török rescued them eighty-three years later (Török 1997).
At the time only the ﬁrst season’s work was described in detail (Garstang et al.
1911). Limited excavations by Peter Shinnie during the 1960s and 1970s
remain the only archaeological investigations at Meroë carried out and

82
Fig. 4.3 Upper part of a stone statue of Taharqa, excavated from a cache of statues at
the Egyptian town of Pnubs, near Kerma. Seventh century BC. According to Adams 1977:
248, Taharqa ‘is the only Nubian to be mentioned by name in the Bible’ (2 Kings XIX, 9).
After Bonnet and Valbelle 2006: 122.
                                                                                     83
African Civilizations

published in a scientiﬁc fashion. Shinnie also summarized what was then
known about Meroë and related sites (Shinnie 1967) and later followed this
with a more general study (Shinnie 1996). Welsby (1996) and Edwards (2004:
141–81) provided other syntheses.
   The site of Meroë (Fig. 4.4) covers an area roughly 0.75 kilometre by
1 kilometre (for plans, mostly variants of the same originals, see Shinnie 1967:
76; 1996: 107; Adams 1977: 299, 314; Bradley 1982: 164; Welsby 1996: 149;
Török 1997: Part II, ﬁgs. 1–3; Edwards 2004: 146). Within the settlement was
a large, stone-walled precinct, roughly rectangular in shape, in which lay a
labyrinth of buildings, mostly of monumental character. Many of these build-
ings, which were usually of mud-brick, often with an external facing of ﬁred
brick, were excavated by Garstang, who interpreted the area as the residence of
the rulers of Meroë, calling it the ‘Royal City’. Its buildings were believed
to include palaces, audience chambers, stores, and domestic quarters for the
palace staff; many of them seem to have been of two storeys (Török 1997:
Part I, 36). There was also a small temple, in front of which was found a bronze
head of Augustus, of Roman manufacture (Shinnie 1967: plate 28). Perhaps
the most remarkable feature of the Royal City, however, was its so-called Roman
Bath. This consisted of a large brick-lined tank with water channels leading into
it from the Nile. At ﬁrst interpreted as a swimming bath (Shinnie 1967: 79), it
was later suggested that it was a water sanctuary associated with Nile ﬂoodwater
festivals (Török 1992: 117; Welsby 1996: 122–3).
   Outside the Royal City, much of the rest of the site is covered by two
extensive occupation mounds, and it is possible that Meroë originated as a
settlement split between three alluvial islands in a braided channel of the Nile,
the course of the river having since changed (Bradley 1982). The south mound
remains unexcavated, and the only investigations of the north mound were test
excavations by Shinnie. These revealed remains of mud-brick structures serv-
ing industrial, domestic, and public functions, as well as furnace remains that
indicated both iron smelting and iron smithing (Bradley 1982; Shinnie and
Kense 1982). Other than this, little is known of ordinary buildings, although
Shinnie (1967: 77) described ‘many mounds covered with red [ﬁred] brick
fragments’ and mentioned ‘six large mounds of slag and other debris of iron
smelting’ on the edges of the site. The signiﬁcance of these mounds of slag has
long been discussed. Some idea of their size can be gained from a railway
cutting made through one of them for the line from Khartoum to Atbara.
Possibly this was the mound into which Arkell excavated an unpublished trial
trench in 1940, recording that it consisted of ‘solid slag and debris from iron
smelting from top to bottom’ (Shinnie and Kense 1982: 18).
   The site of Meroë also has the remains of a number of temples, and, in
contrast with the scant attention given to the residential and industrial areas,

84
                                                             Sudanic genesis: Nubia




Fig. 4.4 Plan of Meroë, in Sudan. After Shinnie 1967: ﬁg. 19; Welsby 1996: ﬁg. 66;
and Török 1997: Part II, ﬁg. 1.




                                                                                     85
African Civilizations

the more important of these have been entirely excavated. They include a
temple of Amon, adjacent to the Royal City; a temple of Isis, on the northern
edge of the site; the Lion Temple, which stands on top of one of the slag heaps
on the eastern edge of the site; and the Sun Temple, which is situated about
1 kilometre east of the site. There is also the Shrine of Apis, located about 2.5
kilometres south of the Royal City, and several lesser temples within the site
itself. In addition, just to the east of the settlement site lie three cemeteries
which have been entirely excavated and which were found to contain many
hundreds of graves, thought to have been occupied by common citizens of
Meroë. Some 3 to 4 kilometres east of the main site, however, lie three other
cemeteries. The most important of these is the North Cemetery, which was the
main burial place of the rulers of Meroë and their immediate relatives, char-
acterized by the best preserved of the small stone pyramids for which Meroë
has become famous. The South Cemetery comprises more than 200 graves,
most containing common citizens, but it also includes mastabas and pyramids
belonging both to rulers and (it is thought) to members of the ruling family. In
contrast, the West Cemetery, which contains about 500 graves, including a
number of pyramids, seems to have been for less important members of the
royal family and also for commoners (Shinnie 1967: 75–87; Hinkel 2000).
   It is regrettable that archaeologists have concentrated on the tomb, temple, and
palace aspect of Meroë, rather than on the settlement itself and its apparent urban
status. At its peak it might have had a population of 20,000 to 25,000 people
(Grzymski 1984: 289), although Edwards (2004: 147) thought it ‘quite impos-
sible even to estimate the size of its population’ and suggested that its ‘urban
character’ had still ‘to be clearly demonstrated’. Nevertheless, an emphasis on
monumental structures at Meroë has produced both inscriptions and artistic
representations that have made contributions to our knowledge of Meroitic
society and history. In particular, we know the names and approximate dates
of most of the rulers of Meroë, even though there is still some uncertainty about
the details of this dynastic sequence (Shinnie 1967: 58–61; Adams 1977: 251–2;
Welsby 1996: 207–9). The inscriptions are in Meroitic, however, rendered either
in hieroglyphs or in the distinctive Meroitic cursive alphabet, and because this
language cannot be fully understood (p. 75), they can be read only in part.
Luckily, the temple and pyramid-chapel reliefs and the small number of pieces
of sculpture in-the-round are more informative: depicting gods, rulers (male and
female), and vanquished enemies and throwing light on royal dress and regalia
and on iconography and religion (Shinnie 1967: 101–9).
   Although little is known of the housing of ordinary people at Meroë itself,
excavations at the site of Hamadab, some 3 kilometres to the south, have
revealed an apparently large nucleated Meroitic settlement of more than
15 hectares (Fig. 4.5). There seems little doubt of the urban character of this

86
                                                             Sudanic genesis: Nubia




Fig. 4.5 Meroitic ‘Upper Town’ of Hamadab, near Meroë. Representing the originally
walled core of the urban settlement, founded probably in the last century BC. Reproduced
by permission of Pawel Wolf, cf. ﬁg. 2 Wolf et al. 2014. Drawing by Nicole Salamanek
(Beuth Hochschule for Applied Sciences Berlin / Geomedia Lab) / Hamadab Archaeological
Project (Qatar-Sudan Archaeological Project).
site, and several potentially similar large sites are known to the south and
north of Meroë (Edwards 2004: 147–8; Wolf et al. 2014).
   There are many other sites along the middle Nile which both culturally and
chronologically can be described as ‘Meroitic’. Perhaps the most important of
                                                                                     87
African Civilizations

these are situated in the western part of the ‘Island of Meroë’, a name applied
to the area known as the Butana, in the triangle formed by the conﬂuence
of the rivers Atbara and Nile. Two of these sites are particularly signiﬁcant:
Naqa and Musawwarat es-Sufra (Shinnie 1967: 87–95; Adams 1977: 318–21;
Edwards 2004: 150–3). At Naqa there are remains of a town nearly as
extensive as those of Meroë itself, and there are at least seven stone temples,
several possible palaces, and two large cemeteries. One of the temples, the Lion
Temple of Natakamani and Amanitere, has remarkable exterior reliefs
depicting the ﬁrst-century AD king and queen and the lion god Apedemak.
The reliefs on the two pylons of this temple are an explicit statement of
autocratic authority, showing both king and queen brandishing weapons
whilst grasping their vanquished foes by the hair. In contrast, the site of
Musawwarat es-Sufra is something of a mystery, consisting principally of
a cluster of monumental stone buildings, of which the largest, the Great
Enclosure, has no Nubian or Egyptian parallel. It included a temple, with a
remarkable irrigated garden, perhaps a palace, and apparently a religious
pilgrimage centre (Welsby 1996: 143–6; Wolf 1997; Wenig 2001; Edwards
2004: 153).
  Another site in the Meroë area is Wad ben Naqa on the east bank of the
Nile, where there is evidence of a considerable town. Excavations there have
revealed the remains of a large, square building of at least two storeys, which
has been interpreted as a Meroitic palace, apparently similar to others at
Meroë, Jebel Barkal, and Naqa. It was built of mud-brick, its exterior walls
faced with ﬁred brick and plastered with white stucco. Only the lower ﬂoor
survived, consisting mainly of long, narrow rooms that were probably vaulted
storerooms, supporting more important rooms in the storey above. Neverthe-
less, the building is an indication of the development of centralized authority in
the Meroitic state (Vercoutter 1962; Adams 1977: 322–3).
  Other evidence of Meroitic settlement has been found as far south as Sennar,
far up the Blue Nile, and as far north as Maharraqa, in Lower Nubia, a distance
of more than 1,100 kilometres (Edwards 1989; 1996). Settlement on the middle
Nile was discontinuous, being concentrated along those stretches of the river
that were economically more viable. Adams (1977: 302) identiﬁed three main
areas of Meroitic culture: the Southern Province, containing Meroë itself; the
Napatan Province; and the Lower Nubian Province. The Southern Province,
which may be regarded as the Meroitic homeland, was connected to the
Napatan Province not by the barren Abu Hamed Reach of the Nile but by
the Bayuda Road, an important desert route that bypassed both the Fifth
and Fourth Cataracts and the contrary winds of this part of the Nile. In the
Napatan Province there was Meroitic activity at Jebel Barkal, Sanam, Kawa,
and Argo and (further north) at Seddenga, but the development of the Korosko

88
                                                         Sudanic genesis: Nubia

Road – a desert route leaving the Nile at Abu Hamed that rejoined it far
downstream in Lower Nubia – cut this area off from the mainstream of
commerce, so that the Napatan Province became something of a cultural and
economic backwater. It is possible that the introduction of the camel, probably
in the early ﬁrst millennium BC (Rowley-Conwy 1988), was one of the factors
that eventually brought about this change (Adams 1977: 304–5). North of the
Napatan Province lay the barren Batn el Hajar, but beyond that was the Lower
Nubian Province where substantial Meroitic settlement has been claimed
(Adams 1977: 345–81). As already explained (p. 74), it was an area thought
to have been virtually uninhabited for some centuries, until resettlement in the
second and third centuries AD as a result of the introduction of the saqia, the
ox-driven water wheel, but this view has been challenged (Edwards 2004:
202–3). The evidence of both cemeteries and occupation sites indicates that
Meroitic settlement in Lower Nubia was characterized not by large settlements
with monumental buildings, as in the southern provinces, but by a nearly
continuous line of farming villages along the Nile, together with a few relatively
small administrative centres. Qasr Ibrim, Jebel Adda, and Faras were amongst
the latter, all of them walled settlements. Karanog appears to have been another
important centre, but it consisted of a scattered collection of houses without
a surrounding wall. Amongst these, however, were two large mud-brick build-
ings, each apparently of three storeys, that are thought to have been successive
palaces of local governors, although their dating remains problematic (Woolley
1911; O’Connor 1993: 100–1). Apparent cultural differences between the
Meroitic north and south prompted Adams to conclude that in Lower Nubia
there had been a secularization of government and that control of trade had
passed into private hands, allowing a widespread development of material
prosperity (Adams 1974; 1976). Subsequently, however, this interpretation
was questioned and it was suggested that the settlement of Lower Nubia might
not have been as dense as was thought (Edwards 1996: 50–2).
   The Meroitic state seems to have faded away in the fourth century AD,
signiﬁcantly at a time when substantial changes were taking place in the
Mediterranean world to the north. Some Meroitic urban centres were aban-
doned and long-distance trade declined, but the elite burials in the mounds of
el Hobagi, 70 kilometres south-west of Meroë, suggest continuity of Meroitic
traditions along with a re-emergence of older ones (Lenoble and Sharif 1992;
Edwards 1996: 92–3; Welsby 1996: 202; Edwards 2004: 191–3). Other
indications of a successor state have been found in Lower Nubia, where the
‘X-Group’, called by Adams the ‘Ballana Culture’ (1977: 392) and treated by
Edwards (2004: 182–211) as one of several ‘post-Meroitic transitions’, sug-
gests the development of an absolute monarchy during the ﬁfth and sixth
centuries AD. The X-Group was ﬁrst recognized from scattered burial

                                                                               89
African Civilizations

evidence, but subsequently a number of village sites were identiﬁed, as well as
larger settlements at Jebel Adda and Qasr Ibrim; excavations at this latter site
suggested that it was a manufacturing centre at this time (Adams 1982: 27–8;
Alexander 1988: 81–2). In addition, the extensively excavated settlement of
Meinarti, just north of the Second Cataract, was also occupied in both the Late
Meroitic and X-Group periods (Adams 2000; 2001; 2002).
  Nevertheless, the X-Group is best known from the remarkable burials
of Ballana and Qustul, situated a little upstream of Jebel Adda. These were
excavated by Walter Emery in the early 1930s and produced evidence
of a concentration of wealth and autocratic power in the hands of a few individ-
uals, thought to be kings (Emery 1938; 1948). There were 122 tombs at Ballana
on the west bank of the Nile and 61 at Qustul on the east bank. All 183 of these
tombs were excavated, and the size of the structures and richness of contents of
perhaps 40 of them might suggest that they contained ‘royal’ burials. Typically,
these larger tombs consisted of a series of brick chambers, constructed at the
bottom of a large pit, which was entered by means of a ramp cut into the hard
alluvium. The chambers were roofed with barrel vaulting and in front of them
there was often a small open court into which the entrance ramp opened. After
the burials and offerings had been placed inside the chambers, in the court and
at the bottom of the ramp, both the pit and the ramp were ﬁlled with earth
and a large earthen mound was raised over them. At Ballana the largest of these
mounds measured 77 metres in diameter and 12 metres in height. It was the
contents of these tombs that were most impressive, however. The ‘king’ was
buried with his ‘queen’ and with his servants, horses, camels, donkeys, dogs,
sheep, and cows. Also included were furniture, food and drink, cooking utensils,
jewels, weapons, tools, and personal possessions.
  Many of these tombs had been ransacked by tomb-robbers in the past but
some survived intact. One of the more remarkable was Tomb 95 at Ballana
(Fig. 4.6). Animal burials lay at the bottom of the entrance ramp, beyond which
were three sealed burial chambers. Inside the ﬁrst chamber was the skeleton of
the ‘king’, who had been laid, wearing his silver crown and other ﬁnery, on a
wooden bier from which he had been displaced soon after burial by the collapse
of the chamber roof. Also in the chamber were the skeletons of his ‘queen’,
wearing a silver crown, and of a male servant and a cow. Weapons and other
personal possessions lay in other parts of the chamber. In an adjacent chamber
were the skeletons of six additional servants, two of them children, accompanied
by more weapons and by lamps, iron ingots, pottery wine jars, drinking cups,
and other things. Most of the third chamber was packed with more pottery wine
jars and drinking cups and with them were numerous bronze cups, a bronze
ﬂagon and pan, a stone bowl, a large vessel of green glass, several scarabs, and a
small gold ingot (Emery 1938: vol. 1, 135–41).

90
                                                              Sudanic genesis: Nubia




Fig. 4.6 Plan of Tomb 95 at Ballana, Egypt. After Emery 1938: vol. 1, ﬁg. 68.


  The animals buried in the tombs at Ballana and Qustul had been pole-axed,
and it was presumed that the human beings, other than the main burial in each
tomb, had met their deaths either by the cutting of their throats or by strangu-
lation. The combination of monumental tomb, wealth, and human sacriﬁce for
the burial of crowned individuals is surely indicative of absolute monarchy in
Lower Nubia during the time to which the X-Group belongs.
  Reisner, who ﬁrst identiﬁed the X-Group, thought that it represented an
invasion of a new people. There is, however, increasing evidence that this
culture evolved within the Nile Valley, where both settlement and burial
evidence suggest that it was a direct successor culture to the Meroitic state,
with similar subsistence strategies and with characteristics comparable to those
indicated by the el Hobagi burials far to the south (Welsby 1996: 204–5;

                                                                                 91
African Civilizations

Edwards 2004: 206–7). Then, with the conversion of the people of the middle
Nile to Christianity in the sixth century AD, a new period of state development
and urbanization was inaugurated.
   The Christian kingdoms of Nubia (Welsby 2002) existed from the sixth
century to about the fourteenth century AD. They developed out of Pre-
Christian states that followed the so-called collapse of the Meroitic state, but
Fuller (2014) has argued that, rather than resulting from collapse, they were
the consequence of increasing regional economic independence. This was
supported by an increasing cultivation of summer crops, such as Sorghum
bicolor and Pennisetum glaucum, and winter crops, such as wheat and barley,
in each case made possible by the third-century introduction of the saqia. Also
important was the growing of cash crops such as cotton and grapes in Lower
Nubia. The major Christian states were Nobadia and Makuria, to the north,
and Alodia (Alwa), to the south; Nobadia became uniﬁed with Makuria at an
early date. Collectively they have left substantial archaeological evidence
(Edwards 2004: 212–55). There are, for instance, the remains of many
churches built of mud-brick and stone. There is also evidence of urban centres
at Qasr Ibrim, Jebel Adda, Faras, Old Dongola, and Soba, as well as evidence
elsewhere of many smaller towns and villages, fortresses, monasteries, indus-
trial sites, and cemeteries. The churches of Medieval Nubia have attracted
archaeological interest for many years (Clarke 1912), but it was not until the
1960s that much work was done on other Christian sites. Study of church
architecture has revealed a steady reduction in size and pretentiousness as time
went on, reﬂecting the gradual decline of Christian Nubia and of its Mono-
physite, Coptic church. Nevertheless, many of the buildings were impressive
structures with stone columns, masonry piers, and brick vaults (Adams 2009).
Most important are the episcopal cathedrals at Qasr Ibrim, Faras, and Old
Dongola and a possible cathedral at Jebel Adda (Adams 1977: 473–8). The
insides of many churches were originally decorated with brightly coloured wall
paintings. Only fragmentary remains of these were known until the 1960s,
when excavations revealed well-preserved paintings in three churches, of
which those discovered in Faras cathedral were quite remarkable. This build-
ing (Vantini 1970) had been abandoned after it ﬁlled with blown sand during
the heyday of Nubian Christianity. Within it were numerous large paintings
depicting biblical scenes and individuals, as well as Nubian kings, bishops, and
eparchs (high-ranking government ofﬁcials), most identiﬁed by name.
   The archaeological remnants of the churches of Nubia indicate the existence
of organized religion and secular authority as separate but interacting entities,
each needing the protection of the other. Under their joint umbrella, the society
of the middle Nile developed its commercial activities to a high level and
became, at least in the northern part of the region, probably more densely

92
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

urbanized than in earlier periods. Unfortunately, archaeological excavation of
the major urban centres has not been extensive; both Faras and Jebel Adda,
for instance, were lost beneath Lake Nasser before much could be done.
Work continued at Qasr Ibrim, however, which was occupied throughout the
Christian period and which survived as an island at the edge of Lake Nasser,
although later ‘almost totally destroyed’ by the lake (Edwards 2004: 159–60).
Excavations there demonstrated that the Early Christian period (c. 500 to c. 800
AD) displayed a remarkable continuity from X-Group times, with many of the
same houses remaining in use and manufacturing activities continuing on a large
scale. Only the conversion of Meroitic temples to churches and the building of a
cathedral and of a monastery mark the introduction of Christianity. During the
Classic Christian period, however, from c. 800 to c. 1200 AD, the city seems to
have become primarily a pilgrimage centre, with most of its housing being
cleared to provide a large open plaza. Nevertheless, during the Late Christian
period (c. 1200 to c. 1500 AD) the site was again fortiﬁed and once more
became crowded with houses, regaining its commercial importance and
(according to excavated manuscript material) also becoming an administrative
centre (Adams 1982: 28–30; Alexander 1988). Excavations of settlements
dating from AD 1000 onwards have also been conducted at Kulubnarti, near
the Dal Cataract, providing further information on the Christian periods and
shedding light on subsequent Islamic occupation (Adams 2011).
  The standard of living for the more afﬂuent during the Christian period has
been indicated by excavations at the site of Old Dongola, far to the south, the
capital city of the kingdom of Makuria (e.g., Godlewski and Medeksza 1987).
A heated bathroom with piped hot water and painted decorations was found
in one supposed house (Jakobielski 1982), and fragments of pottery toilet seats
were also recovered (Godlewski 1991: 92–3, 97). Even further to the south,
the site of Soba, the capital of the kingdom of Alodia, has also been partly
excavated and has revealed rectangular palatial buildings and churches of
mud-brick, ﬁred brick, and stone, as well as both rectangular and circular
(wooden) domestic structures and many burials. Its radiocarbon chronology is
from the ﬁfth to the eleventh or twelfth century AD (Welsby and Daniels 1991;
Welsby 1998; 2002; Edwards 2004: 221–3). In addition, some of the smaller
settlements in Nubia have been excavated, such as Arminna West (Weeks
1967) and Debeira West (Shinnie and Shinnie 1978), both of which were
referred to as ‘towns’ by their excavators, although Adams (1977: 488)
thought that such settlements, although ‘densely urbanized’, numbered only
200 to 400 inhabitants. Indeed, the packed houses of Arminna West (Fig. 4.7)
suggest an urban environment. Many houses in these settlements attempted
to deal with one of the problems of such crowding by providing ‘inside’
latrines (Adams 1977: 491). Usually these would have required night-soil

                                                                             93
94




     Fig. 4.7 Plan of Arminna West, Egypt. After Weeks 1967: ﬁg. 1.
                                                                Sudanic genesis: Nubia

carriers, but at Debeira West there were some latrines that discharged into
individual, vaulted soakaways that were ﬁlled with ash and potsherds (Shinnie
and Shinnie 1978: 106).
  Although some Christian Nubian settlements lacked fortiﬁcations, suggest-
ing peace and stability at times, there were nevertheless many such structures
built over the centuries. In the Early Christian period there were fortiﬁed sites
at Faras, Sabaqura, Sheikh Daud, Ikhmindi, Kalabsha, and Qasr Ibrim, all in
Lower Nubia, presumably responding to military threats from Egypt. Subse-
quently, fortiﬁed settlements, forts, and even castles existed in many other
parts of the middle Nile, probably because of raiders from the adjoining
deserts and dynastic and civil conﬂicts, as well as the need to protect trade.
By the Late Christian period fortiﬁed settlements were common, concentrated
particularly in the Batn el Hajar, in which poor and isolated region many
people seem to have sought refuge (Welsby 2002: 129–36). In particular,
between Faras and Ferka, near the Dal Cataract, two-storey ‘castle-houses’
were constructed, with restricted external access, hidden storage crypts, and
latrine facilities (Fig. 4.8), obviously designed to provide refuge in times of
danger (Adams 1994). Christian Nubian polities were, in fact, disintegrating
into a society of peasant farmers gathered around the castles of local rulers.
The Christian Church was also in decline, and Arabs from the desert were
moving into the region of the middle Nile. With the gradual Arabization and




Fig. 4.8 Cross-section of castle-house at Kulubnarti (Site 21-S-2, House A1). C, cesspit;
H, secret crypt; T, toilet chamber. After Adams 1994: ﬁg. 11b.


                                                                                        95
African Civilizations

Islamization that overtook the area by about the fourteenth century AD,
numerous sheikhdoms based on the tribe replaced central government. How-
ever, eventually a series of loose confederations appeared, the largest and
longest-lasting of which was the Fung kingdom of Sennar, which survived
from the sixteenth century to the early nineteenth century AD (Elzein 2004).
Furthermore, the settlement of Qasr Ibrim, whose occupation dates back to
perhaps 1500 BC, was not abandoned until the early nineteenth century AD,
epitomizing the continuity of urban and state traditions in the middle Nile
region (Adams 1977: 508–636; Alexander 1995). Although those traditions
seem to have had little inﬂuence on the rest of tropical Africa (Shinnie 1989;
Alexander 1993a), this impression needs some qualiﬁcation. First, archaeo-
logically diagnostic artefacts, such as Meroitic and Christian decorated
pottery, are unlikely to have penetrated to economically peripheral areas of
the African savannas, and therefore inﬂuences from the Nile Valley might
be difﬁcult to recognize. Second, during the early Islamic periods large settle-
ments and associated polities did appear in Darfur (west of the Nile) at Uri and
Ain Farah, east of the Nile along the Red Sea coast at Badi’ and ‘Aidhab,
and inland at ‘Allaqi (Elzein 2004: 35–42).


Subsistence economy
The development of cities and states in the middle Nile region was supported
by mixed farming, depending on the cultivation of cereals and vegetables and
on animal husbandry (Edwards 2004). A major factor must have been the
availability of suitable soils that either received seasonal ﬂoodwater or could
be irrigated mechanically. All the developments that have been discussed
took place in areas that were relatively favoured agriculturally. Of the six
geographic subdivisions of the middle Nile, the barren Abu Hamed Reach and
Batn el Hajar were of less importance, while the remainder, particularly the
Shendi Reach and the Dongola Reach, were the locations of important
developments.
  Direct archaeological evidence for subsistence during the periods that have
been considered is not plentiful. However, there is evidence from Kerma for
the cultivation of barley and for the herding of cattle, sheep, and goats, as well
as for hunting, ﬁshing, and the keeping of dogs and donkeys. Sacriﬁces of
sheep and goats were a consistent feature of Kerma burial, and in many cases
a row of ox skulls was placed around one side of the burial mounds (Bonnet
1990; 1992). Transhumant pastoralists in the Wadi Hariq, 400 kilometres
west of the Nile, known archaeologically as the Handessi Horizon, were
contemporary with Kerma and possibly contributed to its subsistence base
(Jesse et al. 2004). All this suggests an early importance of animal husbandry

96
                                                           Sudanic genesis: Nubia

in Nubia; later evidence, from Meroitic times, reinforces this impression.
A bronze bowl (Fig. 4.9) from Tomb G187 at Karanog in Lower Nubia, for
instance, is decorated with an engraved scene showing a cow being milked
and another cow suckling a calf, whilst other calves have been tied to a tree.
Milk is being presented to a woman seated before a corn-stalk hut, the apex of
which is decorated with an ostrich egg; the hut is similar to some made in




Fig. 4.9 Pastoral scenes engraved on two bronze bowls from Tomb G187 at Karanog,
Egypt. The two at the top are on one bowl and the bottom two on another. From Woolley
and Randall-MacIver 1910: vol. 4, plates 27 and 28.


                                                                                  97
African Civilizations

parts of the African savanna until recent times. This bowl is actually one of
two, the other (Fig. 4.9) showing a bull, four cows, and a calf, as well as a
herdsman (Woolley and Randall-MacIver 1910: vol. 3, 39, 59–61, vol. 4,
plates 26–8). To these rural scenes can be added the fact that the quantities of
bones of cattle, sheep, and goats excavated from Meroë, and the ages of the
animals from which they came, indicate that meat as well as milk was
important (Carter and Foley 1980). Indeed, it has been suggested that the
archaeological sites of the Butana region near Meroë reﬂect its exploitation by
semi-nomadic pastoralists, demonstrating the signiﬁcant role of pastoralism
in the Meroitic subsistence economy. Adams (1981) was unconvinced of the
latter, stressing the role of cultivation, and in the drier northern Meroitic
provinces it does seem likely that the cultivation of either naturally or mech-
anically irrigated land provided the greater part of the subsistence base.
Evidence for the growing of sorghum has come from Meroë, Musawwarat
es-Sufra, and Naqa, and of barley from early levels at Meroë (Edwards 1996:
22). Evidence from Qasr Ibrim shows that barley, emmer wheat, and common
millet were at ﬁrst important, but that the ‘summer crops’ of sorghum, cotton,
durum wheat, bread wheat, bulrush millet, termis bean, and sesame were
introduced during the ﬁrst ﬁve centuries AD, about the time that the saqia was
being adopted in the area (Rowley-Conwy 1991). Sorghum seems to have
become especially important, and a relief on a granite boulder at Jebel Qeili,
in the southern Butana, depicts the sun god apparently presenting the Mer-
oitic King Sherkarer, of the ﬁrst century AD, with a number of heads of
sorghum (Shinnie 1967: 51, 96).
  The subsistence economy seems to have remained much the same through-
out Christian and Islamic times (Welsby 2002: 183–9). At Soba, far to the
south, for instance, the excavated cereal remains were dominated by sorghum
and bulrush millet during Early and Classic Christian times (van der Veen
1991: 266); at Qasr Ibrim, sorghum, barley, wheat, and pulses were the major
plant foods during the Late and Terminal Christian periods (Adams 1996:
100) and during the Islamic period. In addition, a variety of fruits and
vegetables had probably long been important. The New Kingdom paintings
in the tomb of Djehuty-hetep at Debeira, in Lower Nubia, depicted workers
harvesting dates and dom-palm fruit (Säve-Söderbergh 1960: 38–40). The
Christian deposits at Soba produced evidence of grapes, ﬁgs, dates, dom palm,
African fan palm, and Christ’s thorn; those at Debeira West, castor oil, dates,
cucumber, (African) groundnuts, and dom palm (Shinnie and Shinnie 1978:
107); and from late in the same period at Qasr Ibrim came castor bean,
watermelon, onion, garlic, and probably cucumber.
  Nevertheless, Edwards (1989; 1996; 2004) questioned the assumption that
cultivation in the Nile Valley was the main subsistence base and stressed the

98
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

probable importance of rainfed agriculture along wadi beds and on other
suitable alluvial soils, particularly (citing Ahmed 1984) in southern Nubia.
Edwards also emphasized the important and continuing input from pastoral-
ism, of which the number of domestic animals buried in X-Group tombs at
Ballana and Qustul remind us. So too might the bones of sheep, goats, cattle,
and pigs, as well as goat droppings, at the Christian site of Debeira West
(Shinnie and Shinnie 1978: 107), and the bones of sheep, goats, pigs, cattle,
horses, donkeys, and camels, and sheep, goat, horse, donkey, and camel dung,
in the Late and Terminal Christian deposits at Qasr Ibrim (Adams 1996: 101).
For Islamic times Qasr Ibrim continues to be informative, showing sheep,
goats, and cattle to be common. That domestic animals were so important
even in the rainless north of Nubia might seem difﬁcult to believe, but in
1963 a livestock census, along the Sudanese stretch of the Nile Valley subse-
quently ﬂooded by Lake Nubia, reported 2,831 cattle, 19,335 sheep, 34,146
goats, 86 horses, 3,415 donkeys, 608 camels, and large numbers of chickens,
pigeons, and ducks, in an area which had just over 50,000 people (Adams
1977: 54). To the south, with seasonal grazing available away from the river,
pastoralism must have been even more important.
  Nubia’s subsistence economy supported both a sedentary population along
the thin ribbon of the Nile, concentrating in places with water and fertile silt
and in rainfed wadis, and a more mobile population, dispersed through the
savanna lands of the south. In addition, mechanical means of irrigation further
increased the agricultural viability of parts of the region.


Technology
Abundant direct archaeological evidence throws light on the technology of the
middle Nile during the periods under review (Welsby 1996; 2002; Edwards
2004). At times this part of Africa reached a high level of technological
sophistication. There is, however, a problem in interpreting such evidence:
how much of this technological achievement is attributable to indigenous
endeavour and how much to exotic sources, be they imports or the presence
of expatriate craftsmen? Because of the repeated cultural contact along
the middle Nile, these are difﬁcult questions to answer. Nevertheless, when
evaluating the contribution of technology to social complexity, it is important
to attempt to separate the indigenous and the foreign import.
  Perhaps the most outstanding aspects of middle Nile technology were build-
ing and construction. Ashlar masonry, coarser types of stonework, ﬁred brick,
and mud-brick were all handled with skill to produce structures that were
often complex. Foreign inﬂuence is evident in much of this, from the Temple of
Amon at Jebel Barkal to the pyramids of Napata and Meroë or the churches

                                                                             99
African Civilizations

of Christian Nubia, all of which are examples of buildings of alien inspiration,
if not of foreign construction. Nevertheless, most of these structures have
distinctively Nubian characteristics. The deffufas and tombs of Kerma and
the tombs of Ballana and Qustul were, indeed, indigenous in design and
execution. So also was the unique Great Enclosure at Musawwarat es-Sufra.
Clearly, Nubians expended considerable energy on building, although many of
their less important structures were probably of grass and wood. Such
examples as the Meroitic palace at Wad ben Naqa, the cities and towns of
Meroitic and Christian Nubia, or the water-storage haﬁrs of the dry areas east
and south-east of Meroë are eloquent of effort as well as of building and
engineering skills. Furthermore, the heated bathroom of the supposed house at
Old Dongola (p. 93) and the latrines in Christian Nubian houses (Adams
2001: 53–4, plates 17e and 20e; Welsby 2002: 170–2) demonstrate a concern
for comfort and convenience, not just for monumental structures.
   Associated with building were a number of other skills, such as quarrying,
stone-dressing, mud-brick making, brick-ﬁring, carpentry, sculpture, wall
painting, and inscription cutting. A knowledge of surveying and architectural
design would also have been necessary; on the wall of one of the pyramid
chapels at Meroë is an architect’s elevation drawing at a scale of 1:10 that
appears to have been done during the construction of one of the other
pyramids in the cemetery (Welsby 1996: 134–5; Hinkel 2000: 19). The
question of foreign inﬂuence and sometimes even foreign execution inevitably
arises in such matters, but, again, the end products usually had a local input.
For much of the time under discussion the people of the middle Nile were at
least partly literate and during the Meroitic period even developed their own
unique alphabet. Moreover, the frequency of grafﬁti and other inscribed
material at Nubian sites indicates that in some periods literacy was fairly
widespread.
   Another important aspect of Nubian technology was the extraction and
manufacturing of metal, especially of iron. It is clear that many items of
bronze, silver, or gold were imported, but the furnace remains and substantial
quantities of iron slag at Meroë suggest that there at least an extensive iron-
working industry ﬂourished. Further evidence of this is provided by the range
of iron weapons and tools recovered from Meroitic sites, including spears,
arrowheads, hoe blades, adzes, axes, shears, and tweezers (Shinnie 1967:
162–5). Mounds of iron slag, probably of a similar date, have also been
reported from Kerma, Kawa, and Argo (Shinnie 1967: 182), and the iron
objects from the Ballana and Qustul tombs indicate that iron-working
skills remained at a high level even after the decline of the Meroitic state.
Another metal for which Nubia was an important source was gold, much of
which came from the desert east of the Nile, north of the Fifth Cataract

100
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

(Vercoutter 1959: 129). Particularly during the New Kingdom period, this
area seems to have been one of Egypt’s main suppliers, as paintings in the
Theban tomb of Huy appear to indicate (O’Connor 1993: 63).
  In addition, manufacturing along the middle Nile produced pottery, textiles,
leatherwork, woodwork, basketry, and wine. Fine pottery had been made
during the Kerma period, but exceptionally high-quality wares were produced
during Meroitic, X-Group and Christian times. These were wheel-made, well
ﬁred, and often had painted decoration. It is apparent that they were ﬁred in
special kilns of brick, of which a number have been excavated at Debeira East
that date from late X-Group and Early Christian times (Adams 1977: 402–3).
Other kilns have been uncovered at Faras, dating from the Early and Classic
Christian periods (Adams 1961; 1977: 496, 498), and kilns are also known
from Meroitic contexts at Meroë and Musawwarat es-Sufra and from the
Christian period at Old Dongola.
  Textile production seems to have been important, largely because cotton
was grown in the area at least by Meroitic times, but textiles found in Meroitic,
X-Group, and Christian tombs at Ballana and Qustul during the 1960s
included cotton, linen, and animal ﬁbre from either goats, sheep, or camels
(Thurman 1979: 36). Clearly, leather working depended on the widespread
animal husbandry, and basketry was based on palm ﬁbres and grasses that
were widely available. Only wood working remains difﬁcult to understand
in the environment of this region, but there is plentiful direct evidence for it
in both X-Group and Christian deposits at Qasr Ibrim (Adams 1982: 28–9).
As for the wine, a number of supposed wine presses have been found in Lower
Nubia; although the environment was not really suitable for vine cultivation, it
seems that wine was produced locally whenever the supply of the superior
Egyptian product was interrupted.
  Some items in Meroitic, X-Group, and Christian sites suggest imported
technologies. Such items as glassware, lamps, furniture, and jewellery of gold
or silver set with semi-precious stones mostly represent status symbols that
were not part of Nubian technology. There were also some aspects of Nubian
technology that resulted from technology transfer. Amongst these was mech-
anical irrigation. The shaduf and the saqia were most important for the
development of human societies on the middle Nile. Equally important was
transportation technology, enabling the commerce of the region to exist. The
oldest aspect of this was the sailing boat, in use on the Nile throughout
the period under discussion. It was, however, the development of desert
transportation systems, particularly that involving the camel, that seems to
have had the greatest impact on the commercial life of this region. These
aspects of irrigation and transportation emphasize the importance of technol-
ogy to social development on the middle Nile.

                                                                            101
African Civilizations

Social system
Monumental tombs at Kerma, Napata, Meroë, and Ballana and Qustul,
in their scale, construction, and contents, show the presence of absolute
monarchy at various times. The divinity and/or autocracy of such rulers is
demonstrated by the practice of human sacriﬁce at Kerma, and at Ballana and
Qustul, and by the sculptured reliefs of some Meroitic buildings. Some of the
latter are supplemented by inscriptions, which unfortunately we cannot fully
understand. Meroitic monarchy gave women an important role; indeed, some-
times they governed in their own right. Absolute monarchy is also suggested by
the existence of large and elaborate domestic buildings interpreted as palaces,
of which those at Meroë, Wad ben Naqa, and Jebel Barkal are perhaps the
most convincing. In addition, numerous temples represent ideologies in which
both spiritual and secular powers were intertwined. Indeed, not only is the
archaeological record eloquent of the emergence of absolute authority, but it
also chronicles its dissolution, as indicated by the numerous fortiﬁed buildings
of Late Christian and Islamic times.
  At the other end of the social scale, the archaeological evidence shows us a
numerous labouring class that presumably consisted, during most periods, of
both free peasants and slaves. Their presence is indicated not only by the
clusters of small houses in many settlements and the numerous ‘poorer’ graves
in cemeteries but also by the monumental constructions such as temples,
tombs, and burial mounds that were the achievement as much of their labour
as of the authority of their rulers. The relationship of this lowest level of
society, to both the rulers and their associated elite, is on occasion starkly
demonstrated by the sacriﬁce of such lesser human beings at the burial of those
to whom they were subservient, as was the case at Kerma and at Ballana and
Qustul.
  Archaeological evidence for the development of trade and manufacturing,
particularly in the Meroitic and Christian periods, would suggest that at times
there must have been a middle section in this stratiﬁed society, made up of
merchant-entrepreneurs and some skilled craftsmen, as well as various gov-
ernment ofﬁcials and holders of temple or church appointments. Some burials
at Kerma, Napata, and Meroë seem to belong neither to the elite nor to the
peasantry. Meroitic houses included both ‘de luxe’ and ‘humbler’ structures
(Adams 1977: 357–8).
  Archaeological evidence also indicates the development of functional spe-
cialization. Cross-cutting much of the social hierarchy but sometimes contrib-
uting to its differentiation, there emerged a variety of specialized occupations.
By Meroitic and Christian times, for instance, there were specialist potters
making high-quality wheel-formed wares, as distinct from traditional potters,


102
                                                         Sudanic genesis: Nubia

who continued to turn out rougher, hand-built pottery. In addition, there must
have been iron smelters, blacksmiths, and perhaps other metal workers; spin-
ners and weavers; builders, who would have included both masons and brick
makers; leather workers; carpenters and joiners; basket makers; and boatmen.
There would also have been scribes, artists (both sculptors and painters),
priests and temple and church ofﬁcials, some soldiers, and merchants.
  A level of social complexity conducive to both urbanization and state
formation would appear to have been reached during several periods along
the middle Nile. However, the social systems discussed were as much symp-
tomatic as causative of the development of cities and states. It is necessary to
look further if this development is to be explained.


Population pressures
The people of the middle Nile were agriculturalists who lived in dry savanna to
the south and in a desert to the north. They were able to do this because of
the existence of the river, which provided water and a base from which,
particularly in the south, they could exploit the seasonal grazing and rainfed
cultivation of the surrounding areas. However, cultivable land and accessible
pasture were limited; indeed, in some areas they were absent. Yet, where
present, they had the potential to yield a surplus and to support population
growth. The problem was that if the population grew, there was nowhere to
go: there was only a ﬁnite amount of land that could be exploited by the means
available. As a result, the settlement of the region was restricted to a long,
narrow, frequently broken strip of viable agricultural land, with some isolated
more fortunate areas, and to adjacent areas that could support transhumant
pastoralism or rainfed cultivation. Theoretically, therefore, the middle Nile
constituted a classic example of environmentally induced population pressure.
  Although limited, there are some archaeological indications of population
pressures during certain periods. For instance, the distribution of archaeo-
logical sites in Lower Nubia seems particularly dense for later Meroitic and
Christian times. Although Edwards (1996: 80) stated that the Meroitic popu-
lation was actually small, it seems that this rainless area did support a surpris-
ingly large number of people. Similarly, the existence of Meroitic sites in the
dry western Butana, away from the Nile but along wadis that could provide
seasonal cultivation, suggests that the population of that area found it neces-
sary to exploit available resources to the limit. It is even possible that the
crowding of houses within some Meroitic and Christian settlements was partly
caused by a desire to conserve adjacent cultivable land.
  The most obvious way that the carrying capacity of the region could be
improved was by increasing the available cultivable land, and the only way to

                                                                             103
African Civilizations

do this was to introduce better irrigation technology. Two such improvements
took place during the periods under review. The ﬁrst was the introduction of
the shaduf, an idea imported from Egypt probably during the New Kingdom.
Possibly it encouraged the growing population of that time that was calculated
by Trigger (1965: 156–66). The second was the saqia, again a foreign idea,
adopted in Nubia in about the fourth century AD during the X-Group period
(Edwards 1996: 80–1, 91). In conjunction with the new ‘summer crops’
introduced around this time (p. 92, 98), it is likely that the improved irrigation
that resulted did lead to an increase in population; indeed, the adoption of the
saqia and the new crops would suggest that population pressure caused their
adoption.
  Edwards (1994: 9) argued that in the Meroitic state, as generally in the
Sudanic savannas: ‘The availability of labour and the means of controlling it,
rather than land, tended to be a major determinant of production’. Neverthe-
less, it is possible that ﬁnite resources of productive land did result in popula-
tion pressures along the middle Nile, pressures that would have been
accentuated by ﬂuctuations in river level and rainfall that caused periodic
famines. It seems that cultivable land and accessible grazing could indeed have
been scarce resources at times. Control of them might have provided a power
base for an emerging elite and, therefore, might have been a contributory
factor in the growth of cities and states. Indeed, the control of both labour
and land could have been important.


Ideology
Tombs, temples, and churches have much to tell us about the beliefs of those
who built them. Their designs, sculptural and graphic decorations, and inscrip-
tions indicate that Nubia was often a borrower and adapter of foreign faiths.
Until about the middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD it was the gods of Pharaonic
Egypt that dominated Nubia; indeed, their veneration survived longer on the
middle Nile than in Egypt itself. The most important of these seem to have
been Isis and Amon; worship of the latter became a state cult for both Napata
and Meroë, with their rulers often taking the name of Amon as part of their
throne names, for example, Tenutamon and Natakamani. From about the
middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD to almost the middle of the second millen-
nium, Christianity became the dominant faith, to be replaced, in turn, by
Islam. Nevertheless, all these faiths developed their own Nubian characteris-
tics, and there were also at times separate indigenous beliefs. This is indicated
by the human sacriﬁces at Kerma and at Ballana and Qustul, and also by the
worship of Apedemak, the lion god of Meroë, who seems to have resulted
from Egyptian-Meroitic syncretism (Zabkar 1975).

104
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

   The archaeological evidence suggests that these ideologies contributed to the
development of states and cities. Prior to the arrival of Christianity on the
middle Nile, the religious beliefs of Nubia were characterized by an integration
of secular and spiritual authority, as frequently the case in Africa. The ruler
became the personiﬁcation of the god, a notion that sometimes manifests itself
archaeologically in monumental tombs and temples, which were an expression
of both human and divine authority. This provided legitimization for the rule
of an absolute monarch, who could literally claim a divine mandate. The
power base of a ruler was strengthened because it was both physical and
spiritual. The state developments of Kerma, Napata, Meroë, and the X-Group
all beneﬁtted from this ideological contribution. With the advent of Christian-
ity, the ruler was no longer a god, even though divinely sanctioned. Human
and divine authority were separate, and ‘royal’ tombs disappeared from the
archaeological record. However, this did not necessarily mean any loss of
authority by the temporal ruler who, as the Faras paintings show, could still
call on ideological support from a Church that was in turn protected. As a
result, the Christian states of Nubia were ruled by both Crown and Cross:
the one claiming authority over people’s bodies, the other over their souls
(Adams 1977).
   The role of ideology in the process of urbanization was different. The
construction of an important temple or church at a particular place sometimes
led to the development of a settlement at that place or to increased growth of a
settlement. In this way, some cities came into existence as religious ceremonial
centres or became more important because they assumed such a role. Nubian
cities also had a more general symbolic role, irrespective of whether religion,
administration, or commerce was the main activity; each city conferred polit-
ical and ideological legitimacy on the regime that controlled it.


External trade
As discussed at the beginning of this chapter (p. 69), Nubia was a major trade
corridor into the heart of Africa for South-West Asia and the Mediterranean.
Moving north were gold and other minerals, ivory, slaves, and a range of
African exotica; going south was a variety of manufactured goods, including
many luxuries. It was an example of characteristic exchange between the
developed and underdeveloped world: manufactures for raw materials.
  Archaeological evidence for this trade is abundant, although it tells us little
about some aspects. Least well represented in the archaeological record are the
commodities that were traded north to Egypt, but there is some evidence. For
example, diorite quarries in the Nubian desert west of Abu Simbel were being
exploited during the Egyptian Old Kingdom and Middle Kingdom. This rock

                                                                            105
African Civilizations

was favoured for statues and stelae in Egypt at this time and apparently was
transported as far as Giza, near modern Cairo, a distance along the Nile of
more than 1,200 kilometres (Adams 1977: 169–70). Similarly, copper-
smelting furnaces have been found in the Old Kingdom town investigated at
Buhen (Adams 1977: 170–4), and numerous gold mines, which were produ-
cing by Middle Kingdom times, are known in the desert east of the Second
Cataract area and in the Batn el Hajar (Vercoutter 1959). Archaeological
evidence suggests that all these activities were at ﬁrst in Egyptian hands, and,
initially at least, their output was probably only for Egyptian use. Evidence for
the trade in ivory is less easy to ﬁnd, but in the Napatan town of Sanam one
room of a possible storehouse had part of its ﬂoor covered with tusks (Grifﬁth
1922: 117, plate LIIIb). In addition, ivory tusks were found in one of the
storerooms in the palace at Wad ben Naqa (Vercoutter 1962: plate XXb).
Almost invisible in the archaeological record, however, is the trade in
slaves, which was probably of importance for much of the time considered
(Alexander 2001). The people sacriﬁced at Kerma or Ballana and Qustul, for
instance, were not necessarily slaves, although they might have been. It could
be signiﬁcant, nevertheless, that the relief at Jebel Qeili and those on the pylons
of the Lion Temple at Naqa show live rather than dead captives; they were
worth more alive. As for the tropical exotica that were traded north, Egyptian
documentary and archaeological sources provide details; amongst other
things, they seem to have included ostrich eggs and feathers, various skins
from wild animals, live wild animals, ebony, semi-precious stones, and incense.
A painting in the mid-second-millennium BC tomb of Rekhmire at Thebes
shows such a range of goods (Kendall 1997: 9). It seems likely that the
commodities sought by Egyptians were collected at trading stations during
the Egyptian Old and Middle Kingdoms, and the Second Cataract forts might
have had such a role during the latter period. Egyptian control of trade is also
probable following the New Kingdom expansion into Nubia, but in the
Kerma, Napatan, Meroitic, and later periods there must have been indigenous
control.
  There is better archaeological evidence for the commodities that were traded
south into Nubia, although it has problems. Outstanding amongst these
imports was a range of manufactured items that, although often common in
their places of origin, seem frequently to have been prized as status symbols in
Nubia and therefore buried in the more important graves. Indeed, the posses-
sion of such ‘prestige goods’ and the distribution of some of them to elite
supporters could have contributed signiﬁcantly to the power base of Nubian
rulers (Edwards 1994: 11–12). Sometimes these objects can be attributed on
the basis of style to their places of origin, although more commonly their
foreign manufacture has merely been assumed because of the technology by

106
                                                         Sudanic genesis: Nubia

which they have been produced. Perhaps the most impressive, by reason of its
fragility and the distances that it nevertheless travelled, is the glassware that
has been found in Meroitic, X-Group, and Christian Nubian contexts. Shinnie
(1967: plates 82–4) illustrated two glass vessels from Meroitic graves at Faras
in Lower Nubia and one from Meroë itself, but the most impressive Meroitic
collection of glass is perhaps that excavated from tombs at Seddenga on the
Abri-Delgo Reach of the middle Nile (Leclant 1973; Wildung 1997: 364–8). In
addition to glassware, ﬁne metalwork and jewellery seem also to have ﬁgured
amongst the imports to Nubia. For example, a silver gilt goblet, probably of
Roman origin, was found at Meroë (Shinnie 1967: plates 78–81), and a gold
ring, also from Meroë, was inscribed in Greek (Shinnie 1967: plate 61). From
various Meroitic contexts have also come an assortment of bronze lamps,
bowls, beakers, bottles, and vases, whilst the X-Group tombs of Ballana and
Qustul produced metal goods and other manufactures that seem to have
originated in Byzantine Egypt. Some objects might even have been loot from
Nubian raids into Egypt, such as the bronze head that was found buried in
front of one of the temples at Meroë and that probably came from a statue of
the Roman Emperor Augustus (Shinnie 1967: plate 28). However, the most
common imports in Meroitic Nubia, according to the archaeological record,
were beads of glass or stone, so common indeed that Adams (1977: 373)
suggested that they might have been used as a medium of exchange.
   In addition to the durable manufactures that were traded into Nubia, the
imported goods also included some consumables that have not usually sur-
vived in archaeological deposits. Some of the Meroitic glass vessels, for
instance, are of shapes used elsewhere for containing unguents and oils, and
it is likely that they were imported for their contents rather than for themselves
(Shinnie 1967: 130–1). Similarly, some of the imported Graeco-Roman
pottery that appears alongside indigenous wares in Meroitic contexts could
have arrived in Nubia as containers for consumables. An Egyptian Old King-
dom text, for example, mentions the Nubians’ fondness for Egyptian honey
(Adams 1984: 41), and the Egyptian amphorae that are found in Nubian sites
of Meroitic, X-Group, and Early Christian date seem to have been imported
full of either olive oil or wine. There must also have been other imported
commodities that have left little archaeological evidence, such as some of the
ﬁne textiles that have been recovered from Meroitic, X-Group, and Christian
tombs at Ballana and Qustul (Thurman 1979).
   Other archaeological evidence that throws light on the organization of
Nubian trade is the location of some of the major urban sites. All of the cities
that survived for any length of time seem to have been at places where the
export commodities of the African interior could be collected at the riverbank,
ready for shipment to Egypt. As time went on and trade networks expanded

                                                                             107
African Civilizations

ever further into the interior, so these places appeared successively further up
the Nile: ﬁrst there was Buhen, then Kerma, then Napata, then Meroë, and
ﬁnally there were Shendi, Soba, and Sennar. Some of these places, and indeed
others also, grew particularly important because they were situated at a point
where a major land route reached the Nile. Thus, Meroë and Napata stood at
the southern and northern end, respectively, of the Bayuda Road, which cut off
the great bend of the Nile containing the Fourth and Fifth Cataracts. In turn,
Napata and Kawa stood at each end of the Meheila Road, which cut off the
next great bend of the river further downstream. These routes were only part,
however, of those that seem to have existed by Meroitic times, including the
Korosko Road, which cut off the whole of the Nile bend that contained the
Second, Third, and Fourth Cataracts; the Wadi Hawad Road, which led
south-east from Meroë to Aksum; and another route that led north-east from
the Atbara–Nile conﬂuence to the Red Sea port of Suakin (Adams 1977). The
location of urban centres and the existence of these land routes suggest two
things: ﬁrst, that the external trade of the Nile might have played an important
role in urban growth; second, that such trade was only part of a vast network
of regional trading links. Archaeological evidence from the Gash Delta in
eastern Sudan (Fig. 5.1, p. 113) suggests contact with Kerma and the possibil-
ity that the area between the Gash and Baraka Valleys was the location of the
Land of Punt, whose trade with New Kingdom Egypt was recorded in a
carving at Deir el Bahari. These are indications of how extensive that network
might have been (Fattovich 1991; Mitchell 2005: 78–80).
   Until we have more archaeological evidence for regional trading systems in
this part of Africa, it is probably premature to assess the actual contribution
that external trade made to the development of cities and states on the middle
Nile. Nevertheless, it could be argued that trade in general provided a major
causative factor for these developments and that if there had been no trade
centred on the Nile, then there would have been little social development there.
However, external trade was only one aspect of long-continued cultural inter-
action between the middle Nile and the world to its north; signiﬁcantly, one
that is more susceptible to archaeological study than some others.


Conclusion
Considering its environment, Nubia would seem to have been an unlikely
place for the development of states and the appearance of cities. Yet not only
did these things happen, they happened here earlier than anywhere else in
tropical Africa. It is little wonder that a common explanation has been to
regard such developments as ‘secondary’ in character, resulting directly from
contact with Egypt. An examination of the archaeological evidence reveals a

108
                                                         Sudanic genesis: Nubia

more complex situation, in which exotic inﬂuences undoubtedly played a role
but where important contributions and initial development came from within,
so that the resultant social complexity had its own distinctive Nubian
characteristics.
  First, Nubia was partly a gift of the Nile, just as Egypt was completely so.
Water and silt from the Nile allowed the development of a sound subsistence
base that in some favoured areas was capable of producing a surplus, espe-
cially where seasonal grazing and rainfed cultivation were possible near the
river. It is noticeable that all of the major sociocultural developments discussed
in this chapter were located on more favoured parts of the river and not in the
less productive areas. The more southerly regions of Nubia, with greater
rainfall and access to seasonal grazing for savanna pastoralists, were especially
fortunate. Second, Nubian technology, although often inﬂuenced by foreign
ideas and products, was able to extend the cultivated land and to intensify its
exploitation by means of mechanical irrigation. It was also able to provide
both land and water transportation systems that could overcome the commu-
nication problems of a population strung out along many hundreds of kilo-
metres of river.
  It seems likely that cultivable land and accessible grazing became scarce
resources, providing a power base for those who controlled both those
resources and the people necessary for their exploitation. Limited resources,
particularly during periods of climatic stress and growing populations, encour-
aged people to gather in urban aggregations, with their potential for surplus
storage. Social stratiﬁcation followed, with society divided between the rulers
and the ruled, and with an increasingly sophisticated technology stimulating
the development of functional specialization and social differentiation. How-
ever, it was trading and exchange activities, and the general cultural inter-
action of which they were a part, that became the catalyst for major social and
political developments in Nubia. In particular, Nubian rulers acquired prestige
goods that conﬁrmed their superior status and gave them the means of ensur-
ing the support of other members of the elite. It is likely that the middle Nile
had long been part of an extensive regional trading system, but from Egyptian
Old Kingdom times onwards the demand of the developed world to the north
for raw materials and tropical exotica created a major interest in external
trade. Nubia became both a pipeline of supply and a successful entrepôt,
proﬁting not so much from its own products but from those that it handled
on their way north or on their way south. The origins of Kerma can already be
discerned at this time. Subsequently, Egypt controlled this trade itself,
extending its authority into Nubia both in Middle Kingdom and, more exten-
sively, in New Kingdom times. When Egypt’s grip weakened, indigenous
control quickly reasserted itself, ﬁrst with Kerma and eventually with the states

                                                                             109
African Civilizations

of Napata and Meroë, as well as those of later times. The earlier of these
polities might have been only tentative, but by Meroitic times we ﬁnd evidence
of a highly complex, stratiﬁed society. It is, however, apparent from archaeo-
logical evidence that all of these autocratic regimes sought to strengthen and
legitimize their control by sheltering behind powerful religious ideologies, of
which in turn contributed to the growth of urban centres. The foreign origin of
most of those religions indicates the considerable contribution made to Nubian
developments by cultural contacts with the north, but even with religion there
was a strong indigenous input.
  The emergence of social complexity on the middle Nile may thus be seen as
the result of a complex interaction between local and exotic factors but an
interaction in which indigenous people made their own decisions. As Shinnie
(1967: 169) wrote of the best known of these polities: ‘Meroë was an African
civilization, ﬁrmly based on African soil, and developed by an African popu-
lation.’ Indeed, the roots of Meroitic achievement can be traced back to Kerma
in the middle of the second millennium BC, and the cultural origins of Kerma
appear to have been contemporary with those of Pharaonic Egypt. Rather than
continuing to see the development of social complexity in Nubia as secondary
to that of Egypt, we should perhaps begin to regard them as parallel and
interacting African achievements.




110
Chapter 5
Isolation: the Ethiopian and Eritrean
Highlands
For many observers it has been the isolation of this region, particularly that
of the central highlands of Ethiopia and Eritrea, that has made the greatest
impression. The core of the region is a great block of mountains, everywhere
more than 1,000 metres in height, that reaches a general level of 2,300 metres
and in places exceeds 4,200 metres above sea level. One could not imagine
a less likely setting for state emergence and urbanization. Nevertheless, in
the modern countries of Ethiopia and Eritrea there is evidence for such
developments during the ﬁrst few centuries AD, and indications of their origins
during the ﬁrst millennium BC (D.W. Phillipson 2009a; 2009c; 2012). Not
only are these dates early for the attainment of social complexity in tropical
Africa, but these achievements were highly sophisticated. Almost 2,000 years
ago, the state of Aksum boasted urban centres; its own form of writing;
coinage in gold, silver, and bronze; masonry buildings of a distinctive archi-
tectural style; unique monuments that indicate quarrying and engineering
skills; extensive trading contacts both within and outside Africa; and a signiﬁ-
cant role in international politics. Indeed, Aksum seems to have been one of
the ﬁrst states to adopt Christianity (D.W. Phillipson 1998: 145 note 1).
However, the antecedents of Aksumite culture can be discerned as early as
the eighth century BC in the period formerly known as the Pre-Aksumite.
Large settlements existed at Yeha, in Ethiopia, and at Matara and Sembel, in
Eritrea, the last one of these belonging to the possibly earlier Ona Culture
(Schmidt and Curtis 2001; Schmidt et al. 2008; Curtis 2009; Fattovich 2009;
Schmidt 2009). In some places inscriptions appeared and there was sophisti-
cated stone masonry, sculpture, and metallurgy, although stone artefacts were
also still used. Furthermore, there were contacts with South Arabia and to a
lesser extent with the Nile Valley. Far from being isolated, Ethiopia and Eritrea
appear to have formed, at times, an important zone for cultural integration.
For Edward Ullendorff (1960: 23) the region was ‘a bridge between Africa
and Asia’.
  After the rise of Islam in the seventh century AD, Ethiopia did become
increasingly isolated, leading the eighteenth-century historian Gibbon to make
his famous exaggerated remark that: ‘Encompassed on all sides by the enemies
of their religion, the Aethiopians slept near a thousand years, forgetful of
the world by whom they were forgotten’ (Gibbon 1952: Vol. 2, 159–60).
However, the Ethiopians’ successful survival through those centuries can

                                                                            111
African Civilizations

hardly be likened to sleep; for some form of Ethiopian state did survive down
to modern times, albeit one of a mostly nonurban type. The Christian Church
of Ethiopia also survived, leaving as a legacy of those centuries some of the
most remarkable ecclesiastical architecture in the world. Clearly, apparent
isolation has had beneﬁts.


Geographical location and environmental factors
The northern end of the East African Rift Valley divides the mountains of
Ethiopia and Eritrea into two parts (Fig. 5.1). The highlands to the north
and west of this valley form the heartland of old Ethiopia, formerly called
Abyssinia. This huge area of mountains is roughly triangular; its northern end
lies close to the western shore of the Red Sea and is now part of Eritrea.
Compared with the dry, hot plains on both the African and the South Arabian
side of the Red Sea, the Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands offer relatively
attractive environments. As a result, cultural contact and even movement of
people might be expected from an early date. It was apparently from such
interaction that social complexity ﬁrst developed in the northern Ethiopian
and Eritrean Highlands.
   Proximity to the Red Sea had other consequences. For the ancient world, as
for the modern world, the Red Sea comprised a major shipping route, which
connected the Mediterranean with the trade of the Indian Ocean. Ethiopia and
Eritrea, able to tap the resources of the African interior, had direct access to
this major route, and this was an important contributory element in the rise of
the Aksumite state.
   The highlands consist of basalts and other lavas overlying sandstones and
limestones. Most of the region is tilted to the west and therefore drains into the
Nile, particularly into the upper Blue Nile, which issues from Lake Tana. The
drainage pattern has cut deeply into the landscape, carving spectacular gorges,
often hundreds of metres deep, which break up the surface of the high plateau.
Parts of the original high plateau have been so eroded that very little level
country remains, except in the form of ﬂat-topped ambas, isolated hills with
precipitous sides (Buxton 1970: 18–20).
   The most important environmental factor in the Ethiopian and Eritrean
Highlands is altitude. Within about 250 kilometres of each other lie the hot
dusty salt ﬂats of the Danakil Desert and the cool heights of the Semien
Mountains, which sometimes experience heavy snow falls (Buxton 1970:
18). Altitude is thus a major determinant of both climate and vegetation.
Ethiopians recognize three main climatic zones: dega, which is land above
2,400 metres with an average temperature of 16C; woina dega, which is land
between 1,800 and 2,400 metres with an average temperature of 22C; and

112
                                            The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands




Fig. 5.1 Principal archaeological sites and places in the Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands
mentioned in the text. 1, Sembel; 2, Adulis; 3, Kohaito; 4, Matara; 5, Aksum; 6, Yeha;
7, Debra Damo; 8, Haoulti Melazo; 9, Maqaber Ga‘ewa; 10, Addi Galamo; 11, Quiha;
12, Gondar; 13, Gouzara; 14, Lalibela Cave; 15, Lalibela. Based on Ullendorf 1960. Drawn
by Joe LeMonnier.


                                                                                     113
African Civilizations

kwolla, which is land below 1,800 metres with average temperatures of 26C
and higher. However, although temperatures vary greatly with altitude, there
is little seasonal variation. The major factor determining seasonality is rainfall.
The highlands occasion a somewhat greater rainfall than is usual at this
latitude in Africa, but because the rain is brought by winds from the south-
west, rainfall is heaviest and the wet season longest in the south-western
highlands; the far north has less rain and a shorter wet season. The average
annual rainfall in the central highlands is about 1,000 millimetres. The nearby
plains of the Red Sea coast, now mostly in Eritrea, have a comparatively slight
rainfall, but this occurs in January and February when the highlands are dry,
and the coastal plains are at their hottest and driest at the time when the
heaviest rain is falling in the highlands. Pastoralists and agriculturalists can
exploit this seasonal and altitudinal variation in rainfall (Ullendorff 1960:
26–8; Buxton 1970: 20–1; Phillipson 1998: 11–15).
   Given the height and open character of much of the Ethiopian Highlands,
exposure to wind is another environmental factor of signiﬁcance. Much of the
high plateau is sufﬁciently windswept for this to affect its utilization. Thus
Buxton (1970: 60) recorded that the population of the Debra Berhan area in
Shoa tended to cluster in and around the gorges, rather than on the open
plateau itself.
   The wide range of altitude and climate is responsible for a great variety of
vegetation. Within the boundaries of the modern states of Ethiopia and Eritrea
this extends from desert scrub to rainforest, but even within the highlands
there was originally an impressive range. Temperate forests of Podocarpus sp.
occurred below 2,200 metres and of Juniperus sp. above that level, but both
have been extensively destroyed by human activity, leaving most of the high
plateau bleak and empty. Nevertheless, much of the vegetation cover of the
high plateau now consists of short grass, which provides excellent grazing.
   The considerable altitudinal range of the Ethiopian Highlands has thus given
rise to great environmental diversity. Although soil erosion has been a prob-
lem, some 27 percent of Ethiopian and Eritrean soils have been classiﬁed as
good agricultural soils and a further 13 percent as fairly good (Ethiopian
Mapping Authority 1988: 8). Such a combination – a variety of environments
and the availability of fertile soils – has enabled agriculture to provide the most
important resources of the region. In many places it is possible to obtain two or
three crops in the same year, and in some places it is possible to sow and
harvest at any time. This is achieved by growing a great range of crops. Among
cereals, for instance, teff, wheat, barley, sorghum, and ﬁnger millet can all be
grown, although it is teff that is most commonly grown in areas of middle and
higher altitude. Ethiopia also produces a remarkable selection of vegetables
and many types of fruit. Other agricultural products of importance comprise

114
                                       The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

maize and ensete (in the high rainfall areas of the south-west), coffee, cotton,
chat (a narcotic), nug (a source of oil), various medicinal plants, and sugar-
cane. Agriculture also includes large numbers of livestock, particularly cattle
(for milk and meat), hair sheep (rather than wool sheep), and goats. Working
animals have included oxen for pulling ploughs – a use unique in tropical
Africa – horses, asses, and mules, the last important for carrying loads in the
broken landscape. Additional useful animals include chickens, dogs, and bees;
civet cats also are kept and the civet collected for use in perfume (Ullendorff
1960: 28–30; Pankhurst 1961: 200–19; Finneran 2007: 67–77).
   The native fauna of the Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands provided other
resources. Not only could ﬁshing and hunting supplement diet, but valuable
trade goods could be obtained from many wild animals, such as elephants,
rhinoceros, crocodiles, lions, leopards, giraffes, and zebras. Resources of
signiﬁcance also included minerals, of which gold and iron ore seem to have
been the most important, but copper, silver, lead, and tin could be found
(Pankhurst 1961: 224–9; Phillipson 2000: vol. 2, 470, 473). In addition the
region produced good building stone; timber became scarce only in more
recent centuries. Finally, human life, as so often in tropical Africa, provided
an important resource in the form of slaves. It has been estimated that between
1800 and 1850 about 1,250,000 slaves were exported. Numbers for earlier
periods are unknown, but the trade could still have been of signiﬁcance
(Alexander 2001). Overall, as with Nubia, the nonagricultural resources of
Ethiopia consisted in the main of commodities sought after in the ancient
Mediterranean world.
   The environment of the Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands was clearly an
attractive one for human settlement. Nevertheless, constraints did exist. The
ﬁrst is that extensive areas of the highlands were too rocky, too exposed, or
too high to have much agricultural value. In addition, much of the landscape
was so rough and so obstructed by gorges and other natural features that
communication remained difﬁcult until modern times. A second constraint
is that historical sources show that Ethiopia was not as healthy as it seems.
Thus Pankhurst (1961: 238–47) showed that the highlands have suffered
from occasional epidemics of great severity. Some of these cannot now be
identiﬁed, but it is apparent that smallpox, cholera, inﬂuenza, and bubonic
plague were amongst them. Dysentery, leprosy, eye diseases, guinea worm,
and elephantiasis are also mentioned amongst diseases found in Ethiopia; in
the lowlands malaria and other fevers were a serious problem. In the highlands
themselves, tapeworm was prevalent, largely because of the practice of eating
raw meat, but this afﬂiction has been customarily treated with indifference
because of the existence of the kosso tree, whose ﬂowers produce a drug that is
highly effective in expelling these intestinal worms. Perhaps the most serious

                                                                           115
African Civilizations

constraint in the highlands, however, has been the periodic recurrence of
famine, recorded as early as the ninth century and still a major concern in
modern times (Pankhurst 1961: 230–7). Famines could result from crop
failure, brought on by inadequate or even excessive rainfall, or by unusually
low temperatures. They could also result from crop destruction caused by
swarms of mice, troops of monkeys, or (most serious of all) massive invasions
of locusts. Serious as some of these constraints might appear, however, the
greater number were episodic, so that overall they seem to have had little
inhibiting effect on the growth of social complexity in the Ethiopian and
Eritrean Highlands.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
Oral traditional, historical, and archaeological sources all throw light
on the development of urbanization and state emergence in this region
(D.W. Phillipson 2009a: 1–2). Least valuable of them is oral tradition, which
attempts to explain the past with fantastic stories, and the Aksumite period is
somewhat beyond its range. Nevertheless, the most famous of Ethiopian oral
traditions, that concerning the visit of the Queen of Sheba to Solomon and
the consequent birth of the founder of the Ethiopian royal house (Buxton
1970: 34), does provide some support for the Semitic contribution to Ethiopia
indicated by other sources (Munro-Hay 1991: 9–16).
  Historical sources are more important and are of four types. First are
references to Ethiopia by ancient foreign writers (Finneran 2007: 16–24).
For example, Pliny the Younger (about AD 77) mentioned Adulis (Munro-
Hay 1991: 17), and the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, also of the ﬁrst century
AD, mentions Adulis, Koloè (possibly Kohaito or Matara), and Aksum
(Kobishchanov 1979: 41; Anfray 1981: 363). Classical sources indicate a
powerful Aksumite kingdom that was able to conquer parts of South Arabia
in the sixth century AD and, before that, was already partly urbanized and
exporting ivory, rhinoceros horn, tortoiseshell, and obsidian through Adulis
(Anfray 1981: 363).
  The second type of historical sources consists of inscriptions on stone found
in Aksumite or earlier contexts (Phillipson 2009c: 265–8) and inscriptions and
representations on Aksumite coins. Unlike Meroitic inscriptions, those from
Aksumite and earlier times can be read, being written in Ge’ez (the old
Ethiopian language), in Sabaean (South Arabian), or sometimes in Greek.
The inscribed stones provide information about military exploits, such as King
Ezana’s apparent expedition to Meroë in the fourth century AD and

116
                                         The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

King Kaleb’s campaigns in South Arabia in the sixth century AD (Munro-Hay
1991: 228, 230). In addition they tell us the names and titles of some of the
rulers of Aksum, as do the coins that might record as many as twenty-four
different Aksumite kings (Pankhurst 1961: 401). The coins are also informa-
tive in other ways, recording, for instance, the fourth-century acceptance
of Christianity, by replacing the pagan crescent and disc with the cross
(see Fig. 5.9).
   Few of these inscriptions are later than the fourth century, and probably
none is later than the ninth (Buxton 1970: 119). The Aksumite kingdom
disappeared sometime between the seventh and the tenth century AD
(Munro-Hay 1991: 93–4; Negussie 1994: 27–9). Its capital moved to an
unidentiﬁed location in eastern Tigray (D.W. Phillipson 2009a: 9), and there
followed some centuries for which there is little historical source material. It is
not until the end of the ﬁfteenth century that there is again a substantial body
of external sources, and these constitute the third type of historical data
(Munro-Hay 1991:19–25; Finneran 2007: 24–6). These writings, by European
visitors, throw a great deal of light on Ethiopian society from the sixteenth
century onwards. Amongst these accounts, those by the Portuguese Francisco
Alvares, relating to 1520–6, and by the Scotsman James Bruce, relating to
1768–73, stand out as remarkable (Pankhurst 1961: 100).
   The fourth type of historical sources consists of writings by Ethiopians
themselves. The oldest surviving manuscripts date from the thirteenth century,
but the greater part of Ethiopian writing was on religious subjects and pro-
vides little information on secular matters. However, royal chronicles were
also written from the fourteenth century onwards, and these form the principal
source for later Ethiopian history (Buxton 1970: 129; Taddesse 1972; Marcus
2002).


Archaeological evidence
The investigation and publication of the abundant archaeological evidence
has sometimes been deﬁcient. Excavation has concentrated on sites with
Aksumite masonry structures, and publication has tended to be descriptive
and preliminary, rather than concerned with analysis and synthesis. Michels,
in Kobishchanov’s book (1979: 1–34), emphasized the importance of the
pioneering work of the German Aksum expedition of 1906 and of research
by the Ethiopian Institute of Archaeology from the 1950s to the early 1970s.
Subsequently, however, political events in Ethiopia prevented further archaeo-
logical ﬁeldwork until the beginning of the 1990s. The resumption of such
work, particularly by David Phillipson, added substantially to knowledge of
ancient Aksum (D.W. Phillipson 1994; 2000; 2012). At about the same time,

                                                                              117
African Civilizations

several publications appeared which made the results of earlier research more
accessible (Munro-Hay 1989; 1991; Anfray 1990; Phillipson 1997; 1998).
   Relevant Ethiopian archaeological evidence was formerly divided into three
main periods: Pre-Aksumite, Aksumite, and Medieval–Modern Ethiopian.
Approximately, these periods represented the eighth century BC to the ﬁrst
century AD, the ﬁrst century AD to the seventh to tenth centuries AD, and the
seventh to tenth centuries AD to the present. It is the ﬁrst two of these that
are of greatest importance for this chapter, and it is these periods that have
attracted most archaeological attention. Francis Anfray, who was responsible
for much of the excavation in Ethiopia during the 1960s and early 1970s,
divided the Pre-Aksumite into a South Arabian period, lasting from the ﬁfth to
the fourth century BC, and an Intermediate period, lasting from the third
century BC to the ﬁrst century AD. He saw the Aksumite period as continuing
until the ninth century AD; Michels also argued for a long chronology (Anfray
1968: 355–8; Michels 2005). Fattovich (1990: 14–15) suggested a start for the
Pre-Aksumite possibly as early as the tenth century BC. He thought that
its origins lay in developments in social complexity beginning in the third
millennium BC with the Gash Group in the Eritrean-Sudanese lowlands,
developments that shifted to the Eritrean-Ethiopian Highlands early in the
ﬁrst millennium BC (Fattovich 2010). In contrast, Munro-Hay (1991), con-
sidering only the Aksumite period and drawing on his studies of Aksumite
coinage, preferred a short chronology. This consisted of six phases commen-
cing in the ﬁrst century AD and terminating in the early seventh century, with
the later seventh to the twelfth centuries placed in a Post-Aksumite period.
Furthermore, a comparison of the stratigraphic evidence from Aksum and
Matara led Negussie (1994) to conclude that (for the Aksumite period) a long
chronology was indicated for Aksum itself but only a short one for Matara,
possibly reﬂecting the greater importance of eastern Tigray, the location of
the latter site, towards the end of the ﬁrst millennium AD (D.W. Phillipson
2009a: 9). Subsequently, D.W. Phillipson (2009c) and Fattovich (2009)
suggested the abandonment of the term ‘Pre-Aksumite’ and its subdivisions.
A more realistic timetable might consist of merely recognizing contrasting
periods in the ﬁrst millennium BC, the ﬁrst millennium AD, and the second
millennium AD. Most recently Bard et al. (2014) have identiﬁed ﬁve phases of
development at Aksum, based on their Bieta Giyorgis excavations, from the
fourth century BC to possibly the ninth century AD. Archaeological research
in Eritrea (Schmidt and Curtis 2001; Schmidt 2009; Curtis 2009; Schmidt
et al. 2008) and in South Arabia (Finneran 2007: 111–13) now allows this
evidence to be seen in a regional and chronological context.
   The best-known Ethiopian site of the ﬁrst millennium BC is Yeha (Buxton
1970: 36–7; Anfray 1972b; 1990: 26–7; Michels, in Kobishchanov 1979:

118
                                            The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

10–12; de Contenson 1981; Fattovich 1990; 2009; D.W. Phillipson 2012).
Situated in the northern end of the highlands where the Aksumite state was to
develop, this place has the remains of a temple (Fig. 5.2) built of ashlar
sandstone masonry set on a stepped base. Parts of this ruin still stand to a
height of about 9 metres, and it is now thought to date from the seventh or
sixth century BC and to have similarities to contemporary South Arabian
buildings. According to Fattovich (1990: 4), the Yeha temple was originally
at least 13 metres in height and approximately 19 by 15 metres in area; the
size and quality of masonry are very impressive. It is perhaps older than




Fig. 5.2 Inside the temple at Yeha, Ethiopia, dating from the seventh or sixth
century BC. Parts of this ruin are 9 metres in height. Photograph by author, 1996.


                                                                                     119
African Civilizations

the Parthenon in Athens and implies a highly organized society. Yeha has
also produced a number of inscriptions that are written in a South Arabian
language and in a South Arabian script. There is, in addition, a cemetery of
subterranean tombs and the site of a stone building which excavation has
shown was destroyed by ﬁre and subsequently replaced by a new building.
Anfray, who excavated a part of this latter structure, which is known as
Grat-Be’al-Guebri, was of the opinion that it was a palace. Yeha also seems
to have other occupation deposits and may possibly have been an early urban
centre. Iron was already in use, and amongst the bronze objects recovered
from Yeha are thirteen ‘identity marks’, consisting of openwork geometrical or
animal designs which often incorporate alphabetical characters (Anfray 1990:
25–7; Fattovich 2009: 281). These have been regarded as personal seals, and
their impressions have been found on pottery. The larger ones might have been
animal brands (three illustrated in Buxton 1970: 37 are 8 to 11 centimetres
long), possibly for paint branding sheep because bronze would seem unsuit-
able for ﬁre branding. Paint consisting of red ochre and water could have
been used.
   The South Arabian inﬂuence seen at Yeha is also apparent in the two
localities of Haoulti-Melazo, situated in the same general area as Yeha, where
several sites have produced so-called Pre-Aksumite material. This includes
fragments of dressed stone with South Arabian inscriptions, two limestone
statues of seated female ﬁgures, and a sophisticated limestone throne decorated
with low-relief carving. There is symbolism associated with the moon god,
Almouqah, apparently venerated in the northern part of Ethiopia as well as in
South Arabia. The statues are comparable to one of similar date from Addi
Galamo, found with other things including a broken altar showing the crescent
and disc of Almouqah. Similar material is also known from Maqaber Ga‘ewa
(de Contenson 1962; van Beek 1967; Michels, in Kobishchanov 1979: 12–13;
de Contenson 1981; Fattovich 1990; 2009; D.W. Phillipson 2012: 28–9).
   So-called Pre-Aksumite material was recorded from numerous sites,
extending from northern Eritrea into Tigray (Fattovich 1990: 3). Many of
these sites are between Aksum and Yeha, having been identiﬁed during a
surface survey by Michels (2005), and there appears to have been cultural
continuity in north-east Tigray (D’Andrea et al. 2008). The earliest ‘Pre-
Aksumite’ culture was inﬂuenced by South Arabia, but from the beginning
Pre-Aksumite culture showed originality and gradually developed characteris-
tics of its own, while those of South Arabia faded. In particular, the language
and script used for inscriptions grew less like the South Arabian from which it
had originated and more like Ge’ez, the ancestor of the Eritrean and Ethiopian
languages Tigré, Tigrinya, and Amharic. South Arabian inﬂuence seems to
have been from the kingdom of Saba, which appears to have originated as

120
                                         The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

early as the late second millennium BC (Finneran 2007: 113). Inscriptions in
Sabaean have suggested the existence of a state known as D’mt by the mid-ﬁrst
millennium BC, located in Tigray and adjacent parts of Eritrea. This develop-
ment has been associated with modest urban growth at least at Yeha and
Matara. Disintegration is thought to have followed during the last two or three
centuries BC, however, and it is difﬁcult to relate the sociopolitical situation to
that of the subsequent Aksumite period (Fattovich 1990). D.W. Phillipson
(2009c: 266–8) questioned the evidence for the D’mt state, and Fattovich
(2009: 287) had similar doubts.
   Nevertheless, it is probable that Aksumite society did develop from the
cultures of the ﬁrst millennium BC in its region. This earlier archaeological
evidence could represent the origins of urbanization and state formation,
stimulated in part by South Arabian inﬂuences, but Aksumite evidence indi-
cates a society in which these processes had reached a mature stage. Some
suggestion of continuity between the two has been provided by excavations on
Bieta Giyorgis, a hill 1 kilometre to the north-west of Aksum. These have
revealed a sequence covering the mid- and late ﬁrst millennium BC, overlain by
early Aksumite deposits (Bard et al. 1997). Subsequently, they have also
provided a revised overall chronology for the Aksum area (Bard et al. 2014).
   The most thoroughly researched of the Aksumite sites is Aksum itself
(D.W. Phillipson 1994; 1997; 1998; 2000; 2003; 2012). It is famous for its
stelae, tall, thin, standing stones of which the largest have been carved to
represent multistoreyed buildings, although many stelae are small and undec-
orated. Similar standing stones are also known at other Aksumite sites, but
none of them with such enormous proportions or such careful ﬁnishing and
decoration as some of those in the main stelae group at Aksum. One of the
larger ones (Stela 3) of that group remained standing and consists of a single
block of granite 21 metres high (plus about 3 metres underground), carved to
represent nine storeys, with a false door at its base (Fig. 5.3). The fallen pieces
of a taller one (Stela 2, about 28 metres long and carved to represent ten
storeys) were taken to Rome in 1937 and erected there, although it was
reerected at Aksum in 2008 following its return to Ethiopia. The largest of
all, however (Stela 1), lies broken on the ground at Aksum and was nearly
33 metres in length, being carved to represent twelve storeys (on counting
storeys, see Buxton and Matthews 1974: 57). D.W. Phillipson (1994: 192)
described this monster stela as ‘a strong candidate for consideration as the
largest single monolith which humans have ever proceeded to erect’. Indeed,
van Beek (1967: 117) suggested that perhaps it fell while being erected, and
archaeological evidence has since supported this interpretation (Phillipson
2000: 161–4, 252–4). More than 140 stelae are known from four main groups
in Aksum, although most are far smaller than those just described. In addition,

                                                                              121
Fig. 5.3 Stelae 3 and 6 at Aksum, Ethiopia. Stela 3, which has continued to stand, is the
third largest of the storeyed stelae and Stela 6 the smallest. Stela 3 after Krencker 1913:
Tafel VI, as reproduced in D.W. Phillipson 1997: ﬁg. 30; Stela 6 after Krencker 1913: Tafel
II as reproduced in Phillipson 1997: ﬁg. 13. Stela 3 is 20.57 metres high, above ground level.
Stela 6 is 15.22 metres long. Reproduced by permission of David Phillipson.
                                         The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

more than 100 stelae (possibly up to 300), both Pre-Aksumite and early
Aksumite in date, are thought to have existed at the Ona Enda Aboi Zague
site on the northern side of Bieta Giyorgis hill (Bard and Fattovich 1993: 17).
   Excavations amongst the main stelae group at Aksum have addressed the
question of their purpose and the problem of their date. Work by Chittick
(Munro-Hay 1989) and Phillipson (2000) revealed extensive, subterranean,
multichambered Aksumite tombs, so it is apparent that the area was a cemet-
ery. The largest stela appears to have been intended to mark two monumental
underground tombs: a stone-built ‘Mausoleum’ to its west, more than
16 metres long and with ten side-chambers, and a possibly similar structure
to its east that has been only partly investigated and that might never
have been completed. As already stated, it seems that this giant stela fell and
broke during the process of erection. Only 2.8 metres (8.5 percent) of its 33-
metre length was intended to be set into the ground, and there is no sign of
base plates such as were ﬁtted to the other large stelae after erection, so it is
possible that the Mausoleum was never actually used for burial (or was later
heavily robbed). This stela probably represents the last of a series of storeyed
stelae, each having been taller than its immediate predecessor until the inevit-
able disaster occurred. Signiﬁcantly, no attempt seems to have been made to
clear up the debris or to replace the stela, suggesting that the project might
have been abandoned. Phillipson (2000: 164) dated this event to the fourth
century AD, and Munro-Hay (1991: 68) put it at approximately AD 400.
Broadly coinciding with the ofﬁcial adoption of Christianity at Aksum by King
Ezana, which Munro-Hay (1991: 78) estimated at around AD 333, it might
have been this ideological change that led to the project’s abandonment.
Certainly, the form of elite tombs changed at this time; the nearby ‘Tomb of
the False Door’, discovered and named by Chittick in the early 1970s, consists
of a subterranean granite-built chamber covered by a squat surface structure
which appears to have been intended to represent a temple or palace. Lacking
an associated stela but retaining a carving of a door similar to those on the
storeyed stelae, it appears that this represents an early stage in the Christianiz-
ing of the burial tradition, dating to the late fourth or early ﬁfth century AD
(Phillipson 2000: 427). A little to the north of Aksum lie twin subterranean
tombs traditionally attributed to the sixth-century kings Kaleb and Gabra
Maskal, which appear to mark a further stage in this process (Phillipson
2000: 427, 431).
   Other than the largest stela, it is often difﬁcult to associate these standing
stones with speciﬁc tombs and in many cases impossible, but it seems they were
primarily intended as tomb markers. It appears that the area of the main stelae
group at Aksum was used for burial from at least the ﬁrst or second century
AD. A series of platforms was gradually built up, on what originally must have

                                                                              123
African Civilizations

been a gentle slope. Stelae were erected on these platforms, beneath which
were subterranean tombs. This process continued for so long that a number of
stelae of rougher, earlier type were actually buried upright by later deposits,
and some of the later carved stelae had their lower parts covered (Munro-Hay
1989: 330). In addition to the tombs already mentioned, the main stelae area
contained several shaft tombs and an extensive rock-cut tomb called the
‘Tomb of the Brick Arches’, which was discovered and named by Chittick.
Probably dating to the fourth century AD (Phillipson 2000: 128–32), this
tomb had not suffered as much from robbers as most of the others investi-
gated, and excavations within it by both Chittick and D.W. Phillipson pro-
duced substantial amounts of important cultural material. More difﬁcult to
understand is the curious structure known as the Nefas Mawcha, which is
adjacent to the main stelae group and seems also to have been a tomb.
It consisted of a giant granite slab, 17.3 metres long, 6.5 metres wide, and
1.1 to 1.7 metres in thickness, which rested on supporting slabs and walls.
This enormous slab weighs about 360 tonnes, and its supporting structure
collapsed in antiquity when the slab was struck by the largest of the stelae
(Stela 1) as it fell, weighing as it did some 517 tonnes (Phillipson 1994: 192,
197). The Nefas Mawcha must, therefore, pre-date the fall of the largest stela;
Munro-Hay (1989: 120) suggested that it belongs to the third century AD.
Probably it was intended to be covered by rubble and soil, although it was
apparently unﬁnished when it was wrecked by the falling stela (Phillipson
2000: 481).
   Ancient tombs also exist in other parts of Aksum, usually associated with
stelae. To the south-east of the city, for instance, is the large rock-cut tomb
known as the ‘Tomb of King Bazen’, so completely robbed that it is undatable
but traditionally attributed to the legendary King Bazen, who was supposed to
have been contemporary with the birth of Christ (Munro-Hay 1991: 13).
More informative, however, is the so-called Gudit Stelae Field, with 594 large
stones, most of which were probably stelae. Situated just outside Aksum to its
south-west, this seems to have been a cemetery for ‘middle-class’ Aksumites,
rather than for the rulers and the elite for whom the other tombs were
constructed (Ayele 1996: 614; Phillipson 2000: 225–8). Nevertheless, modest
though Gudit Stelae Field tomb ‘GT II’ was, Chittick’s excavations of
1974 recovered early third-century glassware of high quality, in spite of the
depredations of tomb robbers (Munro-Hay 1989: 143–6, 190–1). Ayele’s
excavations of 1994, 1995, and 1996 suggested that the area was used for
nonelite burials from the mid-second to the mid-fourth centuries and possibly
for much of the ﬁrst ﬁve centuries AD.
   In addition to stelae and tombs at Aksum, there are a number of stone
platforms that have been interpreted as the bases of thrones. Such thrones

124
                                        The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

seem to have been important in Aksumite culture: one existed at the site of
Matara; they are mentioned in two inscriptions of King Ezana; and in the sixth
century Cosmas Indicopleustes saw one close to a stela at Adulis. Ezana’s
inscriptions also say that he erected metal statues, and although none of these
has been found, a stone slab was discovered in Aksum at the beginning of the
twentieth century that had hollowed-out footprints 92 centimetres long. If this
slab was the plinth for a statue, as has been claimed, then the statue must have
been enormous (Anfray 1981: 372; Phillipson 1998: 30; 2012: 136).
  Aksum is also notable for the discovery of several Greek, South Arabian, and
Ge’ez stone-cut inscriptions mostly of the fourth-century King Ezana, in whose
reign Christianity appears to have been adopted (Pankhurst 1961: 28–30;
Munro-Hay 1991: 224–9; D.W. Phillipson 2012: 57–63). It is rare that
African archaeological evidence can speak to us so directly: ‘I will rule the
people’, claims Ezana, ‘with righteousness and justice, and will not oppress
them’ (Pankhurst 1961: 30).
  Furthermore, Aksum has produced some remarkable residential building
evidence. At the beginning of the twentieth century, the German Aksum
expedition excavated three multiroomed structures of monumental scale,
which were provisionally identiﬁed as palaces. These are known, respectively,
by the names Enda Mika’el, Enda Semon, and Ta’akha Mariam (Phillipson
1997: 93–120). An attempt was made by the German expedition to produce
architectural reconstructions of these buildings. The result for the central part
of Enda Mika’el was a castle-like structure of four square towers, standing
four storeys high on a stepped base. In the case of Ta’akha Mariam the
reconstruction was even more impressive, producing a huge complex of court-
yards, towers, and connecting buildings, which measured overall 80 by 120
metres and was of two storeys and, in places, three storeys (Buxton 1970: 93;
Michels, in Kobishchanov 1979: 6; Phillipson 1998: 84–6). Reconsideration of
the evidence led Buxton and Matthews (1974: 55, ﬁgs. 6–8) to suggest that
Enda Mika’el was of only three storeys and of a somewhat different design,
but their reconstruction still indicated the former existence of an impressive
structure.
  These buildings, in common with other major Aksumite buildings, were of a
distinctive architectural style (Buxton 1970: 91–102; Buxton and Matthews
1974). They were built on a massive masonry podium with stepped sides, a
feature of Pre-Aksumite and South Arabian origin that must have increased
a building’s apparent height. They were also built with a characteristic
indented plan, both the podium and the wall surfaces being alternately
recessed and projecting, a design that must have given the buildings an
appearance of great strength. The upper storeys were apparently of mud-
mortared rubble reinforced with timber, a type of construction that left the

                                                                            125
African Civilizations

ends of some timbers projecting from the walls at the corners of windows and
doors and at intervals along the wall surfaces. This constructional method is
known from excavated archaeological evidence (Munro-Hay 1989: 138, plate
8.8), from its representation on the largest stelae (Buxton and Matthews
1974), and from the tenth- or eleventh-century church of Debra Damo, studied
by the German Aksum expedition and by Matthews and Mordini (1959) and
now dated by D.W. Phillipson (2009b: 63) to the ‘third quarter of the ﬁrst
millennium AD’. Matthews was even able to attempt reconstructions of Aksu-
mite interiors (Buxton 1970: 94–5; Buxton and Matthews 1974: ﬁgs. 12, 18,
28). However, Anfray (1981: 370) questioned whether the walls of such
structures would have been strong enough to support more than two storeys.
Nevertheless, he pointed out that in the sixth century AD Cosmas Indico-
pleustes wrote that in Ethiopia he saw a ‘royal dwelling with four towers’.
Whatever the details, it seems that these monumental residential structures
were attempting to appear of great height; even two storeys, set on a solid
masonry base, would have the appearance of a three-storey building. In fact,
Anfrey has demonstrated that they were imposing buildings, with his excav-
ation of the so-called Dongur Mansion, on the western side of Aksum.
Excavated in 1966–8, this was a forty-room complex occupying approxi-
mately 3,000 square metres, with remains still standing in places to a height
of 5 metres. Stone-built, it comprised a central structure and a series of interior
courtyards that created separate blocks of rooms (Fig. 5.4). It was thought by
its excavator to date to about the seventh century AD. Rather smaller than
Ta’akha Mariam, Anfray interpreted it as a villa of a member of the elite, not
a royal palace (Anfray 1968: 360–3; 1972a: plate 1 for plan; 1981: 365–6;
1990: 97, 100–3; Michels, in Kobishchanov 1979: 7–8). With its many rooms
and courtyards, the Dongur Mansion could have housed numerous retainers,
craftsmen, servants, and slaves, as well as an elite extended family. It might
also have provided storage for agricultural produce and trade goods. Indeed,
Munro-Hay (1991: 49) suggested that this and similar complexes might have
been village centres surrounding landlords’ houses.
   Excavations elsewhere in and around Aksum indicated the existence of other
stone buildings, some of which were for nonelite occupants. D Site at Kidane
Mehret consisted of the remains of a peasant settlement of the eighth to ﬁfth
century BC, followed by a long hiatus in occupation and then a Late Aksumite
settlement of the sixth to eighth century AD. This site was situated about a
kilometre north of Aksum, apparently separate from the city, and appeared
to have been a farming village. Similarly, K Site in Maleke Aksum indicated
the presence of nonelite occupants but within Aksum itself. They appeared to
have been involved in industrial and craft activities during the ﬁfth and sixth
centuries AD (Phillipson 2000: 372–9, 417–18). It seems likely that Aksum

126
                                          The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands




Fig. 5.4 Plan of the ‘Dongur Mansion’ at Aksum. After Anfray 1972a: planche 1.


was an extensive city during the ﬁrst millennium AD, and excavations by
Chittick at the base of the hill behind the main stelae group showed the impact
of the city on its immediate environment. An erosional cycle was indicated and
the hillside is now largely rocky, with little soil, suggesting that the eventual
decline of the city might have been linked to environmental deterioration
caused by a high population density.
   Amongst other Aksumite sites, Matara (Fig. 5.5) is one of the most exten-
sively investigated, although poorly published. Now in Eritrea, it lies about
halfway between the Aksumite port of Adulis and the capital Aksum and is
likely to have been a place of economic and political signiﬁcance. The site

                                                                                 127
African Civilizations




Fig. 5.5 Plan of Matara, Eritrea, providing an indication of Aksumite urban layout.
After Anfray 1974: ﬁg. 7.


occupies about 20 hectares, and deposits up to 5 metres deep contain evidence
of two main phases of occupation: ﬁrst in about 500 to 300 BC and then (after
a long abandonment) an Aksumite period of about AD 700. Anfray excavated
tombs, churches, and residential buildings, and amongst the latter were both
elite houses and ordinary dwellings. Mound B yielded a large, multiroomed

128
                                        The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

mansion; three other similar ‘villas’ were uncovered. In addition, however,
there were houses of only two or three rooms and others that were intermedi-
ate in size between these and the villas, suggesting a social hierarchy. Some
of the residents of Matara must have had considerable wealth, because a
remarkable hoard of goldwork of Roman and Byzantine origin was found.
In addition, some material sophistication is suggested by the presence of a
piped water supply, provided by ﬁtting the bodies of amphorae one within
the other, which served the baptistery of the principal church discovered. The
excavations at Matara also provided an important indication of Aksumite
urban layout (Anfray 1967; 1974; 1981: 367–8; Michels, in Kobishchanov
1979: 14–16).
   There are other Aksumite urban sites at Adulis, on the coast, and at Kohaito,
north of Matara, both now in Eritrea. The remains of stone buildings of
Aksumite style have been excavated at Adulis, and artefacts of both Aksumite
and Mediterranean origin have been found there, indicating its role in long-
distance trade (Paribeni 1907; Anfray 1974; Peacock and Blue 2007). Subse-
quent excavations have revealed an important chronological sequence relevant
to the southern Red Sea region and the Horn of Africa (Zazzaro et al. 2014).
Kohaito, like Matara sometimes thought to be the Koloè mentioned in the
Periplus of the Erythraean Sea (p. 116), has not been excavated but is best
known for a dam, built of carefully ﬁtted blocks of stone, that is 67 metres long
and about 3 metres high (Anfray 1981: 368). This dam was designed to form a
reservoir of water; Pankhurst (1961: 24) called it ‘one of the greatest engineer-
ing feats of the Aksumites’. Another Aksumite site is at Gobedra Hill, about
4 kilometres west of Aksum, where there are quarries from which came the
granite used for the dressed stones of local Aksumite buildings and for some of
the stelae. There are also traces of a road by which such material was trans-
ported to Aksum (Phillipson 2000: 229–51). In addition, de Contenson excav-
ated a late Aksumite stone structure at Ouchatei Golo nearby, suggesting that
it was a Christian church, and undressed stelae were found in its vicinity
(de Contenson 1961; Michels, in Kobishchanov 1979: 10; D.W. Phillipson
1994: 192; 1998: 92; 2012: 91).
   Far more Aksumite sites are known than have been excavated or published
in detail. Anfray (1973: 21) provided a site distribution map, which showed
that the nuclear area of the Aksumite state must have been located around
Aksum and Adulis. He also proposed a distinction between an eastern and a
western Aksumite province, the archaeological record suggesting that the
eastern province was more prosperous but that the western was the centre of
political power. However, it has been suggested that this centre moved east
in Late Aksumite times, with a new capital at a location not yet identiﬁed
(D.W. Phillipson 2009a: 9). In addition, Michels conducted a stratiﬁed

                                                                            129
African Civilizations

random sampling of archaeological evidence in 40 percent of a 500-square-
kilometre area, in the Aksum–Yeha region. About 260 sites were discovered,
ranging from single compounds to large towns and including temples, stelae
ﬁelds, tombs, and workshops. The survey suggested that much evidence still
remained to be located in other areas but shed some light on Aksumite
political organization, demonstrating that the fertile soil of the Aksumite
Plain had been a factor in the development of that organization (Michels,
in Kobishchanov 1979: 22–4; Michels 2005).
  Chronological problems (p. 118) make it difﬁcult to date the end of the
Aksumite period. Signiﬁcantly, the issue of coinage ceased early in the seventh
century, and subsequently there seem to have been few imports or stone
buildings. It appears that the economic and political base of the Aksumite
state was seriously weakened by the extension of Arab control over the Red
Sea trade route. Plague, drought, and environmental deterioration might also
have contributed to Aksumite decline. According to legend, an Agau chief-
tainess called Gudit from further south destroyed the Aksumite state late in the
tenth century AD. As a result of this or other problems, the political centre of
gravity moved south from eastern Tigray, where numerous ancient churches
suggest it was located by this time (D.W. Phillipson 2009b: 51–74, 87–107), to
the Lalibela area, in Lasta (Buxton 1970: 44; Munro-Hay 1991). An Ethiopian
state survived, but during the earlier part of the second millennium AD it seems
to have lost its previous urban character, its rulers now leading a semi-
nomadic life in a succession of camps, which Pankhurst (1979) called ‘moving
capitals’. Such a camp might consist of as many as 100,000 people; continual
movements seem to have been necessitated by the rapid exhaustion in any one
area of food and ﬁrewood. The sites of these transient settlements have a
comparatively low archaeological visibility and have had little attention from
archaeologists, although this is changing (Finneran 2009; 2012). The visible
archaeological evidence for the period from the sixth to the fourteenth centur-
ies AD has been dominated by ecclesiastical structures, for not only did
Christianity survive and ﬂourish but it also provided a stable element in
Ethiopian society. Some remarkable ‘built’ churches from this period have
been studied, including Debra Damo, already mentioned. Rock-hewn churches
are more numerous, however, having survived more readily. These have a long
history, but the most remarkable of them are at Lalibela. There are others in
Tigray Province and scattered across the Ethiopian Highlands, providing
evidence of technical skill and of an ability to marshal the material resources
implied by these vast undertakings. The church of Beta Giyorgis (St George) at
Lalibela, for instance, is a complex and sophisticated ‘building’ entirely carved,
inside and out, from one gigantic block of stone (10.6 metres high) that had
ﬁrst to be isolated in a huge quarry pit (Fig. 5.6). Past studies of the Lalibela

130
                                           The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands




Fig. 5.6 Beta Giyorgis, one of the Lalibela rock-hewn churches, Ethiopia. It is located
within a pit quarried into bedrock. From D.W. Phillipson 1998: plate 10. Reproduced by
permission of David Phillipson.


                                                                                   131
African Civilizations

churches have tended to be architectural or art-historical, but there are now
indications that archaeological structural analysis and excavation of associ-
ated deposits will provide new information about their chronology (Fauvelle-
Aymar et al. 2010). Published accounts of Ethiopian rock-hewn churches
include those of Buxton (1971), Gerster (1970), Plant (1985), and D.W.
Phillipson (2009b).
  In the latter half of the second millennium AD ‘static capitals’, as Pankhurst
(1979) called them, tended to replace the frequently moved camps, although
even these were shifted periodically or used only seasonally. Beginning in
the late sixteenth and early seventeenth century there grew up a practice of
constructing stone castles, which formed the nuclei of capitals. It was one
of these castles that was studied at Gouzara by Annequin (1965), but the
most successful of the castle-based capitals was that at Gondar (Fig. 5.7), north
of Lake Tana (Finneran 2007: 259–63), where no less than twenty successive
emperors made their capital prior to the nineteenth century. Right down to
modern times, Aksum, much reduced in size, continued to be important
as a religious centre. It is popularly believed by Ethiopians that the true
Ark of the Covenant is kept there, and such emperors as were able to do so
went there for their coronation (Pankhurst 1979: 4–6). This typiﬁes the
continuity often claimed to be characteristic of Ethiopian culture (Phillipson
2004). Archaeological evidence supports the idea of such continuity: some




Fig. 5.7 The seventeenth-century castle of Emperor Fasiladas, Gondar, Ethiopia, in the
1860s. From von Heuglin 1874.


132
                                         The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

ecclesiastical buildings make use of Aksumite ruins as foundations, such as the
‘Old Cathedral’ of Maryam Tsion at Aksum, and many built and rock-hewn
churches have Aksumite architectural features (D.W. Phillipson 2009b). How-
ever, until recently archaeologists paid little attention to the last thousand
years of Ethiopia’s past.


Subsistence economy
Until D.W. Phillipson’s excavations of the 1990s little archaeological attention
was given to economic evidence. Nevertheless, Kobishchanov was able to
reconstruct the Aksumite subsistence base from inscriptions and other histor-
ical sources. According to him, both terracing and irrigation were practised
and ox-drawn ploughs were in use. Wheat and other cereals were grown,
viticulture existed, and large herds of cattle, sheep, and goats were kept, as well
as asses and mules. He also claimed that elephants had been domesticated but
were reserved for use by the royal court (Kobish[ch]anov 1981: 383).
  Subsequently, D.W. Phillipson was able to conﬁrm much of this picture with
archaeological evidence. Excavation of the D Site at Kidane Mehret revealed a
farming village of the sixth to eighth century AD, a kilometre to the north of
Aksum. This site produced plant remains including wheat, barley, teff, oats,
a range of pulses, grape, gourd, noog (nug), linseed, cotton, and brassica
(Phillipson 2000: 366). Animal bones indicated that cattle were the most
common livestock, followed by sheep and goats. Chicken and equid (perhaps
donkey) were present (Phillipson 2000: 369). There is also evidence of earlier
subsistence from the D Site at Kidane Mehret, where deposits of the eighth to
ﬁfth centuries BC contained botanical and faunal remains almost comparable
to those of the Aksumite period at this site (Phillipson 2000: 364, 369).
In addition, a substantial quantity of ivory, found within the Tomb of the
Brick Arches, indicates the exploitation of elephants (Phillipson 2000:
116–25). The importance of cattle is further apparent from several animal-
model basins of pottery found in Aksum, each with a pair of yoked oxen of a
shorthorn, humpless breed (Munro-Hay 1989a: 240, 256–7; Phillipson 2000:
63–4). Additional archaeological evidence for subsistence comes from the hill
of Bieta Giyorgis, where excavations at the Ona Nagast settlement site yielded
cattle and sheep and/or goat bones, as well as evidence of wheat, barley, teff,
lentils, and grapes, from a context described as ‘Middle Aksumite’ (Bard et al.
1997: 395). Subsequent detailed study of the Bieta Giyorgis faunal remains
provided evidence from around 700 BC to AD 1200 that conﬁrms the domin-
ance of cattle, both Bos taurus and Bos indicus, which were intensively
exploited for meat, milk, and traction, as well as conﬁrming the presence of
domestic sheep and goats (Chaix 2013). Domesticated livestock seem to have

                                                                              133
African Civilizations

played an important role in the economy. Witness, for instance, the inscrip-
tions of Ezana, recording 31,957 head of cattle, 51,050 sheep, and 827 ‘beasts
of burden’; ﬁgures remarkable not only for their size but also for an exactitude
that suggests that they might have been the result of counting rather than
guesswork (Munro-Hay 1991: 227–8).
   Evidence of Pre-Aksumite subsistence also includes bronze sickles found at
Yeha and Haoulti; pottery models of cattle at the latter site, sometimes
wearing yokes; and grindstones found at various sites (Michels, in Kobishcha-
nov 1979: 14; de Contenson 1981: 356–7; Anfray 1990: 47). Examination of
grindstone material and wear has suggested a change from milling husked
grains during the Pre-Aksumite period to that of free-threshing wheat by late
Aksumite times (L. Phillipson 2012). Evidence of agriculture during the ﬁrst
millennium BC also came from the excavation by Joanne Dombrowski of
Lalibela Cave, east of Lake Tana, which produced cultivated barley, chick-
peas, and some unspeciﬁed legumes, together with bones tentatively identiﬁed
as cattle and small stock, associated with stone artefacts. Indeed, it seems that
agriculture developed at an earlier date than this in Ethiopia. Christopher
Ehret used linguistic evidence to argue that it originated as much as 7,000 or
more years ago. Some archaeological evidence supporting this claim is the
tentative identiﬁcation of domesticated cattle during the sixth millennium BC
at Quiha rock shelter (Barnett 1999). In addition, Ethiopian and Eritrean rock
paintings depict cattle and herdsmen, fat-tailed sheep, and even a man with an
ox-drawn plough, but these are undated.
   Clearly, by the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium AD a strong subsistence
base had been developed, consisting of broad-based, mixed agriculture.
It seems likely that wheat and barley played a particularly important part:
Munro-Hay (1991: 185–6) commented on the frequent depiction of ears
of wheat or barley framing the royal bust on Aksumite coins, and
D.W. Phillipson concluded that it is speciﬁcally emmer wheat that is repre-
sented. Pottery resembling the modern trays on which injera (the ﬂat bread
made from teff) is prepared appears only in the late Aksumite period
(Munro-Hay 1989: 308, 311). This would suggest that this small and hardy
cereal, which will grow at higher altitudes than wheat and barley and which
now forms an important part of diet in the highlands, was not of such
signiﬁcance in Aksumite times. It is important to stress again the signiﬁcance
of the high fertility of the Aksumite Plain. On the basis of local farmers’
opinions, Michels classiﬁed its soil as good to excellent, supporting a full
range of cereal crops on land that relies on seasonal rains. In short, the
heartland of the Aksumite state lay in an area that was advantaged so far
as cereal cultivation was concerned, and which almost certainly was capable
of producing a storable surplus.

134
                                        The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

Technology
Ethiopian and Eritrean archaeological evidence is highly informative on the
technology of the periods under discussion. As with the middle Nile, there
exists some difﬁculty in discriminating between things made in Ethiopia or
Eritrea by local craftsmen and those imported from elsewhere or made locally
by expatriate craftsmen (p. 99). Nevertheless, the technology of the Aksumite
period, in particular, ranks amongst the most sophisticated to be found in
precolonial tropical Africa.
  First, some Aksumite sites have provided evidence of remarkable engineering
skills. To quarry, transport, and attempt to erect such a monolith as the largest
of the stelae at Aksum must have required theoretical knowledge, practical
skill, and good organization. Furthermore, the giant granite slab of the Nefas
Mawcha and substantial numbers of other stelae, although smaller, also imply
the existence of considerable engineering ability (Phillipson 2000: 229–66).
This ability could be directed to practical as well as ceremonial purposes. The
dam at Kohaito and the Mai Shum reservoir at Aksum (Butzer 1981: 479)
suggest that such expertise was applied to the task of water storage, although
this was not for irrigation, as claimed from historical sources (Sulas et al.
2009). So far as archaeological evidence is concerned, it was in quarrying,
carving, and manipulating masses of stone that the Aksumites evinced their
main engineering ability. These skills had a long history, from the cutting of
subterranean tombs during the ﬁrst millennium BC to the quarrying of rock-
hewn churches during the second millennium AD.
  Aksumite archaeological evidence can throw a good deal of light on that
expertise (Phillipson 1994; 2000: 229–66). Granite quarries to the west of
Aksum have rows of slots that were cut for the insertion of either iron or
wooden wedges, the latter probably tightly driven while dry and then soaked
with water, so that their expansion split away the large pieces of stone needed
for stelae and other purposes. Indeed, some of the stelae still standing at
Aksum have traces of these slots, which were not completely removed by the
percussive stone dressing employed to ﬁnish their surfaces. The extent of such
ﬁnishing seems to have varied greatly, no doubt depending on the importance
of the client and the cost of the job, but the Aksumite masons were capable of
very high quality work. The storeyed stelae, for instance, have dressed surfaces
that are both smooth and attractive, with the north face of the one that
remained standing (Stela 3) faintly showing the bands of careful tooling that
were necessary to achieve this. Furthermore, indented parts of the decoration
on the largest stela have their edges undercut, so that when lit by the sun the
resulting shadows enhanced the relief. Even with the hardened iron tools that
must have been employed, it would have required an extraordinary


                                                                            135
African Civilizations

combination of skill and patience to produce such results in a material like
granite (although most of the stone called ‘granite’ at Aksum is technically
syenite, which is softer). In contrast, the archaeological evidence also suggests
that Aksumite knowledge of mechanics was sometimes deﬁcient. With only
8.5 percent of the total length of the largest stela intended to go into the
ground, it would appear that the centre of gravity either had not been calcu-
lated or had been calculated incorrectly. It is little wonder that it probably
fell during the course of erection (Phillipson 2000: 161), although architect
Ruth Plant (1985: 22) raised the possibility that an earthquake could have
been responsible.
  People in the highlands excelled in building construction, from the ﬁrst
millennium BC to the second millennium AD. Using mud-mortared stone-
work, reinforced with timber, to construct stepped and indented walls,
strengthened at the corners with dry-laid ashlar masonry, the Aksumites
constructed monumental elite residences of two or three storeys. It is possible
that the architecture of these buildings was inﬂuenced by Roman style,
conveyed perhaps via Syria, with which early Christian Ethiopia had con-
nections (Michels, in Kobishchanov 1979: 27), but whatever the source of
the style the workmanship was distinctively Aksumite. Building skills also
extended to tombs, temples, early churches, and other structures. In addition
to employing stone and timber, Aksumite builders learned both to manufac-
ture and to use ﬁred bricks, and the construction of brick arches and of brick
barrel vaulting were both understood. Lime mortar and lime render were
also used – although rarely, perhaps because of the quantity of wood needed
to burn the limestone (Munro-Hay 1989: 162–3). Concerning ordinary
domestic buildings, the small number of excavated stone houses (Anfray
1974: 756, ﬁgure 7; Phillipson 2000: 372–9) are supplemented by both
Aksumite and earlier pottery models. These came from Haoulti and from
Aksum (Munro-Hay 1989: 288; 1991: 254) and depict both rectangular and
round structures.
  Other skills were associated with building construction. These included
stone sculpture and inscription cutting. Because the latter used, at one time
or another, both South Arabian and Greek characters, it seems likely that
a foreign hand or a foreign-trained hand was sometimes present. Nevertheless,
the gradual ascendancy of Ge’ez would suggest that even this work was
eventually done by Aksumites. Also associated with building were ﬁne wall
paintings, which were a feature of the interiors of many Ethiopian churches.
Here again, the debt to foreign inﬂuences was great, but the style that
developed was distinctly Ethiopian (Buxton 1970: 136). The origins of Ethi-
opian wall painting are not really known, but probably the churches of
Christian Aksum were already decorated in this way (Phillipson 1998: 136).

136
                                         The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

  Although metallurgy seems to have developed early in Ethiopia and Eritrea
and to have achieved a high level of quality, there is evidence of stone-using
people at Gobedra, near Aksum, during the ﬁrst millennium BC and during the
same time at Lalibela Cave, east of Lake Tana. At other sites near Aksum,
there is similar evidence from the second millennium BC at Anqqer Baahti, and
from as far back as the tenth millennium BC at Baahti Nebait (Phillipson 2000:
22–6, 504). However, the use of stone artefacts continued into Aksumite times
at both Aksum and other sites. Research by Laurel Phillipson has shown how
such artefacts were still used in the ﬁrst millennium BC and until late in the ﬁrst
millennium AD, providing a cheap and readily available means of shaping
wood, ﬁnishing pottery, preparing hides, manufacturing leather clothing, and
producing parchment, as well as sometimes carving ivory (L. Phillipson 2009a;
2009b; 2013a; 2013b; Phillipson and Sulas 2005).
  Nevertheless, by the seventh or sixth century BC a partly literate urban
culture using bronze and iron was present at Yeha. This could have been the
result of inﬂuences from southern Arabia, where iron had been in use from
about 1000 BC, but it is possible that the use of copper had already reached
northern Ethiopia from the Nile Valley. Whatever the case, by the late ﬁrst
millennium BC, a range of iron and bronze artefacts was in use. During the
Aksumite period metal craftsmanship excelled both in the number of tech-
niques employed and in the variety and the quality of its products, which were
made in gold, silver, copper, bronze, and iron (Munro-Hay 1989: 210–34;
D.W. Phillipson 2012: 165–9). Among the more remarkable achievements was
the use of mercury gilding, to inlay gold on selected areas of silver and bronze
coins (Munro-Hay 1991: 177, 188). Admittedly some of the metalwork might
have been imported from elsewhere, but mineral resources were such (p. 115)
that iron must have been mined and smelted in Ethiopia, as perhaps some
other metals were. As for gold, supposedly one of Ethiopia’s exports, it could
probably have been obtained by panning superﬁcial alluvial sources rather
than by mining.
  Archaeological evidence from Aksumite sites also indicates other manufac-
turing skills. Again the difﬁculty is to untangle the imported items from the
locally produced. Most pottery was made locally and was at times remarkably
sophisticated considering that it was formed without the use of a wheel, but a
small amount came from the Mediterranean world, particularly from northern
Egypt, probably as containers for wine or olive oil (Munro-Hay 1989:
235–316). Leather working appears to have been practised (Munro-Hay
1989: 321), and it is surmised that textile production was important, although
textiles of foreign origin were also in use. Carving of high quality was done in
ivory (Phillipson 2000; 2012); bone was worked (Munro-Hay 1989: 321–2);
and civet was probably produced (von Endt 1978). The depiction of vines and

                                                                              137
African Civilizations

grapes on third-century AD ivory carvings found in the Tomb of the Brick
Arches; the recovery of grape seeds from the Kidane Mehret site, north of
Aksum; and the existence of several rock-cut tanks at Adi Tsehaﬁ, north-west
of Aksum, which might have been wine presses, suggest that wine making was
also practised (D.W. Phillipson 1997: 162–5; 1998: 59–60; 2012: 116–17).
From historical and ethnohistorical sources, it seems that salt was probably
obtained from the Danakil Desert, but there is no archaeological evidence for
this. Coins were struck in Ethiopia during Aksumite times for at least 350
years, although some coins were imported (D.W. Phillipson 2012: 181–93).
Finally, there were numerous luxury goods: jewellery, glass, and ﬁne metal-
work, for instance, which were of foreign origin. Nevertheless, although most
of the surprisingly large amount of glass found in Aksum seems to have come
from the eastern part of the Roman Empire or beyond, the characteristics of
some pieces (Fig. 5.8) suggest that they were made at Aksum (Munro-Hay
1989: 208–9). It now appears that fragmented glass from imports was
remelted and worked in a variety of ways (D.W. Phillipson 2012: 162–5).


Social system
Ethiopian and Eritrean archaeological evidence suggests that at least by Aksu-
mite times there was a considerable degree of social complexity. Society
appears to have been a stratiﬁed one. At the top was an absolute monarch,
frequently depicted on Aksumite coins wearing a crown and sometimes shown
seated on a throne (Fig. 5.9). Some of the inscriptions on the coins suggest that
these rulers were, nevertheless, concerned about popular opinion; for example,
‘May this be pleasing in the countryside’ (D.W. Phillipson 2012: 188) and ‘Joy
be to the peoples’ (Buxton 1970: 39) lack the usual tone of autocracy. How-
ever, monarchical government, whatever its exact character, is indicated also
by other archaeological evidence. Thus, at least some of the monumental,
multiroomed, residential buildings must have been royal palaces. In addition,
there are monumental tombs that must have been for royal burials and those
of other leading members of society. Other sorts of monumental structures
also hint at the existence of a monarchical state: temples in earlier periods,
churches in later ones, and the storeyed stelae at Aksum. One thing is common
to many of these structures: they are large. According to historian Kobish[ch]
anov (1981: 394), this ‘mania for the gigantic’ was intended ‘to instil awe-
inspiring admiration for the greatness and strength of the potentate to whom
the monuments were dedicated’. However, not all the ﬁne mansions or the
large tombs might have been intended for royalty; they seem too numerous for
that. Certainly, stelae of small or medium size are too common for such a
conclusion. In addition, the distribution of luxury goods, many obtainable

138
Fig. 5.8 Glass goblet from a third-century tomb in the Gudit Stelae Field, Aksum (height
125 millimetres). Probably a local manufacture imitating an Alexandrian product. From
D.W. Phillipson 2012: ﬁg. 60. Reproduced by permission of David Phillipson.

                                                                                    139
African Civilizations




Fig. 5.9 Ge‘ez-inscribed Aksumite copper coin of King Armah (sixth to seventh centuries
AD), showing the king crowned and throned holding a Christian processional cross, with
another cross on the reverse, its centre gilded. Diameter 20 millimetres. From D.W.
Phillipson 2012: ﬁg. 75. Reproduced by permission of David Phillipson.

only from trade with the outside world, is too widespread. It seems that there
was not only a monarch but also an elite section of society.
  Equally, the archaeological evidence suggests the existence of numerous
peasants and/or slaves. The existence of the latter might be assumed from
the long survival of slavery in Ethiopia, condoned as it was even by Ethiopian
Christianity (Pankhurst 1961: 372–3). In a burial excavated at Matara the
body apparently had worn iron shackles but might have been a criminal rather
than a slave. However, it seems likely that slaves were one of the exports of the
Aksumite state. Whatever the status of the sweating humanity that would have
toiled on such tasks as moving and raising the stelae, large labour forces must
have been involved. Constructional work on the scale frequently achieved in
Aksumite times implies a numerous and an obedient labour force. If the
modern world was built on machines, the ancient world was built on human
backs. Indeed, the necessarily agricultural basis of Aksumite society, and that
of earlier and later times, would require the existence of a large peasant
class, which during times of war would also have provided the bulk of the
ﬁghting men. As is often the case, such a class is not so well represented in
the archaeological record as that of the elite, but the smallest houses of those
excavated in the urban site of Matara would seem to conﬁrm its existence.
Furthermore, the large number of small rooms surrounding the central struc-
ture at such elite residences as the Dongur Mansion would suggest that many

140
                                         The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

of the lowest class lived in some sort of client relationship to society’s
more privileged people. Most, however, were probably scattered through the
countryside in villages and hamlets, such as those located in the survey by
Michels (2005).
  Intermediate-sized houses excavated at Matara would indicate that there were
also people who belonged to neither the elite nor the peasantry, at least in
Aksumite times. Phillipson (2000: 374) provided some conﬁrmation of this,
interpreting the Late Aksumite D Site at Kidane Mehret, just to the north of
Aksum, as representing ‘a middle-rank settlement’ with ‘a status well above that
of a peasant farmstead’. In addition, the burials of the Gudit Stelae Field, placed
in modest tombs that were nevertheless marked by medium-sized to small stelae
and in at least one case contained high-quality grave goods, have been inter-
preted as those of ‘middle-class’ Aksumites (p. 124). It might be expected that
such a class would include government ofﬁcials, scribes, priests of temple or
church, middle-ranking members of the army, merchants, and perhaps some
of the more skilled craftsmen. Amongst such a class there would probably be
some foreigners, permitted to live in Ethiopia because of their special skills.
  The archaeological evidence also suggests functional specialization. In Aksu-
mite times, as well as rulers, government ofﬁcials, and peasant farmers, there
were expert builders, including masons, brickmakers, carpenters, and joiners.
In addition, there must have been miners, quarrymen, iron smelters, black-
smiths, other metal workers, potters, ivory carvers, workers of leather, makers
of stone artefacts, and transporters of goods. One would expect merchants,
artists, scribes, coiners, some professional soldiers, and temple or church
ofﬁcials. Many of these specialists must have been urban dwellers, living in
towns and cities that apparently did not need protection by surrounding walls,
a lack that led D.W. Phillipson (2012: 119) to question their urban status.
However, we know little of the layout of these settlements, although Anfray
(1974: ﬁg. 7) threw some light on that of Matara (Fig. 5.5), and Michels
outlined the probable changing form of the city of Aksum during the ﬁrst
millennium AD.


Population pressures
The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands were attractive to human settlement,
providing climatic conditions and soils conducive to cereal–plough agriculture
and stock raising. Although large areas of the highlands were too rocky or too
exposed, this was offset by the beneﬁts of the great altitudinal range. This gave
diversity to the subsistence base, apparently leading to a growth in population
during the Aksumite period and probably to localized population pressures
that must have contributed to increasing social complexity.

                                                                              141
African Civilizations

  The antecedents of Aksum during the ﬁrst millennium BC were indigenous,
although absorbing some inﬂuences from South Arabia. These developments
and the subsequent Aksumite state were in a part of the highlands that in
recent times has had less rainfall and a shorter wet season than areas to the
south. The Aksumite region was probably prone to drought-induced famine,
and during the second millennium AD Ethiopia’s centre of gravity was consid-
erably further south. It is possible that the north-eastern highlands, with a
growing agricultural and urban population, suffered from recurrent episodes
of population pressure caused by drought and other crises, such as crop
destruction by locusts. In those circumstances, considerable power would
be placed in the hands of those who controlled the most productive agricul-
tural land. Furthermore, the long-term effects of tree clearance, cultivation,
and periodic drought could have caused the destruction of some agricultural
land by erosion, another factor that could place pressure on subsistence
agriculturalists.
  Using geoarchaeological evidence, Karl Butzer suggested that Aksumite
culture ﬂourished at a time of better spring rains than at present, and declined
when land pressure and erratic rainfall caused soil destruction during the
seventh and eighth centuries (Butzer 1981: 471). Bard et al. (2000: 80–1)
supported this interpretation, identifying a humid episode from the mid-ﬁrst
millennium BC to the mid-ﬁrst millennium AD during which agricultural
activity was intensiﬁed to sustain a state-level urban society. Consequently,
demographic pressure increased, reaching a peak in the mid-ﬁrst millennium
AD and causing progressive soil degradation that led to environmental deteri-
oration by the seventh and eighth centuries AD and famine in the ninth
century. Thus population increase stimulated by favourable climatic condi-
tions could have come under great pressure when conditions became less
favourable. Signiﬁcantly, ecological degradation does seem to have become a
problem in some areas. Evidence excavated by Chittick at Aksum suggested
serious erosion of a hillside following tree clearance and cultivation (p. 127).
  According to D.W. Phillipson, population growth in the Aksum area even-
tually led to environmental collapse and depopulation, to which a sixth-
century outbreak of bubonic plague might have contributed (D.W. Phillipson
2012: 206–7, 209). The consequent decline was probably one of the causes of
a shift in the centre of the Aksumite state to north-eastern Tigray after the sixth
century. Indeed, it seems that resources were unequally distributed in north-
eastern Ethiopia and Eritrea and that some areas were under greater settlement
pressure than others. Partial conﬁrmation of this is provided by the settlement-
pattern survey undertaken by Michels in the Aksum area (p. 129–30). This
stratiﬁed random sampling survey demonstrated a growth in the population of
Aksum during the period AD 450–750 to a total estimated at 39,603, followed

142
                                       The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

by a decline in the succeeding period of AD 750–850 and population collapse
after 850 AD (Michels 2005). Moreover, according to D.W. Phillipson (2012:
120), Michel’s ﬁgure for Aksum’s maximum population was signiﬁcantly
underestimated. A growing population could have contributed to the emer-
gence of the city and state of Aksum, just as its decline contributed to their
collapse.


Ideology
Archaeological evidence from Ethiopia and Eritrea indicates that religion
played an important role in the emergence of the Aksumite state and in the
continued existence of its successors. The evidence also suggests that religion
contributed to the process of urbanization before and during Aksumite times
and to the eventual reappearance of urban living in the second half of the
second millennium AD. At ﬁrst, religion consisted of a complex polytheism
probably of South Arabian origin. From the fourth century AD onwards, for
both the later Aksumites and subsequent Ethiopians, the principal religion has
been Christianity of a distinctive Ethiopian type (Phillipson 1998; Finneran
2002: 120–47). Ullendorff (1960: 97) called Ethiopian Christianity ‘the most
profound expression of the national existence of the Ethiopians’, and it is
possible that the beliefs that pre-dated it had a similar signiﬁcance.
  The most obvious indication of the role of religion consists of the numerous
and impressive remains of temples and churches. The temple of Yeha was so
well built that after more than 2,500 years its ruins still stand to a height of
about 9 metres; the churches of Ethiopia are the most important surviving
structures of their period. The direction of resources into such buildings must
have been in the hands of the ruler and the elite, who no doubt expected in
return an ideological legitimization of their position.
  That such a legitimization was claimed by the monarchical Aksumite state is
indicated on the coins that were minted. The earlier ones showed the crescent
and disc, representing the moon and sun of earlier beliefs; the later ones
included the cross (Fig. 5.9), among the earliest coins of any country to do
so, according to Buxton (1970: 40). The stone-cut inscriptions of Ezana also
demonstrate the support that the monarchy sought from religion, calling ﬁrst
on pre-Christian deities and subsequently on the Christian god.
  In addition there are the stelae, particularly the larger stelae at Aksum that
seem to have been grave markers for royal burials (D.W. Phillipson 1994;
2000; 2012). As such, they appear to have had a religious role as well as being
symbols of state authority. Groups of holes at the tops of the storeyed stelae
(Fig. 5.3) have been thought to indicate the ﬁxing of religious symbols to the
stone. These symbols were probably of metal, but none survives. Consequently

                                                                           143
African Civilizations

there has been debate as to whether the symbols consisted of the crescent and
disc or the Christian cross (e.g., van Beek 1967: 118, 121). D.W. Phillipson has
shown that these stelae are, in fact, pre-Christian in date, and indeed a stela at
Matara does have a crescent and disc carved at its top. The more important
of these monuments must have played a signiﬁcant role in reinforcing the
power of the state.
   Perhaps less obvious is the contribution that religion made to urbanization.
The temple at Yeha and the tombs and stelae at Aksum suggest that these
urban developments were religious centres as well as commercial and adminis-
trative ones. Certainly it was as a religious and a ceremonial centre that Aksum
survived into modern times, so that Bent (1893) could call it ‘the sacred city of
the Ethiopians’. Also, in Ethiopia during much of the second millennium AD it
was religion that maintained the few static settlements: Lalibela might have
been principally a religious centre but its archaeological remains imply that
there must have been many people living in its vicinity. When urban centres
appeared again in the second half of the second millennium AD, the Church
still played an important role: Gondar, for example, is said to have had no less
than forty-four churches (Pankhurst 1979: 5). Clearly, something more than
religious fervour was involved; there were the politics of propitiating a power-
ful clergy and there was prestige for the ruler and supporting elite.


External trade
Aksum had trading contacts with the Roman provinces of the eastern
Mediterranean and with Egypt, Nubia, South Arabia, the Persian Gulf, India,
and Sri Lanka (Phillipson 1998: 69). Kobishchanov (1979: 175) used both
historical and archaeological sources to put together an impressive list of
goods imported into the Aksumite kingdom. They consisted of iron and
nonferrous metals, and artefacts made of them; articles of precious metals;
glass and ceramic items; fabrics and clothing; wine and sugarcane; vegetable
oils; aromatic substances; and spices. From historical sources, Kobishchanov
(1979: 172) also reconstructed the exports of Aksum. They comprised ivory,
gold, obsidian, emeralds, aromatic substances, rhinoceros horn, hippopot-
amus teeth and hide, tortoiseshell, slaves, monkeys, and other live animals.
These details suggest that Aksumite external trade was extensive and, like the
Nubian trade of the middle Nile, basically involved the exchange of raw
materials and African exotica for manufactured and luxury articles. It seems
unlikely that trade prior to the rise of Aksum was so widespread, and it is
apparent that post-Aksumite Ethiopia suffered from a comparative trading
isolation. It is tempting, therefore, to conclude that the Aksumite state was a
product of the international trade of its day. If Nubia was the corridor to

144
                                       The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

Africa, as Adams thought (Chapter 4), then it might be claimed that for a time
Aksum, through its port of Adulis, was a front door to the continent. Indeed, it
has been suggested that the rise of Adulis damaged the Nile Valley trade and
contributed to the decline of Meroë after the ﬁrst century AD.
   As regards the commodities that were imported and exported, archaeology
is both informative and disappointing. As is the case with Nubia, exports are
not well represented in the archaeological record. However, an elephant tusk
was found at Adulis (Anfray 1981: 377), and the Tomb of the Brick Arches at
Aksum has yielded evidence not only for Aksumite involvement in the ivory
trade but also for ﬁne craftsmanship in its utilization (Phillipson 2000). It
seems that Aksum became ‘a major supplier of ivory’ to the Mediterranean
world (D.W. Phillipson 2012: 196). Furthermore, occasional gold artefacts
from excavations in Aksum (Munro-Hay 1989: 210) and the ﬁnding of more
Aksumite gold coins in South Arabia than in Ethiopia itself (Munro-Hay 1991:
183) are indications of a trade in gold. The problem is that many of the other
commodities exported would either not have survived or would need to be
identiﬁed as of Aksumite origin in the country to which they were traded.
Archaeological evidence for imports is much better, although durables tend
to survive and consumables do not. In addition, soil and climatic conditions in
the Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands are not as conducive to the preservation
of organic materials as they are in the middle Nile Valley. As a result, most of
the evidence for imports consists of artefacts of metal, ceramic, and glass.
For example, Aksum and Adulis have produced Byzantine bronze artefacts,
and from Matara has come a Byzantine bronze lamp, two Byzantine gold
crosses, a necklace of Roman silver coins of the second to third centuries AD,
and a bronze lamp of South Arabian origin depicting a dog catching an
ibex (Kobishchanov 1979: 173–4). Even more remarkable is the hoard of
104 Indian coins of third-century date that were found at Debra Damo
(Munro-Hay 1982: 111). Examples of ceramic and glass imports are more
numerous. Aksum, for instance, has yielded amphorae of Mediterranean
origin, pottery imitative of Roman ﬁne ware, and glass ointment ﬂasks of
Roman and Egyptian manufacture (Kobishchanov 1979: 173). Such imports
as wine and oil, however, which must have been inside some of these pottery
and glass containers, have left no trace. Even textiles, which were probably
imported in signiﬁcant quantities, are represented only by occasional discov-
eries such as that of silk fabrics at Debra Damo, which originated from Coptic,
Mesopotamian, and Islamic Egyptian sources of sixth- to twelfth-century AD
date (Kobishchanov 1979: 174).
   Some conﬁrmation of the importance of Aksumite external trade is offered
by several other pieces of evidence. Thus, Aksum was the ﬁrst state in tropical
Africa to mint its own coinage, which was produced in gold, silver, and

                                                                           145
African Civilizations

bronze. It is noticeable that the Aksumite monetary system was similar to the
Byzantine system in weight, standard, and form (Kobish[ch]anov 1981: 386)
and that many of its coins, particularly the gold ones, were inscribed in Greek,
not Ge’ez (Munro-Hay 1991: 180–95). Therefore, it would seem likely that
coins were introduced because of Aksum’s participation in an international
trade that was accustomed to such a means of exchange. The earliest Aksumite
coins belong to the third century AD, the latest to the seventh century (Munro-
Hay 1991: 67–8), and it is surely signiﬁcant that they ceased to be issued at a
time when Aksum’s external trading interests were in decline. Nevertheless, of
the several thousand coins that are known, 90 percent have been found in
northern Ethiopia itself and consist mainly of bronze coins. A few bronze coins
have also been found in Egypt, Meroë, Israel, and Aqaba, but most of the gold
coins have come from South Arabia and, less certainly, from India (Kobish-
chanov 1979: 184; Munro-Hay 1991: 184; Phillipson 1998: 69). It would
appear that the coinage of Aksum had a rather limited circulation, although
foreign coins were imported into Aksum from South Arabian, Roman, and
Indian sources.
  A further indication of the importance of external trade to Aksum is the
geographical location of this state. Situated in the extreme north-eastern part
of the Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands, it was in an advantageous position to
take part in the Red Sea trade. It was sitting at the side of one of the major sea
routes of the ancient world and had easy contact with Arabia across the Red
Sea (Pankhurst 2004). Just as the coinage died when Aksum was excluded
from these routes, so too did the Aksumite state fade away. Indeed, during the
second millennium AD the political and cultural centre of Ethiopia was located
far to the south. By then the need was not for access to the Red Sea but for
isolation from Ethiopia’s enemies.
  The geographical location of Aksum in relation to the network of trade
routes within this part of Africa provides still more evidence for the role of
external trade in the development of this state and of its cities. According to the
Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, the journey from Adulis to Koloè (either
Kohaito or Matara) took three days, and the journey from Adulis to Aksum
took eight, as it apparently still did at the beginning of the twentieth century
(Kobishchanov 1979: 185). By the standards of ancient trade routes this was a
brief journey, and this route from Adulis to Aksum was, in fact, merely the
beginning of a route that led from the Red Sea to the Nile Valley, ending near
Meroë. Another route ran north-west from Aksum to the Aswan region, across
the Nubian Desert, a journey which took thirty days according to Cosmas
Indicopleustes. Yet another route ran south from Aksum to Lake Tana and
Sasu, the latter reputedly a source of Aksumite gold. According to Cosmas
Indicopleustes this journey took ﬁfty days. Branches from this route led,

146
                                        The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

respectively, to Shoa and into the region of the African Horn (Kobishchanov
1979: 185–6). Thus Aksum was at the centre of a web of regional trade routes
(Sernicola and Phillipson 2011) that tapped the resources of the African
interior and injected some of them into the Red Sea trade.


Conclusion
Ethiopian and Eritrean isolation was relative to the circumstances of the
surrounding world. The Aksumite state of the ﬁrst millennium AD was able
to beneﬁt from its participation in regional and international trade and for a
time ruled parts of southern Arabia; the Ethiopian state of much of the second
millennium AD was able to isolate itself from hostile neighbours. Situated, as it
were, on the roof of the world, ancient Ethiopians could join or reject that
world as they wished. Thus can be explained the paradox of a people who
have spent much of their history forgotten by the rest of humanity but who
were, nevertheless, the creators of one of the earliest states and some of the
earliest cities in tropical Africa.
   It can be argued, therefore, that the geographical location of Ethiopia and
Eritrea and their mountainous environment played a basic role in these devel-
opments. In particular, the diversity of well-established agriculture made
possible by the great altitudinal range and inﬂuences from South Arabia
during the ﬁrst millennium BC provided a foundation for what followed. It
is signiﬁcant that the growth of social complexity during the last few centuries
BC and the ﬁrst few centuries AD took place in that part of the Ethiopian and
Eritrean plateau most accessible from the Red Sea coast. However, compared
with the surrounding lowlands, the highlands were healthier, had better soils,
and a greater range of agricultural adaptations, providing a fertile seedbed for
social change. In particular, the heartland of the Aksumite state lay in an area
with a strong agricultural resource base in cereals, other crops, and livestock.
This appears to have triggered localized increases in population and in popu-
lation density during a relatively favourable climatic period early in the ﬁrst
millennium AD. In such a situation and given likely rainfall variability,
episodes of stress brought on by periodic drought-induced famine would have
created temporary population pressures, which could be exploited by those
with access to land that was more productive. Such land was probably a
limited resource, the control of which could have provided a power base for
an emerging elite. Archaeological evidence indicates that by Aksumite times
there had developed a partly urbanized stratiﬁed society consisting of mon-
arch, surrounding elite, ‘middle class’, and peasant/slave class. It also suggests
a fair degree of functional specialization with a sophisticated technological
base. Furthermore, it is clear that the social order was conﬁrmed and

                                                                             147
African Civilizations

legitimized by religious dogma. Even the change from pre-Christian to Chris-
tian beliefs may be seen as a reinforcement of the prevailing social system,
in which control of people must have been as important as control of
productive land.
   To all this must be added the impact of external trade, particularly the
export of ivory, a highly valued commodity in much of the ancient world.
Such trade was not in itself a cause of social complexity but, nevertheless, was
a contributory factor of some importance. It is clear that the apogee of the
Aksumite state and cities was coterminous with Aksum’s involvement in the
Red Sea trade, but it is equally apparent that the state of Ethiopia, if not its
cities, was able to survive many centuries of comparative isolation from
international trade during the second millennium AD. However, the Red
Sea trade, conducted by Aksum through its port of Adulis, was actually part
of a widespread network of trade that Aksum had developed throughout
much of north-east Africa. Thus Aksum proﬁted from the role of entrepôt,
acquiring wealth and prestige from commodities mostly obtained from others.
If Ethiopia and Eritrea appear to have been isolated, this was clearly an
isolation that had its beneﬁts.




148
Chapter 6
Opportunity and constraint: the West
African savanna
In May 2012 the United Nations estimated that 18 million people in the Sahel
region of West Africa were suffering from food shortages caused by drought
and conﬂict and that nearly 1.5 million children were near starvation. The
Sahel was deﬁned broadly, although technically it is only the driest of the
savanna zones south of the Sahara Desert. Nevertheless, how could it be that
one of the areas of early urbanization and state formation considered in this
book is situated within this apparently disastrous zone? Clearly, its occupants
did not always face the bleak situation that now exists. Particularly this seems
to have been the case immediately bordering the southern edge of the Sahara,
which was the setting for important social and political developments during
the ﬁrst and second millennia AD. Some historical sources indicate conditions
that were far from bleak. For example, in the early sixteenth century Leo
Africanus said of Jenné, situated in the Inland Niger Delta on the edge of the
Sahel zone: ‘This place exceedingly aboundeth with barlie, rice, cattell, ﬁshes,
and cotton’ (Africanus 1896: vol. 3, 822). This description was by an outsider,
for Leo Africanus came from North Africa, but a local scholar, al-Sa’di,
writing in about 1655, wrote: ‘This city is large, ﬂourishing and prosperous;
it is rich, blessed and favoured by the Almighty . . . The area around Jenné
is fertile and well populated; with numerous markets held there on all the days
of the week’ (al-Sa’di 1964: 22–4). Although it was pointed out that al-Sa’di
might have been biased in favour of Jenné (McIntosh and McIntosh 1980:
vol. 1, 49), Bovill (1968: 135) thought that this was a ‘convincing tribute’.
Thus, it seems from historical sources, oral tradition, and archaeological data
as if the West African savanna was in the past a zone that offered opportunities
as well as constraints to the people who lived there.


Geographical location and environmental factors
Throughout the history of the human race in Africa, the most important
ecosystem in the continent has probably been the savanna. Rich in faunal
and ﬂoral resources, by the Holocene attractive for both cereal agriculture and
livestock rearing, it offered conditions of relatively easy movement in which
natural resources and manufactured products could be readily exchanged. The
most extensive area of savanna in Africa consists of a broad zone that stretches


                                                                           149
African Civilizations

from the Atlantic Ocean to the Gulf of Aden. This chapter is concerned with
the western part of that zone, the savanna lands to the west of Lake Chad.
  The West African savanna consists of grassland with varying densities of
trees and shrubs, situated between the tropical rainforest to the south and
the Sahara Desert to the north. In the past the Sahara formed what Bovill
(1968: 1) called ‘one of the world’s greatest barriers to human movement’,
although, as Bovill showed, trade repeatedly breached that barrier. Beyond lay
the lands of the Mediterranean, heart of the Roman and of the Medieval
world, with contacts deep into Eurasia. To the south was the tropical rainfor-
est and beyond that only the Atlantic Ocean, bordering a coast that until the
middle of the second millennium AD was to remain isolated from the rest of
the world. This is in contrast to the East African coast, discussed in Chapter 8,
where external contact is known to have been present for some 2,000 years.
Much of the coast of West Africa is uninviting when approached from the
sea: natural harbours are relatively few and most of the coast is fringed
by mangrove swamps or exposed surf-pounded beaches or is backed by
inhospitable desert. The real problem, however, is that south of Morocco,
along the Saharan coast, the prevailing winds are always from the north.
Given the technology of the ships of the ancient and Medieval worlds, it was
possible to sail south but impossible to return (Mauny 1978: 292–3). As a
result, Cape Bojador at about latitude 26 north remained effectively the
furthest south to which outside ships were able to penetrate until towards
the middle of the ﬁfteenth century AD. It was only at that time that circum-
stances changed, because of the adoption of the lateen sail and of the stern-post
rudder by seafarers of the western Mediterranean and Atlantic seaboard,
which enabled ships to sail into the wind as well as with the wind. Bovill also
emphasized the importance of the discovery that it was possible to return from
the West African coast, not by ﬁghting contrary winds along the coast but by
striking west into the Atlantic to pick up winds blowing from the south and
west. This discovery, discussed by Crosby (1986: 112–14), occurred about
1440 and was made possible, Bovill suggested, by the Portuguese adoption of
the caravel, a vessel that was much more manoeuvrable than earlier ships
(Bovill 1968: 115). The caravel had both lateen sails and a stern-post rudder.
  If the ocean could remain a barrier for so long, it is perhaps surprising that
so formidable a barrier as the Sahara Desert should have been successfully
breached by trade at least eight centuries earlier. The fact that it was has often
been explained as the result of another cultural innovation: the introduction to
Africa of the domesticated camel as a mode of transport over long distances
through arid regions (Bulliet 1975). It will be argued below that the ‘ship of
the desert’, as the camel has been called, did not inaugurate trans-Saharan
trade but, in the hands of people who knew how best to utilize its peculiar

150
                                                     The West African savanna

physiology, it undoubtedly led to a very substantial development of that trade.
The camel seems to have been brought into use in the Sahara during the ﬁrst
few centuries AD, coming originally from Arabia, although it appears to have
been known in Egypt for many centuries previously (Rowley-Conwy 1988).
It was not until after the seventh century AD, however, that the coming of the
Arabs to North Africa brought about the development of trans-Saharan
commerce based on the use of camel transport (Mauny 1978: 286–92).
   It would be a mistake, however, to think of the West African savanna as
merely a uniform zone, isolated to varying degrees through time by the desert,
the forest, and the ocean. Rather, it was a world of its own and a highly
complex world, richly endowed with resources. Indeed, the West African
savanna consists of a parallel series of different environmental zones, running
roughly from west to east and forming a part of a greater series of such zones
extending from south to north across West Africa. These zones have usually
been characterized in terms of vegetation differences; one of the best-known
attempts to do this was the map produced by Keay (1959). Thus a hypothetical
traveller, journeying north from the Nigerian coast, could traverse in less than
1,500 kilometres a whole range of environments, from coastal mangrove
swamp to true desert (Fig. 6.1). On the way she or he would pass through
tropical rainforest, forest–savanna mosaic, relatively moist woodlands and
savanna, relatively dry woodlands and savanna, wooded steppe, and subdesert
steppe. The close proximity of these different environments must have had an
important inﬂuence on the development of human culture in West Africa.
Because of the range of ecozones and ecotones that they presented, there was
both the necessity and the occasion for the exchange of raw materials and
products across environmental boundaries. Each environment possessed some
resources but lacked others. Thus salt was available in the desert and along
the coast but was relatively difﬁcult to obtain in the savanna, where for cereal
agriculturalists it was a physiological necessity (Alexander 1993b). Thus the
forest was deﬁcient in meat but the savanna supported very large numbers of
domestic animals, particularly cattle (Buchanan and Pugh 1955: 120–3). There
are many other examples, but the important point is that the complexity of the
West African environment provided conditions conducive to the development
of a complex network of regional trade. Within that network the West African
savanna, relatively easy to traverse, played an essential part. It is likely that
such trading activity was almost as old as West African food production, and,
indeed, its remoter origins must have been even earlier.
   Consider the main resources that would probably have been available in
the West African savanna 2000 to 3000 years ago. Foremost of these would
have been agricultural products: cereals such as sorghum, millet, fonio,
and African rice; several indigenous yams; vegetable oils such as those

                                                                            151
152




      Fig. 6.1 West African environmental zones showing area of major yam cultivation. After Keay 1959 and Coursey 1980: ﬁg. 1.
                                                       The West African savanna

obtained from the shea-butter tree and the oil palm; two African groundnuts;
cowpeas; black beniseed; and other things (Harris 1976: 329–32). There
would also have been meat, dairy products, and hides and skins from
the numerous cattle, sheep, and goats. Furthermore, food supplies could
have been supplemented by hunting wild animals and by ﬁshing; such ‘wild’
resources could in addition have provided ivory. Moreover, a number of wild
plants and trees could have contributed to human sustenance, particularly in
times when cultivated crops failed, while at all times botanical sources would
have been able to supply a wide range of useful raw materials, for baskets,
canoes, medicines, rooﬁng, and many other purposes (Dalziel 1937; Casey
1998). Important inorganic materials would have been available in the West
African savanna, as well: in particular, iron ore, alluvial gold, rocks suitable
for making grindstones, good building earths, and potting clays. Last, a
relatively high population density would have provided a resource in itself
that could have been exploited: the slave trade has a history in West Africa
which goes further back than the advent of Europeans on the Guinea Coast
(Alexander 2001).
   Nevertheless, the West African savanna was a zone of constraints as well
as opportunities. Foremost of these constraints was water availability. The
rainfall is markedly seasonal, the amount less and the wet season shorter
the further north one goes. Also the temperature increases as one goes north,
leading to a greater loss of surface water to evaporation, so that much of the
northern parts of the savanna consist for most of the year of a virtually
waterless landscape. Although drinking water for both domestic animals
and human beings is usually available by digging wells of varying depths, in
such conditions the margins of perennial rivers and lakes assume an especial
attraction for agriculturalists. It is in such areas that ‘ﬂoodwater farming’ in
its various forms has been of great importance. Such farming techniques – of
which ‘recessional cultivation’ (the cultivation of naturally watered areas as
ﬂoodwaters recede) is probably the most common – were one of the principal
ways of intensifying African agricultural systems. Such techniques seem to
have underlain the growth of social complexity in the Egyptian Nile Valley,
and in West Africa they existed (and still exist) both in the Inland Niger Delta
in Mali (Harlan and Pasquereau 1969) and around the southern edge of Lake
Chad (Connah 1985), as well as probably in other places. Nevertheless,
there is a second environmental constraint in the West African savanna that
sometimes discourages human settlement around the very bodies of water that
attract it. Of the major diseases found in the savanna that can seriously
damage human or animal health, sleeping-sickness and animal trypanosomia-
sis, malaria, schistosomiasis, ﬁlariasis, river blindness, and a range of intestinal
parasites are associated in one way or another with water. Clearly the West

                                                                               153
African Civilizations

African savanna was no earthly paradise but did offer considerable opportun-
ities to human groups that could adapt to its constraints.
   Signiﬁcantly, this interplay of opportunities and constraints was not static
through time, because even over the last 3,000 years there have been variations
in the West African climate which have had profound effects on human
societies in the savanna. Although conditions in West Africa were becoming
steadily drier from about 4,500 years ago, Brooks (1998) identiﬁed an arid
period between about 300 BC and about AD 300, a period of increased
rainfall from about AD 300 to about 1100, another dry period from about
1100 to about 1500, another period of increased rainfall from about 1500 to
about 1630, and yet another dry period from about 1630 to about 1860.
Dating these periods is uncertain, and in addition there have been frequent
shorter ﬂuctuations in rainfall, resulting in droughts similar to those of recent
decades and sometimes more severe (Shanahan et al. 2009). Within the
savanna, economic and social responses to these changes have tended to be
characterized by stability and growth during moister periods, and instability
and decline during drier periods. This is to claim not that climate has been
deterministic, but that it has been one of the factors that have shaped the
complex dynamic relationship of people and environment.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
Until late in the twentieth century, knowledge of the precolonial cities and
states of the West African savanna was mainly based on historical sources.
Some of these originated as oral traditions, but many of them consist of
documentation, usually in Arabic and mainly written by outsiders who at best
had only visited the area. The principal of these were al-Masudi, ibn Hawqal,
al-Bakri, al-Idrisi, Yaqut, al-Umari, ibn Battuta, ibn Khaldun, Leo Africanus,
al-Maqrizi, ibn Said, al-Sa’di, and ibn Fartua. Collectively they throw light on
the period roughly from the tenth century AD to the seventeenth century.
Similar sources also provide brief references to the West African savanna back
to the eighth century AD. Drawing on all these and other sources (including
the writings of mainly nineteenth-century European travellers, such as Park,
Denham, Clapperton, Caillié, and Barth), modern historians have been able
to reconstruct, in varying degrees of detail, the history of the most important
states of this area over the last 1,200 years or so. For example, Nehemiah
Levtzion (1973) examined the old states of Ghana and Mali, and John
Hunwick (1971) those of Songhai, Borno, and Hausaland. In fact, there exists
an extensive literature on the history of the regions that were known as the

154
                                                         The West African savanna

Western and Central Sudan. It is the character of the sources on which that
literature is based, however, that for a long time determined the standard
explanation of the development of cities and states in the West African
savanna. That explanation was most clearly stated by Levtzion:
  Sahil is the Arabic word for ‘shore’, which is well understood if the desert is
  compared to a sea of sand, and the camel to a ship. Hence, the towns which
  developed in the Sahel . . . may be regarded as ports. These towns became both
  commercial entrepôts and political centres. Those who held authority in these
  strategic centres endeavoured to extend it in order to achieve effective control over
  the trade. Thus trade stimulated a higher level of political organization, while the
  emergence of extensive states accorded more security to trade. Political develop-
  ments in the Western Sudan, throughout its history, are related to the changing
  patterns of intercontinental and trans-Saharan trade routes. (Levtzion 1973: 10)

In other words, cities and states in this zone developed as a result of external
stimulus, in the form of long-distance trade. In addition, this view usually
emphasized the role of Islam in these developments. Such an explanation
might be expected, of course, if sources are limited to post-eighth-century
AD documents written by people of Islamic culture, who mostly belonged
to lands beyond the Sahara. As a view of the later developments in the West
African savanna, it is no doubt sound, but does it adequately explain the
origins of these developments? Fortunately, there is another source of infor-
mation that has neither the chronological limitations of the historical sources
nor their possible prejudices: this consists of archaeological evidence, a source
that deserves more attention than formerly (Fig. 6.2).


Archaeological evidence
The archaeology of the West African savanna is still limited by insufﬁcient
ﬁeldwork and excavation. Furthermore, much of the earlier work was tech-
nically inadequate and publication was often poor or absent. There was also
a tendency to adopt research strategies designed to throw more light on
historically known sites. Mauny (1961) synthesized this earlier work, but
so little was known about the archaeology of the area that in 1979 McIntosh
and McIntosh (1979: 227) called the three millennia preceding the earliest
historical documentation the ‘silent millennia’. Similarly, Mauny himself
used the phrase ‘les siècles obscurs’ (the obscure centuries) in the title of a
book about the interface of history and archaeology in tropical Africa
(Mauny 1970).
  Nevertheless, archaeological research in the West African savanna is now
throwing new light on the origins of cities and states in this area. Perhaps the

                                                                                  155
156




      Fig. 6.2 Principal archaeological sites and places in West Africa mentioned in the text. This map is relevant to both Chapters 6 and 7. 1, Teghaza;
      2, Azugi; 3, Majâbat Al-Koubrâ; 4, Tichitt; 5, Tegdaoust; 6, Rao; 7, Siouré; 8, Cubalel; 9, Sincu Bara; 10, Dakar; 11, Koumbi Saleh; 12, Dia;
      13, Tondidarou; 14, Kouga; 15, Koi Gourrey; 16, Timbuktu; 17, Karkarichinkat; 18, Essouk-Tadmakka; 19, Talohos; 20, Kidal; 21, Azelik; 22,
      Jenné; 23, Galia; 24, Doupwil; 25, Hamdallahi; 26, El-Oualedji; 27, Gao; 28, Oursi hu-beero; 29, Kissi; 30, Niani; 31, Kirikongo; 32, Kong; 33,
      Daboya; 34, Birimi; 35, New Buipe; 36, Begho; 37, Nsawkaw; 38, Kintampo; 39, Bono Manso; 40, Kumasi; 41, Adansemanso and Asantemanso;
      42, Lake Bosumtwi; 43, Abomey and Cana; 44, Katsina; 45, Durbi Takusheyi; 46, Daura; 47, Kano; 48, Dufuna; 49, Birnin Gazargamo;
      50, Gajiganna; 51, Zilum; 52, Kursakata; 53, Daima; 54, DGB sites; 55, Zaria; 56, Turunku; 57, Nok; 58, Bussa; 59, Old Oyo; 60, Oyo; 61, Ife; 62,
      Iwo Eleru; 63, Ijebu-Ode; 64, Benin City; 65, Nsukka; 66, Igbo-Ukwu; 67, Obobogo; 68, Akonétye. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.
                                                    The West African savanna

earliest sign of complex societies in semi-arid West Africa is the appearance,
from about 4000 BC, of what MacDonald (1998) termed ‘Mobile Elites’,
based on transitory accumulations of pastoral wealth and power. This devel-
opment is represented in the archaeological record by evidence for cattle
herding, the making of valued objects in polished stone, and the construction
of mounds – some for burial and others for the ritual disposal of objects
belonging to the deceased. MacDonald suggested that, in favourable regions,
additional climatic or cultural stimuli resulted in these Mobile Elites develop-
ing into semi-sedentary chiefdoms by about 1500 BC. One of these, he claims,
was in the Dhar Tichitt-Walata area, in south-eastern Mauritania, where Holl
(1985) studied a large series of drystone-built settlement sites dating from
about 4,000 to about 2,000 years ago, which are strung out along more than
100 kilometres of sandstone cliffs. Towards the end of their occupation these
sites formed a settlement hierarchy of four ranks: seventy-two hamlets with
less than twenty compounds each, twelve small villages with twenty to ﬁfty
compounds each, ﬁve large villages with 120 to 198 compounds each, and one
regional center, Dakhlet el Atrous I, measuring 92.75 hectares with 590
compounds, which could be described as a city. The communities in these
settlements practised mixed farming based on grain cultivation (particularly
bulrush millet: Pennisetum sp.) and the herding of cattle, sheep, and goats.
They also exploited wild grains and fruits, ﬁshed in the freshwater lakes that
then existed, and hunted a range of wild animals. Climatic deterioration
almost certainly played a part in concentrating population into this area. It
also eventually led to the abandonment of the settlements and their survival as
archaeological sites, providing us with some of the earliest indications of
developing social complexity in the West African savanna and the adjacent
Sahara (Fig. 6.3).
   The ideas of MacDonald and Holl challenged previous ideas about the
processes and timing of social change in West Africa. Perhaps the greatest
challenge, however, came from the work of Susan and Roderick McIntosh in
the late 1970s and early 1980s on the settlement mounds of the Inland Niger
Delta of Mali (McIntosh and McIntosh 1980; McIntosh 1995; McIntosh
1998; 2005). By combining regional surface investigations with excavations
at the sites of Jenné-jeno, Hambarketolo, and Kaniana, the McIntoshs were
able to trace the emergence of urbanism in this area, from its apparent origins
in about the third century BC to the foundation in the early second millen-
nium AD of the nearby historical city of Jenné. At Jenné-jeno the settlement
had grown to at least 12 hectares by about the ﬁrst century AD and reached
its maximum extent of 33 hectares by about the ninth century (Fig. 6.4).
At this latter stage it consisted of a packed mass of compounds, containing
both round and rectangular mud houses, that was surrounded by a

                                                                           157
158




      Fig. 6.3 Plan of Dakhlet el Atrous I, Mauritania, the largest Dhar Tichitt settlement site, 92.75 hectares in size. The dots represent
      tumuli, and the enclosures are stone compound and corral walls, not houses. After MacDonald 1998: ﬁg. 4.5.
                                                         The West African savanna




Fig. 6.4 Plan of Jenné-jeno, Mali, showing growth. After McIntosh 1995: ﬁg. 10.3.



mud-brick city wall some 2 kilometres long. Its population has been esti-
mated at between 4,800 and 12,800, and if the adjacent site of Hambarke-
tolo is included, along with twenty-ﬁve other contemporary satellite sites
clustered around Jenné-jeno within a 1-kilometre radius, a population of
10,000 to 26,700 is possible. Although such a high density might have been
exceptional, this is only a relatively small part of the Inland Niger Delta,
suggesting that there was an overall population buildup in the area from late
in the ﬁrst millennium BC to early in the second millennium AD. Excavated
evidence from Jenné-jeno suggests that the economic base for this develop-
ment consisted of mixed farming on the seasonally inundated ﬂoodplain and
its margins, particularly involving rice and cattle, but it is apparent that
ﬁshing, hunting, and the gathering of wild plant food were also important.

                                                                                    159
African Civilizations

In addition, both metallurgy and other craftsmanship were well developed,
and Jenné-jeno participated in a trading network with a radius of at least 350
kilometres. Yet so far as any external stimulus is concerned, such as that
suggested by Levtzion, ‘Jenné-jeno is too big, too early, and too far south’
(McIntosh and McIntosh 1980: vol. 2, 448).
   Although the evidence from Jenné-jeno has established a convincing case for
the indigenous development of urbanism in the Inland Niger Delta, it has not
demonstrated the existence there of a stratiﬁed sociopolitical hierarchy or
centralized authority (McIntosh and McIntosh 1993a), unless it is argued that
the construction of the city wall indicates the latter. As a result, the site
provides little information about the origins of state formation in the West
African savanna. Possibly we should reexamine our theoretical assumptions,
as the McIntoshs have suggested, but the amount of excavation that has been
done is still very small considering the size and number of the sites involved.
This is a characteristic problem of urban archaeology, although one that
systematic multiple coring of deposits might eventually overcome to some
extent. Nevertheless, the homogeneity of material culture over a considerable
area of the Middle Niger, the existence of a three-tier settlement hierarchy in
the Jenné-jeno area, and a positive correlation of site size with surface artefact
diversity on sites within a 4-kilometre radius of Jenné-jeno suggest that at its
maximum development the city might indeed have formed the centre of a
sociopolitical or economic development larger than its own immediate urban
environment (McIntosh 1995: 410). However, R.J. McIntosh (2005: 187) has
argued that this was not a hierarchy but ‘a highly complex society organized
horizontally, a heterarchy, with multiple overlapping and competing agencies
of resistance to centralization’. This is an important idea that calls into ques-
tion the traditional ideas of urban hierarchical evolution, for both Africa and
some other parts of the world.
   Archaeological ﬁeld research in other parts of the Middle Niger and
adjacent regions has shown that past urban development was no isolated
phenomenon. In the Timbuktu region, for instance, surface and excavated
evidence indicate settlement growth in the ﬁrst millennium AD, although
followed by decline caused by increasing aridity (Post Park 2010). The
same seems to have occurred in the Méma region to the west of the Inland
Niger Delta (Togola 2008), and probably also in the Lakes Region of
the Middle Niger (McIntosh 1994: 178). However, Gao Ancien, on the Niger
to the east of Timbuktu, revealed a sequence of archaeological deposits
from the sixth or seventh century AD to the ﬁfteenth or sixteenth century
(Insoll 1996a: 41). Subsequent work, at both Gao Ancien and the nearby
site of Gao Saney (Sané on p. 180), indicated occupation beginning in
the seventh or eighth century and produced substantial evidence for

160
                                                       The West African savanna

long-distance trade in glass beads and copper during the eighth to tenth
centuries (Cissé et al. 2013).
  More than 1,000 kilometres to the north-west, the Middle Senegal Valley
has presented a different picture from that of the Middle Niger. Although
this is also a ﬂoodplain initially colonized about 2,000 years ago, which
has a large number of clustered settlement mounds, most Middle Senegal
Valley sites remained small, and the excavated evidence from Cubalel and
Siouré indicates a small-scale society that changed little throughout the ﬁrst
millennium AD. Only at the end of that millennium did major changes in
scale and complexity take place, at the same time as a sudden expansion of
trading contacts, changes that led to the emergence of the so-called Takrur
Empire at the beginning of the second millennium AD. It has been suggested
that this contrast in the organization of society, on the Middle Niger and
the Middle Senegal, resulted from differences in the distribution of land-
forms. Evenly distributed subsistence opportunities on the Middle Senegal
favoured an even distribution of population in small groups, whereas on the
Middle Niger a very uneven distribution of such opportunities encouraged
more specialization. Jenné-jeno and a number of other settlements, such
as Kalifa Gallou (40 hectares), Dia (50 hectares), Toladie (85 hectares), and
Soy (110 hectares), grew up as urban centres because of their unusually
advantageous positions (McIntosh et al. 1992; McIntosh 1994: 178–9). An
apparent exception in the Middle Senegal Valley is the site of Sincu Bara,
of the ﬁrst millennium AD, 67 hectares in extent with occupation deposits
up to 3 metres in depth but lacking obvious mounds (McIntosh and
Bocoum 2000).
  The success of the McIntoshs’ research stems at least in part from their early
realization that:

  the most effective way to investigate the appearance and development of the pre-
  colonial town in West Africa is not to excavate only the town site, but to document
  and explain the evolution of the settlement hierarchy of which the town is the
  summit. (McIntosh and McIntosh 1980: vol. 2, 346)

Instead, much of the ﬁeld research by other archaeologists, particularly the
older work, has tended to focus on the sites of cities or towns which can, with
varying degrees of certainty, be identiﬁed in the historical sources (Fig. 6.2).
For instance, important excavations have been conducted at Tegdaoust, in the
Mauritanian desert, of which the main site is 12 hectares in size. Work over
many years revealed multiple phases of occupation, much of it the remains of
stone buildings provided with facilities including wells, hearths, and latrines
(Fig. 6.5). The earliest phase was preurban, and the entire occupation is
thought to extend from the seventh to the sixteenth century AD (Holl 2006

                                                                                161
African Civilizations

summarizes earlier publications). The site has been identiﬁed with the histor-
ically known town of Awdaghost, which was a desert port-of-trade on one of
the trans-Saharan routes. The excavated evidence indicates that Tegdaoust
became a ﬂourishing Islamic town, heavily involved with trade beyond the
desert. In contrast, the site of Niani, in Guinea, is of uncertain signiﬁcance.
Its excavator claimed it to have been the capital of the old state of Mali,
but excavations did not reveal the wealth of Arab imports that might have
been expected (Filipowiak 1969). Other writers suggested that the real
capital was much further to the north-east; Conrad (1994) argued that its
location changed more than once. The radiocarbon dates for Niani are from
the sixth to the tenth centuries AD and suggest a reoccupation in about the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries (Calvocoressi and David 1979: 15–16, 23;
Sutton 1982: 306, 311). The gap in these dates further reduces the likelihood
that this was the capital of the state of Mali at the height of its power in the
fourteenth century, although Holl (2006: 2–3) appears to think that it could
have been.
   However, the site of Koumbi Saleh, in Mauritania, is thought by most
scholars to have been the capital city of the old state of Ghana. Excavations
have been conducted there on a number of occasions, some of the earliest
being those of Thomassey and Mauny (1951; 1956). This site, of 49 hectares
with stone buildings of several storeys and extensive cemeteries, is clearly of
great importance. Although Thomassey and Mauny failed to explore its
lower occupation levels, excavations by Robert and Robert (1972) and later
by Berthier have remedied that omission. There are now radiocarbon dates
for the site extending from the ninth to the ﬁfteenth century AD (Berthier
1997: 102; Holl 2006: 13). The problem with Koumbi Saleh is that in the
eleventh century al-Bakri described it as consisting of two towns: an Islamic
town and a royal town (Levtzion 1973: 22–3). Unfortunately, it seems that it
is the Islamic town that has been excavated; evidence for indigenous origins
would be more likely to be found in the native town than in the strangers’
town.
   An important excavation of an early West African urban complex was
conducted in 2005 at the site of Essouk-Tadmakka, in Mali (Nixon 2009).
This was a major Saharan trading town at a place ﬁrst mentioned by Ibn
Hawqal in the tenth century AD. Its main site covers 50 hectares, and excav-
ation at the EKA location in its centre revealed horizontally stratiﬁed deposits
6.5 metres in depth, containing the remains of both dry-stone and pisé struc-
tures dating from the middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD to c. 1400. Excavation
at this location and at EKB and EKC shed light on the changing scale of trade
over time, in particular providing unprecedented eighth- and ninth-century AD
evidence for extensive trade. The investigations were also informative about

162
163   Fig. 6.5 Plan of Building Sequence 6, eleventh century AD, at Tegdaoust, Mauritania. This shows the site in its most developed stage.
      After Holl 2006, ﬁg. 13.
African Civilizations

the character of the Saharan trade, the town being advantageously situated in
the Sahel, on the route from North Africa to the Niger Bend. The discovery
in the EKA excavation of coin moulds containing traces of gold, dated to the
ninth to tenth century AD, is evidence of the early development of the gold
trade and of the ﬁrst coins in West Africa, although probably these were only
blanks that were subsequently minted in North Africa (Nixon et al. 2011).
Social conditions in the town are indicated by carefully built living spaces in
EKA and also by a latrine pit in the EKB excavation.
  There are many other archaeological sites of cities or towns that can be
identiﬁed, or tentatively identiﬁed, in the historical record. Although excav-
ations have been conducted at some of these places, they have tended to be
limited in scale and to concentrate on second-millennium Islamic deposits.
Examples include Azelik (Niger), possibly Takedda visited by ibn Battuta in
1353 (McIntosh and McIntosh 1984: 85); Birnin Gazargamo (Nigeria), capital
of Borno dating from the ﬁfteenth century AD (Bivar and Shinnie 1962;
Connah 1981); Kong (Ivory Coast), a trading town dating from the sixteenth
century AD (Sutton 1982: 306–7, 311); and Hamdallahi (Mali), which lasted
for only a few decades in the nineteenth century but has been called the biggest
city of precolonial West Africa (Gallay et al. 1990; Mayor 1996). Other places
that have been subject to excavation are Azugi, in Mauritania, and Marandet,
in Niger (Holl 2006). Kano, Zaria, and Katsina in Nigeria have not yet
attracted signiﬁcant attention from excavators.
  In addition to those historically known, there are numerous other large
settlement sites. For example, excavations at the settlement mound of Tongo
Maaré Diabal, on the eastern edge of the Middle Niger area, have shown
that this 9-hectare ‘town’ was occupied from about AD 200 to about 1200.
Also, work by Bedaux and others (1978) on the two settlement mounds of
Doupwil and Galia in the Inland Niger Delta revealed settlements that
were ﬁrst occupied in the eleventh century AD. Each of the latter sites
were probably about 8 hectares in area, before erosion, compared with
the approximately 12 hectares of Tegdaoust. Other settlement mounds
of importance are those south of Lake Chad, on the ﬁrki clay plains of
north-east Nigeria (Daima is the best known), some of which constitute the
remains of quite large settlements whose origins lie in the ﬁrst millennium BC
(Connah 1981). These are only part of a group of 822 known mounds that
also extend across northern Cameroon and into south-western Chad (Holl
1996: 581). Although many of the settlements represented by these mounds
were probably too small to be considered urban, they are nevertheless
relevant to an investigation of West African urban origins in the context of
a McIntosh regional settlement hierarchy. In northern Cameroon, for
instance, Holl (1996: 589) suggested a settlement hierarchy of at least three

164
                                                    The West African savanna

levels: ‘open mounds of different but generally small size; walled sites, former
village chiefdoms and later district centres; and ﬁnally paramount central
settlements’. Examples of the central settlements were from 7 to more than
20 hectares in area, and probably represent the origins of the walled cities
and small states that were historically recorded in this region from the
sixteenth to the nineteenth century AD (Gronenborn 2001). Also indicative
of sociopolitical change in the same region are the sixteen so-called DGB sites
in the Mandara Mountains of northern Cameroon. These remarkable dry-
stone structures, consisting of platforms, terraces, and other features, appear
to date from about the ﬁfteenth century AD, are mostly less than 4 hectares in
size, and remain of uncertain function. Nevertheless, their construction
required substantial labour and skill that suggest growing social complexity
(MacEachern and David 2013).
  Enclosing settlements with walls of stone or earth, with banks and ditches,
or merely with timber palisades or naturally grown vegetation seems to have
been widespread in Africa over the last 3,000 to 4,000 years (Connah 2000a;
2000b) but became particularly common in West Africa during the second
millennium AD. Probably this resulted from increased competition for
resources, as populations expanded or environmental conditions deteriorated.
In the West African savanna many towns and cities sought to protect them-
selves in this way, especially with the increasing use of horses in warfare from
the thirteenth or fourteenth century onwards. By about the ninth century,
however, Jenné-jeno was already walled. Much earlier is the evidence of a
fortiﬁed settlement at Zilum, in north-east Nigeria, in the middle of the ﬁrst
millennium BC (Fig. 6.6). This was a settlement of 12 hectares, with an
estimated population of 1,750 to 2,500. A combination of magnetic survey
and excavation revealed the details of this site, a reminder of how much might
be learned if a similar methodology was used at other large settlement sites
(Magnavita et al. 2006).
  Although primarily a protective strategy, almost certainly the enclosing of
large settlements had other functions as well: it assisted in the governance of
the inhabitants, made taxation and control of trade easier, clearly distin-
guished city-dwellers from outsiders, and imparted prestige to rulers. It has
also provided archaeologists with important physical evidence. The surviving
remains of these enclosures should have encoded in them information about
many aspects of the societies that constructed them. Archaeological investi-
gation of those remains might be able to throw light on the size and shape of a
former settlement and on changes through time in that size and shape, as well
as on numerous other matters. Appropriate research strategies include map-
ping of city enclosures, giving attention to location, layout, and structural
sequence, and the excavation of sections through the remains of such

                                                                           165
African Civilizations




Fig. 6.6 Magnetogram of the settlement at Zilum, north-east Nigeria, showing the
enclosing ditch and other features. The ‘anomaly-free-buffer’ is probably the location of a
vanished bank or wall. Z8, Z11, and Z17 indicate test excavations of the ditch. From
Magnavita et al. 2006, ﬁg. 5. Reproduced by permission of Africa Magna Verlag, Frankfurt
am Main.


structures and especially through the accumulated silt of any accompanying
ditch or ditches. However, relatively little such work has been done, and the
evidence is fast disappearing (Connah 2000a).
  An example that has been investigated to some extent is the formerly
massive city wall of Kano in the north of Nigeria, apparently constructed
of both mud-bricks and dumped earth. In the mid-1820s Captain Hugh
Clapperton recorded it as about 24 kilometres in length, with ﬁfteen entry
gates and with heights of more than 9 metres and a dry ditch on both the

166
                                                     The West African savanna

inner and outer sides (Denham et al. 1826, Clapperton’s Narrative, 50).
In 1885 Paul Staudinger claimed the wall to be ‘probably twenty metres
high’ (Staudinger 1889, trans. Moody 1990: vol. 1, 210), and Frederick
Lugard, faced with the task of storming the wall in 1902, admitted: ‘I have
never seen, nor even imagined, anything like it in Africa’ (Lugard 1903: 28).
It is therefore fortunate that we do have a surface archaeological
study of the remains of the wall as they were in the mid-1960s, in which
they were assessed in the context of the oral and documentary record
(Fig. 6.7). This study, by H.L.B. Moody, identiﬁed three phases of growth
in the Kano wall system: in the eleventh to twelfth century AD, the late
ﬁfteenth century, and the seventeenth century, a sequence documenting
the growing size and importance of the city (Moody n.d. [1970]). Sadly,
there have been few attempts to emulate this work, at least so far as
accessible publications indicate, although the 6-square-kilometre walled site
of Turunku, near Zaria in northern Nigeria, has been the subject of a
preliminary study (Effah-Gyamﬁ 1986). The seriousness of this omission
may be judged from the fact that in 1904 Lugard reported that there were
forty walled cities within a 48-kilometre radius of Kano alone (Moody n.d.
[1970]: 18). Clearly, ﬁeld survey and excavation of the precolonial city
and town walls of the West African savanna have the potential to add
signiﬁcantly to our understanding of the origins and development of urban-
ization in the region.
  In addition to settlement sites, there are numerous burial sites that can
provide information about the growth of social complexity in the West African
savanna. Best known of these are tumuli, or burial mounds, which are found
particularly in Mali but also occur as far west as the coast of Senegal and as far
east as the extreme north of Nigeria. McIntosh and McIntosh (1980: vol. 1,
31–6) distinguished three types of burial mound in Mali: stone tumuli, in the
Sahara; earthen tumuli, in the dry savanna to the west and east of the Inland
Niger Delta; and tumuli covering rock-cut tombs, in the wooded savanna. It is
the earthen tumuli, dating principally to the late ﬁrst and early second millen-
nium, which have provided the most relevant evidence for our inquiry. Both
the size of these tumuli and the grave goods buried with the dead indicate
differences in social status. Indeed, some of the larger earthen tumuli appear to
have been remarkable structures. Thus some of them had their outer layers of
clay baked rock-hard by numerous small ﬁres that were lit on the mound
surface. An example of such a tumulus is the 15- to 18-metre-high mound of
Koi Gourrey (also known as Killi) in Mali (Desplagnes 1903), where two
individuals had been buried with varied grave goods and with twenty-ﬁve to
thirty other people, presumably sacriﬁces. Equally impressive was the tumulus
of El-Oualedji, also in Mali, which was 12 metres high and contained a

                                                                             167
Fig. 6.7 Plans of the Kano city walls, Nigeria, from a survey in the mid-1960s,
identifying three phases of growth (a, b, and c). After Moody n.d. [1970]: 39–41.


168
                                                        The West African savanna

wooden funerary chamber, in which two individuals had been buried with
accompanying objects (Desplagnes 1951; R. J. McIntosh 1998: 224–7). These,
and perhaps a small number of other tumuli, indicate burial rites of the sort
recorded by al-Bakri in the middle of the eleventh century for the kings of the
state of Ghana:

  When the king dies, they build a huge dome of wood over the burial place. Then they
  bring him on a bed lightly covered, and put him inside the dome. At his side they
  place his ornaments, his arms and the vessels from which he used to eat and drink,
  ﬁlled with food and beverages. They bring in those men who used to serve his food
  and drink. Then they close the door of the dome and cover it with mats and other
  materials. People gather and pile earth over it until it becomes like a large mound.
  Then they dig a ditch around it so that it can be reached only from one place.
  (al-Bakri, as quoted by Levtzion 1973: 25–6)

Indications of the age of these large earthen tumuli are provided by radiocar-
bon dates: the early eleventh century AD for El-Oualedji (McIntosh and
McIntosh 1986: 428, 439); the tenth to eleventh century for a tumulus
at Kouga, in Mali (McIntosh and McIntosh 1980: vol. 1, 31); the eighth to
the eleventh century for three tumuli at Toyla, Tissalaten, and Kawinza, in the
Lakes Region of the Inland Niger Delta (McIntosh and McIntosh 1986:
428–9, 439); and the seventh century for tumuli associated with the Tondi-
darou standing stones, in Mali (Saliège et al. 1980; McIntosh and McIntosh
1986: 428, 439). It has been suggested that some of the grave goods from these
mounds reﬂect ‘the increasing wealth and power of groups controlling the ﬂow
of trade goods along the Middle Niger’. Possibly this increasing social stratiﬁ-
cation, plus the development of iron production in the Lakes Region and in the
adjacent Méma region and the urban growth of Jenné-jeno, were all related in
some way to the consolidation of the Empire of Ghana.
  Perhaps the most impressive burial evidence comes from a number of tumuli
in the Rao region of north-west Senegal, north-east of Dakar. These mounds
yielded a remarkable collection of grave goods, including jewellery of silver
and gold; one item of gold is a decorated disc of exceptional workmanship,
184 millimetres in diameter and 191 grams in weight. There were also an iron
sword, beads, and objects of copper (of which two were Moroccan lidded
bowls). These ﬁnds have been dated to a period for the northern Senegalese
tumuli from the tenth century AD, continuing into the second millennium
(Joire 1955; McIntosh and McIntosh 1993b: 104). It is thought that there
were until recently more than 10,000 tumuli in Senegal, and collective inhum-
ations often with rich grave furnishings have been found in a number of them
(McIntosh and McIntosh 1993b: 75). The southern tumuli have been dated to
approximately AD 700 to 1000, possibly earlier than those to the north but


                                                                                 169
African Civilizations

later than the earliest of the numerous megalithic sites, with which they
overlap in time and space (McIntosh and McIntosh 1993b: 104–5). Found
in both Senegambia and Mali, these arrangements of standing stones, in
Senegambia apparently with associated burials and evidence of human sacri-
ﬁce (Gallay et al. 1982), have proved difﬁcult to date, but radiocarbon and
pottery analysis suggest that they belong principally to the second half of the
ﬁrst millennium AD and the ﬁrst half of the second (Gallay 2010). Collectively,
the wealthy burials and monumental funerary structures of Senegal suggest
increasing social differentiation by people who were in touch with both the
gold-producing areas to their south and the Arab markets of the Mediterra-
nean world to the north. Perhaps this is an archaeological expression of state
emergence, in this case of the so-called Empire of Takrur (p. 161) or of some
related polity.
   Far to the south-east, between Katsina and Daura in northern Nigeria, the
tumuli of Durbi Takusheyi also provide evidence of an elite, in this area
relating to the emerging Hausa city-states of the fourteenth to sixteenth
centuries AD (Griffeth 2000). Excavation of three of the at least eight mounds
at this site revealed a single burial in each. Copper, bronze, brass, iron, silver
alloy, and gold grave goods accompanied these, as well as cowries, glass beads,
carnelian beads, ivory bracelets, and the remains of textiles (Fig. 6.8). The
copper/copper alloy items included bracelets and anklets, buckets, and other
items including bowls, one of which is inscribed in Arabic (p. 67) and indicates
trading contacts with North Africa or further aﬁeld (Fig. 3.10). Two of the
buried individuals are presumed to have been interred in a seated position and
were possibly male; the third was accompanied by two earrings, a pendant,
two rings, and other jewellery, all of gold, which suggest the deceased was
female. Overall, the Durbi Takusheyi burials are important evidence of an
hierarchical state with wide trading connections (Gronenborn 2011: 70–107;
Gronenborn et al. 2012).
   All the tumuli discussed above appear to represent non-Islamic burial prac-
tices, but such practices seem to have been varied; not only was there inhum-
ation in tumuli, but some small earthen tumuli west of the Inland Niger Delta
contained cremations in pottery urns. Indeed, the usual burial rite in the Inland
Niger Delta seems to have been inhumation in large pottery urns (McIntosh
and McIntosh 1980: vol. 1, 36–7). Other non-Islamic burial practices are also
recorded archaeologically from the last three millennia in the West African
savanna. However, although many of these are probably pre-Islamic in date,
some could be later than the introduction of Islam to the area, which was
certainly in progress by the eleventh century AD. This is because the replace-
ment of previous practices by Islamic rites is likely to have been a gradual
process, rather than an abrupt change.

170
Fig. 6.8 Elite burial in Tumulus 5, Durbi Takusheyi, northern Nigeria, probably of the
fourteenth century AD. The grave goods included two massive copper-alloy anklets, ingots
of brass, other metal items, ivory bracelets, and cowrie and glass beads. The burial had
probably been in a seated position from which it had subsequently collapsed. Drawing by
Vera Kassühlke, Römisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum (RGZM). Reproduced by
permission of Detlef Gronenborn (RGZM).
African Civilizations

Subsistence economy
Livestock husbandry and cereal cultivation seem to have been ﬁrmly established
in the West African savanna by the ﬁrst millennium BC (Klee and Zach 1999;
MacDonald and MacDonald 1999; Neumann 1999). For example, there
is evidence for domesticated cattle and small stock, as well as for both domesti-
cated and wild Pennisetum sp. (bulrush [pearl] millet) at Karkarichinkat (Mali)
in the second millennium BC (Smith 1992: 73–4). Also, Pennisetum was being
grown by the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium BC at Dhar Tichitt, in Maurita-
nia, as part of a mixed farming strategy that included the herding of cattle,
sheep, and goats (Munson 1976). Furthermore, from Jenné-jeno there is direct
evidence for the cultivation of Oryza glaberrima (African rice), Pennisetum, and
sorghum from about the third century BC onwards. These were apparently part
of a diversiﬁed subsistence economy that also included substantial amounts of
Brachiaria ramosa, a wild millet, and other wild cereals, as well as domesticated
cattle, sheep or goats, and hunting and ﬁshing. The occupation of Jenné-jeno
lasted until about the fourteenth century AD; the economy remained remarkably
stable throughout this period of approximately 1,600 years, although hunting
became less important and the breed of cattle changed (MacDonald 1995: 313).
This stability was despite climatic and demographic changes (McIntosh 1994:
172–3; 1995: 377–9). The strength of the subsistence base may be judged from
the growth of this settlement, from at least 12 hectares by the beginning of the
ﬁrst millennium AD to a maximum of about 33 hectares towards the end of
that millennium (Fig. 6.4). Indeed, the distribution of archaeological sites on
the ﬂoodplain near Jenné-jeno indicates that towards the end of the ﬁrst millen-
nium the population density of the Inland Niger Delta was probably greater
than at present. This was at a time when the climate of this area seems to have
been wetter than usual, so that to a large extent this could explain the greater
population density (McIntosh and McIntosh 1980: vol. 2, 428; R. J. McIntosh
2005: 84). Another factor of importance, however, might have been the practice
of recessional cultivation (the cultivation of naturally watered areas as ﬂood-
waters recede), probably for growing rice. Recessional cultivation can constitute
a form of agricultural intensiﬁcation (Connah 1985), so perhaps urban growth
in the Inland Niger Delta was supported by one of the relatively rare examples
of African intensive agriculture. Whatever the case, the subsistence economy of
the area seems to have been particularly successful. Indeed, the McIntoshs
suggest that it was the agricultural surplus of the Inland Niger Delta that
provided much of the food for urban centres situated in less fortunate areas
such as Timbuktu, Gao, and places further aﬁeld. In such movement of food-
stuffs, canoe transport on the Niger River seems to have played a major role
(McIntosh and McIntosh 1980: vol. 2, 448–50).


172
                                                    The West African savanna

  Cultivation was already practised by about 1000 BC both in the Chad basin
and in northern Burkina Faso. The settlement mound of Kursakata, in the
Nigerian part of the former area, has produced grains of cultivated Pennisetum
glaucum from the period between about 800 BC and about AD 100, and
domesticated cattle and sheep or goats were present at the two settlement
mounds of Gajiganna by about 1000 BC (Breunig et al. 1996; Neumann et al.
1996; Klee and Zach 1999). Signiﬁcantly, the Chad basin is another area
where recessional cultivation could have given the inhabitants an advantage,
and it seems likely that most cases of increasing social complexity in the West
African savanna had an agricultural base that was exceptional in some way,
and therefore had the potential to produce a surplus. Probably this was
frequently in the form of grain, which could be stored or transported. This
meant that the surplus produce of more fortunate regions could support urban
centres situated on trade routes at the edge of the desert. It also meant that
specialists could be supported within those urban centres. Climatic and envir-
onmental deterioration might by the twenty-ﬁrst century have rendered the
West African savanna less agriculturally viable than it was a thousand years
ago. The McIntoshs’ evidence for this in the Inland Niger Delta is not the only
evidence. A drop in the level of Lake Chad during the last millennium indicates
that such deterioration might have been general in the West African savanna
(Brunk and Gronenborn 2004), in spite of a relatively wetter period in about
the seventeenth century.
  The excavation of Oursi hu-beero, a house complex in northern Burkina
Faso belonging to the eleventh century AD, has provided a remarkable insight
into the details of a Sahelian subsistence economy (Petit et al. 2011). Pearl
millet (Pennisetum glaucum), cowpea (Vigna unguiculata), and Bambara
groundnut (Vigna subterranea) were the main cultivated plant foods, but
Sorghum bicolor and Hibiscus sp. were also consumed, as were a range of
wild plants and tree products. Domesticated animals included cattle, sheep,
and goats, and dogs were eaten. Chicken were kept and also horses or
donkeys. Fishing, hunting, and collecting molluscs contributed additional
animal protein; a wide variety of fauna was eaten including monitor lizards,
crocodiles, lesser pouched rats, hares, and antelopes. The use of such diverse
food resources seems to have been typical of the drier savanna, as a strategy to
minimise the risk of starvation, and has continued into modern times.


Technology
Iron technology emerged in West Africa no later than the middle of the ﬁrst
millennium BC (Pole 2010). Copper was also being smelted by a similar date
(McIntosh 1994: 173–5; Woodhouse 1998). Evidence from Jenné-jeno

                                                                           173
African Civilizations

indicates that the occupants of the settlement mounds in the Inland Niger
Delta were using iron from the time of their arrival late in the ﬁrst millennium
BC, in spite of the nearest iron ore being 50 kilometres away (McIntosh and
McIntosh 1986: 427; McIntosh 1995: 380). In addition, the builders of the
tumuli and of the megaliths discussed above seem to have been iron users.
Although the condition of excavated iron is often poor, it is clear that the metal
was being used for a variety of purposes by the ﬁrst millennium AD, ranging
from weapons and tools to bracelets and other jewellery (e.g., Fabre 2009:
ﬁgure 4). There is also evidence that these were indigenous products, in the
form of furnace remains, slag, and other indications that smelting and black-
smithing were widespread (e.g., Holl 2009). Indeed, iron production in the
Méma region of Mali in the late ﬁrst millennium and early second millennium
AD was on too great a scale for local requirements only (Håland 1980).
Similarly, in the Middle Senegal Valley the remains of some 60,000 iron-
smelting furnaces have been counted, in only a 15-kilometre portion of the
Mauritanian bank of the river, suggesting substantial iron production in the
ﬁrst half of the second millennium AD.
   Judging by evidence from Jenné-jeno, copper was also reaching the Inland
Niger Delta by the middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD, and crucible and mould
fragments as well as artefacts indicate that both it and bronze were being
worked at Jenné-jeno by late in the same millennium, with brass introduced
from the north at the end of that millennium (McIntosh 1995: 385). The early-
second-millennium AD tumulus of Koi Gourrey (Killi) produced copper and
bronze items, some of which appear to have been made by the lost-wax casting
technique, as was also the case with two massive copper-alloy anklets
(Fig. 6.8) in the probably fourteenth-century AD Tumulus 5 burial at Durbi
Takusheyi (Desplagnes 1903: 165; Gronenborn et al. 2012). In addition,
Bedaux and others (1978) excavated a mould for lost-wax casting from a
context dated to the end of the eleventh and the beginning of the twelfth
century, at the settlement mound of Doupwil in the Inland Niger Delta. Thus
it seems likely that items of copper and copper alloys were manufactured
locally, although the requisite metals were perhaps mined and smelted
elsewhere.
   Of less certain origin are the occasional items of silver and even gold
jewellery recovered from some of the tumulus burials, the most remarkable
being the gold disc from Rao (p. 169). Gold, although mentioned often in the
historical sources, is rare in the archaeological record, as might be expected in
view of its value. Nevertheless, an undated hoard of gold and silver excavated
at Tegdaoust included ﬁve gold ingots as well as gold jewellery (Robert 1970),
and crucibles with traces of copper and gold, from the same site, possibly
belong to the eighth century AD. In addition, excavations at Jenné-jeno

174
                                                     The West African savanna

produced a gold earring from a ninth century AD context (McIntosh 1995:
390); the probably fourteenth-century AD Tumulus 7 at Durbi Takusheyi
contained gold jewellery (Gronenborn et al. 2012); and coin moulds dated to
the ninth to tenth century AD containing traces of gold were found at Essouk-
Tadmakka (Nixon et al. 2011).
  There must have been miners, particularly of gold, but with the exception of
Kiéthéga (1983), archaeology has little to tell us of their techniques. This is in
spite of the general location of the gold deposits being known and in spite of
ethnohistorical observations of traditional gold-mining methods in West
Africa. There might also have been specialist builders, because mud architec-
ture dates from the early to middle ﬁrst millennium AD at Tongo Maaré
Diabal and Jenné-jeno, and from a similar date at Daima in north-east Nigeria.
Later in the same millennium at sites in the Inland Niger Delta, mud-bricks
rather than coursed mud (pisé) were used for building, and occasionally ﬁred
bricks were employed (McIntosh and McIntosh 1980: vol. 1, 188–92; Connah
1981: 147–9; McIntosh 1995: 364–5). A change from coursed mud to mud-
brick also occurred at Kirikongo, in Burkina Faso, about AD 700 (Dueppen
2012: 275). Furthermore, in both the Inland Niger Delta and the Chad basin
potsherd pavements were made late in the ﬁrst millennium AD (Connah 1981;
McIntosh 1995). In areas with suitable geology, building in stone was also
practised, as at Dhar Tichitt, Tegdaoust, Koumbi Saleh, and Essouk-
Tadmakka. In addition, some of the larger megalithic structures and tumuli
suggest the presence of people specialized in the necessary construction
techniques.
  Concerning other crafts, pottery making had reached an impressive technical
level by the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium AD. Although handmade, like
most traditional African pottery, it was generally thin-walled, symmetrically
shaped in many forms, and well ﬁred. It was usually painstakingly decorated,
often with impressions and sometimes, in parts of the northern savanna, with
painted patterns. Pottery ﬁgurines of both animals and humans were also
made, particularly in the Chad basin and the Inland Niger Delta, those of
the latter area demonstrating considerable artistic skill late in the ﬁrst millen-
nium and early in the second millennium AD. In addition, from this period at
Jenné-jeno there were even pottery drainpipes, further demonstrating the
versatility of ﬁred-clay technology (Connah 1981; McIntosh 1995: 368–9).
This was part of a tradition of ceramic craftsmanship in the West African
savanna, of which the mainly ﬁrst-millennium BC terracottas from Nok in
northern Nigeria are perhaps the most remarkable examples (Boullier et al.
2002–3).
  The production of textiles, as indicated by the archaeological occurrence
of spindle whorls, might not have developed until the end of the ﬁrst

                                                                             175
African Civilizations

millennium AD, by which time the spinning and weaving of cotton was
probably becoming established. Textile remains from Tongo Maaré Diabal
have been dated to the second half of the ﬁrst millennium AD, and woollen
textiles from burials at Kissi in Burkina Faso have been dated mainly to the
middle of that millennium, although it is uncertain whether they were pro-
duced locally or imported (Magnavita 2008). Previously, clothing was prob-
ably of leather and, with the long-standing traditions of livestock husbandry in
the area, it is reasonable to suppose that the working of hides and skins had a
long history. Other crafts that must also have been established for many
centuries would have included wood working, bone working, basketry, and
mat making. Although archaeological evidence for these activities can be
limited, the 8000-year-old dugout canoe from Dufuna in north-eastern
Nigeria, Africa’s oldest boat, emphasizes the antiquity of both wood-working
skills and water transportation in the West African savanna (Breunig 1996).
Equally, the bone tools from the ﬁrst-millennium BC deposits at Daima and
the mat impressions sometimes used as a pottery decoration in the part of
Nigeria south of Lake Chad serve as reminders of some of the other, less visible
crafts (Connah 1981; Sterner 2012).


Social system
It is difﬁcult to determine social organization from the available archaeological
evidence in the West African savanna. In particular, there has been insufﬁcient
area excavation of settlement layouts and house plans. Nevertheless, the
apparent density of sedentary settlement in the Inland Niger Delta, the Middle
Senegal Valley, or the plains south of Lake Chad suggests the emergence of
social complexity before a thousand years ago. So does the increasing size
of some of these settlements: Jenné-jeno, for example, grew from 12 hectares
early in the ﬁrst millennium AD to 33 hectares towards the end of that
millennium. With a population perhaps as large as 13,000 enclosed by a
2-kilometre city wall, beyond which perhaps as many people again lived
within a distance of 1 kilometre, there must surely have been developments
in order to maintain law and order and regulate trade. However, the McIn-
toshs question this assumption because of the lack of evidence for elites
(McIntosh 1995: 396) and the few indications of social or economic differ-
ences (McIntosh and McIntosh 1993a: 632). Roderick McIntosh has argued
that a heterarchy rather than a hierarchy existed, with authority arranged
horizontally rather than vertically (McIntosh 2005). This is an idea that might
explain other acephalous societies that nevertheless achieved social complex-
ity, such as the Igbo of eastern Nigeria (p. 206). However, until more extensive
excavation is done at Jenné-jeno and other early urban sites in the West

176
                                                      The West African savanna

African savanna, it seems premature to assume that social stratiﬁcation and
despotic authority were absent, particularly as they had developed by the time
the state of Ghana ﬁrst appears in the documentary record in the eighth to
ninth century AD. The gold earring found in the Jenné-jeno excavations
appears to be of a similar date and suggests that there, also, resources were
unequally distributed. Nevertheless, it is possible that social systems could
undergo major changes over time, for example, from clan-based village soci-
eties to elite hierarchies and subsequently to egalitarianism. An attempt to
identify archaeological evidence for such social transformations, in a Burkina
Faso settlement at Kirikongo during the ﬁrst and early second millennium AD,
has been made by Dueppen (2012).
   The burial evidence is less problematic: the size and sophisticated construction
of some of the larger tumuli, and the wealth of grave goods sometimes present,
are strongly suggestive of a social hierarchy. The owner of the Rao gold disc, for
instance, was no ordinary person. In addition, the presence of human sacriﬁces
with some other burials is indicative of the special status of the deceased.
It is surely signiﬁcant that the archaeological evidence, from some of the tumuli,
compares so closely with al-Bakri’s eleventh-century account of the burial of the
kings of Ghana quoted above (p. 169). The Senegambian megaliths also suggest
social differentiation: like the tumuli, they are evidence of the expenditure of
considerable effort and resources for the beneﬁt of a select group of people.
Nevertheless, the usual burial rite in the Inland Niger Delta during the ﬁrst
millennium AD seems to have been inhumation in large pottery urns, presum-
ably evidence of a large nonelite population that received more modest treat-
ment in death. However, it seems that trade in gold and iron, and the presence
of an agricultural surplus in more fortunate areas, were already stimulating
social and political changes giving rise to the state of Ghana before the earliest
Arab contact. In short, state formation was already in progress before the
growth of trans-Saharan trade with Arabic North Africa, and it seems likely
that during the earlier ﬁrst millennium AD ranked chiefdoms, such as might
have existed at Dhar Tichitt as early as the second millennium BC, were
becoming stratiﬁed societies. Also in the ﬁrst millennium AD, the development
of urban centres was in progress, as the evidence from Jenné-jeno indicates. The
culmination of such development can be seen at Tegdaoust or Koumbi Saleh,
with their stone-built houses, and in the great walled city of Kano, which in
1851 had a population estimated by Heinrich Barth at between 30,000 and
60,000 (Barth 1857–8: vol. 2, 124). Indeed, during the second millennium
AD, Kano and other Hausa cities became some of Africa’s most developed
city-states, supported by productive agriculture, varied technology, extensive
trading connections, complex bureaucracies, defensive and offensive military
organizations, and Islamic legitimization (Griffeth 2000).

                                                                              177
African Civilizations

  As well as social stratiﬁcation, the archaeological evidence suggests
the development of functional specialization prior to Arab contact. Many
craftsmen were already present in some West African savanna societies by
the ﬁrst millennium AD. There were also farmers, pastoralists, and ﬁshermen;
merchants and transporters; religious functionaries; and community leaders.
Thus the social system in some parts of the West African savanna could have
been particularly receptive of Arab and Islamic inﬂuences over the last millen-
nium or so. The outcome was a complex mixture of the old and the new, of the
indigenous and the alien.


Population pressures
The West African savanna is characterized by a dynamic interplay of oppor-
tunity and constraint, varying through time with ﬂuctuations of rainfall. Not
only have human populations had to come to terms with the speciﬁc con-
straints of each area, but the more productive areas have been bounded by less
fortunate areas. Areas of greater productivity have also varied in both size and
conditions in response to environmental variations, triggered by either climatic
change or activities such as iron smelting or the grazing of domesticated
animals. Such a situation would have been likely to produce population
pressures, not only on the occupants of the advantaged areas by their poorer
neighbours, but also within the more productive areas themselves if a period of
environmentally good conditions was followed by environmental deterior-
ation. From the McIntoshs’ work, it seems that this is what probably happened
in the Inland Niger Delta, where the unusual hydrological conditions allowed
the intensiﬁcation of agriculture by means of the recessional cultivation of rice.
This could have encouraged a concentration of population within this area.
The work done by the McIntoshs revealed a remarkable density of settlement
by the middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD. In addition, the area of the Inland
Niger Delta is conﬁned, and, as the McIntoshs have shown, its variety of
landforms is highly susceptible to environmental ﬂuctuations, so that by the
early second millennium AD many of its settlements had been abandoned.
Such an area, richly endowed with resources and yet subject to periodic stress,
could well have been the location of social changes. It is thought that the
Middle Niger supported a population with a relatively high density, and it has
been estimated that during the ﬁrst millennium AD the population of the Sahel
states (Mauritania, Mali, Niger, and Chad) doubled from 1 million to 2
million – by 1975 it was about 15 million (McEvedy and Jones 1978:
238–40). Given recurrent droughts and environmental degradation, social
and economic instability must have been a constant threat in this region.
Intergroup violence was probably one consequence, of which the burning of

178
                                                        The West African savanna

the Oursi hu-beero house complex and the death of three of its occupants in
the eleventh century AD provides some archaeological evidence (Petit et al.
2011: 210–14). Population pressure was surely one of the circumstances that
stimulated social changes leading to urbanization and state formation.


Ideology
Historical sources indicate that Islam had an important inﬂuence on the course
of West African urbanization and state formation. The Islamic world of the
early second millennium AD was a world of independent states, in which
substantial numbers of people lived in towns and cities that were often the
centre of mercantile activities. It was also a proselytizing world, seeking, with
ﬂuctuating enthusiasm, to convert the inﬁdel not only to its religious beliefs but
also to its way of life. Archaeology has revealed the remains of early mosques in
a number of places, at Koumbi Saleh, Tegdaoust, and elsewhere (Mauny 1961:
472–6; Robert 1970), and indeed some mosques still in use, such as that at
Jenné, are reputed to be of great age. However, archaeology has also conﬁrmed
historical evidence that the inhabitants of the earliest cities and states of the West
African savanna were not Muslims. The tumuli, in particular, indicate non-
Islamic practices, as also do the urn burials of the Inland Niger Delta and the
making of clay ﬁgurines in that and other regions. Some of this evidence might
represent a survival of traditional practices after Islam had been introduced to
the West African savanna, and historical sources indicate that this did happen.
Nevertheless, urban development at Jenné-jeno by early in the ﬁrst millennium
shows that the origins of urbanization and state formation in the West African
savanna were indeed pre-Islamic. The people involved with these developments
must have been animists, and the variety of non-Islamic burial practices in the
archaeological record of the West African savanna would suggest that there was
considerable diversity of belief among different human groups. It is not known
what these beliefs were, but the evidence of the tumuli, the megaliths, and
human sacriﬁce suggests that funerary cults were signiﬁcant. In such cults,
ancestors could have had an important role in which the clay ﬁgurines were
relevant, so that the monumental character of some of the associated structures
might indicate that ideology provided reinforcement for elite authority.


External trade
Using historical sources, both Bovill (1968: 236) and Levtzion (1973: 10) saw
long-distance trade as a vital stimulus to developments in the West African
savanna. Certainly, archaeological evidence of the trans-Saharan trade of
Bovill and Levtzion has been found often enough. For example, Koumbi Saleh

                                                                                 179
African Civilizations

produced stone plaques with Arabic inscriptions and Islamic decorations,
not to mention stone houses said to show Maghrebian inﬂuence (Thomassey
and Mauny 1951; 1956). Thus, also, Tegdaoust yielded imported pottery,
oil lamps, glass vessels, glass weights, and ingots of both copper and gold
(Robert 1970). Perhaps the most impressive of the archaeological evidence
for the trans-Saharan trade, however, is amongst the group of twelfth- and
thirteenth-century gravestones found at Sané, near Gao on the Niger in Mali.
Some of these are marble gravestones with inscriptions in Kuﬁc, an early angular
form of the Arabic alphabet. These inscribed stones have been closely dated to
AD 1100–1110 and are thought to have been made in Spain and carried by
camel across the Sahara (Flight 1975: 82). There is even archaeological evidence
of the difﬁculties that could assail such trans-Saharan camel transport, in the
form of the abandoned loads of a caravan buried in a sand dune in the lonely
Majâbat Al-Koubrâ, halfway across the desert. Dated to the twelfth century AD,
these loads consisted of large numbers of brass rods and of cowrie shells of
the species Monetaria moneta (Monod 1969). The presence of such shells, more
than 9,000 kilometres from their source in the Maldive Islands, south-west of
India, is eloquent testimony to the very extensive trading networks of which the
trans-Saharan trade formed a part (Hogendorn and Johnson 1986: 18).
  There is, indeed, a considerable amount of archaeological evidence for the
trans-Saharan trade. For instance, countless sites in the West African savanna
contain beads of glass or semi-precious stones; many of the earlier of these
must have originated from that trade. The source and date of manufacture of
such beads can be difﬁcult to determine, but some might indicate that the
trans-Saharan trade is older than has usually been thought. It is becoming
apparent that relay trading networks in the Sahara, rather than trade crossing
the whole desert, had already developed by Roman times (Wilson 2012). Of
six Jenné-jeno glass beads selected for chemical analysis, from contexts dating
from the last two centuries BC to AD 1400, the earliest is likely to have been
made in India or East or South-East Asia, while one of the later ones might
have come from India and another have been of Roman origin, from Egypt or
Italy. Only two of the beads appear to be from an Islamic source (McIntosh
1995: 252–6). Glass beads of Asian origin from burials at Kissi, in Burkina
Faso, also indicate the existence of a trans-Saharan trade during the ﬁrst
millennium AD before the arrival of Arab merchants (Magnavita 2003).
Furthermore, analysis of copper-alloy objects from the same site has shown
that most consisted of metal from North Africa and beyond (Fenn et al. 2009).
Other evidence for the Saharan trade consists of the location of some of the
West African cities and towns. Pushed well forward of the most viable agricul-
tural lands of the savanna or even into the desert proper, such places as
Timbuktu, Tegdaoust, or Essouk-Tadmakka were clearly located at strategic

180
                                                     The West African savanna

points on the trade routes, rather than in hinterlands that could support them.
Also, many of the savanna urban centres appear to have grown up at environ-
mental interfaces, between transportation systems. Thus at Timbuktu goods
were transferred from camel to canoe, and at Kano from camel to donkey.
A comparable situation will be seen in Chapter 7: trading centres growing up
at the junction of the savanna and forest, where the tsetse ﬂy made it necessary
to transfer goods from donkey to human head.
  However, archaeological evidence does not give the detailed picture of
Saharan trade reconstructed by historians (Fig. 6.9). Where in the archaeo-
logical evidence is any indication of the millions of tons of salt that must have
travelled south from the desert to the savanna (Lovejoy 1986)? Similarly,
where is the evidence of the cloth that was carried south from North Africa,
or of the thousands of slaves who were taken north (Meillassoux 1991:
44–64), or of the ivory, ostrich feathers, ﬁne leather, and pepper? For that
matter, who would realize, from the archaeological evidence, just how import-
ant the gold trade was? Clearly, some of the durable commodities, which were
traded to the south, had a greater chance of surviving in archaeological
contexts than the generally organic consumables, which dominated the trade
to the north. Thus there will be a tendency for the West African archaeological
evidence to be biased in favour of imports. This makes the discovery at Gao of
a tenth- to eleventh-century AD hoard of at least ﬁfty-three hippopotamus
tusks, apparently a hidden consignment of export ivory, particularly import-
ant (Insoll 1995; 1996a: 38, 40, 98). Also the discovery at Essouk-Tadmakka
of coin moulds with traces of gold, dated to the ninth to tenth century AD, has
provided evidence of the early development of the gold trade (Nixon et al.
2011). Furthermore, artistic representations of black Africans in the ancient
Mediterranean world is an indication that the Saharan slave trade was already
active in the ﬁrst millennium BC (Fentress 2011). Similarly, a review of the
archaeological evidence south of the Sahara by MacDonald (2011) has traced
the origins of the Saharan trade to the ﬁrst millennium BC and earlier.
  Of course, questions about the traded commodities lead to others. If West
African agriculture is at least 3,000 years old, as the evidence appears to
indicate, then why should we believe that the salt trade developed only towards
the end of the ﬁrst millennium AD with the advent of the Arabs and their camel
caravans? According to Nenquin (1961), an adult on a mixed diet needs 12 to
15 grams of salt per day. In the West African savanna, salt could be brought
from the coast where it has long been extracted from seawater, transported from
the Sahara where it is quarried from rock-salt deposits, or obtained by ﬁltering
plant ashes, which is possible only in certain areas and is not very efﬁcient
(Alexander 1993b). In practice, this leaves extensive areas where the local
supply is deﬁcient but where diet and climate make salt a necessity.

                                                                            181
182
                                                                                                          Sijilmasa                                                                          Ghadames
                                                           Marrakech



                        M
        Cape Bojador ea .P.,
                       t, d co
                           ate pp
                              s, er,                ces
                                ho                                                                                                                                                               Ghat
                                   rse            spi
                                       s
                     wh
                                             sla                                   Teghaza
                                                ves
                                                   ,
                                                               Salt
                                                             date , M.P.,
                                            ld,
                                                                                                                          M



                                                                                   Gold, slaves, spices
                                           Go                                                                                                               le
                                                                                                                       hor .P., d
                                                                                                                                                      att
                                                                 s, co                                                    ses ate              sla
                                                                       pper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Alum, slaves,
                                                                                                                             , co s               ve
                                                                                                                                                     s,
                                                                                                                                  ppe                   c                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                   er
                                                                                                                                                                                 Salt
                                                                                                                                                                                                     M.P., copp
                                                                                                                                      r    ld,                                          s
                                                                                                                                                                                 date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ivory, pepper
                                                                                                                                          Go
                               Salt             Awdaghust                                                                                                                                            Sa
                                                                              Timbuktu                                                                                                           t      lt
                                                                                                                                                                                           Mille



                                                                                                                                                                            Slaves, gold
                                           Koumbi Saleh                                                                      Gao
                                                                               Fish                                                                               er,
              Salt         Cotton-clot                                                                                                                         pop .P.
                                                                                                                                                            Co es, M
                                                                                                           lt
                                             h                                                            Sa
                                                                                                                                                                s                                                                               rses
                                                                                                   Cotton-cloth                                             hor                                                              Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M.P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ., ho
                                                                                                  Jenne                                                                                                                      chad
                                                                                                                                                                          Textiles,                                                              s, gold
                     Sla
                        ves                                                   lt                                                                                            M.P                                                            Slave
                                                                              Sa                                                                                                                            Slaves
                     Iron                                                                                                                                                Kano
                                                                                                                                     ola
                                                                                    v e s                                        d, k
                                                                                                                              Gol                                                                        main trade routes
                                                       Gold, kola,            S l a                                                                              Slaves
                                                                                               ld,
                                                                                             Go la                                                                                                       Gold                       Copper
                                                        pepper
                                                                       Kong                    ko                                Old Oyo
                                                                     Kola                                      Begho                                                                                     Salt                       Kola
                                                                                                                                            Ife Pepper Igbo-
                                                                                                                                           Benin City  Ukwu
                                             Pe                                                                                                                                                M.P. – manufactured products
                                                p pe
                                                       r
                                                                                                                                                                                             0                               500              1000 km


      Fig. 6.9 Precolonial trade routes and commodities in West Africa. After Mauny 1961: ﬁg. 55.
                                                       The West African savanna

Consequently, it is probable that trade networks within West Africa are likely to
be at least as old as the beginnings of food production in the region and that
trading contacts with the desert are therefore nearer to 3,000 than to 1,000
years old. In addition, no one has suggested that gold mining in West Africa
commenced because of stimulus from across the desert. On the contrary, histor-
ical sources tell us that West Africans were so secretive about the location of the
mines that outsiders had little idea where the gold came from. Furthermore,
there is evidence of gold at Jenné-jeno by AD 800. Thus there seem to be several
reasons for supporting the idea that a regional network of trade routes grew up
in West Africa before the advent of the Arab trans-Saharan trade. The McIn-
toshs (1980: vol. 2, 444–6) pointed out that because Jenné-jeno was using iron
from the time of its earliest occupation, and because there was no iron ore in the
vicinity, then supplies of raw materials or of ﬁnished iron must have been
brought from more than 50 kilometres away. Also, situated at the interface of
the dry savanna and the Sahel, on a fertile alluvial plain, and at the highest point
on the River Niger for reliable seasonal river transport, Jenné-jeno was well
placed to play an important role in a developing trade network.
  Paintings and engravings on rocks in the Sahara of horse-drawn chariots and
ox-drawn carts suggest that such a network could have had early connections
with the desert (Mauny 1978; Law 1980b). These are distributed along two
main axes, both of which stretch from North Africa to the Niger, axes which
have been called ‘chariot tracks’. It has been assumed that these rock drawings
date from the ﬁrst millennium BC, more likely from its second half. Most
scholars now doubt that these are representations of vehicles used in com-
merce, however, and Camps (1982) rejected the idea of ‘routes’, pointing out
that the distribution of this rock art merely reﬂects the distribution of rock
outcrops in the Sahara. Nevertheless, this art is important in indicating that
horse and ox traction and wheeled vehicles were known in the desert before
the advent of the camel during the ﬁrst few centuries AD (p. 151). Indeed,
Blench has argued that the small West African ponies mentioned in historical
sources ‘were produced by the dwarﬁng of horses brought across the Sahara in
the last three thousand years’ (Blench 1993: 103). Even Bovill could admit,
with characteristic wisdom: ‘There is certainly no reason to suppose that
caravan trafﬁc in the Sahara only became possible with the arrival of the
camel’ (Bovill 1968: 17). Timothy Garrard has indicated that such trafﬁc could
have been at least pre-Arab in origin. He has suggested the existence of a
Berber gold trade in the early ﬁrst millennium AD, between the savanna and
the Roman world, because the Carthage mint began issuing gold coins at the
end of the third century, although it had no local gold source (Garrard 1982).
In addition, the McIntoshs (1980: vol. 2, 445) have commented on the pres-
ence of copper at Jenné-jeno from the middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD; the

                                                                               183
African Civilizations

three closest known sources are all in the Sahara. The McIntoshs could well
have been correct when they argued that ‘the rapid establishment and expan-
sion of Arab trade in the Western Sudan was possible because it keyed into an
already-extant system of indigenous sub-Saharan trade networks’ (McIntosh
and McIntosh 1980: vol. 2, 450).


Conclusion
The emergence of urbanism and political centralization in the West African
savanna was formerly attributed to contact with the Mediterranean world,
resulting from long-distance trade. Suspiciously, the origins of that trade were
usually dated to the period of the earliest historical sources that touched on the
subject. Archaeology tended to play a conﬁrmatory role in the stock historical
interpretation. It was a case of so much historical information being available
that archaeologists failed to ask the sort of questions that they might have
asked otherwise. As a result, the quality of the archaeological data available to
shed light on the origins of cities and states in the West African savanna was
poor. This situation has now changed, and work at Jenné-jeno and related sites
in the Inland Niger Delta, as well as in other parts of the West African
savanna, has produced a very different picture. A review of the evidence makes
the long-accepted external-stimulus explanation untenable. It would appear
that the West African savanna by the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium AD
already had a sound agricultural base, with the potential for intensiﬁcation of
production in some more fortunate areas, and already had a varied iron-based
technology. Developing social complexity is already evident at Dhar Tichitt as
early as the second millennium BC, and it seems quite probable that during the
ﬁrst millennium AD, and prior to Arab contact, stratiﬁed societies were
emerging in the West African savanna, based on resource control stimulated
in part by localized population pressures. At the same time those pressures,
coupled with increasing functional specialization and expanding local trade,
encouraged a growth in size both of individual settlements and of aggregations
of settlements, leading to some of West Africa’s earliest examples of urbanism.
Such developments seem to have taken place before the advent of Islam but,
nevertheless, with the ideological support of a variety of animistic religions.
Finally, it seems most likely that an extensive trading network existed within
West Africa before the Arab trade across the Sahara began and that this
network had already developed contacts across the desert. The cities and
towns of the savanna were indeed to become ‘ports’ at the edge of the ‘sea of
sand’, as Levtzion (1973: 10) said (p. 155), but they were ports with a vast
trading hinterland that already existed. After all, what ship would ever visit a
port unless there was a chance of delivering or collecting a cargo?

184
Chapter 7
Achieving power: the West African forest
and its fringes
In the second half of the ﬁfteenth-century AD European sailors ﬁrst set eyes on
the southerly coast of West Africa. What they saw was hardly encouraging:
from a distance, a vague grey line pencilled in between an immensity of sea
and sky; from close-in, either a dangerous, surf-pounded, sandy beach or an
uninviting network of mangrove swamp, creek, and river mouth. Whatever
the character of the shoreline, however, behind it there was nearly always
an impenetrable tangle of trees and other vegetation. Experience soon taught
such visitors that this was a coast to be reckoned with: ships’ crews died of
fever, and shipworms (Teredo spp.) ate the bottoms out of their ships. Yet it
was neither altruism nor curiosity that tempted most Europeans to such a
region; it was proﬁt. The very names they gave to different parts of this coast
indicate their motives: ‘The Grain [pepper] Coast’, ‘The Ivory Coast’, ‘The
Gold Coast’, ‘The Slave Coast’ (Bosman 1967: frontispiece map). Europeans
quickly discovered that behind the coast lay a forested and savanna hinterland
rich in resources, where the inhabitants were willing to trade on a considerable
scale. Not only that, but those inhabitants lived in highly organized commu-
nities, some of which took on a size and density which left the visitors in
no doubt about what they were dealing with. Within some parts of the West
African forest and its fringes there were, indeed, hierarchical states, towns,
and cities. Because of their conspicuousness, it was these large settlements that
particularly attracted European attention. Thus, writing in AD 1507–8, the
Portuguese Duarte Pacheco Pereira described Ijebu-Ode (now in Nigeria)
as ‘a very large city’ (Bascom 1959: 38). In a similar vein, the Englishman
Towerson, writing in 1557, could claim, perhaps with some exaggeration, that
a town in what is now Ghana was ‘by the estimation of our men, as big in
circuit as London’ (Blake 1942: vol. 2, 406).
  These quotations are selected from early in the history of European
West African contact, because state development and urbanization in the West
African forest and its margins have sometimes been written about as if they
were developments resulting from that contact rather than pre-dating it.
Although there is no doubt that European seaborne trade did play an import-
ant part in the later development of these states and their towns and cities,
historical sources suggest that some were in existence before that trade started.
Oral traditions give a similar impression, and, since the middle of the twentieth
century, archaeological evidence has pointed in the same direction. It seems

                                                                            185
African Civilizations

likely that there was increasing social complexity in some parts of the West
African forest and its fringes from late in the ﬁrst millennium AD onwards.
The question is why should such developments take place in and around the
West African rainforest, environments that to many outsiders have seemed
to constrain rather than to encourage human endeavour?


Geographical location and environmental factors
Compared with the West African savanna (Chapter 6), the tropical rainforest
of West Africa occupies a relatively small area. An extension of the equatorial
rainforest, it stretches from Cameroon to Sierra Leone but is broken between
the western frontier of Nigeria and eastern Ghana by a gap where forest–
savanna mosaic and relatively moist woodlands and savanna reach the ocean.
This is known as ‘The Dahomey Gap’ and its alternating absence and presence
in the past indicates the role of climatic change in determining the extent of the
rainforest (Salzmann and Hoelzmann 2005). At present, the belt of rainforest
is never wider than 400 kilometres, and in many places it is narrower. To the
south it is bounded by coastal mangrove swamp or by the Atlantic Ocean. To
the north it merges into forest–savanna mosaic, often called ‘derived savanna’
because it has been thought to result from agricultural exploitation, over many
centuries, of what was originally tropical rainforest. This would suggest high
population densities, although (as with the Dahomey Gap) climatic change is
also likely to have been an important factor. Whatever the cause, these
northern fringes of the forest form an ecotone that has been particularly
important in the history of the human race in West Africa. It is therefore
impractical to consider the West African rainforest without giving attention to
the adjacent savanna into which it merges.
   As recently as the middle of the twentieth century the West African forest,
where undisturbed, consisted of dense tropical rainforest. A few large trees
grew to a height of about 42 metres and many others to a height of about 27
metres, but they protruded above the main leaf canopy that was formed at
about 10 metres by most of the trees. Smaller trees and bushes densely
occupied the zone below. It is possible that in its natural state the forest often
lacked this dense tangle of lower growth, and the forest ﬂoor may have been
relatively easy to traverse (Richards 1952: ﬁg. 6, pp. 29–31). However, much
of the forest has now been taken over by secondary growth, often of no great
height but virtually impenetrable unless one chops a path through with a
machete. To some extent, this results from modern timber exploitation, but
even at the beginning of the twentieth century Thompson (1910–11: 131)
recorded that most of the forest consisted of secondary growth. It seems
probable that this situation resulted from the long practice of rotational

186
                                         The West African forest and its fringes

bush-fallow agriculture. In the area around Benin City, for instance, it was
shown during the 1960s that most of the apparently ‘well-grown forest of
considerable age’ had probably ‘been farmed at one time or another during the
past few hundred years’ (Allison 1962: 243, 244). The secondary growth that
has resulted is so dense that Boisragon and Locke, ﬂeeing for their lives after
the so-called Benin Massacre in 1897, found it very difﬁcult to travel through
the forest, which was ‘so thick that neither man nor beast can press through it’
(Boisragon 1897: 94). An 1817 account of part of the Asante forest, in what
is now Ghana, by Bowdich (1966: 20–1), indicated the problems of travel
even when fear was not forcing a cross-country route. Descriptions such
as these make it difﬁcult to understand how the West African rainforest could
have been the setting for the cultural developments that undoubtedly took
place there.
   In reality, the forest is much more complex and varied than descriptions by
culture-shocked Europeans, writing to impress other Europeans, have often
made it appear. In the area around Benin City, for example, it seems that
vegetation on the upper interﬂuves might originally have been less dense than
that of the lower valley slopes, and it has been shown that farming has tended
to concentrate on those more easily cleared areas. Darling suggested that the
forest environment around Benin varied in part because of the ever-changing
mosaic of plant succession following agricultural clearance and fallowing, but
also in part because of differences in soil characteristics. In addition, if we
consider local perceptions of the environment, we ﬁnd not the European
notion of continuous forest broken only by clearings for settlements but a
three-part division of the ‘forest’ itself into farmlands, fallow areas, and ‘wild’
forest. It is also possible that forest density has varied through time. Both
climatic change and human activity could have resulted in more open condi-
tions in the past. This is suggested by some historical accounts and by the
extensive earthworks in the Benin City region, discussed later in this chapter.
These ditches and banks are virtually invisible in dense rainforest or regrowth
and must have been constructed when there was far less vegetation cover than
in recent times; otherwise, they would have been of little use as boundaries
(von Hellermann 2010).
   In one respect the forest has an advantage over the savanna to its north:
it has more water. Rainfall is higher, the wet season longer, humidity greater,
and evapotranspiration lower. As a result, the forest has numerous rivers
and streams, many of which ﬂow all the year round. Also as a result, the
rate and ease of vegetal growth is phenomenal; even fences take root and
grow into thriving hedges or rows of trees. It is apparent that many forest
soils are moderately fertile, if this is measured in terms of productivity. This
is providing that farming practices minimize erosion and alternate brief

                                                                              187
African Civilizations

cropping periods with long periods of fallow, during which the ‘bush’ is
allowed to invade the ﬁelds.
   Many resources would probably have been available in the West African
forest and its fringes 2,000 to 3,000 years ago. The most signiﬁcant would
have been plant foods, including several species of yam, the oil palm, kola,
coffee, okra, ﬂuted gourd, and akee (a tree cultivated for its fruit). At the
western end of the forest belt there might also have been African rice and
Melegueta pepper, the so-called Grains of Paradise (Harris 1976: 329–33).
Introduced plants of South-East Asian and tropical American origin (such as
certain yams, plantain, banana, sugarcane, citrus fruits, cassava, sweet potato,
maize, papaw, and chilli pepper) have become so important now in this region
that it is easy to forget that the West African forest and its edges were already
well endowed with plant foods before these others arrived. Particularly
important amongst the indigenous plants would have been the various West
African yams and the oil palm, the former providing carbohydrates and the
latter supplementing these with both fat and vitamin A (Harris 1976: 351).
It should be noticed, however, that both yams and oil palms seem originally to
have belonged in the forest–savanna ecotone and must have been introduced
to the forest proper by people planting them on cleared land. Thus Coursey’s
West African ‘yam zone’ (Fig. 6.1) includes extensive areas of the southern
savanna as well as the more northerly parts of the forest (Coursey 1980:
Fig. 1). In contrast to plant foods, the forest was not so well provided with
animal foods as was the savanna. Tsetse ﬂies precluded the keeping of domesti-
cated livestock in the forest, with the exception of small numbers of
trypanosomiasis-resistant dwarf goats and cattle (Blench 1993). Furthermore,
the forest had fewer wild animals that could be hunted than did the savanna,
although a wide selection of those that were present have probably been eaten
in the past, including elephants, baboons, monkeys, bats, large rats, the giant
land snail (Achatina spp.), and anything else that could be caught. In addition,
ﬁsh from the sea, coastal lagoons, and rivers have almost certainly been an
important source of animal protein for a long time. The forest also possessed
numerous other resources, of which perhaps the most important were a great
many types of wood, suitable for everything from house building to canoe
making to carving to ﬁrewood. Various sorts of wood could also be burnt
to produce charcoal, potash, salt, and other things. In addition, the forest
could supply numerous medicinal substances, beeswax, gum, bark, rope,
and other commodities. There was also ivory; inorganic raw materials
included gold, iron ore, copper, lead, rocks suitable for making grindstones,
good building earths, and potting clays. Last, a population density that in
places was probably higher than in the more northerly savanna could be
exploited as a source of slaves.

188
                                       The West African forest and its fringes

  The West African forest zone and its edges suffered from constraints as
well as beneﬁting from substantial resources. The most serious constraints
were diseases that included trypanosomiasis that afﬂicted domestic animals
and, as sleeping sickness, humans as well. The latter was only part of a
heavy burden of human diseases; malaria, in particular, has been so serious
a problem for so long a time that some populations in the region have
developed a greater than normal incidence of the sickle-cell gene, a blood
anomaly that provides a measure of protection (Livingstone 1967). Other
serious diseases included yellow fever, dengue fever, ﬁlariasis, yaws, and a
wide selection of parasitic infections, particularly of the intestinal tract.
Disease levels in these areas might have been higher than those of the more
northerly, drier savanna. Another constraint within the forest and forest–
savanna mosaic was the availability of water during the dry season. In spite
of a greater rainfall than most of the savanna, a long dry season together with
generally permeable soils and high temperatures on cleared surfaces meant
that women and children frequently had to carry water long distances from
rivers and streams. Various strategies were used to alleviate this problem,
including wells, underground cisterns, and even artiﬁcial ponds. The extent
to which dry-season water supply could be a problem, however, particularly
for large groups of people on the move, is illustrated by the experience of the
British expedition against Benin City in 1897, for which water was a major
worry (Home 1982). That same expedition also showed how difﬁcult com-
munication within the forest could be, with movement restricted to narrow
paths and head loading the only means of shifting burdens. Communication
problems have, indeed, been another traditional constraint, particularly
during the wet season when paths are frequently reduced to rivers of mud.
Nevertheless, the people who lived in and around the forest adapted well to
such difﬁculties. Thus canoe transport on rivers and coastal lagoons was
extremely important, and the very impenetrability of parts of the forest could
be used as a defence by leaving a ring of uncleared land around settlements,
as was recorded in the nineteenth century for the ‘war-towns’ of Sierra Leone
(Siddle 1968).
  To people not accustomed to living in the West African forest and forest
fringes, the constraints might seem sufﬁcient discouragement from develop-
ing the undoubted resources. However, states, cities, and other aspects of
cultural complexity did develop in some parts of those zones, and these
developments probably commenced without external stimulus, because both
distance and environment attenuated inﬂuences from the northern savanna
and Sahel. Nevertheless, by the end of the ﬁrst millennium AD the forest and
forest–savanna ecotone were probably linked with the regions to their north
in a regional trading network (Insoll 1996b: 668; Casey 2010). Only the

                                                                           189
African Civilizations

appearance of European traders on the coast of West Africa reversed this
economic orientation and turned what had been a relatively remote hinter-
land into a major contact zone of long-distance trade.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
Most of what is known about precolonial urbanization and state formation
in the West African forest and its fringes comes from historical sources.
Numerous contemporary accounts by European visitors from the late ﬁfteenth
to the late nineteenth century represent the outsider’s view. These visitors were
of different national backgrounds: in particular, Portuguese, English, Dutch,
French, Danish, and German; and of a variety of professions, including sailors,
traders, explorers, and missionaries. To their number must be added others
who merely stayed at home and compiled books and maps from information
supplied by those who had actually visited the Guinea Coast. Some of
the principal accounts by outsiders are those by Adams, Barbot, de Barros,
Bosman, Bowdich, Burton, Dapper, de Marees, Landolphe, and Pacheco
Pereira. Such sources throw light on some of the societies of the West African
forest and its fringes during the 400 years prior to colonial takeover. A.F.C.
Ryder, for instance, was able to use them as the main basis for a study of
European relationships with the state of Benin (Ryder 1969). They are limited,
however, not only by their sometimes imperfect understanding of what was
observed but also by their short time range. Whereas external sources for the
West African savanna reach back for a little over a thousand years, those for
the forest zone and related areas cover only half that time. Fortunately,
however, they are complemented by the insider’s view, represented by the oral
traditions of West African societies themselves. European scholars collected
many of these in recent times, but the people to whom they refer also recorded
some of them. Perhaps the most notable of these are Samuel Johnson’s History
of the Yorubas, originally published in 1921 (Johnson 1921), and Jacob
Egharevba’s Short History of Benin, ﬁrst published in 1934 (Egharevba
1968). Such sources do throw a little light on the centuries before Europeans
appeared on the Guinea Coast; they take us back perhaps to the beginning of
the second millennium AD. Unfortunately, however, their information
on the earlier periods is limited and of doubtful reliability. Their chronologies
are particularly uncertain, as Bradbury demonstrated in the case of Benin City
(Bradbury 1959). Overall, therefore, the written and oral historical sources have
comparatively little to tell us about the origins of cities and states in the
forest and adjacent savanna, except that such developments either took place

190
                                         The West African forest and its fringes

during or had already taken place by the ﬁrst half of the second millennium AD.
From such sources, it has sometimes been implied that these developments
were later than those of the savanna because it took longer for long-distance
trade and postulated migrations to reach so far into the hinterland. In other
words, as in the savanna, external stimulus has been advanced as an explan-
ation, an explanation now thought to be unacceptable.


Archaeological evidence
Archaeological research, concerning recent millennia, commenced later in
the West African rainforest and its margins than further north. Nevertheless,
there has been a similar tendency to pursue research programmes aimed at
providing more information on historically known sites. Archaeological ﬁeld
prospection and survey is so difﬁcult in the forest itself that sites are not easily
found; it is easier to excavate sites that are known from documentary sources or
oral traditions. Patrick Darling’s work on the linear earthworks of Benin and
Ishan (Darling 1984; 1988; 1998) is one of the few cases where systematic search
has revealed previously unknown sites. Also, the artwork associated with some
of the historically known sites of southern Nigeria has often concentrated arch-
aeological attention on those sites, such as at Ife (Willett 1967). As a result,
archaeological ﬁeld research and excavation has been limited to relatively few
sites, particularly in Ghana and Nigeria, although there has also been activity in
Sierra Leone and the Republic of Benin. More recently, increasing attention has
been given to urban and state developments during the second half of the second
millennium AD. The archaeological evidence is more visible than that for earlier
periods, and associated documentary and oral sources enhance its interpretation,
suggesting the ways in which earlier developments might have taken place.
   Some of the archaeological evidence relevant to the origins of urbanization
and state formation in the forest and its fringes comes from investigations
into the Akan states, in what is now Ghana. These have been described as
city-states, which collectively comprised a city-state culture (Kea 2000). James
Anquandah (1982: 85–112) described the Akan as ‘a golden civilization’; these
states seem to have controlled part of the gold trade from the forest north to
the Inland Niger Delta. The Akan states already existed by the beginning of
the eighteenth century AD when they were mentioned by European visitors,
and a considerable amount is known about the last major Akan state, that of
Asante, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (McLeod 1981). The earlier
of these states were situated on the fringes of the forest, and archaeological
investigations at the site of Begho, in this region, have revealed the remains
of a large market town made up of four different ‘quarters’, which were
1 to 2 kilometres from one another (Posnansky 1987; 2010). These constituted

                                                                               191
African Civilizations

a dispersed pattern of residence, probably subject to episodic mobility
(Fletcher 1998). Each of these quarters consists of a group of mounds, about
1.5 metres high and 30 metres across, which are often L-shaped and which are
in most cases the remains of mud-walled houses. Some 1,500 of these mounds
have been counted, enabling Anquandah (1993: 648) to estimate that the
population of Begho peaked at 10,000 in the seventeenth century AD, when
the densest area of settlement covered about 3 square kilometres. At ﬁrst, oral
tradition and radiocarbon dates indicated that the town was occupied between
about 1400 and 1725, being most prosperous towards the beginning of
the seventeenth century, but radiocarbon dates from subsequent excavations
indicated that settlement probably began as early as the eleventh or twelfth
century (Posnansky and McIntosh 1976: 166, 189). Excavation of some of the
house mounds has yielded evidence of a population engaged in metallurgical,
textile, and ceramic industries, supported by an agricultural subsistence econ-
omy that included domestic cattle, sheep, goats, and pigs and by a substantial
long-distance trade (Anquandah 1993: 649).
   At Bono Manso (Fig. 7.1), another town site in the same region, occupation
appears to have commenced about the thirteenth century and to have continued
until about the middle of the eighteenth century (Effah-Gyamﬁ 1985). This seems
to have been a more nucleated settlement than Begho and perhaps more homo-
geneous in its ethnic composition, for there was a separate settlement of aliens
(probably Muslim merchants) about 4 kilometres away at Kramokrom. Like
Begho, numerous small mounds, most representing the remains of houses from
which population estimates could be made, characterized Bono Manso. Arch-
aeological investigations, including excavation, showed that Phase I of the
settlement had occupied a more extensive area than Phases II and III but that
its population, estimated at about 4,000, had actually been lower than the
approximately 10,000 and 8,000 estimated, respectively, for the two later phases.
A dispersed pattern of residence had apparently changed to a more compact one,
perhaps reﬂecting sociopolitical changes (Effah-Gyamﬁ 1985). This contraction
to a more densely occupied form of settlement is of considerable theoretical
interest because, according to Fletcher’s ‘interaction-communication model’,
‘Bono Manso contracted to precisely the maximum areal extent at which it
could have been nonliterate and permanently sedentary’ (Fletcher 1998: 125).
   Thus Begho and Bono Manso do throw some light on the origins of urban-
ization, and perhaps of state formation, on the fringes of the Ghanaian forest
during the early second millennium AD. Furthermore, excavations at Adanse-
manso and Asantemanso (Fig. 7.2) provided evidence of settlement growth
within the forest itself from the late ﬁrst millennium AD onwards, suggesting
even earlier developments (Vivian 1996; Shinnie 2005). Also, the second phase
of a site some 150 kilometres further north at New Buipe represents an

192
                                           The West African forest and its fringes




Fig. 7.1 Plan of the site of Bono Manso, in Ghana, indicating a change from a
dispersed pattern of residence to a more compact one. After Effah-Gyamﬁ 1979: ﬁg. 2.

iron-using community late in the ﬁrst millennium AD. Consisting of three
mounds with a total diameter of less than 200 metres, they seem to have been
part of a larger complex (York 1973). It might also be signiﬁcant that the area

                                                                                  193
African Civilizations




Fig. 7.2 Plan of the site of Asantemanso, in Ghana, showing areas of occupation during
different periods. After Shinnie 2005: ﬁg. 1. (Redrawn by Andrew Stawowczyk Long.)

194
                                       The West African forest and its fringes

of the early Akan states on the forest fringes (the centre of Akan power shifted
into the forest proper only after European contact) is the same area that
provided most of the evidence for the early food-producing Kintampo Trad-
ition of the late third to late second millennium BC (Watson 2010). In add-
ition, it is an area rich in iron ore and has produced a second-century AD
radiocarbon date for iron smelting at Hani, near Begho (Posnansky and
McIntosh 1976) and a fourth-century radiocarbon date for an iron-smelting
site adjacent to Bono Manso (Effah-Gyamﬁ 1985: 204). The problem is
linking such earlier evidence to the growth of urban communities in the second
millennium AD. This is in spite of excavations by Shinnie and Kense (1989) at
the town site of Daboya, on the White Volta River further north in the
savanna. Occupied during the last 4,000 years or so, its earliest evidence for
iron was in about the middle of the ﬁrst millennium BC. A source of salt,
Daboya probably became a link in an extensive trading network. However,
much later evidence from the Republic of Benin, dating from the seventeenth
to nineteenth centuries AD, shows how urban and state development could
occur in this region. Albeit spurred by the European-sponsored Atlantic trade,
the growth of urban centres, particularly at Abomey (Fig. 7.3) and Cana, and
the emergence of the states of Dahomey, Allada, and Hueda provide a model
for sociopolitical changes that might also have occurred earlier than archaeo-
logical evidence presently indicates (Monroe 2012; 2014).
   Other important archaeological evidence relevant to urbanization and
the growth of the state in the West African forest and forest fringes relates
to the Yoruba people of south-western Nigeria, many of whose larger settle-
ments were individual city-states that collectively constituted a city-state
culture (Peel 2000). As Bascom wrote: ‘They are undoubtedly the most urban
of all African peoples’ (Bascom 1955: 446). Studies of this phenomenon,
however, have concentrated on historical sources, most of which are of
nineteenth-century date. There has been less concern about origins, probably
because many people assume that the impressive urban developments in most
cases do not predate 1800. Indeed, the early-nineteenth-century Fulani
attacks on northern Yorubaland, and the Yoruba civil wars that followed,
do seem to have played a substantial part in the development of the urban
pattern that now exists. Nevertheless, some large urban centres, such as
Ijebu-Ode, clearly did exist amongst the Yoruba at an earlier date (Fletcher
1998: 128), and archaeological investigations are beginning to show this.
Excavation and oral tradition have also indicated that Early Osogbo, a small
town on the Upper Osun River, originated in the late sixteenth century
(Ogundiran 2014). Particularly important, however, were the excavations
and survey during the 1970s by Robert Soper at the site of Old Oyo, in the
southern savanna, which as the capital of a large Yoruba state was at the

                                                                           195
African Civilizations




Fig. 7.3 Plan of Abomey, Republic of Benin, showing the royal palaces and the remains of
the bank and ditch system. After Monroe 2014: ﬁg. 5.5.


height of its power in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries AD.
In common with many Yoruba towns and cities (Usman 2004), Old Oyo
was surrounded by a complex of earthen banks and ditches, from a study of
which Soper and Darling (1980) were able to gain some idea of the shape of
the former settlement and to suggest a tentative relative chronology for its
development (Fig. 7.4). Soper (1993) also surveyed the site of the ruler’s
palace within Old Oyo and showed how closely its plan compared with that
of the pre-1979 parts of the palace in the present city of Oyo, which lies
about 130 kilometres to the south. Radiocarbon dates from the excavations

196
                                            The West African forest and its fringes




Fig. 7.4 Plan of the city walls of Old Oyo, Nigeria. After Soper and Darling 1980: ﬁg. 1.



at Old Oyo indicate the existence of a substantial settlement of more than
1 square kilometre as early as the twelfth century AD (and perhaps as early as
the eighth century), which apparently pre-dated the earthwork complex
(Calvocoressi and David 1979: 19–20, 27; Agbaje-Williams 1990: 369).

                                                                                    197
African Civilizations

Old Oyo was, however, only the most important of numerous towns aban-
doned in the southern savanna as a result of the Fulani attacks. Near Old
Oyo, Agbaje-Williams (1990) drew attention to the sites of Koso and Ipapo
Ile, both of which have defensive earthworks.
   Even now Yoruba towns and cities tend to be concentrated in the transitional
zone between grassland and forest. Archaeologically, the most important of
those in the northern part of the forest itself is Ife, where according to Yoruba
traditions the world was created. Ife has remained of spiritual and ceremonial
importance to the Yoruba, and the remarkable terracottas, copper-based alloy
castings, and stone sculptures discovered there since the beginning of the twen-
tieth century have focused archaeological activity on this site (Willett 1967).
The art itself suggests emerging social stratiﬁcation, for some of it represents
personages of importance (Fig. 7.5); in addition, art on such a scale implies
patronage, particularly because the items of copper-based alloys are made from
materials that were probably imported (Willett and Sayre 2006). Excavations in
the present city of Ife (which covers the area of the ancient city), by Frank
Willett, Ekpo Eyo (Eyo 1974), and Peter Garlake, produced a radiocarbon
chronology suggesting that occupation commenced during the late ﬁrst millen-
nium AD. Archaeological deposits at Ife are difﬁcult to excavate, and rarely has
mud walling been isolated in the generally shallow deposits. Nevertheless, the
excavation of pavements of edge-laid potsherds and small stones has provided
some indication of the layout of domestic buildings (Willett 1967: ﬁgs. 16 and
17, plate 66; Garlake 1974: ﬁgs. 3 and 4; 1977: ﬁgs. 4 and 8). The main period
during which such pavements were made has been dated by radiocarbon to
approximately the twelfth to the ﬁfteenth century, and both radiocarbon and
thermoluminescence dates have been used to suggest that the most important
period of Ife art was in the late fourteenth to early ﬁfteenth century. Little,
however, can be said of the growth of the city itself, although a series of
concentric city walls (Fig. 7.6) suggests several phases in which the city grew
up around the palace of the ruler (Ozanne 1969). These walls have not been
adequately dated, and at least some of them belonged to only the last few
centuries. It seems, nevertheless, that the ancient city must have covered a
considerable area. Garlake (1977: 92) suggested that it was probably at least
as large as the nineteenth-century walled town, because two of the excavated
sites lie outside the western wall of that town while another lies beside and
just beyond the eastern wall. He also claimed: ‘There are strong indications
that buildings were sufﬁciently compact and close together for the settlement
to be ranked as urban.’ In addition, this was an urban development with a
thriving technological base, not only in metal casting but also in other activities,
probably including the manufacture of glass from its primary materials
(Freestone 2006; Lankton et al. 2006; Babalola 2011).

198
                                             The West African forest and its fringes




Fig. 7.5 ‘Bronze’ casting of an Oni of Ife. Height 467 millimetres. The Frank Willett
Collection. Image courtesy of The Hunterian, University of Glasgow 2014.

  More archaeological evidence relevant to the present discussion comes from
Benin City, also in southern Nigeria. Benin (not to be confused with the
Republic of Benin) is archaeologically fascinating not only because it is deep

                                                                                        199
African Civilizations




Fig. 7.6 Plan of Ife city walls, Nigeria. Single lines represent earlier walls, double lines
later walls. After Ozanne 1969.

within the rainforest but also because its origins are still unclear. Excavations
during the 1950s by Goodwin (1957) and by myself during the 1960s (Connah
1975) revealed substantial post-European-contact deposits (i.e. dating from
after the late ﬁfteenth century AD) on the site of the old palace. However, my
own work also demonstrated occupation of the city by about the thirteenth
century. The principal evidence for this consisted of radiocarbon dates for a
mass burial of at least forty-one young women, who lay at a depth of more than
12.5 metres in a narrow, well-like cistern (Fig. 7.7). Wearing clothing, bracelets,
ﬁnger rings, and beads, they appeared to have been dropped down the deep

200
                                            The West African forest and its fringes




Fig. 7.7 Section of shaft containing mass sacriﬁce, Benin City, Nigeria. After Connah
1975: ﬁg. 18.

                                                                                        201
African Civilizations

shaft in which they were found and must surely represent ritual sacriﬁce indica-
tive of centralized authority, particularly as the shaft lay within the area of the
old palace. There is documentary evidence for throwing the bodies of sacriﬁcial
victims into such pits as late as 1897 (Roth 1903). Deep beneath the modern city
of Benin there must surely be other similar pits, and it is possible that some of
them could be older than the one excavated. The 1960s excavations also
showed that edge-laid potsherd pavements had been made in Benin City during
or prior to the fourteenth century AD, a practice that appears to have ended
before European contact. As at Ife, such pavements suggest the existence of
formal architecture. Indeed, there is ethnohistoric, ethnographic, and archaeo-
logical evidence for postcontact architecture in coursed mud in Benin City. This
was distinguished by tall, steep-roofed entrances (Fagg 1963: plate 35); horizon-
tally grooved, polished red mud walls (Connah 1975: plates 8 and 17); and a
plan in which rooms were arranged around a series of rectangular courtyards
open to the sky, called impluvia (Roth 1903: ﬁgs. 180 and 185; Connah 1975:
plate 1). An important example of a chief’s house, which survived a ﬁre that
destroyed much of the city at the time of its British conquest in 1897, is
Ogiamien’s House, with its formal plan of rooms built in coursed mud that
combined domestic and symbolic-sacred functions (Fig. 7.8). Its ‘location and




Fig. 7.8 Ground plan of Ogiamien’s House, Benin City, Nigeria. Solid black indicates
coursed mud walls of the main structure, open lines are compound walls, dotted lines show
roof edges, and some other lines within rooms represent impluvia. The main entrance is to
the left, and the row of rooms at the top are wives’ quarters, with a menstruation room at
the extreme right. Nevadomsky et al. 2014: ﬁg. 1. Reproduced with permission of Springer
Science+Business Media, New York, and Copyright Clearance Center’s RightsLink.


202
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

design’ have been claimed as ‘roughly a thousand years old’ (Nevadomsky et al.
2014: 67), but there is no archaeological evidence for such antiquity. Attempts
to improve the dating of this house are overdue and might include dendrochron-
ology of its major timber components or thermoluminescence of samples from
its mud-wall cores.
   Also important are the so-called Benin City walls, the innermost of which
has been demonstrated by radiocarbon dating, historical documentation, and
oral tradition to have been constructed before European contact, possibly
around the middle of the ﬁfteenth century (Connah 1975). Consisting of
a massive earthen bank and ditch, with a total vertical height, from the
excavated bottom of the ditch to the top of the surviving bank, of as much
as 17.4 metres and a circumference of 11.6 kilometres, this earthwork repre-
sents an enormous investment of human effort that must have been directed
by a powerful centralized authority. Calculations have suggested that its
construction would have absorbed 5,000 people occupied for ten hours a
day, if it had been completed in one dry season, or 1,000 people if spread
over ﬁve dry seasons. The direction of labour on such a massive project must
have implications of the greatest signiﬁcance for our enquiry into state forma-
tion. That is not the whole story, however, because surveys by myself during
the 1960s in the tangled vegetation around Benin City revealed a vast network
of further interlocking enclosures, consisting of more than 145 kilometres of
earthworks. These appeared to hint at a process of synoecism (‘the union
of several towns or villages into or under one capital city’ (Oxford English
Dictionary 1933)) by which a group of villages had developed into a city, at a
date prior to the construction of the innermost and most massive of the ‘walls’.
   Subsequent work by Darling (1984; 1988; 1998) and by others (Maliphant
et al. 1976; Roese 1981) showed that even this outer network mapped by me
(Connah 1975) was only a small peripheral part of more extensive rural
earthwork enclosures. These cover an area of about 6,500 square kilometres,
with an estimated total length in excess of 16,000 kilometres (Fig. 7.9). At least
150,000,000 person-hours of work over several centuries are implied. As
Darling showed, these earthworks probably have more to tell us about the
process of state formation (reﬂecting power struggles for agricultural land)
than about the urban origins of Benin City itself. Indeed, on the basis of the
distribution and character of the earthworks and of a statistical analysis of
surface-collected potsherds, he proposed a settlement model for both the Benin
area and that of Ishan to its north from the late ﬁrst millennium AD onwards.
He argued that there was ‘a strong southward colonization by savannah/
savannah–forest ecotone Edo speakers [Edo is the language of Benin] into
the rainforest’. The area over which this movement is thought to have taken
place has a dense network of enclosures, ‘whereas there is an almost total

                                                                             203
African Civilizations




Fig. 7.9 Earthwork enclosures in the Benin City area. Dotted line indicates limits of
modern city in the 1960s to 1970s. After Darling 1982.



204
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

absence of them amongst the Urhobo speakers’ just to the south (Darling
1988: 122–3). Darling could well be right, but as he admitted, his archaeo-
logical survey remains ‘largely undated’ (Darling 1988: 133). It is regrettable
that a satisfactory series of radiocarbon dates for the land surfaces beneath
these earthworks has still not been obtained. Six radiocarbon determinations
are available, but two of them give ‘modern’ dates, one gives a nineteenth-
century date, and three give dates in the thirteenth to ﬁfteenth centuries (Sutton
1982: 309, 312). Furthermore, the other radiocarbon dates for Benin City,
obtained by myself in the 1960s, need to be replaced by modern assessments
now that techniques have improved so greatly.
   Chronological problems also remain regarding the artistic use of copper-
base alloys in Benin. My excavations of the 1960s showed that these materials
were used artistically as early as the thirteenth century AD, but those excav-
ations recovered no evidence of casting these metals prior to European contact.
In spite of the numerous artistic studies that have been made of the famous
Benin castings (e.g., Forman et al. 1960; Dark 1973), we still have little
evidence about their detailed chronology. In view of the implications of these
castings, indicating both an hierarchical power structure and considerable
artistic patronage, it is unfortunate that so few have been recovered from
controlled stratigraphic excavations. Although a small number of Benin cast-
ings have been dated on the basis of the thermoluminescence of ﬁred clay core
remaining within them, they were all found to date from about the ﬁfteenth
century AD or later (Willett and Fleming 1976). Nevertheless, stable lead
isotope analysis indicated that the source of the metal used in both Ife and
during an early period in Benin was faraway France (Willet and Sayre 2006:
77), an indication of the extent of the trading networks in which these cities
participated.
   A question concerning Benin City and the state of which it formed the capital
is whether they were always within the rainforest. As von Hellermann (2010)
suggested, it is possible that forest density has varied through time; both
climatic change and human activity could have created more open conditions
in the past (p. 187). Talbot and Delibrias (1977) found evidence of drier
conditions between 700 and 200 years ago in their investigations of Lake
Bosumtwi, in Ghana, and some historical accounts support their interpret-
ation. In addition, the extensive earthworks in the Benin City region discussed
above are useless as boundaries in the heavily overgrown conditions in which
many are now situated. The ditches and banks are virtually invisible in dense
rainforest or regrowth. They must have been constructed when there was far
less vegetation cover than at present. Rees (in Connah 1975: 237–42) raised
the possibility of a formerly different environment in an area of forest near
Benin City that was cleared for planting oil palms; he found pits and mounds

                                                                             205
African Civilizations

as well as earthworks, indicating denser settlement in the past. Technology
now exists in the form of aerial LiDAR (light detection and ranging) that can
see through the vegetation in order to investigate this possibility (Eve 2014).
   Archaeological evidence seemingly irrelevant to state formation and urban-
ization comes from Igbo-Ukwu, east of the River Niger in Nigeria. This is in an
area occupied by the Igbo people, who have long interested anthropologists
precisely because they developed neither cities nor states until recent times, in
spite of a high population density. As late as the 1930s the Igbo could still
boast that ‘there is no one who owns us’ (that is to say: we have no rulers), and
their society remained characterized by ‘a dispersal rather than a concentration
of authority’ (Green 1947: 145, 73). What, then, is one to make of Igbo-Ukwu,
where the burial of a clearly important individual (Fig. 7.10), a repository of
sophisticated regalia, and a ritual pit produced, amongst other things,
685 copper and bronze objects and some 165,000 stone and glass beads?
Thurstan Shaw, the excavator of this site, suggested that this indicates the
former existence of a local ‘priest king’ who was the holder of a politico-ritual
title in the democratized title-taking system of this area (Shaw 1970; 1977).
Some ethnohistorical evidence supports this interpretation, although it is
uncertain whether this should be applied to archaeological data a thousand
years old. This date, at the end of the ﬁrst millennium AD, is based on
radiocarbon dates that were formerly the subject of argument, but subse-
quently there was a greater readiness to accept them (Posnansky 1980). The
approximately tenth-century date for the Igbo-Ukwu evidence is of importance
not only because of the sophisticated metallurgy and unique art forms but
also because it implies early trading connections between the West African
rainforest and the Mediterranean or even India. Analyses have shown that
some of the copper and copper alloy probably came from the lead, zinc, and
copper deposits of the Benue Rift, only 100 kilometres to the east of the site
(Chikwendu et al. 1989), where there is evidence of mining dating to the end of
the ﬁrst millennium AD (Craddock et al. 1997). Nevertheless, stable lead
isotope analysis indicated that some of the metal came from Tunisia or
Morocco (Willet and Sayre 2006: 77), and the glass and carnelian beads must
have resulted from trade either across the Sahara or east-west through the
Sahel. Indeed, Insoll (1996a: 80) suggested that elephant ivory was being
shipped north up the River Niger to Gao, from where it was transported
across the desert by camel caravan. If that was the case, then Gao could have
been the immediate source of many of the beads found at Igbo-Ukwu, having
been sent south in exchange for the ivory but originating from more distant
locations (Insoll and Shaw 1997).
   Clearly there was participation in both local and long-distance trade by
people living in the Igbo-Ukwu area, and some of the products of this trade

206
                                             The West African forest and its fringes




Fig. 7.10 Plan of the burial at Igbo-Ukwu, Nigeria. 1, 15, and 22, Elephant tusks; 2,
decorated copper roundels; 3, crown; 4, decorated copper plate; 5, pectoral plate; 6 and 19,
position of point of bracket; 7, 10, 13, 17, and 18, copper anklets; 8, copper strap; 9,
skull; 11, spiral copper bosses set in wood: remains of stool; 12, beaded armlets; 14,
copper handle for calabash; 16, copper fan holder; 20, position of point of rod
supporting bronze leopard’s skull; 21, bronze horseman hilt; X, iron nails and staples.
After Shaw 1970: ﬁg. 14.


                                                                                       207
African Civilizations

were concentrated on one individual. Elsewhere, such archaeological evidence
would probably be thought indicative of an emergent state or a ranked
chiefdom. Until we know more about the late ﬁrst millennium AD in this part
of Nigeria, there are three tentative conclusions. First, we should be careful
when deducing sociopolitical organization from archaeological evidence for
‘rich burials’. Second, the social and political organization observed in any
area during the last few centuries does not necessarily indicate the situation a
thousand years ago; societies are dynamic, not static. Third, Igboland raises
questions about the nature of West African urbanism. In 1955 this region had
one of the densest populations in Nigeria, with estimates for some areas of
‘well over 1000 per square mile [259 hectares]’ (Buchanan and Pugh 1955:
60). Perhaps for mainly socioeconomic reasons, Igbo settlement was dispersed
rather than nucleated, like that of the Yoruba, each Igbo farmstead lying in the
middle of its own cultivated area near a road or bush path. Given such
population densities, it seems pointless to ask about the ‘absence’ of urbanism.


Subsistence economy
Unfortunately, forest soils are usually destructive of bone, and the recovery
of botanical evidence by means of ﬂotation has sometimes been neglected.
However, the preservation of organic materials in the Benin cistern containing
the sacriﬁced women suggests that exceptional conditions do exist if archae-
ologists can ﬁnd them. Meanwhile, evidence from the second millennium BC
Kintampo sites, at the junction of forest and savanna in Ghana, remains
of value even for this later period. From these sites there is evidence of
domesticated dwarf sheep or goats and possibly of small domesticated cattle.
In addition, cowpeas, oil palm, and perhaps yam were exploited, although it is
unknown whether these were domesticated or not, and several wild plants
were also eaten. Similarly, faunal and artefactual evidence indicates that
hunting and ﬁshing remained a signiﬁcant part of the basic subsistence (Stahl
2005a; Watson 2005a; 2005b). To the north, in the southern savanna, the
second to ﬁrst millennium BC Kintampo site of Birimi showed that pearl millet
(Pennisetum glaucum) was grown (D’Andrea et al. 2001); this savanna crop
was also being cultivated in the rainforest of southern Cameroon during
the ﬁrst millennium BC, suggesting a period of forest recession (Kahlheber
et al. 2009).
  From sites of the late ﬁrst millennium AD or early second millennium AD,
there is less evidence for subsistence. At Daboya the faunal remains indicated
the presence of domesticated cattle, sheep, or goats and chicken or guinea
fowl over the last 2,000 years or so, and wild animals remained an important
resource. However, the site provided no evidence for domesticated plants

208
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

(Shinnie and Kense 1989: 223–7). At Bono Manso the faunal material
indicated the keeping of goats and chickens, as well as the exploitation of
wild species, but little bone was recovered and most was undiagnostic.
Furthermore, most of the bones came from the later phases, and, again, there
was no evidence for cultivated plants (Effah-Gyamﬁ 1985: 98–9). In the case
of Ife there is slight evidence of sheep or goat associated with potsherd
pavements (Garlake 1977: 91), and terracottas of a bull and of a ram’s head
were found at Lafogido (in Ife) in a twelfth-century context (Eyo 1974). As for
Benin City, there is no evidence of value (Connah 1975: 218), and although
the ritual disposal pit at Igbo-Ukwu yielded a moderate number of bones, they
were all of wild though edible fauna, a circumstance perhaps explained by
the presumed ritual character of the pit (Shaw 1970: vol. 1, 247–8).
  With so little direct archaeological evidence, it is necessary to fall back on
indirect evidence and on evidence from nonarchaeological sources. As already
discussed (p. 188), there were substantial plant-food resources in the rain-
forest, and all the sites that have been mentioned are situated within the West
African ‘yam zone’ (Figs. 6.1 and 6.2). Furthermore, those sites tend to be in
the more northern parts of the forest or in the southern savanna, where yams
and oil palm originally grew more readily, and it is those plants that are likely
to have become the major components in forest subsistence (D’Andrea et al.
2006). The main deﬁciency would probably have been animal protein, as in
recent times, but small numbers of dwarf goats and cattle, large quantities of
ﬁsh, and extensive hunting in the forest (Gautier and Van Neer 2005) could
have rendered this less of a problem than it is for the present, exploding
population. Overall, this food-production system was almost certainly indi-
genous in its development and of substantial antiquity. Pottery, ground stone
axes, and possible sickle components appear at the Nigerian rock shelter of
Iwo Eleru during the last 5,000 years BC (Shaw and Daniels 1984: 55), and
during the last few millennia BC many of the stone-using peoples of the forest
made pick-like and hoe-like implements, which some archaeologists have
interpreted as digging tools for the collection and eventual cultivation of
yams. Sowunmi (1993: 15) detected a ‘sharp rise’ in the occurrence of oil palm
at about 800 BC in a Niger delta deposit, along with the appearance of weeds
of cultivation. Furthermore, those trypanosomiasis-resistant goats and cattle
must have taken a considerable time to acquire the resistance that enables them
to survive in the forest.
  Apparently, by the end of the ﬁrst millennium AD, and perhaps 1,000
or 2,000 years earlier, a sound agricultural system had grown up on the
interﬂuves of the more northerly parts of the forest. This system was based on
the rotational bush-fallow cultivation of extensive areas of forest land, which
were cleared by slashing and burning and then abandoned to regeneration when

                                                                            209
African Civilizations

soil exhaustion reduced productivity. The possibility that this human impact,
combined with climatic change, led to a more open landscape in some parts
of the forest must also be considered (von Hellermann 2010). One of the
main crops was probably yams, and yams are a food that can be stored and
transported. Therefore, it seems likely that by the early second millennium AD
the subsistence economy of the rainforest was able to produce a surplus and
to provide adequate support for the growing social complexity of which the
archaeological record provides evidence. Then, during the later second millen-
nium AD, the subsistence of the area was subject to major changes brought on
by the participation of West Africa in the Atlantic trade (Stahl 2001; Ogundiran
and Falola 2007; Monroe and Ogundiran 2012). Maize, cassava, various beans,
tobacco, and other plants from the Americas were added to the economy. In
addition, the acquisition of European trade goods from the coast had important
socioeconomic consequences that stimulated the substantial urban and state
developments in the West African forest and its margins that were observed
by early European travellers but had originated earlier.


Technology
Killick (2004) and Alpern (2005) have reviewed the evidence for early iron
smelting in Africa, and it seems that at least some of the occupants of the West
African forest were working iron from early in the ﬁrst millennium AD and
probably earlier. Smelting was already present at Hani in Ghana, just north of
the forest, by about the second century AD, and evidence from Nsukka, in
eastern Nigeria, and Obobogo, in Cameroon, indicates that in the southern
savanna smelting probably commenced in the second half of the ﬁrst millen-
nium BC (Okafor 1993; Woodhouse 1998). Also, iron objects from probable
graves at Akonétye, in southern Cameroon, date from the ﬁrst half of the ﬁrst
millennium AD (Meister and Eggert 2008). At the earliest Nsukka sites, the
smelters were already using furnaces that were ‘extremely efﬁcient’ (McIntosh
1994: 174). Certainly the iron-working skills of West African forest peoples
became in time highly sophisticated; there is evidence of this by the end of
the ﬁrst millennium AD at Igbo-Ukwu (Shaw 1970: vol. 1, 97–103). Also, the
description by Bellamy (1904), recording the operation of an impressive
induced-draught furnace near Oyo in Yorubaland, indicates a long-established
tradition. The adoption of iron by people living in and on the fringes of the
forest must have made the agricultural exploitation of those zones more
practicable than previously, enabling cultivation on a scale that could support
communities of increasing size.
  In addition to the working of iron, copper and copper-base alloys were
being handled with great skill by the close of the ﬁrst millennium AD. The

210
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

evidence from Igbo-Ukwu shows that both lost-wax casting and smithing
and chasing had been mastered. Indeed, by the second quarter of the second
millennium AD, metalsmiths in Ife were also producing copper-base alloy
castings of a technical excellence and an artistic reﬁnement that is very
impressive. A little later, craftsmen in Benin City were excelling in a similar
fashion. and the Akan were producing copper-alloy weights for weighing
gold dust, as well as casting an impressive range of jewellery in gold. Modern
experts have described the Igbo-Ukwu material as ‘extremely ambitious in
design and executed by highly skilled and experienced craftsmen’ (Craddock
and Picton 1986: 4).
  Perhaps the most impressive aspect of the forest-dwellers’ technology, how-
ever, was its diversity. Thus the artists of ancient Ife excelled in the making of
terracotta representations as well as ones of copper-base alloy. Furthermore,
they also carved hard stone such as granite-gneiss and quartz, to produce
accomplished sculptures. Some of these were decorated in a distinctive way,
by driving iron nails into holes drilled into the stone (Willett 1967: 79–84,
plates 72–4, 77–9). Also at Ife, the complex pavements of potsherds and stones
hint at considerable architectural sophistication, a sophistication that was still
apparent in the much later mud palaces of some Yoruba rulers. Indeed, some
of the coursed-mud architecture of the West African forest was quite remark-
able. That of the Asante, for instance, with its polished red and white walls
decorated with low reliefs (e.g., McLeod 1981: 56), remained an impressive
demonstration of what was possible in this building material, as also did that
of Benin, with its polished, ﬂuted red walls. Indeed, Benin City has provided a
time capsule of traditional technology in the form of the varied collection of
objects looted from the city at the time of its capture by the British in 1897
(e.g., Pitt Rivers 1900). The Bini were proﬁcient not only in iron working,
‘brass working’, and building but also in carpentry, wood and ivory carving,
mud and terracotta sculpture, pottery, leather working, weaving, and bead-
work (Dark 1973). In addition, the earthworks in the Benin and Ishan areas
suggest an understanding of surveying and civil engineering, as well as a
capacity to move monumental amounts of earth.
  The full range of technological skills amongst some forest communities,
during the last 500 to 1,000 years, is too great to discuss in detail, but two
other activities deserve a mention. First, a number of sites at Ife have yielded
evidence of glass melting, in the form of fragments of crucibles coated with
waste glass (e.g., Garlake 1977: 89–90). This might mean only that imported
glass was being melted to turn into beads or other small objects (Willett 1977:
22), or it could mean that glass was being made from its primary materials, as
now seems likely (Freestone 2006; Lankton et al. 2006; Babalola 2011).
Radiocarbon dates for a site described as a glass-bead-making factory indicate

                                                                             211
African Civilizations

a date between the late eleventh and the fourteenth centuries (Sutton 1982:
309, 312). Second, although there has been little archaeological investigation
of gold mining in southern Ghana, there are ethnohistorical accounts of
mining in the Akan forest to a depth of as much as 46 metres. Clearly, the
miners must have known a considerable amount about their craft. Traces
of mining have also been reported in the Nigerian lead, zinc, and copper
deposits east of Igbo-Ukwu, where open cuts and tunnelling reached depths
of about 10 metres (Chikwendu et al. 1989: 31). A radiocarbon date in the
tenth century AD, for charcoal associated with mining debris, suggests that
these mines were in use at the time that the Igbo-Ukwu copper and copper-
alloy objects were being made (McIntosh 1994: 176; Craddock et al. 1997).
Awaiting further investigation are the tunnels and spoil heaps of iron-ore
mining in the Republic of Benin, thought to date to the ﬁrst half of the second
millennium AD (Randsborg 2010: 81).
  Thus by early in the second millennium AD, if not before, there was a varied
and sophisticated level of technology in at least some of the West African forest
communities. There must have been a growth in functional specialization
amongst the societies concerned.


Social system
Ethnohistorical and oral sources have more to tell us about social organization
in the West African rainforest during the last half millennium than does
archaeological evidence. Nevertheless, the latter can augment the other
sources, and it is our major source of information for the crucial earlier
formative periods. Archaeological data indicate that by late in the ﬁrst millen-
nium AD, or early in the second millennium, there was growing social stratiﬁ-
cation in some locations based on the control of trade resources and
agricultural surplus. This took place particularly in the northerly parts of the
forest and in the forest–savanna ecotone. It led in some places to increasing
centralization of authority, particularly in the form of divine kingship. The
copper-base alloy castings of Ife and Benin are evidence of that institution and,
in the case of Benin, of the social and political hierarchy that supported it. In
particular, it seems likely that the famous ‘bronze’ heads of Ife were made for
attachment to wooden bodies which, provided with clothing, crowns, and
other regalia, were carried in funeral processions of rulers, members of their
families, and perhaps some of their more important chiefs. Such ﬁgures could
have represented not only the deceased but also the authority of the ofﬁce that
he or she had held, much as was the case in Medieval and Early Modern
Europe where similar practices were recorded (Willett 1966). Furthermore,
some idea of the power that such authority could wield is given by the

212
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

thirteenth-century sacriﬁcial victims at Benin and by the scale of the earth-
works of that city and its surrounding settlements.
  Similarly, whatever the sociopolitical signiﬁcance of the Igbo-Ukwu evi-
dence, it clearly indicates a concentration of ‘wealth’ on one individual,
an individual who held institutionalized power of some sort. The burial is
especially persuasive in this respect. As shown in Caroline Sassoon’s recon-
struction painting (Shaw 1970: vol. 1, frontispiece; McIntosh 1999: ﬁg. 1.2),
the deceased sat on an ornamented stool, clothed, crowned, and with regalia
and jewellery. It is likely that stools were already symbols of authority, as was
later the case with the Asante of Ghana (McLeod 1981: 112–18). Indeed, some
stools of exceptional workmanship from Benin, made of wood or of copper
alloy (e.g., Pitt Rivers 1900: plate 41; Roth 1903: ﬁgs. 111 and 112; Dark
1973: plate 40), and from Ife, carved out of stone (e.g., Willett 1967: plate 77),
must have had a similar role. Regrettably, we still lack structural evidence such
as the layout of palace buildings, other than much later examples at Old Oyo,
Benin City, or Abomey. Nevertheless, the material record does provide signs
of emergent city-states in the West African forest by early in the second
millennium AD.
  There are also signs of urbanization by this time; at the very least Begho,
Bono Manso, Ife, and Benin were already of increasing size with tendencies
to nucleation. Archaeological evidence for the beginnings of urbanization in
the West African forest is poor, but technological developments suggest a
growth of specialist crafts, and with this a growth in functional specialization
within society that Mabogunje thought fundamental to the development of
urbanization. Furthermore, it seems that by the early second millennium AD,
Mabogunje’s ‘limiting conditions’ (p. 5) for urbanization were also being
met in some parts of the West African forest. There was almost certainly a
surplus of food; there were in some areas small groups of people able to
exercise power; and very likely there was a class of traders and merchants. In
some places, however, whether or not these conditions were met, urbaniza-
tion did not take place. There is the example of the Igbo people of eastern
Nigeria who, in spite of what might have been a large population, developed
a form of sociopolitical organization that was dispersed rather than nucle-
ated. The origins of Igbo society would merit careful archaeological examin-
ation, for if we understood why there were no Igbo cities, then we might
understand more about the overall process of urbanization in the West
African rainforest. Roderick McIntosh (2005) might well have the answer,
as discussed in Chapter 6, with his idea of heterarchy, authority arranged
horizontally, rather than hierarchy, authority arranged vertically. It is appar-
ent that large numbers of people living in a small area might choose different
ways of organizing their society.

                                                                             213
African Civilizations

Population pressures
The West African rainforest would appear to be an unlikely place for popula-
tion pressures; there seems to be almost limitless unused land, and water stress
is not as acute as in the savanna. Indeed, it is possible that the iron-using
farmers of the ﬁrst and early second millennium AD did enjoy for some
centuries a virtual ‘frontier’ situation, in which there was always sufﬁcient
fresh land to meet increases in population. This might even be the reason why
urbanization and state development were apparently later phenomena in the
forest than in the savanna.
   However, Darling’s work around Benin City showed that forest soils and
environments varied in their attractiveness to farmers. It seems probable that
the best farmlands were situated on the upper interﬂuves, where the vegetation
might have been easier to clear and the soils were better drained. Also there seems
to have been a preference for ecotonal environments on the fringes of the forest.
Given a rotational bush-fallow agricultural system of the sort practised in the
forest during recent centuries, each piece of farmland would have to be fallowed
for ten to ﬁfteen years, after only three or four years of cultivation. During those
brief periods of cultivation each piece of land would be relatively productive and
capable of producing a food surplus. This might stimulate population growth,
but a time would come when the best land would become harder to ﬁnd, unless
farmers reduced the fallowing period, thereby reducing productivity and food
supplies. This is supposition, but for the area around Benin City, Allison (1962:
244) produced evidence that most of the forest had been farmed at one time or
another. Indeed, the vast pattern of earthworks mapped by Darling (1984)
is surely indicative of an expanding farming population competing for land.
Communities do not indulge in such monumental labour unless there is good
reason. Whether such competition existed also in other areas of the West African
forest remains to be seen. The area occupied by the Igbo, for instance, has been
said to have ‘among the poorest of Nigerian soils – highly leached, extremely
acid, suited only to a limited range of crops and eroding rapidly under conditions
of overcropping’ (Buchanan and Pugh 1955: 60). It might be that population
dispersal was the most appropriate strategy for dealing with such generally poor
soils, whereas nucleation on areas of better soils tended to take place where
there was a greater variation in soil quality. There is also the possibility that
climatic change and human impact altered the environment in the past, with
a drier, more open landscape between 700 and 200 years ago, followed by a
moister, more forested one in recent centuries (p. 205). This could have resulted
in a high population density that led to political turmoil and warfare as condi-
tions changed and to the decline in which British observers found the Benin state
at the end of the nineteenth century (von Hellermann 2010).


214
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

Ideology
Prior to European contact, the religions of West African forest peoples seem
to have consisted of a varied collection of beliefs. From ethnohistorical
sources and oral tradition, it appears that pantheons of deities as well as
ancestors played a part in these beliefs and that the ruler of a community
often fulﬁlled the function of its chief priest. Thus in Benin City the Oba
appears to have been the principal ofﬁciant in major religious ceremonies
(Bradbury 1957: 52–60), and at least some of these involved human sacriﬁces
in which the victim or victims were asked to carry a message to the gods
(Roth 1903: 71–2). Likewise, the Oni of Ife was a spiritual leader; the Akan
chiefs seem to have had spiritual as well as temporal powers (McLeod 1981);
and rulers of Dahomey reinforced their control with rituals that included
human sacriﬁces (Monroe 2012). Therefore, ideology might have played a
crucial role in the emergence of West African forest states, particularly
as a means of legitimizing and reinforcing centralized authority. In view of
the importance of a food surplus in the development of both states and cities,
it is interesting that in many parts of the forest and its fringes some of the
most signiﬁcant ceremonies of the religious year were concerned with the
yam harvest.
   There is some archaeological evidence that suggests that the role of religion
might have been similar in the early centuries of the second millennium AD.
In Ife, for instance, Garlake excavated fourteenth-century altars built into
the edge of potsherd pavements and comparable to those dedicated to past
Obas that were still to be seen in the royal palace of Benin late in the twentieth
century (Garlake 1977: 69). At Benin itself there is evidence of human sacriﬁce
in the thirteenth century. In addition, many of the Benin copper-base alloy
castings of sixteenth- to nineteenth-century date, particularly those in the form
of human heads, apparently represented former Obas and were important
liturgical furnishings of the altars (Gore 2007). The ‘bronze’ and terracotta
heads from Ife of fourteenth- to ﬁfteenth-century date were perhaps intended
for similar use or, in some cases, for funeral ceremonies. Herbert (1984: 302)
suggested that such items were ‘actual containers of power’, not merely
‘passive signiﬁers’ of it. For earlier periods, however, the interpretation of
religious symbolism can be difﬁcult, such as with the thousand-year-old
Igbo-Ukwu evidence for the existence of a ‘priest king’ (Shaw 1977). Neverthe-
less, whatever its signiﬁcance might be, that site does suggest that the combin-
ing of spiritual and temporal authority is indeed an ancient practice in the
West African forest. An amalgam of deeply embedded beliefs, rituals, and
state-sponsored violence underpinned a number of the forest hierarchies
and their rulers.


                                                                             215
African Civilizations

External trade
In Chapter 6 (p. 151) it was argued that the range of environments in West
Africa would have provided both the necessity and the occasion for the
exchange of raw materials and products across environmental boundaries.
Thus one might expect an early development of regional trading both within
and between the various ecozones and ecotones of West Africa. The forest and
forest fringes must have played a part in such development, just as the drier
savanna and Sahel to their north did. Furthermore, the wooded savanna in
between these contrasting environments, sometimes referred to as the ‘Middle
Belt’, would have provided a vital trading link between the two, although one
that needs more attention from archaeologists (Casey 2010). Forest products
that were probably exchanged in local markets and traded to greater distances
could have included yams, other vegetables, vegetable oils, palm wine, dried
ﬁsh, salt, Melegueta pepper, kola nuts, dyewoods, various gums, cloth, pots,
canoes, charcoal, ivory, gold, and slaves. A number of these stimulated long-
distance trade, particularly gold, ivory, slaves, pepper, and kola nuts. By the
end of the ﬁrst millennium AD some of these were being carried across the
Sahara, and by the middle of the second millennium AD seaborne European
traders were seeking them on the coast and, in addition, developing what was
to become an almost insatiable demand for vegetable oils. Because of its gold
production, it has been claimed that ‘West Africa was for centuries a center of
the world economy’ (Kea 2012: 347).
  In return for their exports, the forest and forest fringes received an assort-
ment of goods, of which luxury items that gave status to the recipients formed
a substantial part. This is not to deny that meat-on-the-hoof from the savanna
was important in the forest probably from an early date or that salt from the
Sahara must have reached as far south. Nevertheless, it appears that amongst
the most important of the commodities reaching the forest from the Saharan
trade were copper-base alloys, either as ingots or manufactures. These were
much sought after by peoples of the forest, and from the time of their arrival
on the West African coast European traders were quick to take advantage of
this demand. Clearly, copper and its alloys were luxury materials of consider-
able sociopolitical and economic importance. There is evidence that France
was one source of the metal used in Ife and of that used at an early date in
Benin City (Willett and Sayre 2006: 77), a remarkable indication of the extent
of the trading networks in which these cities participated, involving European,
Mediterranean, Saharan, Sahelian, savanna, and forest transportation
systems. In addition, cowrie shells were an important commodity traded into
the forest, originally across the Sahara but eventually to the coast on European
ships (Johnson 1970a; 1970b; Hogendorn and Johnson 1986). It has been


216
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

estimated that about 16 billion cowries were brought into West Africa during
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (Ogundiran 2007: 94). Used both
decoratively and as currency, their possession was again an important indica-
tor of status. The same could be said of many of the other imports to the West
African forest. As indicated by European records of ships’ cargoes, there was a
demand for a variety of manufactured goods, particularly glass beads, coral
beads, ﬁne cloths, metalware of all sorts (especially iron knives), iron bars,
alcohol, tobacco, gunpowder, guns, and mirrors (Ryder 1969). One of the
most remarkable status symbols, however, was the horse. Used in the forest
fringes, horses were also known as deep in the forest as Benin City; they were
brought there from the savanna and, in later times, occasionally from Euro-
pean traders on the coast (Law 1980a). With trypanosomiasis in the forest, it is
unlikely that horses could have lived long in such an environment. It would
seem that their use in Benin represented a remarkable example of conspicuous
consumption.
   Much of the above is based on ethnohistory and oral tradition, mainly from
post-European-contact times. The advent of European traders on the West
African coast, from the sixteenth century onwards, reversed the orientation of
trade from north to south; incoming commodities increasingly came via the
coast, outgoing ones went the same way (Monroe and Ogundiran 2012). The
trans-Saharan trade gradually faded away, so that by the twentieth century little
of it survived. Consequently, to ﬁnd evidence of external trade in the forest,
from before about 500 years ago, we must turn to archaeology. The most
important of such evidence is Igbo-Ukwu. Although it seems that some of the
metal used in the items of copper-base alloy at that site came from no great
distance (Chikwendu et al. 1989), it appears that the rest came from North
Africa (Willett and Sayre 2006: 77), and the large number of glass and carnelian
beads must imply similar or other trading links. So must the mounted horse or
donkey on one of the Igbo-Ukwu castings (Shaw 1970: vol. 2, plates 365 and
366). Even if based on another work of art rather than on direct observation,
this indicates a connection with the savanna. Sutton (1991) suggested trading
contacts with Egypt and Nubia, and although an Indian origin has often been
assumed for the carnelian because of an apparent lack of African sources, it
‘occurs abundantly’ in Egypt (Lucas and Harris 1962: 391).
   However, irrespective of where the beads came from, the problem is to know
what the people of Igbo-Ukwu were giving in exchange. Shaw (1970: vol. 1,
284–5) suggested ivory, in the form of elephant tusks, and added that probably
slaves and perhaps kola nuts had also been exported. His suggestions seem
reasonable, but the location of Igbo-Ukwu in the northern margin of the forest,
near to the Niger River and not far from the Niger Delta, makes one wonder
whether salt, dried ﬁsh, and perhaps other delta products might also have been

                                                                            217
African Civilizations

amongst the goods traded to the north. As already mentioned (p. 206), Insoll
(1996a: 80) suggested that some of the ivory was carried up the River Niger to
Gao, from where it was fed into the Saharan trade, and that Gao might therefore
have been the immediate source of many of the beads found at Igbo-Ukwu,
whatever their remoter origin. Indeed, beads excavated from Gao are similar to
those from Igbo-Ukwu (Insoll and Shaw 1997). However, Sutton (1991: 154)
pointed out that both elephants (for ivory) and people (as slaves) were common
south of the Sahara a thousand years ago, and he argued that to produce so
much wealth as far south as Igbo-Ukwu there must have been ‘some other
valued commodity speciﬁc to that place’. It is an important point because,
whatever else they represent, the objects found at Igbo-Ukwu do indicate a
considerable concentration of wealth, which (on present knowledge) was unique
in that region at that time. Sutton has suggested that the special commodity
might have been silver, which apparently occurs in small quantities in copper
ore in south-eastern Nigeria, and of which traces have been found in the copper-
alloy objects from Igbo-Ukwu. It is an attractive idea, for here indeed was a rare
commodity of considerable international value at the relevant time, particularly
sought after for use in the currencies of both the Islamic and Christian worlds.
However, Craddock et al. (1997: 424) have described Sutton’s suggestion that
silver was being smelted in the Igbo-Ukwu area as ‘very unlikely’.
   Further to the west, the location of Begho and other sites thought to relate to
the early Akan states is surely indicative of an early trade in gold and other
forest commodities. To the south of Begho lay many of West Africa’s gold
mines and substantial resources of kola. To the north lay more gold mines, and
the Akan states seem to have developed astride a major trade route from the
coast to the region of Jenné in the Inland Niger Delta. Copper-base alloy
basins and bowls that have survived in eight or more localities in the Akan
area provide some conﬁrmation of this trade. These appear to have had a
North African origin; indeed, three items from Nsawkaw have Arabic inscrip-
tions, and one of those three is thought to be possibly of fourteenth-century
date. Also remarkable is the fourteenth-century English bronze jug that was
amongst the loot taken by the British from Kumasi in 1896. However, there
was probably a wider range of imports into the Akan area than such items
would suggest. Similarly, the commodities exported could have consisted of
things other than just gold and kola, such as ivory, dried ﬁsh, slaves, and salt.
It was on this part of the coast of West Africa that an eighteenth-century
European visitor recorded salt production (by seawater evaporation) on such a
scale that a number of storehouses were seen which each contained about
50 tonnes of salt (Nenquin 1961: 115–16).
   At both Ife and Benin City the only ﬁrm archaeological evidence for external
trade prior to European contact consists of items of copper-base alloys.

218
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

Craddock and Picton (1986: 9) found ‘signiﬁcant analytical differences’ between
such metal used at these places from the thirteenth to the ﬁfteenth century AD
and that which had been used at Igbo-Ukwu, ‘showing that new sources of
metal, probably imported, were now used’. Indeed, Willett and Sayre (2006: 77)
have since suggested that France was its most likely origin. To some extent this
reﬂects the growth of a trans-Saharan trade in brass, which European maritime
trade later took over. As an indication of the range of pre-European trade within
the forest itself, by the fourteenth century objects of copper-base alloys were
even reaching the Niger Delta, implying canoe-borne trading. In the case of
Ife, it has been suggested that a trade route ran north from Yorubaland to a
crossing of the Niger below Bussa, where copper-base-alloy castings known as
the ‘Tsoede Bronzes’ were found. Signiﬁcantly, some of these contain a small
percentage of zinc, which suggests the use of imported brass from the Saharan
trade (Craddock and Picton 1986: 8–9). This could have been an important
trade route from the forest zone, and the commodities probably traded out of
Yorubaland would have been kola nuts (important in the savanna because kola
is the only stimulant permitted by Islam), ivory, salt, dried ﬁsh, and slaves.
Similar goods would probably have been exported from Benin City, although
Melegueta pepper was probably more important than kola. Also trade in
vegetable oils is likely to have long pre-dated European contact. The location
of Benin City seems never to have been adequately explained in terms of trade
routes, although it was well placed to maintain contact with both the Niger
Delta to its south and the Niger River to its east.
   Although direct archaeological evidence is limited, there seems no doubt that
external trade was important for the peoples of the West African forest and its
margins long before European traders arrived on the coast. Such trade had
probably commenced at least by the ﬁrst millennium AD, and its origins might
be much earlier. Although long-distance contacts with trans-Saharan trade
must have stimulated the movement and procurement of certain commodities,
there seems no reason why the inauguration of such contacts should be
claimed as the beginning of forest-zone trade. It appears that a regional
network of trade routes existed in West Africa before the advent of the Arab
trans-Saharan trade. Such a network must have included the forest and its
margins, as well as the wooded savanna to their north.


Conclusion
Why did cities and states develop in the West African rainforest and its fringes?
Why should dense settlements and hierarchical social systems appear in this
region? Many explanations have drawn on external trade to explain such
developments, and indeed they took place at approximately the same time as

                                                                            219
African Civilizations

the appearance of Arab trade across the Sahara. Such an external stimulus
hypothesis remains untested, however, until we know more about the archae-
ology of the ﬁrst millennium AD within the forest and adjacent environments.
Until then, it seems almost certain that the origins of these cities and states lay
within the forest and its margins. The forest possessed abundant resources and
the potential to produce a food surplus. By early in the ﬁrst millennium AD
there existed an iron-based technology sufﬁciently sophisticated to exploit the
forest environment more successfully than before. The diversity of this tech-
nology gave rise to functional specialization, and this, probably combined with
localized population pressures reﬂecting variations in land productivity and
short-term climatic change, helped to stimulate the growth of larger, more
heterogeneous communities. It was possibly population pressures also that in
certain areas led to an increasing stratiﬁcation of society, in which control of
resources fell into fewer and fewer hands. In some places this culminated in
centralization of authority on one individual, whose power was frequently
reinforced by the assumption of spiritual as well as temporal attributes, with
social control expressed as state-sponsored violence. This situation seems to
have developed by the early second millennium AD, if not before.
   However, one cannot ignore the part that trade, both local and external, did
play in the development of urbanization and state formation in this zone. It was
an important factor in the growth and location of cities. Such cities tended to be
located in the northern part of the forest or even in the southern savanna, so that
they were situated at the interface between donkey transport and human
portage. There was also a tendency for them to be located on important trade
routes. In addition, the growth of states within this zone was undoubtedly
stimulated by control of trading resources or of the trade routes. As Law
(1978) showed, for instance, West African rulers in later times drew their
incomes both directly and indirectly from trade. Furthermore, imported com-
modities provided both status symbols to enhance the position of local rulers
and a source of moveable wealth that could be used to reward supporters. It is
little wonder that rulers in the West African forest often insisted that it was their
right to control the trade that was carried on in their territories, particularly
after Europeans drew West Africa into the Atlantic world during the second
half of the second millennium AD. Trade, however, was only one factor in
the appearance of cities and states in the West African forest, and, like other
factors, its origins were probably within that zone rather than external to it.




220
Chapter 8
Indian Ocean networks: the East African
coast and islands
‘Kilwa is one of the most beautiful and well-constructed towns in the world.’
This is how the much-travelled ibn Battuta described, ﬁrst-hand, ‘the principal
town on the [East African] coast’ in 1331. Kilwa (properly called Kilwa
Kisiwani), situated in what is now Tanzania, was no isolated phenomenon.
On the same coast, in what is now Somalia, was Mogadishu, of which
he wrote that it was ‘a very large town’ (Freeman-Grenville 1975: 27–31).
Ibn Battuta represented the scholarly opinion of the fourteenth-century Islamic
world. By the end of the following century there were less-scholarly visitors
from the Christian world of Western Europe, but they also were impressed
with settlements on the East African coast. Thus in 1498, the unknown author
of the Journal of the First Voyage of Vasco da Gama, 1497–1499 compared
‘the town of Malindi’ (now in Kenya) to Alcouchette, a town near Lisbon in
his native Portugal (Freeman-Grenville 1975: 55–6). Indeed, the account of
Vasco da Gama’s second voyage (1502) by Gaspar Correa (written about
1561) describes Kilwa as follows:
  The city is large and is of good buildings of stone and mortar with terraces, and the
  houses have much wood works. The city comes down to the shore, and is entirely
  surrounded by a wall and towers, within which there may be 12,000 inhabitants.
  The country all round is very luxuriant with many trees and gardens of all sorts of
  vegetables, citrons, lemons, and the best sweet oranges that were ever seen, sugar-
  canes, ﬁgs, pomegranates, and a great abundance of ﬂocks, especially sheep, which
  have fat in the tail, which is almost the size of the body, and very savoury. (Freeman-
  Grenville 1975: 66)

The East African settlements would be expected to make a favourable impres-
sion on sailors several months outward bound from Portugal, who had just
endured the eastern Atlantic on a dull if not inadequate diet. Nevertheless,
historical sources such as these demonstrate that settlements of considerable
size had already developed on the East African coast before the middle of the
second millennium AD. Archaeological and oral traditional evidence supports
this conclusion. The problem has been to explain how such a development
took place, a development that was limited to a narrow strip comprising 3,500
kilometres of coastline, from southern Somalia to southern Mozambique and
including various offshore islands, as well as the Comoro Archipelago and
parts of Madagascar.


                                                                                    221
African Civilizations

   The distinctive culture that developed along this coastal strip was at least
partly urban, mercantile, literate, and Islamic. Modern scholars often refer to it
as the ‘Swahili Culture’, because many of the inhabitants are now speakers of
one or another form of ki-Swahili, a north-eastern Bantu language rich in loan
words from Arabic and a number of other languages, although it is uncertain
if the term ‘Swahili’ should be used in contexts earlier than the last few
centuries (Horton and Middleton 2000: 16). Nonetheless, whatever one calls
the developments along this coast prior to the arrival of the Portuguese, they
were clearly impressive. Consequently, it is not surprising that external stimu-
lus was formerly advanced as the most likely explanation for such develop-
ments. Thus we were told that: ‘We should picture this civilization as a remote
outpost of Islam’ (Chittick 1971: 137). Subsequently, however, this ‘colonial-
origins interpretation’ has been rejected (Allen 1993), and archaeological as
well as other evidence has increasingly suggested that the development of the
coastal culture owed more to its African origins than to external inﬂuences,
contributory though these obviously were (Horton 1987a; 1996). So, was the
East African coast merely the edge of the Islamic world, or was it the centre of
an indigenous African development of substantial signiﬁcance? Viewed simply,
the latter now seems the case, but culture change on this coast was highly
complex, as might be expected in such an interaction zone, and Swahili culture
did incorporate both local and foreign elements.


Geographical location and environmental factors
The area with which this chapter is concerned consists of a long narrow
coastal strip and adjacent islands. Extending from about 2 north to about
16 south and perhaps to as much as 24 south, this comprises a large part of
the eastern coast of Africa (Fig. 8.1). Relevant cultural developments seem to
have been mainly restricted to that coast, although there are indications that
the hinterland played a bigger role than is sometimes stated (Pawlowicz 2012;
Kusimba et al. 2013). Nevertheless, the development of social complexity
clearly had a maritime orientation. This situation contrasts with that of West
Africa, discussed in Chapters 6 and 7. In that case, cities and states developed
far from the coast in the northern savanna, before they did so in the forested
coastal region. When such developments did take place in the forest, they were
always inland and often in or near the forest–savanna ecotone. Until the
advent of European sailors in the ﬁfteenth century AD, the coast itself
remained relatively remote and was not the scene of any major cultural
developments. The explanation of this contrast can be found in the different
locations and marine environments of these two coasts. On the West African
coast, the Atlantic Ocean was a barrier rather than a highway, until knowledge

222
                                                The East African coast and islands




Fig. 8.1 Principal archaeological sites and places on the East African coast and islands
mentioned in the text. 1, Aden; 2, Warsheikh; 3, Mogadishu; 4, Lake Naivasha; 5, Bur Gao;
6, Lamu Archipelago; 7, Ungwana; 8, Ras Kipini; 9, Malindi; 10, Mgombani; 11, Gedi;
12, Kilepwa; 13, Mombasa; 14, Vumba Kuu; 15, Mtambwe Mkuu, on Pemba Island;
16, Pujini, on Pemba Island; 17, Dakawa; 18, Unguja Ukuu, on Zanzibar Island;

                                                                                    223
African Civilizations

of the winds improved and changes in sailing technology took place during the
ﬁfteenth century. Only then could European ships both avoid and sail against
the prevailing northerly winds and currents that had previously made it
impossible to return from a visit to this coast (Crosby 1986: 112–14). In
addition, the more environmentally attractive parts of the West African coast
are a long way from Western Europe; a voyage from Lisbon to Ghana, for
instance, would be roughly 5,500 kilometres as indicated by modern marine
distance tables (Caney and Reynolds 1976). The East African coast, on the
other hand, has the great advantage of ease of navigation from coastal south-
ern and western Asia. The winds and currents of the Indian Ocean are seasonal
and reverse their direction every few months. Thus, from December to March
the prevailing wind on the East African coast is the north-easterly monsoon,
but from April until November it is the south-westerly monsoon. This enables
voyages to be made from the southern Arabian coast, the Persian Gulf, and the
north-west coast of the Indian subcontinent. Furthermore, it is possible to
return to such places from the East African coast within the same year. Also,
the length of such a voyage need not be so great as those to the West African
coast; a voyage from southern Arabia to the Kenyan coast, for example, would
be roughly 2,800 kilometres (Caney and Reynolds 1976). Currents also con-
tribute to the ease of navigation to and from East Africa. In particular, the
main Indian Ocean currents ﬂow east–west, reversing each half-year, and thus
make it easier to sail to and from western and southern India, Indonesia, and
South-East Asia. These differences between the west and east coasts of Africa
have had a marked effect on their respective histories. On the west coast,
seaborne contact with the outside world has existed for only 500 years, but
on the east coast such seaborne contact has certainly been a reality for more
than 1,000 years (e.g., Ricks 1970), and, judging by the ﬁrst-century Periplus
of the Erythraean Sea (Casson 1989: 6–7), there was also such contact during
the Roman period. Indeed, since Miller (1969: 145–8) wrote about a Roman
‘Cinnamon Route’ from Indonesia to Madagascar and East Africa, there has
been an increasing acceptance that the Indian Ocean has long been a means of
interaction rather than a barrier for the people living on its rim (Beaujard
2007; Mack 2007). In particular, the remarkable evidence for long-distance
seaborne trade found at Quseir al-Qadim in Egypt, discussed in Chapter 2
(p. 39), has demonstrated this interaction (van der Veen 2011).

Caption for Fig. 8.1 (cont.) 19, Mkadini; 20, Ras Nunge and Kaole; 21, Mkukutu and
Kivinja; 22, Dar es Salaam; 23, Ukunju Cave, on Juani Island close to Maﬁa Island;
24, Kilwa and Sanjé ya Kati; 25, Songo Mnara, on Songo Mnara Island; 26, Nsudjini;
27, Itsandra; 28, M’Bachile; 29, Sima; 30, Domoni; 31, Dembeni and Acoua-Agnala M’kiri;
32, Mahilaka; 33, Murrapania; 34, Antsoheribory; 35, Kingany; 36, Ankadivory;
37, Antananarivo; 38, Sofala; 39, Chibuene; 40, Inhambane. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.


224
                                            The East African coast and islands

   The environment varies along the East African coastal strip, although most
of it belongs to the same vegetational subregion (Sinclair 1991: 181). To its
north, the coast of Somalia from Cape Guardafui to round about Mogadishu
is open, has few harbours, and an arid hinterland. From Mogadishu to near
the present border of Somalia and Kenya, harbours are more numerous, but
the coast is still exposed, hazardous, and somewhat barren. South of the
border of Somalia and Kenya, however, there is a fair rainfall and numerous
natural harbours. Along the northern part of this coast there is also a string of
coral islands, close offshore, known as the Bajun Islands. Between them and
the mainland is a sheltered channel; at their southern end are the islands of the
Lamu Archipelago: Pate, Manda, and Lamu (Fig. 8.2). Only a narrow,
mangrove-fringed channel separates these islands from the mainland, and
from here southwards there is an almost continuous offshore coral reef,
providing protected inshore waters along which there are many small creeks
and harbours. Much of the mainland coast is fringed with mangrove swamps,
but there are also stretches of sandy beach, the foreshores of which shelve so
gradually that at low tide the sea retreats for long distances. The more
protected of these beaches provide ideal landing places. The lightly built sewn
boats that were used along this coast in the past could be anchored on the high
tide and unloaded at low tide while they were high and dry. On the islands
along the coast, fresh water could usually be obtained by digging wells, and
consequently they provided locations for human settlements. To the south, the
large ocean islands of Pemba, Zanzibar, and Maﬁa, less than a day’s voyage
from the mainland, are particularly important, but south of them are the
inshore islands of Kilwa and Songo Mnara and further south again the
Kerimba Archipelago and Mozambique Island, the last islands of the coral
reef. South of the Zambezi estuary the sea is too cold for coral growth; beyond
Inhambane the coast is not relevant (Chittick 1971: 108–9; Garlake 1978a:
95–6). Both the Comoro Islands and parts of Madagascar are, however, and
their inclusion adds further to the range of environments. The former are
volcanic, tropical, and, with the exception of Ngazidja, well watered, whilst
Madagascar is characterized by environmental diversity resulting from altitud-
inal differences and oceanic location.
   The environment of the coastal strip and adjacent islands would have been
attractive to human settlement. Much of the area has a rainfall of about 1,000
millimetres per year, and its maritime, tropical climate has encouraged agri-
culture in areas where there are suitable soils. The character of the coast and
adjacent islands would have stimulated the development of coastal shipping,
and because of the winds and currents of the Indian Ocean, the people of the
East African coast and islands were bound to come into contact with other
maritime peoples. During the ﬁrst and early second millennium AD many

                                                                            225
226




      Fig. 8.2 Principal archaeological sites in the Lamu Archipelago, Kenya.
      Fig. 8.3 East Africa’s place in the Eurasian and African world system during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries AD, before the development
227   of European maritime contact. After Beaujard 2007: ﬁg. 4. Copyright British Institute in Eastern Africa, reproduced with permission.
African Civilizations

ports in East Africa became part of a vast trading network (Fig. 8.3), which
extended as far as South-East Asia and has been called the Eurasian and
African world system (Beaujard 2007).
   In contrast to this narrow coastal strip and islands, the environment of the
interior has been described as relatively unattractive. According to this view,
behind the generally narrow, sandy, often fertile coastal plain, where fresh
water could be found in many places, lies a gently rising belt of dry, scrubby,
savanna bushland, 100 to 200 kilometres in width, difﬁcult to penetrate,
harbouring tsetse ﬂies, and offering little to people adapted to a maritime
environment. Furthermore, there are few permanent rivers, and of these only
the Zambezi, at the southern end of the coastal strip, is navigable for any
distance. Consequently, it has been assumed that, although there was contact
between the coast around Sofala and the Zimbabwe Plateau, there was
little between the Kenya–Tanzania coast and the interior until recent centuries.
However, the idea of an attractive coast and an unattractive hinterland needs
to be questioned (Kusimba et al. 2013). A closer examination indicates a
greater variety of environments, at least in some areas. Thus, in the stretch
of coast and hinterland between Bur Gao (Somalia) and Ras Kipini (Kenya),
Horton (1987a: 292) identiﬁed a range of ecological areas including driest
woodland, riverine woodland, lowland wet forest, coastal swamps, island
savanna, and reefs and littorals. Consequently, within relatively short dis-
tances are pastoralists, agriculturalists, hunter-gatherers, and ﬁshing people,
comprising a wide range of ethnic groups of which the pastoralists and some of
the hunter-gatherers speak Cushitic languages and the farming and ﬁshing
communities speak Bantu languages. Particularly important for East African
coastal societies are the cultivable fertile soils along the lower parts of some of
the coastal rivers, such as the Shibeli and Juba in Somalia, the Tana and
Galana in Kenya, and the Pangani and Ruﬁji in Tanzania.
   The East African coast possessed a variety of resources that must have
played an important part in its cultural developments. By the middle of the
second millennium AD, documentary sources tell us that millet, rice, sorghum,
cocoyam, coconuts, bananas, citrus fruits, pomegranates, ﬁgs, sugarcane, and
vegetables were being grown. Fat-tailed sheep, goats, cattle, and chickens were
raised; ﬁsh and probably other marine foods were exploited; and bees were
kept in hives (Chittick 1971: 136; 1974: vol. 1, 236, 248–51). Amongst the
food plants were a number that had been introduced to Madagascar from
South-East Asia during the ﬁrst millennium AD, including rice, the greater
yam, coconut, and Indian saffron, as well as bananas and taro that had
reached the East African coast at an earlier date (Beaujard 2011). The most
important indigenous African plant foods were probably millet, sorghum, and
a number of vegetables; there is archaeological evidence from the hinterland of

228
                                             The East African coast and islands

the Kenyan coast for the cultivation of Sorghum bicolor (sorghum), Pennise-
tum glaucum (pearl millet), and Eleusine coracana (ﬁnger millet) during the
ﬁrst millennium AD (Helm et al. 2012). Food resources were substantial and
varied, and the environmental diversity of the coast and adjacent areas must
have encouraged an early development of local exchange systems handling
these and other resources (Kusimba et al. 2005; Wright 2005). Indeed, by the
nineteenth century the East African coast was exporting grain, including
sorghum, maize, and sesame (Spear 1978: 81–2). The last two were introduced
to Africa, maize from the Americas in the sixteenth century AD and sesame
from India by the second millennium BC (Bedigian 2003). By the nineteenth
century AD the volume of this trade was probably much greater than in
previous centuries, but it is likely that grain export to the dry lands of southern
Asia had a long history. Records in Aden show that rice was imported there
from Kilwa prior to Portuguese contact, and it is thought that much of the rice
actually came from Madagascar.
  It was with other East African resources, however, that the export trade of
this coast was principally developed. Most important seems to have been
ivory, already mentioned in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea in the ﬁrst
century AD (Casson 1989: 16, 42) and still important in the nineteenth
century (Spear 1978: 81–2). It appears to have been obtainable from the
coast, but some tusks came from deep in the interior (Ylvisaker 1982: 221).
The Periplus also mentions rhinoceros horn and tortoiseshell (actually from
sea turtles) and pearly shell (on the latter, see Chittick 1981: 186). At a later
date there were, in addition, numerous other resources that became import-
ant trade commodities during the ﬁrst half of the second millennium AD.
From Sofala, in the south, came gold and copper, both of which must have
been from the interior. From the Horn of Africa, to the north, came frankin-
cense and myrrh, aromatic gum resins much sought after in some parts of the
world. From more central parts of the East African coast, mangrove poles,
ebony, and perhaps other timbers were exported, as was iron, ambergris, and
sandalwood. Slaves were probably exported from the more northerly parts of
the coast, in the later second millennium AD mainly to markets in Arabia
and the Persian Gulf (Vernet 2003). However, it is likely that the slave
trade from this coast had a long history, judging from the revolt of appar-
ently East African slaves that took place in southern Iraq in the late ninth
century AD (Trimingham 1975: 116–18). Nineteenth-century exports also
included other commodities that are an additional indication of the range
of East African resources. Excluding obviously late introductions, these
comprised copal (a tree resin used in the manufacture of varnish), hides,
wax, hippopotamus teeth, coconuts, orchilla (a vegetable dye), beans, shells,
and livestock (Spear 1978: 82).

                                                                              229
African Civilizations

   Some of these nonfood resources, such as iron, copper, and perhaps ivory,
would have been important for local use as well as for export. Timber would
also have mattered, particularly for building construction and shipbuilding.
In addition, there were other resources that were of local signiﬁcance only
or formed the basis of production for trade with the interior. Thus the coral
reefs and the coral on dry land provided important building materials: both
stone and lime for mortar and plaster. A considerable amount of cotton was
grown on the coast and manufactured locally into cloth. Even silk was pro-
duced. Furthermore, the coast probably produced salt and also made use
of some marine molluscs, either as raw material for beads or, in the case
of cowries, perhaps for decoration, although in this area not as currency
(Hogendorn and Johnson 1986: 102). Various coastal palms provided many
things, including coconuts, wine, rope, matting, and caulking for ships.
Finally, the coast had fresh water, often a problem in the dry hinterland and
so crucial both for human settlements and for ships’ crews anxious to replenish
their supplies.
   With such resources, it is difﬁcult to understand why so many settlement
sites of the ﬁrst half of the second millennium AD were abandoned, in some
cases prior to the arrival of the Portuguese. The main cause was probably
unreliable water supply. In the Lamu Archipelago, for example, the best fresh
water is found in wells closest to the sea, where it ﬂoats on the heavier, salt
water. If the wells are overdrawn or the well shafts made too deep, the supply
becomes salty and unusable. In fact, the wells at the abandoned settlements on
these islands are today salty. As there is little or no surface water on this coast,
the only alternative to such fragile well supply would have been rainwater
cisterns. Another constraint on this coast would have been soil fertility, which
in some places seems to have been poor and could have been damaged by
agricultural exploitation. A range of tropical diseases could have provided
further problems, and perhaps the maritime contacts of this coast complicated
this situation by introducing and reintroducing such diseases as smallpox,
cholera, and plague. There were also other constraints. Problems of overland
communication, particularly with the interior of East Africa, have probably
been exaggerated, but nevertheless it would have been so much easier to move
by boat along the coast that communications would have concentrated around
a coastal axis. The coast-clinging locations of the larger settlements, however,
would have rendered them vulnerable to attack, both by those inland peoples
over whom they had no control and from the sea that brought them so much
of their livelihood. That vulnerability was clearly demonstrated during the
ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries AD by the Galla and the Zimba from inland
and by the Portuguese from the sea.


230
                                              The East African coast and islands

Sources of information
Historical evidence
Compared with West Africa, historical documentation is extensive, commencing
with the ﬁrst-century Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, thought to have been
written by an Egyptian Greek merchant from personal experience and including
an account of the East African coast (Casson 1989: 7–10). Another early source
is Claudius Ptolemy’s Geographia, originally written in about AD 150 but in its
ﬁnal form probably an edited compilation of about AD 400 (Freeman-Grenville
1975: 3). Both of these sources contain information about the East African coast,
but it is difﬁcult to use them and there is no further information until the ninth
and tenth centuries. From then on there is a series of documentary sources, mostly
from Arabic authors (Trimingham 1975) but some from Chinese writers (Wheat-
ley 1975), until the arrival of the Portuguese at the end of the ﬁfteenth century.
Perhaps the most informative of these sources are al-Masudi in the tenth century,
al-Idrisi in the twelfth century, and ibn Battuta in the fourteenth century. None of
these provides the wealth of ethnohistorical evidence in the sixteenth-century
accounts of Portuguese writers, such as the anonymous authors of the Journal of
the First Voyage of Vasco da Gama, 1497–1499 and The Voyage of Pedro
Alvares Cabral to Brazil and India. Other useful early Portuguese sources include
Gaspar Correa’s Lendas da India, João de Barros’s Da Asia and an account
written by Duarte Barbosa (Freeman-Grenville 1975). In addition, there are
many other European sources concerning the last few centuries before colonial
rule, although most date only from the nineteenth century.
   All this historical documentation consists of the writings of outsiders, visitors
to East Africa and some who had never even been there and merely repeated
information that was at best second hand. It is fortunate, therefore, that we also
have the oral traditions of the people who lived in some of the East African
coastal settlements. Best known is the ‘Kilwa Chronicle’, available both as a
sixteenth-century Portuguese version and as an Arabic version that was copied
in Zanzibar in 1862. These record the traditions about Kilwa that were current
in the earlier sixteenth century and give some account of its origins (Chittick
1974: vol. 1, 13–14). There are also a number of other traditional accounts, but
they seem to have been written down only in the nineteenth or early twentieth
century. Perhaps the best known of these is the ‘History of Pate’, written
about 1910 but covering the period back to 1204 (Freeman-Grenville 1975:
preface, 241). Although some of these traditional histories include useful infor-
mation, much of their content consists of myth and genealogy, difﬁcult to use
historically. For example, a substantial literature has grown up on the inter-
pretation of the Kilwa Chronicle story of a ‘Shirazi’ immigration to the East


                                                                               231
African Civilizations

African coast from the Persian Gulf (e.g., Chittick 1965; Allen 1982; Horton
1996: 3; Sutton 1998: 118). Nevertheless, Thomas Spear, on the traditions
of the Mijikenda peoples, and J. de V. Allen, on those about Shungwaya,
demonstrated how some of the inland traditions indicate a greater indigenous
contribution to the coastal culture than the better-known oral histories suggest
(Spear 1978; Allen 1983; 1993). However, neither oral nor documentary
historical sources are able to explain the origins and early development of
the coastal cities and states.


Archaeological evidence
Archaeological investigations on the East African coast commenced shortly
after the Second World War. Substantial research programmes, including
excavation, have been organized by the British Institute in Eastern Africa, based
in Nairobi, by Uppsala University, in Sweden, and by the University of Dar es
Salaam, in Tanzania. Nevertheless, until late in the twentieth century, work
concentrated on sites with stone ruins, rather than looking at these sites in their
overall archaeological context. This resulted from the assumption that the
remarkable stone buildings derived from the cultural inﬂuence of Muslim
immigrants from the Persian Gulf and parts of the Arabian coast, an assumption
that the stone buildings helped to perpetuate. It was admitted that such Arab
immigrants had been integrated with the local people, but it was insisted of the
resulting culture that there was little contributed by Africans. This interpret-
ation of the culture of the East African coast inﬂuenced much of the archaeo-
logical research. While the coastal cities were thought of as semi-alien trading
centres clinging to the edge of the African continent and relevant only as the
periphery of an international trading system, there seemed little point in investi-
gating their relationship with the ‘indigenous’ settlements of the coast or the
interior, nor in bothering about their local antecedents. As a result, much of
the archaeological survey and excavation concentrated on the highly visible
stone ruins of mosques, tombs, and houses (e.g., Kirkman 1954; 1963; 1964;
1966; Garlake 1966; Chittick 1974; Wilson 1978; 1980). There was relatively
little investigation of those parts of settlements built in mud, wood, and thatch
or of those settlements built only of such materials. In addition, the presence of
complex architectural features, of inscriptions, of coins, and of imported glazed
earthenware, porcelain, glassware, and beads tended to focus research on
artefact studies and particularly on the chronology that they provided. By the
1970s and 1980s, however, the emphasis was changing, as some archaeologists
realized the basically indigenous character of the coastal culture and began to
see the cities as part of a process of African social and economic change, rather
than the result of alien colonization (e.g., Horton 1987a; 1996; Wilson 1982).

232
                                                  The East African coast and islands




Fig. 8.4 Plan of Gedi, Kenya. After Pradines (2010: ﬁg. 4). This shows more detail than the
plans in Kirkman (1964: ﬁg. 7) or Pradines (2004: ﬁg. 72). Included are two phases of city
walls and their gates. 1, north gate well (70 metres north of 20); 2, Great mosque, 11th to
14th centuries; 3, dated tomb, 14th century; 4, houses of the dhow and of the double court;
5, North-east Quarter; 6, mosque between the walls; 7, mosque of three bays; 8, eastern
gate; 9, south defensive work; 10, south necropolis; 11, mosque against the south wall;
12, house against the south wall; 13, south-west barred corner; 14, small mosque; 15, large
house with arches; 16, mosque of the sarcophagus; 17, western gate; 18, house against the
west wall; 19, north-west gate; 20, north gate; 21, North-west Quarter; 22, palace and large
pillar tomb; 23, Great mosque, 15th to 16th centuries; 24, south gate; 25, south barred
corner. Reproduced by permission of Stéphane Pradines.

  There are 173 settlement sites with stone ruins between Warsheikh (north
of Mogadishu) and the Tanzania–Mozambique frontier. In addition, there
are relevant sites in Mozambique, the Comoro Archipelago, and northern
Madagascar (Duarte 1993; Wright 1993; Chami 1994), and many sites that lack
stone ruins have not received much attention. While there must be a large number
of sites spread over a great length of coast and its adjacent islands, most of
the archaeological investigations have been on the Kenyan or Tanzanian coasts.

                                                                                       233
African Civilizations

One of the ﬁrst sites to be excavated was the city of Gedi, on the mainland
of Kenya, where Kirkman revealed a skeletal city plan (Kirkman 1954: 185).
He showed the layout of its city walls, which clearly represented two structural
phases: an earlier city of about 18 hectares and a later, smaller city of about
7 hectares (Kirkman 1975: 239). Within the latter were a so-called palace, several
houses, and a number of mosques and tombs. Subsequently, Pradines (2004:
ﬁg. 72; 2010: ﬁg. 4) provided plans of the city that were more detailed (Fig. 8.4),
but even these have extensive empty spaces, many of which must have been
ﬁlled with buildings of mud, wood, and thatch: the houses of the bulk of the
inhabitants. The angular outline of the city walls would suggest that they enclosed
tightly an irregular mass of houses, similar to that at Shanga (Horton 1996:
ﬁgs. 5, 9, and 10), where mud and thatch houses partly surrounded a central
core of stone structures (cf. Figs. 8.4 and 8.5).
   Kirkman’s chronology of Gedi (1975: 237–9) was revised by Pradines
(2004: 205), who identiﬁed ﬁve periods in the city’s history (later revised to
six periods, Pradines 2010: 199, 211), from the eleventh to the beginning of
the seventeenth century. The city attained its greatest size in the late fourteenth
to early ﬁfteenth century, its outer city wall dating from the middle of the
ﬁfteenth to the middle of the sixteenth century and its inner city wall from
the middle of the sixteenth to the beginning of the seventeenth century. Most
of the excavated buildings were of ﬁfteenth-century date, and house plans
(Garlake 1966: 194) throw light on pre-Portuguese social organization. The
coral ragstone houses comprised several narrow oblong rooms, averaging about
2.4 metres wide, the maximum rafter span. The basic plan both at Gedi and in
other coastal settlements consisted of two of these long narrow rooms, one
behind the other in parallel, with the ﬁrst one fronting an enclosed courtyard
and the rear one opening into two or three smaller rooms behind. None of these
rooms had windows, but sometimes there was another courtyard behind the
smaller rooms. Probably each house was intended for a separate family, with the
rooms providing a graded privacy: most public in the front courtyard, most
private in the back rooms. The stone houses in archaeological sites such as Gedi
are in the same tradition as the mostly eighteenth-century, stone-built mansions
of Lamu, some of which are still occupied (Ghaidan 1976; Donley 1987). This
would suggest that by the ﬁfteenth century there already existed a class of
cultured, wealthy, mercantile urbanites (similar to those later known as the
wa-ungwana). They reinforced their position by reserving to themselves the
right to build their houses in stone, thus making use of what Linda Donley
called ‘house power’ (Donley 1982; Donley-Reid 1990). The Gedi house plans
suggest that a number of such families sometimes built their houses in interlock-
ing groups, each group representing a distinct lineage or kin. Such people seem
to have lived at a level of material comfort higher than that of most of their

234
235   Fig. 8.5 Plan of Shanga, Kenya. The broken line indicates the limits of the settlement. Note the areas of mud and thatch buildings as
      well as those of stone. After Horton 1996: ﬁg. 5. Copyright British Institute in Eastern Africa, reproduced with permission.
African Civilizations

contemporaries. Houses had plastered walls, indoor latrines, washplaces with
bidets, underﬂoor soakaways, and rainwater drains. Indeed, at Gedi one group
of houses was identiﬁed by Kirkman as a palace. With its monumental arched
entrance and its generous provision of courtyard space, this might well represent
the houses of a particular lineage which, having become the hereditary ruling
family, had adapted its dwellings to suit its new status.
   Kirkman also excavated at other sites in Kenya and Tanzania. One was
Ungwana, a walled city of about 18 hectares on the northern Kenyan coast
near the estuary of the River Tana (Kirkman 1966). Kirkman concentrated on
the mosques and tombs, although the ruins of stone houses were present.
According to his plan, however, extensive areas of this city were empty space
(Kirkman 1966: 71); as with Gedi, it seems likely that much of this space
must have been ﬁlled with buildings of mud, wood, and thatch. Apparently,
Kirkman’s excavation strategy was not designed for this possibility. Thus at
Kilepwa, a small thirteenth- to sixteenth-century settlement near Gedi, the
remains consisted of a small mosque, two pillar tombs, and a group of houses.
According to Kirkman, this was just a family unit, yet we are told that ‘sherds
of sgrafﬁato [imported glazed earthenware of eleventh- and twelfth-century
date] were found all over the site, so it may have had a large population in the
pre-building period’ (Kirkman 1975: 239–40). To this excavator, it seems, a
building that was not made of stone was not a building.
   Buildings of mud, wood, and thatch must have constituted a large part of
some settlements on the East African coast and islands, as some archaeologists
have recognized (Fleisher and LaViolette 1999). If this was the case, the
indigenous African contribution to the growth of these settlements is likely
to have been important. For example, the town of Songo Mnara, on the island
of that name off the Tanzanian coast, must have consisted of more structures
than just a collection of stone houses, a so-called palace, and several mosques,
within a large walled area. These, after all, appear to have been recorded
without excavation (Garlake 1966: ﬁg. 74). Similarly, at Kilwa (Sutton
1998), in the same area, where there have been extensive excavations, the city
site covers about 1 square kilometre but the stone ruins consist of only a scatter
of structures. As its excavator admitted: ‘Many, and perhaps most, of the
buildings at Kilwa, even at the height of its prosperity, were built of mud-and-
wattle, evidently in a similar style to that which can be seen on the coast today’
(Chittick 1974: vol. 1, 24). However, it appears that the ratio of buildings of
stone to buildings of less permanent materials varied from site to site. For
instance, the ﬁnal phases of Shanga, abandoned in the ﬁfteenth century and
comprising a town of 8.68 hectares on the shore of Pate Island (Kenya),
probably consisted mainly of stone structures, which took up 6.57 hectares
of the occupied area (Fig. 8.5). The three mosques, approximately 400 tombs

236
                                                The East African coast and islands




Fig. 8.6 Plan of Takwa, Kenya. After Wilson 1982: ﬁg. 2, revised on his advice.


outside the town, other tombs within the town, and about 220 houses were all
built of stone, leaving some but not much space for buildings of other materials
(Horton 1996: 33, 38, 63). Another case is Takwa, a town probably occupied
from the tenth to the seventeenth century (Abungu and Mutoro 1993: 695).
Situated near the shore of the Kenyan island of Manda, the ﬁnal phases of

                                                                                  237
African Civilizations

this stone-built walled town of a little over 4 hectares contained a mosque,
a well, and 137 other structures, most of which were probably houses
(Fig. 8.6). Allowing for open spaces for gardens and markets, or cemeteries
and public performances, as has been suggested for Songo Mnara (Fleisher and
Wynne-Jones 2012; Fleisher 2013), there were still some empty areas that
could have contained mud, wood, and thatch buildings, but they were limited
(Wilson 1982). In contrast to Shanga and Takwa, the stone remains at Dondo,
on the coast of the Kenyan mainland close to Pate Island, consist of only two
mosques, two wells, two groups of tombs, and two structures suspected to be
Portuguese. The excavator of this site concluded that this unwalled town, of
about 5 hectares, was occupied between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries
by people of sufﬁcient wealth to build lavish tombs and two mosques who
were, nevertheless, living in nonstone structures (Horton 1996: 23–4).
Geophysical survey of such sites, as at Vumba Kuu, in Kenya (Wynne-Jones
2012), has the potential to provide more information about them, particularly
if followed by excavation.
   If mud, wood, and thatch buildings meant indigenous contribution, does this
imply that stone buildings meant alien contribution? At one time many writers
thought so; now the question is more difﬁcult to answer. Garlake, seeking
the origins of the architectural styles of the stone buildings, found various
parallels in different parts of South-West Asia but came to the conclusion that
before the eighteenth century the architectural style of the coast was, ‘to a large
extent, indigenous to the coast’ (Garlake 1966: 116). Clearly, alien inﬂuences
might be seen in the fourteenth-century palace and commercial centre of
Husuni Kubwa, just outside the city of Kilwa, with its audience court, open-
sided pavilion, bathing pool, domed and vaulted roofs, and Arabic inscrip-
tions. The same might be said of the nearby site of Husuni Ndogo, a large
rectangular enclosure that could have been a mosque, a market, a barracoon
(an enclosure for slaves), or possibly (Sutton 1998: 157) a caravanserai for
visiting merchants and their servants. These sites, however, are exceptional,
and the stone buildings of the coast and islands have a far wider range of
quality. Thus, Takwa consisted mainly of small stone houses not much better
than those of mud and thatch. Indeed, as already argued, stone buildings were
only one aspect of these coastal settlements. Thomas Wilson showed that
coastal sites in southern Somalia and Kenya could be subdivided into ﬁve
classes, based on their size, ranging from more than 15 hectares to less than 2.5
hectares. Signiﬁcantly, the smaller sites tended to have fewer buildings built of
stone and tended to lack stone-built houses (Wilson 1982). So stone buildings
were an integral part of an overall settlement pattern, rather than the major
features of coast-clinging cities of alien merchants. Moreover, when that
settlement pattern is analysed for location and date, it appears that this

238
                                           The East African coast and islands

supposedly coast-clinging culture has 30 percent of the southern Somalian,
Kenyan, and Tanzanian sites located in places that have poor or no harbours
(including six that are actually inland), and it seems that although Swahili
society became overwhelmingly sea oriented, it might have been less so in
earlier centuries.
  The signiﬁcance of building in stone is bound up with the question of the
origin of these coastal settlements. Ceramics excavated at Ras Hafun, near
Cape Guardafui in the far north of Somalia, indicate trading contacts with
the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, and perhaps South Asia as early as the ﬁrst
century BC, and with the Persian Gulf and South Asia in the second to ﬁfth
centuries AD (Smith and Wright 1988). Nevertheless, the earliest substantial
indications of trading settlements further south on the East African coast
belong to the last quarter of the ﬁrst millennium AD. In spite of the mention
in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea of an East African port called Rhapta, it
has not been possible to identify this early-ﬁrst-millennium site (Datoo 1970),
which was most likely in the Ruﬁji Delta region (Chami 1999a: 210).
However, potsherds from Ukunju Cave, on Juani Island close to Maﬁa Island,
near the Ruﬁji Delta, have suggested contact with India, South-East Asia, and
the Red Sea during the ﬁrst millennium BC and the ﬁrst millennium AD. In
addition, four glass beads of Roman origin have been recovered from an
approximately fourth-century AD deposit at Mkukutu in the Ruﬁji Delta
(Chami 1999b), and two sherds of Roman pottery were found in a ﬁfth-
century AD context at Unguja Ukuu on the island of Zanzibar (Juma 1996).
Nevertheless, none of the supposed discoveries of early-ﬁrst-millennium coins
on this coast is thought to be reliable.
  Kilwa was an early trading settlement; its excavator Neville Chittick thought
that its occupation commenced about AD 800. Dating the various excavated
‘periods’ was partly from imported ceramics, indicating that the settlement had
overseas trading contacts from its beginning. In Period Ia (ninth century to
about 1000) buildings were at ﬁrst lacking and were then in mud and thatch
with a little coral stone used with mud mortar. Similar buildings were found in
Period Ib (about 1000 to late twelfth century). It was only in Period II (late
twelfth to late thirteenth century) that the ﬁrst substantial building in lime-
mortared stone occurred, but Sutton (1998: 166) thought this began 150 or
200 years earlier. This period was when the ﬁrst coins appeared. It was not
until Periods IIIa and IIIb (late thirteenth century to about 1400, and about
1400 to about 1500, respectively) that the ﬂoruit of stone building occurred.
Chittick thought that the earliest settlement was a pre-Islamic ﬁshing village,
with Islam beginning to arrive in Period Ib and becoming ﬁrmly established by
Period II, by which time ‘Kilwa had become a substantial and prosperous
town’ (Chittick 1974: vol. 1, 18–19, 28–9, 235–41). Thus the early evidence

                                                                           239
African Civilizations

at Kilwa suggests the gradual development of both building techniques and
settlement complexity, rather than any sudden arrival of these cultural
characteristics from outside.
   Another early settlement is Manda, on the island of the same name in the
Lamu Archipelago. This was also excavated by Chittick and showed the
existence of a town as early as the ninth century, occupied until perhaps
the nineteenth century. Again, there was evidence of overseas trade from the
beginning of the settlement, but in this case buildings of both mud, wood, and
thatch and of stone were constructed from the start, the stonework of the latter
sometimes being set in lime mortar, sometimes in red earth. There were also
‘sea walls’, some of which were of massive masonry that was set without
mortar. In addition, unique on the East African coast, there were structures
made of burnt bricks set in mud mortar, and it was suggested that these could
have been imported from the Persian Gulf, perhaps as ships’ ballast. Chittick
concluded that immigrants from the Persian Gulf founded the town and that at
least some of the inhabitants were Muslim from the settlement’s beginning
(Chittick 1971; 1984). This made Manda an exception, compared with similar
sites on the East African coast, and Horton (1986) convincingly challenged
Chittick’s conclusions. The earliest stone buildings were shown to be later than
the excavator had thought and to be inﬂuenced from the Red Sea rather than
the Persian Gulf. However, later excavations at the town site of Sanjé ya Kati,
near Kilwa, dating from AD 950 to 1250, did produce evidence for the arrival
of people from the Persian Gulf who, it was argued, contributed to urban
development on the East African coast (Pradines 2009).
   Only 15 kilometres from Manda is the town site of Shanga, on Pate Island.
Excavations over nine years made Shanga (Fig. 8.5) of major importance for
the origins of urbanism on the East African coast. Its excavator, Mark Horton,
established a building sequence from mud, wood, and thatch to stone, with
imported ceramics throughout. This sequence extends from the late eighth
century to the beginning of the ﬁfteenth; mud mortar and stone buildings ﬁrst
appeared in the tenth century and lime-mortared stone buildings not until the
twelfth century, becoming more important by the fourteenth century. It seems
that the primary occupation at Shanga was non-Islamic, but there are remains
of mosques from the end of the eighth century onwards. The sequence at this
site suggests the indigenous origins of coastal culture, and the ten stages
identiﬁed during the excavation of its central area show the evolution of the
settlement over a period in excess of 600 years (Horton 1996).
   Other coastal sites appear to have had an early origin. Mogadishu was
occupied by the eleventh century AD (Broberg 1995; Dualeh 1996), Mombasa
by about 1000 (Sassoon 1980), and Pate by about 800 (Wilson 1982: 214–15;
Wilson and Lali Omar 1997: 63); in the Lamu Archipelago there are eleven

240
                                               The East African coast and islands




Fig. 8.7 Examples of Triangular Incised Ware sherds from the Tanzanian coast and
hinterland. After Chami 1994: ﬁg. 9.


sites with probable occupation in the ninth century (Horton 1986: 204). In
addition, an archaeological study of the cultural landscape concentrating on
the Tanzanian sites of Kilwa and Kaole produced evidence as early as the sixth
century AD (Pollard 2008). Even more remarkable, because it is so far south
on the Mozambique coast, is Chibuene, an occupation site belonging to the
last quarter of the ﬁrst millennium AD that contained imported Islamic glazed
wares as well as glass beads and bottle fragments (Sinclair 1982; 1987: 86–91,
168; 1991: 190, 216; Sinclair et al. 2012: 734). Thus, early sites are so widely
distributed that one would have to postulate a huge migration from southern
Asia to attribute their simultaneous development to external stimulus. Such
stimulus doubtless existed, but its relative unimportance is indicated by the
very small percentage of imported wares in excavated sites (0.2 percent in
Period Ia at Kilwa (Chittick 1974: vol. 2, 302)). Most of the recovered sherds
are of indigenous wares, and in the earliest periods there is general uniformity
amongst pottery from widely separated areas, although some regional diver-
sity is present (Fleisher and Wynne-Jones 2011).

                                                                                   241
African Civilizations

   This pottery (Fig. 8.7) is known as ‘Triangular Incised Ware’ (TIW) (Chami
1994), previously called ‘Early Kitchen Ware’ (Chittick 1974: vol. 2, 320–2;
1984: 109–18) and also referred to as pottery of ‘the Tana tradition’ (Horton
1987a: 315–17) or ‘early Tana Tradition’ (ETT) (Fleisher and Wynne-Jones
2011: 246, footnote). It has been found on many coastal sites dating to the
tenth century and earlier, extending from Somalia to southern Mozambique,
and on the Comoro Islands and in northern Madagascar. Similar pottery has
also been found inland, particularly along river valleys such as that of the Tana
River in Kenya, where it has been recorded 250 kilometres upstream (Abungu
1995). In addition, it has been excavated from some of the Mijikenda kaya
sites of the coastal hinterland in Kenya (Mutoro 1994–5). There has been
disagreement about the antecedents of this pottery. Horton (1987a: 315–17;
1996: 410–11) and Abungu (1995: 253–5) preferred an ancestry in ‘Pastoral
Neolithic’ pottery made by Cushitic pastoralists of the interior, whereas Chami
(1994: 94–8; 1995) has seen its origins in ‘Early Iron Age’, or what he calls
‘Early Iron-Working’ (EIW) wares produced by Bantu agriculturalists. The
presence of Triangular Incised Ware, in ﬁrst-millennium AD contexts on the
East African coast, argues strongly for an indigenous origin for the settlements
concerned. This probability is strengthened by the work of Chami and
Msemwa (1997) on the central coast of Tanzania, investigating sites dating
from the ﬁrst to the seventh century AD. They found evidence of Early Iron-
Working farmers both on the coast and islands and in the interior, with
Triangular Incised Ware clearly overlying Early Iron-Working pottery at the
important site of Kivinja that dates to the ﬁfth and sixth centuries. Also at that
site were imported ceramics from the Middle East and glass from the Graeco-
Roman world, showing that both local and transoceanic trade had already
developed by the middle of the ﬁrst millennium. Conﬁrmation of this is
provided by other sites, such as Unguja Ukuu, on Zanzibar Island, where
again both forms of indigenous pottery have been found, in conjunction with
imports dating from the ﬁfth to seventh centuries from India, the Middle East,
and even Roman sources. Indeed, both Triangular Incised Ware and Early
Iron-Working pottery were also found at an eighth-century site near Dakawa,
some 200 kilometres inland from Dar es Salaam on the Tanzanian coast, along
with indications of substantial iron production (Haaland 1994–5). Increas-
ingly, therefore, archaeological evidence is providing veriﬁcation of the pre-
Islamic origins of the East African trading network.
   That network also included the Comoro Archipelago and Madagascar.
The commencement of settlement was most likely in about the eighth century
in the Comoro Islands (Sinclair 1995: 101–2; Allibert and Vérin 1996), but the
earliest known settlement in Madagascar was in the early or middle ﬁrst millen-
nium AD, although there are traces by the third century BC (Mitchell 2004).

242
                                             The East African coast and islands

Linguistic evidence indicates that Malagasy, the most commonly spoken
language in Madagascar, has its closest relatives in Indonesia (Adelaar 1996;
Blench 2007), but archaeology has been unable to conﬁrm the arrival of people
from there (Dewar and Wright 1993; Wright 1993: 659), and it seems likely that
settlers from the East African coast were also important (Dewar 1996; Beaujard
2011). By the late ﬁrst millennium AD, iron-using villagers on the Comoro
Islands, whose basic subsistence depended on ﬁshing and domesticated animals
and plants, were also trading with the Persian Gulf, East Asia, and the coast of
East Africa, as shown by ceramics, glass beads, and glass vessels recovered from
their sites (Wright 1984). Best known is Dembeni, a large village of mud, wood,
and thatch buildings on the island of Maore (also known as Mayotte), its
earliest occupation dating from about AD 850 to 880, and a later one from
about the tenth to eleventh centuries (Allibert et al. 1990). Subsequent excav-
ation has shown that from the ninth to the twelfth centuries this settlement
received a variety of imported ceramics from Persian, Chinese, and Islamic
sources, apparently mainly in exchange for rock crystal, a valuable commodity
traded from Madagascar from where vessels of chlorite-schist (sometimes
described as soapstone) were also obtained. Rock crystal was important in
international trade because of its beauty and religious and mystical properties.
Widely exchanged, it reached many distant places, including Europe (Pradines
2013). The occupants of settlements such as Dembeni were probably also
supplying tortoiseshell, marine shell, and other commodities for the Indian
Ocean trade. The presence of Triangular Incised Ware indicates contact with
the East African coast, just as the rock crystal and chlorite-schist show connec-
tions with Madagascar. Furthermore, the bones of house mice in several Dem-
beni Phase sites suggest that some of the ships visiting the Comoros were large,
long-distance vessels (Wright 1992: 84–5). As Sinclair (1995: 101) claimed, the
Comoro Islands ‘were signiﬁcant hubs of the western Indian Ocean trading
systems’. In origin, these developments were pre-Islamic, but Islam gradually
became established as the settlements increased in size; the towns of Sima and
Domoni, on the island of Nzwani, grew to about 8 hectares during the eleventh
to thirteenth centuries (Wright 1992: 124). Excavations at Acoua-Agnala
M’Kiri, on the northwest coast of Maore (Mayotte) Island, have revealed
a walled settlement that participated in the western Indian Ocean trade between
the twelfth and ﬁfteenth centuries, providing a port of call for ships sailing from
Madagascar to the Swahili coast (Pauly 2013). By the eighteenth century
the Comoros seem to have been characterized by fortiﬁed towns, such as
Itsandra and Ntsudjini on Ngazidja Island, which controlled adjacent territories
(Dahalani 1992).
   Archaeological research has also traced the process of urbanization and state
formation in some parts of Madagascar. By the 1850s both developments were

                                                                              243
244




      Fig. 8.8 Antananarivo, Madagascar, in the 1850s, showing a royal procession passing along its eastern side. From Ellis 1859: 365.
                                             The East African coast and islands

advanced, as recorded by the Reverend William Ellis (1859) during his visits
(Fig. 8.8). Amongst early archaeological evidence is that from Kingany on the
north-west coast of Madagascar, a town site with stone ruins that seems to
have been occupied from the ninth or tenth century AD to about the sixteenth
century, and some of whose inhabitants participated in the Indian Ocean trade
(Vérin 1986: 161–7). Subsequently, a town on the island of Antsoheribory, in
the same area, was occupied from the late sixteenth to the early eighteenth
century and has evidence of trading contacts with the Near East, the Far
East, and Europe (Wright et al. 1996: 55–66). Another early town site is
Mahilaka, further north along the same coast. Occupied from the tenth to
the ﬁfteenth century, this site had a walled area of more than 60 hectares,
within which were a few stone structures but many others of less permanent
materials (Wright 1993: 668; Radimilahy 1998). Mahilaka had wide trading
connections, possibly exporting rock crystal, chlorite-schist and gold, as
well as mangrove wood, copal, tortoiseshell, and slaves. Rat bones from the
site suggest plague, brought to the island by visiting ships, as one possible
cause of the town’s abandonment (Radimilahy 1998: 110, 202–6, 208–11).
However, it was in the central highlands that most sociopolitical develop-
ments took place, leading to the emergence of the Merina state by the
eighteenth century (Crossland 2001). Ankadivory, near present-day Antana-
narivo, is one of many ditched settlements in this area and has been dated
to about the thirteenth century. It has also produced evidence that by that
time even inland Madagascar was in contact with the Indian Ocean
trade (Wright and Rakotoarisoa 1990: 28–9; Sinclair 1991: 196–8), in which
slaves from the Comoro Islands and Madagascar became particularly import-
ant from the sixteenth century onwards (Vernet 2003).
   As research has progressed, attention has been given to the overall layout of
Swahili towns, rather than concentrating on stone buildings. Prospecting
techniques such as geophysical survey as at Kilwa (Fleisher et al. 2012), or a
combination of geophysical survey, geochemical testing, and geoarchaeology
as at Songo Mnara (Fleisher 2013: 271), are revealing more information about
the towns and their contexts.


Subsistence economy
Archaeologists have sometimes neglected the subject of subsistence in this part
of Africa, and John Mack (2007: 8) pointed out that in a maritime context
such as this ‘trade was itself subsistence’. Nevertheless, archaeological evidence
for people’s food resources is essential if we are to understand their socio-
economic situation. For example, the cultivation of sorghum in the eleventh
and twelfth centuries is attested by the recovery of carbonized sorghum from a

                                                                             245
African Civilizations

layer attributed to Period Ib at Kilwa (Chittick 1974: vol. 1, 52–3). Also the
early deposits at Kilwa produced evidence for the eating of ﬁsh and shellﬁsh,
while a well dated to the late thirteenth to fourteenth centuries contained the
mandible of an immature camel (Chittick 1974: vol. 1, 28, 43, 98).
   There is evidence from Chibuene for sheep, cattle, ﬁsh, and shellﬁsh in the
lower occupation level, dating from about AD 600 to 1000, although there
are no indications of plant husbandry (Sinclair 1982: 152, 162; 1987: 88;
1991: 190, 216; Sinclair et al. 2012). Also Badenhorst et al. (2011) reported
livestock, chickens, and wild animals, with ﬁsh, turtle, and shark most
common. At Shanga botanical evidence is lacking but the faunal record is
substantial; seafood seems to have been important and included ﬁsh of reef,
inshore, and (rarely) deep-sea type; dugong; turtles; and shellﬁsh. In addition,
there were cattle, sheep, goats, camels, and chickens; cats and dogs were also
kept. The hunting of wild animals contributed a small part of the diet.
Signiﬁcantly, the black rat was present, suggesting relatively dense human
occupation and, as a vector of bubonic plague, perhaps one of the causes for
the eventual abandonment of the site. Probably a mixed economy was prac-
tised at Shanga, although the absence of plant food evidence is a problem
(Horton and Mudida 1993; Horton 1996: 378–93). Excavations at Manda
suggested a similar subsistence economy, with evidence of sheep or goat, cattle,
domestic fowl, and domesticated cat. In addition, dugong, turtles, and ﬁsh
were exploited. Camel was present and a little game was hunted. Again, this
site lacks evidence for plant food (Chittick 1984: 215). Fortunately, there is
evidence from Mgombani, some 16 kilometres from the Kenyan coast, for the
cultivation of Sorghum bicolor (sorghum), Pennisetum glaucum (pearl millet),
and Eleusine coracana (ﬁnger millet) during the ﬁrst millennium AD (Helm
et al. 2012). The authors described this as ‘the ﬁrst signiﬁcant evidence for
early agriculture on the Kenyan coast’.
   Excavations at Dembeni, Old Sima, and M’Bachile in the Comoro Islands
provided more information on diet. There was substantial use of ﬁsh, particu-
larly from the coral reefs; turtles and some wild animals and birds were
hunted; and domesticated sheep or goats were kept, most probably goats.
There was also botanical evidence for the cultivation of rice (Oryza sativa),
millet (possibly Setaria), coconut (Cocos nucifera) and sesame (Sesamum cf.
indicum) (Wright 1984: 48–54; Allibert et al. 1990: 153). The site of Mahi-
laka, in Madagascar, provided evidence of rice cultivation and the use of
coconut; the keeping of cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, chickens, guinea fowl, and
ducks; and the hunting of wild animals and birds; as well as ﬁshing, turtle
catching, and shellﬁsh gathering (Radimilahy 1998: 195–9). The approxi-
mately thirteenth-century site of Ankadivory produced evidence for the keep-
ing of cattle in the central highlands of Madagascar (Sinclair 1991: 196).

246
                                           The East African coast and islands

  It seems that by late in the ﬁrst millennium AD, when the earliest identiﬁable
coastal cities and towns were settled (earlier sites could have been lost to
coastline changes), there already existed a mixed economy exploiting the
resources of both sea and land. Fishing and livestock husbandry could have
provided ample animal protein, and plant food must have made a signiﬁcant
contribution to the diet. In particular, it is likely that plants originating in
South-East Asia, introduced during the ﬁrst millennium, played an important
role. Asian rice, the greater yam, coconut, and Indian saffron were probably
brought to Madagascar by settlers from Indonesia at that time; bananas, taro,
and other yams had probably reached the East African coast from a similar
source at an earlier date (Beaujard 2011). Shepherd (1982) argued that the
southern end of the East African coast, particularly the Comoro Islands,
played an important early role in the development of the coastal culture. If
this was so, then perhaps the enhancement of the coastal subsistence economy
by the South-East Asian food plants was a factor in the growth of the coastal
settlements. Rather than being peripheral to the African coast, Madagascar
and the Comoro Islands might have been a gateway for new ideas. Whether or
not this was so, it is clear that by the second half of the ﬁrst millennium AD,
the subsistence economy of the East African coast must have been producing
a surplus adequate to support increasing social complexity.


Technology
Archaeological evidence from East African coastal and island sites indicates
considerable technological sophistication, although it is uncertain how much of
it was of foreign origin rather than indigenous. Particularly important was
metalworking. Iron was both smelted and forged, and evidence of one or both
processes occurred, often at an early date, at Kilwa, Manda, Shanga, and
Chibuene, as well as at Dembeni and Old Sima in the Comoro Islands, and at
Mahilaka in Madagascar. Kusimba (1999: 101–7) emphasized the role of iron
working on the Swahili coast, and indeed the twelfth-century writer al-Idrisi
mentioned iron as an important export commodity (Horton 1996: 416). Prob-
ably smelting was usually in the hinterland, where more wood was available for
fuel; the inland site of Dakawa had evidence of iron smelting as early as the
seventh to ninth century AD (Haaland 1994–5). In addition, some of the coastal
sites produced evidence of working in copper or copper-base alloy, in the form
of slag or of crucibles with metal traces, and there are also indications that
gold, silver, and lead were sometimes worked (Chittick 1974; 1984; Wright
1984; Sinclair 1987; Horton 1996; Radimilahy 1998). Metal artefacts seem
to have been manufactured on the coast and islands, but it was the minting of
coins that was most notable. These have been recovered from many coastal sites,

                                                                           247
African Civilizations

being produced at Kilwa, Maﬁa, Zanzibar, Mogadishu, and perhaps other
places. Usually they were of copper or copper-base alloy, like the more than
300 coins from a deposit excavated at Songo Mnara that is attributed to the end
of the fourteenth or very early ﬁfteenth century (Perkins et al. 2014). However,
more than half of the coins found at Shanga are of silver (Brown 1996), and most
of the more than 2,000 coins in the eleventh-century hoard found at Mtambwe
Mkuu on Pemba Island are of silver (Horton et al. 1986). Also from East African
coastal sites are less common coins from other parts of the Islamic world and
even from China, with most of the gold coins coming from the former.
  The most remarkable aspect of East African coastal technology, however,
was building. As well as working in timber, mud, and thatch, considerable
skills were developed in the construction of stone buildings. Coral was
quarried, either from offshore reefs or on land; Horton (1996: 26–7) distin-
guished between well-coursed walls of dressed pieces of Porites solida, from
the ﬁrst source, and rougher walls of coral rag from the second. Traces of
quarrying for both materials have been found near Shanga, and those for
Porites coral are underwater, implying knowledge of underwater quarrying
(Horton 1986: 206). Intertidal quarrying was also carried out, as at Ras
Nunge, near the site of Kaole in Tanzania, although for ‘cemented shelly
sandstone’, not coral (Pollard (2008: 180, ﬁgs 7.6 and 7.36). Both types of
coral walling could be bonded with mud or lime mortar, the latter obtained




Fig. 8.9 Section through the Small Domed Mosque, Kilwa. After Garlake 1966: ﬁg. 14.


248
                                            The East African coast and islands

by burning coral and mixing sand with the lime produced. Several approxi-
mately thirteenth-century lime kilns were found at Kilwa (Chittick 1974:
vol. 1, 39–43). The use of lime mortar seems to have become more common
with time; plaster for internal wall surfaces and rendering for external
surfaces also had a lime base. Some stone structures were high, and scaffold-
ing, presumably with lashed mangrove poles, seems to have been used. Roofs
consisted usually of mangrove rafters, stone, and lime mortar but could
also be supported with columns and beams or consist of vaults or domes
(Fig. 8.9). Doors and windows usually had ﬁtted woodwork; most houses
possessed internal latrines and washing places; and drainage was provided
both inside and outside some buildings (Garlake 1966). Wells were dug
to provide convenient water supplies. This implies functional specialization:
there must have been quarrymen, lime burners, stone masons, plasterers, and
carpenters, as well as others. In addition, some knowledge of architecture
was obviously present. Whatever the contributions to this overall expertise
from alien sources, the bulk of the actual work was surely done by local
craftsmen, and it is signiﬁcant that the so-called pillar tomb, that is common
on the East African coast, has no known parallels elsewhere.
  An important part of coastal technology must have been boat building,
although there is as yet no archaeological evidence for this. Nevertheless, the
Periplus of the Erythraean Sea recorded sewn boats on this coast nearly 2,000
years ago (Casson 1989: 9), and the Portuguese remarked on them at the end
of the ﬁfteenth century (Ravenstein 1898: 26). All the materials needed to
construct these boats were available on the East African coast, and it is likely
that the dau la mtepe and the mtepe, with their sewn hulls and matting sails,
were often built there. Although we have few details of how they were built
(Prins 1982), grafﬁti of such boats, scratched into the wall plaster of houses
and mosques along the coast, show how important they must have been
(Chittick 1974: vol. 2, 266–7). Boats constructed in this manner stand up well
to the frequent strandings necessary on much of the eastern coast. It is
apparent that some of them were of considerable size: in 1866 David Living-
stone had one loaded with ‘six camels, three buffaloes, and a calf, two mules,
and four donkeys’ (Waller 1874: vol. 1, 9). Furthermore, it seems that the
people of the East African coast had not only developed the skills to build these
boats but also knew how to use them. Evidence of contact between Madagas-
car, the Comoro Islands, and the East African coast, as well as with South and
South-East Asia, implies a substantial knowledge of seamanship.
  Of the other crafts practised on the coast, probably the most important was
spinning and weaving cotton cloth, suggested by the number of spindle whorls
which occur in contexts dated to the ﬁrst half of the second millennium (e.g.,
Horton 1996: 337–41). Seawater was evaporated to produce salt, an activity

                                                                            249
African Civilizations

for which there is some evidence at Mkadini on the Tanzanian coast. In
addition, ivory and bone were carved and shell beads made, as well as beads
of rock crystal and carnelian (e.g., Horton 1996: 323, 332–3, 346–7, 349–50).
A range of pottery included some with complex painted patterns and included
lamps (Chittick 1974). Of particular interest is evidence from Mahilaka that
indicates glass-bead manufacture, probably by melting broken glass from
imported items (Radimilahy 1998: 184, plate 7.1d, h, j, k), and the possibility
exists of similar activity at Shanga (Horton 1996: 332).


Social system
Archaeological evidence for social organization includes many settlements, some
of them walled, ranging from villages to cities. The use of stone for some
buildings has left clear indications of the character of urbanization prior to
Portuguese contact. This was a society where many people lived in towns or
cities but where many remained in the rural areas in villages, and there has been
discussion of the relationship of urban and rural settlements (LaViolette and
Fleisher 2005: 339–43). The level of functional specialization was probably
higher in larger settlements, with most of the inhabitants of smaller settlements
engaged in primary production. In addition, the degree of social stratiﬁcation
seems to have been greater in the larger settlements. This is suggested by the
range in quality and size of the houses, both within the settlements and between
different settlements. At the bottom end of the scale were mud, wood, and
thatch buildings, about which less is known, although the excavations at Shanga
have shed some light on them (Horton 1996: 235–42). Above these were small
stone houses of one to three rooms, like those at Takwa (Wilson 1982: ﬁg. 2),
but with the larger houses provided with latrines. Higher again were multi-
roomed houses with an enclosed courtyard, like some of those at Songo Mnara
(Garlake 1966: ﬁg. 74). At the top of the scale were large multiroomed houses
with multiple courtyards and monumental features, such as imposing entrances,
like the so-called palace at Gedi (Kirkman 1963: ﬁg. 2).
   This is an example of social and economic stratiﬁcation apparent in arch-
aeological evidence. A society is suggested that ranged from ruling merchant
princes at the top to wealthy merchants to successful artisans to slaves or
lowly menials. There are also signs that social differentiation became more
marked with time. For example, building in mud, wood, and thatch was at
ﬁrst usual, but building in stone gradually became more common.
Furthermore, the so-called palaces of Gedi and Songo Mnara probably
originated as interlocking houses belonging to one extended family. These
could have been subsequently transformed into a ‘palace’ by the addition of
monumental features, when the head of that family became the hereditary

250
                                             The East African coast and islands

ruler of the settlement (p. 236). An indication of the status to which some of
these rulers eventually aspired is given by the coins bearing their names,
particularly during the twelfth to fourteenth centuries. Indeed, at least
one ruler seems to have been outstandingly ambitious, if the luxury of the
‘palace’ of Husuni Kubwa at Kilwa is considered. It appears, both from
the number of medium to large stone houses and from the wide use of imported
ceramics, that there emerged a socially superior merchant class comparable to
the wa-ungwana of recent Swahili towns and cities (Donley 1982; Donley-Reid
1990). Indeed, the many stone tombs that were constructed along the East
African coast also suggest the existence of such a class.
   It is difﬁcult to decide the extent to which these social developments led to
state formation, because the archaeological evidence offers little relevant infor-
mation. There are also geographical differences in that information. Towns on
the northern Swahili coast had relatively more stone buildings and fewer mud,
wood, and thatch buildings, and it has been suggested that they had ‘a more
horizontally differentiated power base, with numerous leaders (merchant,
religious, political)’. In contrast, towns on the southern Swahili coast con-
tained fewer stone buildings and more mud, wood, and thatch buildings, and it
has been proposed that they had ‘a small-scale, ranked hierarchy, whose leader
ruled through custom and consent’ (LaViolette and Fleisher 2005: 340).
However, the existence of a few much larger settlements, and their geograph-
ical relationships to neighbouring settlements of medium or small size, suggests
that some cities, for example, Mogadishu, Pate, Malindi, Mombasa, and
Kilwa, controlled the territory around them, a possibility reinforced by the
issue of coinage in some places. Indeed, the prosperity apparent in the early
fourteenth century at Kilwa suggests an extension of control over the gold
trade from Sofala, far to the south in what is now Mozambique. A coin minted
in Kilwa even got as far as Great Zimbabwe. It seems likely that some of the
east coast cities did function as small city-states from early in the second
millennium AD and that, sometimes, certain city-states came to dominate
others. In addition, collectively, the Swahili cities were part of a city-state
culture, as discussed by Sinclair and Håkansson (2000: 479). In spite of local
variations, they shared the same religion, same language, same architectural
tradition and material culture, and a kinship-based political organization,
often with both elected kings and a degree of consensus.


Population pressures
The distribution, number, and size of settlement sites along the East African
coast and on its islands suggest that, prior to Portuguese contact, the region
supported a substantial population. It is thought that Swahili towns with stone

                                                                             251
African Civilizations

buildings each had in excess of 5,000 inhabitants, and places such as Kilwa
and Mombasa had more than 15,000 (LaViolette and Fleisher 2005: 340). In
addition, villages of mud, wood, and thatch buildings proliferated in many
coastal areas, as on the island of Pemba (LaViolette and Fleisher 2009). With
both land and sea resources, with food supplies augmented by South-East
Asian domesticated plants, and with fresh water available in many places,
the coast and its islands must have contrasted with the dry lands of the interior.
Thus the coast could have stimulated population growth, but there was
nowhere for excess population to go, other than north or south along the
coast or onto its islands. This is because coastal peoples would have been
unlikely to adapt to the dry interior. The result was the long, narrow distribu-
tion of the East African coastal culture. However, the optimum coastal condi-
tions gradually petered out to both north and south. In addition, even within
the best areas, soil character and water availability varied, making some
localities more attractive for settlement than others. Thus, population pres-
sures could have been one of the factors that contributed to urbanization and
state development.
  Two things suggest that such pressures existed. First, a signiﬁcant number of
settlements, on the coast itself and also in the Comoro Islands and Madagas-
car, were protected by walls, suggesting that population levels had reached
a point where competition for resources was causing intergroup conﬂict or
threat of conﬂict. A remarkable example is the ﬁfteenth- to seventeenth-
century fortiﬁed site of Pujini, on Pemba Island, Tanzania, which ‘appears to
have been a manifestation of, and contributor to, island tensions – political,
economic, social’ (LaViolette 1996: 81). Second, although relevant archaeo-
logical evidence is difﬁcult to identify, the export of slaves from this coast
seems to have had a long history (Trimingham 1975: 116–18; Horton 1996:
415–16), implying the existence of excess population that provided a source.
However, some of the slaves might have come from inland.
  Not all the hinterland is dry, unattractive country. As already pointed out
(p. 228), cultivable fertile soils along the lower parts of some of the rivers must
have made important contributions to the coastal economy, so that Mogadi-
shu, for instance, although situated on a dry coast mostly unsuitable for
cultivation, was largely maintained by the productivity of the Shibeli River
inland to its west (Dualeh 1996). That such interaction of coast and inland
riverine plains was important in the past is indicated by the coastal and interior
distribution of ﬁrst-millennium AD Triangular Incised Ware in both Kenya
and Tanzania (Abungu 1995; Chami 1995). It was this relationship of coastal
and interior peoples that must have formed the basis of the trading networks
that provided the commodities sought by the Indian Ocean trade (Mutoro
1998). Like the coast, however, the more productive inland areas were limited

252
                                             The East African coast and islands

in extent and are likely to have experienced population pressures, particularly
during periods of environmental stress.
  It has also been suggested that there were dry conditions in Ethiopia and
Equatorial Africa between about AD 500 and 800 (Hassan 1997: 219–20). In
addition, the sediments of Lake Naivasha, in Kenya, provide a climatic record
for equatorial East Africa over the last 1,100 years, suggesting that it was
generally drier than today from AD 1000 to 1270, but fairly wet from 1270 to
1850, although interrupted around 1380 to 1420, 1560 to 1620, and 1760 to
1840 by episodes of aridity more severe than any drought of the twentieth
century (Verschuren et al. 2000). Such climatic oscillations would have
allowed population growth during moister periods but caused population
pressure during drier periods, periods that might be correlated with socio-
economic growth or contraction on the Swahili coast and islands.


Ideology
As in the West African savanna (Chapter 6), Islam was the major ideology on
the East African coast and islands (Insoll 2003). Wright (1993: 671–2) argued
that Islam, along with trade, was the crucial factor in Swahili urban develop-
ment. It bound together the people in the towns and bound the towns to
surrounding villages, thus contributing also to state formation. Islam was
not just a religion, it was a way of life. Islamic belief brought with it distinct
patterns of symbolic and material culture, including social behaviour, art,
music, literacy, scientiﬁc knowledge, scholarship, education, coinage, and even
the layout of settlements (Insoll 1999). At many Swahili archaeological sites
there is at least one stone-built mosque; signiﬁcantly, the main congregational
mosque usually occupies a central position within each settlement. In addition,
the care and expense that was often lavished on the building of mosques show
how important the role of Islam was in coastal life. Islam was the faith of
urban, mercantile, literate South-West Asia, and its adoption brought East
Africa into a huge common market; it ensured commercial and cultural
intercourse with Arab lands to the north. In Swahili the word for ‘civilization’
is ustaarabu, often understood to mean ‘becoming like an Arab’ (Chittick
1971: 112; Jahadhmy 1981: 10). On the East African coast, to become like
an Arab meant to follow Islam, to live in a stone house in a city, and to be
involved in trade.
  However, Islam was not the primary cause of urbanization and state devel-
opment on the East African coast, whatever its later inﬂuence on those
developments. As in the West African savanna, Islam seems to have arrived
after the initial changes had taken place. Thus, in the fourteenth century when
ibn Battuta visited Kilwa, Islam had already been accepted there, but in the

                                                                             253
African Civilizations

tenth century when al-Masudi visited the East African coast some at least of
its occupants were animists: ‘Every man worships what he pleases, be it a
plant, an animal or a mineral’ (Freeman-Grenville 1975: 31–2, 16–17). The
available archaeological evidence conﬁrms that Islam was usually adopted
only after initial settlement. For example, the primary occupation at Shanga,
dated from about AD 760 to 780, contained no evidence for Islam, although
from the late eighth century onwards there was a succession of buildings which
have been interpreted as mosques (Horton 1996: 394–406). At Gedi there
might have been a much longer pre-Islamic period, because houses probably
occupied the site of the congregational mosque until as late as the middle of the
ﬁfteenth century (Kirkman 1954: 8–9, 14). At Kilwa its excavator thought that
Islam began to arrive in the eleventh to twelfth centuries. We can conclude
that although Islam played a big part in the developments on the East African
coast, it did not necessarily inaugurate them. So far as ideological input was
concerned, unknown animistic beliefs probably contributed substantially.
The strength of those beliefs may be judged from the fact that East African
Islam has remained syncretic until recent times.


External trade
So considerable is the archaeological evidence for long-distance external trade
in East African coastal and island sites that it has often dominated discussion
of those sites and inﬂuenced interpretations. The cities and city-states have
been seen as a direct response to the growth of that trade: trading bases for
overseas mercantile interests, clinging to the coast of a hostile continent, in
which they had no interest other than the acquisition of primary products
for export. These colonial settlements, it was thought, had little impact on
the African interior and were gradually Africanized by intermarriage, as some
aspects of the alien culture were adopted and the distinctive Swahili culture
evolved.
  This interpretation is no longer accepted, and the coastal and island settle-
ments are now seen as part of an enormous interaction zone that included the
Indian Ocean, Arabia, South and East Asia, East Africa, and the African
interior. Of crucial importance for contacts within this zone were ships able
to make long trading voyages and crews with the necessary knowledge of
the winds and currents as well as navigational skills. In the Indian Ocean zone
the ship provided the vital link, just as the camel did in the Sahara (Insoll 2003:
143). In the same way that the trans-Saharan trade penetrated deep into the
lands south of the desert, so Swahili trade reached far into East and Central
Africa. Historically documented inland trade routes of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries very likely followed routes that were of great antiquity

254
                                             The East African coast and islands

(Wynne-Jones and Croucher 2007). The idea that there was little interaction
between the coastal settlements and the African interior has become increas-
ingly untenable (Kusimba et al. 2005).
   The evidence for long-distance, overseas trade is remarkable. Much of this
consists of imported ceramics, material that is quite distinct from African
pottery traditions and can usually be assigned both to an area of origin and
to an approximate date. At Kilwa, for example, the earliest deposits of the
ninth and tenth centuries contained Islamic glazed wares that probably origin-
ated in the Persian Gulf or were trans-shipped there. Although the wares
changed with time, and the places from which they came also changed to
some degree, such Islamic glazed wares continued to be imported until well
after Portuguese contact. In addition, from about the thirteenth century,
Chinese ceramics began to arrive in Kilwa; indeed, from about the fourteenth
century onwards they equalled or exceeded the quantity of Islamic glazed
wares. It is these Chinese products, at both Kilwa and other East African
coastal sites, which have convinced archaeologists of the extent of the long-
distance trade of this coast. No doubt the Chinese material was usually trans-
shipped several times, but the distances involved are still most impressive. In
addition, imports other than ceramics have also been found in East African
coastal sites. At Kilwa, for instance, glass vessels and beads of glass, carnelian,
and other semi-precious stones were found, widely distributed through time.
The carnelian and perhaps the glass beads might have come from western
India; the other items probably from various parts of the Islamic world
(Chittick 1974; Insoll et al. 2004). Furthermore, these trade goods consist only
of those that happen to have survived in the archaeological record. As was the
case with the trans-Saharan trade discussed in Chapter 6 (p. 181), one wonders
about the imports that have left no trace. For instance, it is thought that cloth
would have been one of the principal imports, particularly high-quality cloth
and coloured cloth. Such a commodity could have come from a very wide area
indeed. So extensive and substantial was East Africa’s international trade that
Islamic, Indian, Sri Lankan, and Chinese coinage reached the Swahili coast,
and, to facilitate commercial transactions, local rulers struck their own coins.
Remarkably, many bronze coins were exported from China, for use as a metal
source in regions around the Indian Ocean, including East Africa. For
example, a bronze lion ﬁgurine excavated from Shanga was either cast in India
or more probably cast in East Africa by Indian craftsmen, possibly using
Chinese coins (Horton and Blurton 1988; Horton 1996: 358).
   In return for the things supplied to the East African coast and islands,
overseas traders were tapping the natural resources of the coast and interior.
These primary products included ivory, rhinoceros horn, tortoiseshell, amber-
gris, gold, copper, iron, rock crystal, frankincense, myrrh, mangrove poles,

                                                                              255
African Civilizations

ebony and other timbers, sandalwood, and slaves, not to mention spices, about
which there is less certainty. Without access to these commodities, the socio-
economic development of the Swahili coast would not have occurred, because
its settlements could not have attracted interest from the Indian Ocean traders.
Many of the exports would have come from deep in the African interior, but
the imported goods have rarely been found in the interior. A notable exception
is a very small quantity of the Chinese pottery known as ‘celadon’, which
reached the site of Great Zimbabwe in the fourteenth century. In addition,
glass beads reached sites in the Limpopo Valley, such as Indian and Persian
examples found in a ninth-century context at Schroda (p. 270) (Pwiti 2005:
382). Glass beads also occurred in the Upemba Depression in south-east
Democratic Congo, in the thirteenth to ﬁfteenth centuries, along with cowrie
shells, which had already appeared there by the tenth to twelfth centuries
(p. 311). This is 1,500 kilometres from the East African coast, from which
the cowries must have come and presumably the glass beads as well (Insoll
2003: 378). Furthermore, at a date around the fourteenth century, a few glass
beads, along with a single cowrie shell (probably Monetaria annulus), found
their way to Kibiro on the eastern shore of Lake Albert (Connah 1996).
   Nevertheless, evidence for coastal-interior contacts remains limited; so what
sort of a trade could have gathered so many African resources but apparently
given so little in exchange? The answer lies partly in the differential preserva-
tion of the archaeological evidence, for not only would imported cloth not
have survived, but, without historical sources, we would know little even
about the exports. However, this does not explain why imports that survive
in the coastal sites are not in general found in the interior; after all, Chinese
ceramics are tough material. The most likely explanation is that trade was
more complex than a simple exchange of overseas goods for African commod-
ities. Chittick distinguished not two categories of goods that were traded, that
is to say imports and exports, but four categories. These consisted of (1)
African goods sought for export, (2) goods imported for trade with the inter-
ior, (3) goods imported for use in the coastal towns, and (4) goods produced in
those towns for trade with the interior. Thus, the East African coastal settle-
ments were acting as entrepôts, that is to say, as commercial centres of import,
export, collection, and distribution. Two sorts of imports arrived from over-
seas: cloth that could be traded into the interior and luxury goods that were
sought by the more successful occupants of the coastal cities and towns for
prestige purposes. These exotic manufactures, of which ceramics and some
other items are all that have survived, were probably restricted by economic
and social factors to the coastal elite. To trade with the peoples of the interior,
the merchants of the coastal settlements used much of the cloth that had been
imported from overseas, but they also transported into the interior cotton

256
                                             The East African coast and islands

cloth manufactured in the coastal settlements. In addition, before the thir-
teenth century, beads of marine shell were manufactured on the coast, and
large numbers of cowrie shells were collected. Both of these were probably
used for the inland trade, although imported glass beads seem to have taken
the place of shell beads in later times.
   It is also likely that coastal communities traded some agricultural surplus into
the interior, just as inland riverine cultivators must have traded surplus both to
the coast and to more immediate neighbours (Kusimba et al. 2005: 260).
Nomadic pastoralists, hunter-gatherers, and even the farmers of the drier areas
would probably have welcomed additions to their diet. They would also have
welcomed salt, which was probably produced on the coast. In return for these
and other commodities, recipients in the inland gave the primary products
that the coastal merchants sought and which they exported overseas. The
antiquity of such contacts between coast and inland is indicated by the seated
burial excavated at the site of Murrapania IV, near Nampula, in the interior of
Mozambique. Dated to the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium AD, the burial was
associated with an elephant tusk and pottery decorated with marine-shell
impressions (Sinclair 1991: 188).
   A key factor in this complex trade was local input, of primary products and
manufactures from the coast itself. Environmental diversity and the conse-
quent unevenness of resource distribution must have necessitated the early,
pre-Islamic development of local exchange systems on the East African coast
and between it and its hinterland. In particular, coastal trading in small vessels
would have developed early on a coast that was generally suited to inshore
navigation. Some indication of this trade network was found at Kilwa, where
stone vessels made of chlorite-schist appeared from about the eleventh to
twelfth centuries onward. These are thought to have originated in Madagascar
(Chittick 1974: vol. 1, 237). In addition, it was no doubt because of such a
coastal trading network that Kilwa was able to proﬁt from the export of gold,
from the Zimbabwe Plateau, by southern Mozambique coastal settlements.
Indeed, it seems that the more successful of the coastal cities, such as Kilwa,
were successful not only because of their location on trade routes connecting
the interior to overseas markets but also because of their location on coastal
trade routes which enabled them to act as collecting points for local products
and as distribution points for imports. Horton (1987b) wrote of what he called
‘The Swahili Corridor’, stressing movement of goods along the coast, but
Sinclair (1995: 107) preferred the idea of a ‘Swahili trading wheel’, with its
hub located in different places at different times, such as the Comoro Islands,
Kilwa, or Zanzibar. Insoll (2003: ﬁg. 4.4) provided a map of how the pre-
Islamic trade networks might have looked. Such a circular trading network, or
a series of such networks, might have linked the long East African coastal strip

                                                                              257
African Civilizations

to the offshore islands and to Madagascar, as well as to parts of the African
interior such as the Zimbabwe Plateau, and then linked the whole system into
the Indian Ocean trade.
  Thus the East African towns and cities did not result simply from the
development of external trade with overseas markets. Such trade had a sub-
stantial inﬂuence on their subsequent history but was only part of a complex
network involving local exchange systems, which almost certainly pre-dated
the overseas connections and deﬁnitely pre-dated the arrival of Islam.


Conclusion
Urbanization and state formation on the East African coast and adjacent
islands have sometimes been treated as though they resulted from external
stimulus. In particular, the larger settlements of this coast have been regarded
as Islamic trading cities, founded by colonists who originated from the
Persian Gulf at the end of the ﬁrst millennium AD. Such a view has held that
this coast was signiﬁcant only as the edge of the Indian Ocean trading
network, to which it supplied the products of the African interior and from
which it received some of the products of the most sophisticated cultures of
its time. Unfortunately, this interpretation has been arrived at by looking at
the results rather than at the causes of the remarkable East African coastal
developments.
   Eventually, external trade was extremely important to the settlements of this
coast; no doubt there were some mercantile colonists from outside. However,
it is necessary to ask what already existed on this coast to attract such attention.
This question cannot be answered by excavating the stone-built settlements of
the thirteenth to ﬁfteenth centuries, on which much of the archaeological ﬁeld
research has been concentrated. It is doubtful if it can even be answered by
excavating the important settlement deposits of the ninth and tenth centuries,
which have also commanded attention. The answer must lie in the investigation
of the coastal settlement archaeology of the last millennium BC and the earlier
part of the ﬁrst millennium AD, a task to which archaeologists are now giving
attention. In addition, the large coastal settlements of the ﬁrst half of the second
millennium AD will undoubtedly be better understood if they can be viewed
in the context of the whole settlement pattern of which they formed a part:
in short, archaeologists are having to look for and investigate the smaller
settlements that were contemporary with such places as Kilwa, Gedi, or Shanga.
As these things are done, it is becoming clear that the indigenous contribution to
cultural development on the East African coast was much more substantial than
previously thought and that the origins of the East African coastal culture were
African, not Asiatic.

258
                                           The East African coast and islands

   We have seen that there existed a strong subsistence base, capable of produ-
cing a surplus, encouraging complex local exchange networks. It is also
probable that the introduction of South-East Asian food plants, some 2,000
years ago, had a catalytic effect on coastal cultural evolution. To these things
should be added the existence of a sophisticated technology that encouraged
functional specialization, and there should also be added the possibility of
complex population pressures within increasingly hierarchical societies, whose
socioeconomic order could be legitimized ﬁrst by indigenous animism and
later by Islam. It is signiﬁcant that, during the later ﬁrst millennium AD,
similar locally made pottery was in use both at widely separated coastal
settlements and in parts of the interior. It is also signiﬁcant that some early
coastal sites show a gradual change from construction in mud, wood, and
thatch to stone and that some of the later coastal sites remained substantially
settlements of mud, wood, and thatch buildings, some of the less important
ones almost entirely so. In addition, so widespread were these coastal and
island settlements that a massive immigration would have to be invoked if they
are to be explained as alien foundations. One must conclude that the large
settlements of the East African coast and islands were not merely the edge of
an Indian Ocean trading network but the focus of complex African networks,
which subsequently incorporated substantial elements from the Indian
Ocean world.




                                                                           259
Chapter 9
Cattle, ivory, and gold: social complexity in
Zambezia
Zambezia is the region between the Zambezi and Limpopo Rivers and
between the Kalahari Desert and the Indian Ocean. The name was already in
use by 1890 (Maund 1890) and has remained relevant (Pikirayi 2001b). This
region comprises modern Zimbabwe, southern Mozambique, north-eastern
Botswana, and the extreme north of South Africa. From the archaeological
perspective, it is characterized by widespread evidence for the development of
social complexity, commencing in the ﬁrst millennium AD and continuing
until the nineteenth century. Most famous of this evidence is the site of Great
Zimbabwe, perhaps one of the most ill-used of Africa’s archaeological sites. Its
fame is such that it has given its name to the country in which it is situated, the
country formerly known as Rhodesia and before that as Southern Rhodesia.
Its ill usage has been both intellectual and physical, starting when it ﬁrst
became known to Europeans. The ﬁrst such visitor was a German geologist,
Carl Mauch, in 1871. After giving an account of the impressive stone ruins,
Mauch felt it necessary to explain their presence deep in the African interior
and did so by associating them with King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba.
Perhaps it is understandable that a nineteenth-century European should grasp
at such an unlikely biblical explanation, but unfortunately the myth of alien
origin for the Great Zimbabwe structures was to survive for a long time, even
surfacing as a political issue in the 1960s and 1970s (Garlake 1973: 209–10).
This was probably because such a belief became psychologically essential for
some European colonial settlers in this part of Africa. Perhaps the most
damaging aspect of the African colonial experience was the attempted denial
to African peoples of their own cultural heritage, of which the attribution of
Great Zimbabwe to outside inﬂuence must be the classic example.
   For those who understood the archaeological evidence, there was never any
doubt about the African origins of Great Zimbabwe (e.g., Garlake 1973;
1978a). Nevertheless, the resulting controversy has inﬂuenced much of the
research that has been conducted at this famous site. Intellectually, it has
dictated the questions that have been asked by researchers; physically, it
has sometimes occasioned excavations and restoration work that damaged
or destroyed archaeological evidence. Excavations by Theodore Bent in 1891,
Richard Hall in 1902–4, David Randall-MacIver in 1905, and Gertrude
Caton-Thompson in 1929 were all directed principally at the problem of
who built the ruins and when (Bent 1896; Hall 1905; Caton-Thompson 1971;

260
                                                 Social complexity in Zambezia

Randall-MacIver 1971). The ﬁrst two excavators were determined to prove
that alien builders were responsible and ignored indications to the contrary;
the second two treated the evidence objectively and were able to demonstrate its
indigenous identity. Dating, however, remained a problem, and later excavation
and survey in 1958 was still principally concerned with the chronological
sequence of occupation within the stone ruins (Robinson et al. 1961). It was
only as radiocarbon dates became increasingly available that archaeologists
were able to turn their attention to other questions.
   In the latter part of the twentieth century, for instance, archaeologists began
to ask themselves what the stone ruins of Great Zimbabwe and similar sites
represented in social, economic, and political terms. In particular, it
was realized that the stone-walled enclosures of at least some of these sites
were merely the central and most important features of quite large former
settlements. At Great Zimbabwe, the recognition of extensive areas of densely
packed huts caused the revision of Peter Garlake’s 1973 population estimate, of
1,000 to 2,500 adults (Garlake 1973: 195), to one of about 18,000 (Huffman
1986: 323; 1996: 125). It is unfortunate, therefore, that archaeologists have
been so obsessed by the stone structures at Great Zimbabwe and related sites
that for a long time they virtually ignored other parts of these sites. Sinclair
calculated that of the estimated 600 square metres excavated and published
from all zimbabwe sites (here called ‘zimbabwe-tradition sites’) after the time of
Randall-MacIver, all except about 20 square metres had been excavated inside
and immediately outside stone-walled enclosures (Sinclair 1984). This meant
that ‘at least at Great Zimbabwe over 90 percent of archaeological effort has
been focused upon 2 percent of the population’ (Morais and Sinclair 1980:
351). Attention concentrated on the elite; commoners were ignored. However,
changes in research orientation have occurred, and Huffman’s excavations of
the early 1970s (p. 290) provided information about an extensive area of
commoner housing (Huffman 2007: 398).
   Great Zimbabwe has indeed been ill used. The only ‘mystery’ or ‘riddle’
connected with this site is why it took archaeologists so long to recognize its
urban character. By the 1970s Huffman was calling it southern Africa’s ﬁrst
town, and others saw it as the capital of the earliest state in its area. We have
little documentary or oral traditional evidence to support these claims, but it
seems likely that these sites, on and around the Zimbabwe Plateau, do indicate
the presence of both urbanization and state formation during the ﬁrst half of
the second millennium AD. The real ‘problem’ of zimbabwe-tradition sites has
been to explain why and how these developments took place. In particular,
what economic factors led to a growth in the size of some settlements and to
increased centralization of authority? Furthermore, how did those factors
change so that by the late nineteenth century there were merely ruins scattered

                                                                             261
African Civilizations

through a rural landscape? Indeed, answering such economic questions is only
part of the task of explaining the Great Zimbabwe phenomenon. Both this and
the related sites can be understood only by seeing them in their full context:
chronological, geographical, economic, and sociocultural; only then might it
be possible to explain their rise and fall.


Geographical location and environmental factors
Most of the well-known sites of zimbabwe tradition are located on the
Zimbabwe Plateau, an area of high land much of which is more than 1,000
metres above sea level. However, there are also comparable sites on the
lowveld to the south of the plateau (Manyanga 2007), in areas to its west
(van Waarden 1998; 2012), and in one known case to its east (Garlake
1976a). The plateau is situated between about 16 south and about 22 south,
bounded on the north by the valley of the Zambezi River, on the south by the
valley of the Limpopo River, and on the east by an escarpment that runs down
to the wide coastal plain of the Indian Ocean. To the west the plateau merges
gradually with the Kalahari Desert (Fig. 9.1). It might seem that Zambezia
would have been isolated in the past, but this was not the case. There was
apparently contact with areas now in Zambia, southern Democratic Congo,
the Transvaal (now Limpopo Province of South Africa), and north-eastern
Botswana, as well as with the Indian Ocean coast. Via the latter there were
even connections with more distant parts of the world: in earlier times with the
Persian Gulf and China, in later times with Western Europe. Travel outside
the plateau itself was made easier by the river valleys which dissect its sides,
particularly those of the tributaries of the Save and Mazoe Rivers.
  The Zimbabwe Plateau has a wet season from November to March and
a dry season from April to October. Temperatures are highest late in the dry
season, are slightly lower during the wet season, and can fall below freezing
point. Rainfall tends to be heavier in the north and east of the plateau than in
the south and west. Geologically, the plateau consists mainly of igneous and
metamorphic rocks, particularly of granites and schists, amongst some of
which there has been extensive mineralization (Collins 1965: 40–1). Much
of the landscape comprises gently rolling plains broken by granite inselbergs
and by bare, rounded hills of granite. Parts of the plateau are deeply dissected
by river valleys, however, leaving rugged ranges of hills between them. In
addition, there are the mountains of the Eastern Highlands, which contrast
with much of the rest of the plateau. Variations in the geology of the plateau
have resulted in a variety of soil conditions: some soils are remarkably fertile,
while others are very poor. Natural vegetation varies with both altitude and
soil but generally consists of savanna–woodland, with trees scattered among

262
                                                    Social complexity in Zambezia




Fig. 9.1 Distribution of zimbabwe-tradition sites of Great Zimbabwe and Khami style.
After Garlake 1973: ﬁgs. 25 and 26.

wide grassy spaces. The trees tend to be more numerous in lower areas, but
some of the highest parts of the plateau consist of almost treeless grassy plains.
The Eastern Highlands, on the other hand, have a variety of trees as well as
grassland, while the lowlands off the edge of the plateau are usually thickly
wooded, mostly by mopane trees (Phimister 1976; Beach 1980).
  Much of the Zimbabwe Plateau would have been attractive to early human
settlement. Its relatively cool, well-watered plains provided a generally healthy
environment. The plateau and surrounding areas also possessed a variety of
resources, of which agricultural and pastoral potential was probably the most
important. Extensive pasturage made parts of the plateau, and of areas to its
west, good country for sheep, goats, and particularly cattle. The considerable
range in altitude between the plateau and the coastal plain offered the possibility
of transhumant pastoralism for overcoming seasonal variations in pasture and
other conditions. Suitable climate and soils also made cultivation important in
some areas, however, and provided the staple foods of sorghum, millet, beans,

                                                                                  263
African Civilizations

and squashes (Garlake 1978a: 73). The signiﬁcance of food production amongst
the region’s resources was clearly indicated by a Portuguese, Antonio Bocarro,
writing in the seventeenth century about the Mwene Mutapa state, one of
the successors of Great Zimbabwe. According to Bocarro the land ‘abounds
with . . . millet, some rice, many vegetables, large and small cattle, and many
hens . . . and the greater number of . . . [people] . . . are inclined to agricultural
and pastoral pursuits, in which their riches consist’ (Theal 1964: vol. 3, 355).
  There were, however, other resources on the plateau and in surrounding
areas, of which ivory and gold were the most important (Summers 1969; Swan
1994: van Waarden 1998: 144, see table 6.3 for later statistics). Much of the
ivory came from the Shashe-Limpopo Basin, and gold could be obtained both
from alluvial deposits and from quartz reefs, particularly on the plateau itself
(Miller et al. 2000: ﬁg. 2). Together, they became the basis of long-distance
trade from the ﬁrst millennium AD into the ﬁrst half of the second millennium.
Other metals included iron, copper, and tin. Silver might also have been
present (Pikirayi 2001b: 226, 263). In addition, there appears to have
been salt available (Pikirayi 2001b: 146). A further resource was granite, of
which much of the plateau consisted. This continually exfoliated in thin layers
from the many rock surfaces exposed to the marked daily changes of tempera-
ture. The thin, parallel-sided slabs produced in this way collected as a scree
around granite domes and inselbergs and could be readily broken up into
rectangular blocks of uniform size. These provided abundant building material,
needing little or no preparation. Indeed, supplies were virtually inexhaustible,
because lighting ﬁres on the rock surfaces and quenching them with water
produced exfoliation artiﬁcially (Garlake 1973). It was the ready availability of
building stone in such a uniform size and shape that gave many of the walls of
Great Zimbabwe, and of some other sites, their unusually regular appearance.
For although drystone building was widely practised in precolonial Africa, the
neat, horizontal coursework of some of the zimbabwe-tradition ruins is
unusual. The resources of the plateau also included other building material:
wood and grass for house construction and clays derived from decomposed
granite, which formed the main ingredient of the ‘mud’ used in building.
Known in this part of Africa as daga, this was sometimes of such high quality
that it was used for free-standing structures that could survive considerable
exposure. Some of the earlier excavators at Great Zimbabwe erroneously called
this material ‘cement’ (Garlake 1973: 19). Also amongst the plateau’s resources
were clays suitable for potting and soapstone for carving. Finally, there was
abundant wild fauna, which not only provided important sources of ivory but
could also supplement human food supplies.
  Counterbalancing these resources were a number of environmental con-
straints that would have inﬂuenced the character of precolonial settlement

264
                                                Social complexity in Zambezia

on and around the Zimbabwe Plateau. Probably most important was the
tsetse ﬂy, particularly Glossina morsitans, whose presence discouraged human
settlement both because of the danger to human health and because it killed
the livestock on which so many human groups were dependent. Much of the
plateau is free of tsetse, as Garlake showed (1978b: ﬁg. 1); however, Summers
(1967) suggested that tsetse distribution could have expanded at times during
the last two millennia, given slightly warmer and wetter conditions. Although
Garlake doubted the evidence for such climatic changes, he showed how the
location of zimbabwe-tradition sites might have been inﬂuenced by transhu-
mant pastoralism on the seasonally ﬂuctuating boundaries of tsetse ﬂy infest-
ation (Garlake 1978b). At lower elevations than the plateau, particularly in the
Shashe-Limpopo Basin, tsetse could have been more of a problem, although
it has been suggested that the danger of disease for livestock and humans in
that area has been exaggerated (Manyanga 2007: 59). In such places, malarial
mosquitoes could also have been an inhibiting factor for settlement.
   Another constraint of importance was climatic variability, which often led to
what the Shona (the principal inhabitants of the Zimbabwe Plateau) called
shangwa (Beach 1980: 28–9). This was drought or some other natural disas-
ter. Thus the rains might arrive too late or fail completely or even be so
abundant as to destroy the crops. Records exist of droughts and extreme
weather from 1790 to 2003, with comparable conditions back to the ﬁfteenth
century (Manyanga 2007: 56). There is also evidence for longer climatic
ﬂuctuations, from cool and dry to warm and wet, from AD 100–200 to
1810 (van Waarden 1998: 116). Alternatively, locusts or other pests, whose
appearance was climatically linked, might be destructive. The result, according
to Beach, was that although four years out of ﬁve might have normal rainfall,
it was probable that the ﬁfth would see some such disaster. The keeping of
livestock (goats were the most numerous) was a strategy for surviving years of
that sort, for not only could the animals be eaten during a famine but they
could be exchanged for grain with neighbours who had not suffered so badly.
   Variable soil fertility was also a constraining factor for settlement on the
plateau and in surrounding areas. There were undoubtedly some areas of
fertile red clay soil and some areas of fertile alluvial soil, but large expanses
of the plateau were covered by poor sandy soils developed on the granite
(Sinclair 1987: 38–40). Off the plateau the best soils were along river margins
or on the edges of seasonally ﬂooded areas, both important in an otherwise dry
environment. Thus it is probable that good land was limited, and control of
such land might have been one of the means by which rulers exerted economic
control over their people (Sinclair 1984). Soil conditions affected not only
cultivated crops but also the nutritional value of the pastures available for
livestock. In addition, some parts of the land were agriculturally useless

                                                                            265
African Civilizations

because they consisted of bare rock surfaces or because they were too steep to
exploit. In the latter case, terracing was a solution; this was extensively
employed in the Nyanga (formerly Inyanga) area of the Eastern Highlands
from the sixteenth to the early nineteenth century AD. In that area, not only
were cultivation terraces constructed on hillsides but also stone-lined pits
to house livestock within the stone-built homesteads (Soper 2002).
  The interplay of environmental assets and constraints that characterized
the Zimbabwe Plateau and surrounding areas seems to have concentrated
precolonial population around the watershed between the middle Zambezi to
the west and the lower Zambezi and Save-Limpopo rivers to the east. Ethno-
historical and archaeological evidence shows that there was a huge curved
area of denser settlement, particularly to the east of this watershed, which David
Beach called ‘The Great Crescent of population’ (Beach 1994: 19–23). It was in
this area that the sociopolitical developments associated with the best-known of
the zimbabwe-tradition sites took place, although the plateau must also be seen
in the context of developments in adjacent environments.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
Our knowledge of Great Zimbabwe and comparable sites is heavily depend-
ent on archaeological evidence. However, there are also historical documen-
tation and oral tradition that are relevant. Stone buildings on the Zimbabwe
Plateau were known to the Portuguese, who in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries AD had trading posts along the Zambezi River and on adjacent
parts of the plateau (Pikirayi 1993: 71–4). They wanted to control the gold
trade, by exerting inﬂuence on the Mwene Mutapa, a ruler of part of an
area of similar culture from the Zambezi to the Limpopo and from the
Kalahari to the Indian Ocean. Unfortunately, the Portuguese had little
direct knowledge beyond the area of the Mwene Mutapa’s own Karanga
kingdom, on the northern end of the Zimbabwe Plateau. Nevertheless, it is
thought that this kingdom was one of the successor states to that of Great
Zimbabwe, on the southern part of the plateau. If this was so, then the
Portuguese descriptions of what they observed in the territories of the Mwene
Mutapa must have some relevance for Great Zimbabwe itself. They seem
to have been told about Great Zimbabwe, although they never visited it.
One of them, João de Barros, published a secondhand account in 1552
(Theal 1964: vol. 6, 267–8), and Garlake thought that the place described
was Great Zimbabwe, which had been virtually abandoned by that time.
Although subsequent archaeological research has shown that it was still

266
                                                 Social complexity in Zambezia

inhabited, it was no longer as important as it had been (Garlake 1973: 53;
Huffman and Vogel 1991: 69).
   The de Barros description is the nearest that historical documentation comes to
providing details about Great Zimbabwe, but it was based on information
obtained after its heyday. To understand the economic, social, and political
organization of this place, it is necessary to draw on later Portuguese accounts.
Also it is necessary to consider oral traditions, but again there are problems.
Great Zimbabwe was most prosperous about 600 years ago, which is a long time
for oral traditions to have real value. In addition, it is probable that the Ngoni
invasions of the 1830s, and other ethnic movements during the nineteenth
century, caused a break in those traditions. When Carl Mauch reached the site
in 1871 he found people living there who seemed to know little about its history
and signiﬁcance. Nevertheless, sufﬁcient oral traditions exist to show that Great
Zimbabwe was built by the ancestors of the present Shona people, for whom
it apparently formed an important political and religious centre. From these
traditions it has been possible to reconstruct something of its religious signiﬁ-
cance (Garlake 1973), social organization (Huffman 1981), and position in
Shona history (Beach 1980). Indeed, it has been claimed that oral and ethnohis-
torical evidence concerning the Venda, a people to the south of the Shona but said
to be related to them, can be used to reconstruct life in Great Zimbabwe (Huff-
man 1996). This has been done by applying the Venda evidence to the layout of
the seventeenth- to nineteenth-century site of Danangombe (formerly called Dhlo
Dhlo), and then back to the ﬁfteenth- to seventeenth-century site of Khami, and
even further back to the thirteenth- to ﬁfteenth-century site of Great Zimbabwe
and its thirteenth-century predecessor at Mapungubwe. The result is a stimulat-
ing picture of life at Great Zimbabwe and in similar sites but one that is imposed
on the physical evidence rather than generated from it, occasioning much discus-
sion, some of it critical (Beach et al. 1997; Beach 1998). Subsequently, Chirikure
and Pikirayi challenged Huffman’s interpretation and used the archaeological
evidence to argue that the various parts of Great Zimbabwe represent not
contemporary activities by different occupants but ‘the work of successive rulers,
each founding a new residence and power centre in accord with Shona practice’
(Chirikure and Pikirayi 2008: 976). Inevitably, Huffman (2010a) objected
to their approach, which they then defended (Pikirayi and Chirikure 2011).
Publication concerning Great Zimbabwe has become almost an industry in itself.


Archaeological evidence
It is archaeological evidence that has the greatest potential for informing us
about Great Zimbabwe and similar sites (Fig. 9.2). Great Zimbabwe is the
largest of an extensive group of stone ruins situated on the high granite

                                                                             267
268




      Fig. 9.2 Principal archaeological sites in Zambezia mentioned in the text. 1, Ingombe Ilede; 2, Kadzi; 3, Songo Plateau; 4, Zvongombe; 5, Swart
      Village; 6, Baranda; 7, Ruanga; 8, Nhunguza; 9, Lekkerwater (Tsindi); 10, Mtelegwa; 11, Chipadze’s Ruin (Harleigh Farm); 12, Tebekwe Mine;
      13, Naletale; 14, Danangombe (Dhlo Dhlo); 15, Chivowa Hill; 16, Montevideo Ranch; 17, Great Zimbabwe; 18, Domboshaba; 19, Leopard’s
      Kopje; 20, Khami; 21, Sofala; 22, Chumnungwa; 23, Malumba; 24, Bosutswe; 25, Taukome; 26, Toutswe; 27, Mapungubwe; 28,
      Bambandyanalo; 29, Schroda; 30, Manyikeni (Manekweni); 31, Machemma; 32, Dzata. Note that the site of Bambandyanalo is also known as
      ‘K2’. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.
                                                Social complexity in Zambezia

country of the Zimbabwe Plateau. It has been estimated that about 150 ruins
built in the Great Zimbabwe style, or in the later Khami style, survive in this
area (Fig. 9.1) and that perhaps another ﬁfty have been destroyed since the
1890s (Garlake 1973: 162). Outside the area, similar sites have been located
in north-eastern Botswana, northern Transvaal (now Limpopo Province of
South Africa), and Mozambique, and both these and the sites in Zimbabwe
are part of a widespread practice of drystone construction in southern Africa
(e.g., Walton 1956). The characteristic feature of the Great Zimbabwe-style
sites is the presence of single or multiple enclosures of drystone walls, which
are usually free standing and broad based relative to their height. These
walls are constructed of either regularly coursed, dressed masonry or poorly
coursed masonry; both types of walling are often found on the same site.
Occasionally the walls are decorated with courses of stonework set in a
chevron, herringbone, or other pattern or with courses of darker stone. Other
typical architectural features include rounded ‘bastions’, stepped platforms,
and upright monoliths. The walls are usually built of granite blocks, but
on sites where granite was not available they are constructed of whatever
stone was to hand. These stone-walled enclosures were evidently intended
as ‘containers’, for apparently they usually sheltered small groups of circular
huts with solid daga walls and thatched roofs. Alternatively, on occasion
they might have sheltered granaries (Huffman 1981: 6) or even groups of
religious emblems (e.g., the Eastern Enclosure of the Hill Ruin at Great
Zimbabwe).
   Sites of this tradition are called ‘zimbabwe’ (madzimbabwe is the more
correct plural form) because this is what the Shona called them. This has been
said to be a contraction of dzimba dza mabwe, meaning ‘houses of stone’, and
has also been claimed to be derived from dzimba woye, meaning ‘venerated
houses’, a phrase used to describe chiefs’ houses or graves (Garlake 1973: 11;
1978b: 479). Shona linguists, however, point out that dzimbahwe itself means
court, home, or grave of a chief. Most of these sites are situated on the
Zimbabwe Plateau and within the modern state of Zimbabwe. To avoid
confusion, it has become customary amongst archaeologists to refer to the
largest and most researched site as ‘Great Zimbabwe’. However, sites of
the same tradition do occur in more distant locations, and there might be
more than are yet known. One example is Manyikeni (formerly known as
Manekweni) on the coastal plain of Mozambique, only 50 kilometres from the
Indian Ocean and some 270 kilometres from the nearest other known
zimbabwe-tradition site. This small site is dated principally to the thirteenth
to ﬁfteenth centuries and consists of a single stone enclosure of poorly coursed
limestone blocks. The enclosure is subdivided by internal walls and contains
traces of occupation in the form of an eroding hut ﬂoor of daga and two

                                                                           269
African Civilizations

middens. Outside the stone ruin there is extensive evidence of habitation
consisting of low mounds, most of which are middens, and house-ﬂoor
remains. In addition, an overall scatter of broken pottery deﬁnes the site limits
at approximately 368 by 264 metres; the population has been estimated at
150 to 200 (Garlake 1976a; Sinclair 1987: 91–9). Another outlying site of
zimbabwe tradition, although probably of a later date, is on the Songo Plateau,
near the Cabora-Bassa Dam in central Mozambique (Ramos 1980; Macamo
and Duarte 1996). Also a number of stone ruins of either the Zimbabwe
or Khami style exist in north-eastern Botswana, of which Domboshaba has
been dated to the ﬁfteenth to sixteenth centuries (Denbow 1986: 25–6).
Furthermore, some of the numerous precolonial stone structures in the former
Transvaal show similarities with zimbabwe-tradition sites, notable examples
being Dzata and Machemma in the Zoutpansberg (Walton 1956: 123, 125;
Huffman and Hanisch 1987; Huffman 1996: 40, 75).
   For many years Great Zimbabwe was studied in isolation, but it has become
increasingly apparent that it needs to be seen in its chronological and geo-
graphical context. It represents the apogee of socioeconomic developments
that ﬁrst become evident in the archaeological record of Zambezia during
the ﬁrst millennium AD. Agropastoral people on and around the Zimbabwe
Plateau were keeping herds of cattle that are thought to have been indicators
of wealth and power, as well as a source of food. To the south, in the Shashe-
Limpopo Basin, the settlement sites of Schroda, Bambandyanalo (K2), and
Mapungubwe provide a dated sequence from AD 900 to 1300; increasing
settlement size indicates growing social complexity at the same time that there
is increasing evidence of trade with the East African coast (Leslie and Maggs
2000; Calabrese 2007). Occupants of these sites were receiving glass beads
(p. 294) manufactured in places from the Persian Gulf to China (Wood 2000:
ﬁg. 1). Cloth and other manufactures were probably also being obtained.
In exchange were a variety of African commodities, of which ivory was
important, as mentioned in the ﬁrst-century Periplus of the Erythraean
Sea (Horton 1996: 414). Furthermore, ‘the Mapungubwe area is capable of
supporting large herds of elephants’ (Huffman 2009: 37). It has been shown
that these could have met the trade demand for ivory but that the area was
also attractive for cultivation and domestic livestock, as well as large wild
mammalian herbivores (Forssman et al. 2014: 75). By the thirteenth century
ivory and other resources had made Mapungubwe the urban capital of south-
ern Africa’s ﬁrst state (Fouché 1937; Gardner 1963), with structures of dry-
stone walling and elite burials accompanied by gold grave goods (Duffey
2012). It was succeeded in this role by Great Zimbabwe, Mapungubwe’s
abandonment probably being caused by climatic deterioration in the Limpopo
Valley, exotic diseases introduced by the Indian Ocean trade, and a shift north

270
                                               Social complexity in Zambezia

in the trade routes to the coast. These routes were particularly important for
the trade in gold, because the gold mines were more accessible from Great
Zimbabwe, and by the thirteenth century the trade in gold had become more
important than that in ivory (van Waarden 1998: 123). Similar to the devel-
opments in the Shashe-Limpopo Basin, a three-tiered social structure emerged
in the Toutswe Complex of north-east Botswana, also based on cattle herding.
Most common were small settlements of 2,000 to 5,000 square metres. Above
these were fewer sites, always on hilltops, of about 10,000 square metres,
such as Taukome and Thatswane. At the top of the socioeconomic pyramid
were three much larger hilltop sites, each of more than 40,000 square metres:
Toutswemogala, Bosutswe, and Sung (Denbow 1999; Reid and Segobye
2000). Glass beads reached some of these sites but far fewer than were received
in the Limpopo Valley. In exchange, Toutswe sites were probably supplying
ivory for trade with the East Coast.
   Such is the background for the emergence of Great Zimbabwe. It consists
of two main areas of stone ruins: a group of enclosures clustered around
boulders at the top of a precipitous granite hill and another group of enclos-
ures on the far slope of an adjacent valley. Much of the ‘Hill Ruin’, as it
has been called, consists of small enclosures separated by narrow twisting
passages, but at one end is the large ‘Western Enclosure’, which is bounded
by walls more than 9 metres high, capped by turrets and monoliths. This
enclosure contained deposits over 4 metres in depth, the remains of a succes-
sion of daga structures, and had room for about fourteen dwelling huts.
At the other end of the Hill Ruin is the ‘Eastern Enclosure’, much smaller
than the Western Enclosure and bounded on one side by a high wall origin-
ally capped by two courses of decorative stonework. The ground inside this
enclosure slopes steeply upwards; it was originally terraced and supported
groups of stone platforms in which were set some of the large number
of monoliths found in this enclosure. Some were of soapstone and were
surmounted by carved birds (Matenga 1998). The most remarkable of the
ruins in the valley is a large stone enclosure with a maximum diameter of
89 metres, which has been variously called the ‘Temple’, the ‘Circular Ruin’,
the ‘Great Enclosure’, and the ‘Elliptical Building’. Garlake, who preferred
the last of these names, described its outer wall as ‘by far the largest single
prehistoric structure in sub-Saharan Africa’ (Garlake 1973: 27). This wall
is 244 metres long and, at its greatest, 5 metres thick and 10 metres high.
It has been estimated to contain 5,151 cubic metres of stonework. Parts of
the wall consist of exceptionally sophisticated drystone masonry, comprising
the most regular coursing at Great Zimbabwe and with the top of the wall
capped by monoliths and a decorative frieze. Other walls, many of which
appear to belong to an earlier period than the outer wall, subdivide the space

                                                                           271
African Civilizations

within this enclosure. There is also a conical tower, about 5.5 metres in
diameter and more than 9 metres high, built of solid drystone masonry, in
itself one of Africa’s most remarkable precolonial structures. Spreads of daga
within the enclosure suggest that parts of its interior were originally occupied
by daga structures, most of them probably huts. The remainder of the ruins
in the valley at Great Zimbabwe consist of small enclosures, a number of
which were formerly named after early European visitors. Thus there was the
‘Mauch Ruin’, the ‘Renders Ruin’, the ‘Posselt Ruin’, the ‘Philips Ruin’,
and the ‘Maund Ruin’. Others had names such as the ‘East Ruin’, the
‘No. 1 Ruin’, the ‘Ridge Ruins’, the ‘Camp Ruin’, and the ‘Outspan Ruin’
(Garlake 1973: 25–30). Although these appear to have been renamed, the
Posselt, Philips, and Maund Ruins, for instance, becoming, respectively,
the Western, Central, and Eastern Valley Enclosures (Collett et al. 1992),
their former names are common in the older literature.
   Investigations at Great Zimbabwe and other zimbabwe sites have been
architectural and archaeological. Architecturally, it was shown that there
was an indigenous evolution of masonry techniques at Great Zimbabwe, from
poorly coursed (P) to regularly coursed (Q) stonework, which ﬁnally devolved
into uncoursed, loosely piled (R) walling (Robinson et al. 1961). Radiocarbon
dating subsequently conﬁrmed the sequence from P to Q masonry but showed
that R stonework was contemporary with them rather than belonging to a
separate late phase (Huffman and Vogel 1991: 69). Architectural studies at
Great Zimbabwe have also identiﬁed a number of distinctive features in the
Great Zimbabwe style of building. Thus the poorly coursed, early walls were
frequently built among and over boulders, which were incorporated into their
fabric (Fig. 9.3). Regularly coursed, later walls, on the other hand, were
usually built on level ground free from boulders. Doorways in these later walls
are distinctive, having rounded sides and high thresholds that frequently have
curved steps, each successive step curving more sharply into the doorway and
merging into the walls at the sides. Pairs of semi-circular projections, often
called ‘bastions’, are inside most doorways and passages in later walls and
have the effect of making entrances narrower and longer. Slots in the sides of
many of these bastions and in other locations might originally have held
upright stone slabs (but see Huffman 1996). Similar slabs were also set upright
as monoliths, in the ground, grouped on low daga platforms, or along the tops
of some of the walls. Other features associated with the regularly coursed later
walling are stepped, curved platforms, perhaps intended as seats or as display
stands for ceremonial objects, and small stone turrets, either on the ground
within enclosures or on the tops of walls (Garlake 1973: 21–5).
   Archaeological investigations of Great Zimbabwe and at related sites have
concentrated on the date of the stone structures and the identity of their

272
                                                    Social complexity in Zambezia




Fig. 9.3 Stonework in the Hill Ruin at Great Zimbabwe. Note the skill with which the
masonry has been built around the natural outcrops of granite. Photograph by the
author, 1994.

builders. Considerable attention has also been given to the question of why
these structures were built. It appears that building in stone at Great Zim-
babwe dates mainly from AD 1275 to 1450, with a late period from 1450 to
1550 (Huffman and Vogel 1991: 68). The builders might have been descend-
ants of earlier occupants of the site during the ﬁrst millennium AD, a people
whose culture was related to that of cattle-oriented groups in south-eastern
Zimbabwe (Huffman 1982). As already discussed, Great Zimbabwe seems to
have inherited the role of Mapungubwe, a hilltop settlement on the south side
of the Limpopo Valley, which has been described as ‘the ﬁrst Zimbabwe
Culture capital’ (Huffman 1982: 146) and seems to have been at its most
important in the thirteenth century AD. Thus the site of Great Zimbabwe was
already occupied before the earliest stone walls were constructed. According to
Huffman and Vogel (1991: 69), continuity in the pottery at Great Zimbabwe
from the twelfth century onwards ‘deﬁnitely establishes a Shona identity’ for
the builders, but why were the walls constructed? Archaeologists seem agreed
that all zimbabwe-tradition stone structures were intended to be indicators of
status for the dwelling places of the elite. In short, their ﬁrst appearance may be
regarded as a sign of social and political change. That being the case, it is
unfortunate that so much archaeological attention has been given to the stone

                                                                                  273
African Civilizations

ruins at zimbabwe-tradition sites and so little to the rest of the settlement of
which each ruin must have formed a part. As a result, not only has most
attention been concentrated on a very small part of the population of these
settlements, as Morais and Sinclair claimed (p. 261), but the impressive char-
acter of the stone ruins at Great Zimbabwe has led to a concentration of work
on that site, while inadequate attention has been given to other zimbabwe-
tradition sites. Indeed, so single-minded were the earliest excavators that they
virtually destroyed the archaeological deposits within the main stone-walled
enclosures at Great Zimbabwe. Fortunately, both Randall-MacIver (1971)
and Caton-Thompson (1971) recognized the necessity to excavate at other
sites also, if they were to understand Great Zimbabwe itself. In addition, both
of them realized that the stone structures at Great Zimbabwe and similar sites
were only part of the story. Thus Randall-MacIver wrote in 1906: ‘It is,
properly speaking, the huts which constitute the really essential part of the
ruin in every case; the stone wall which the visitor so much admires is only the
skin, the huts are the ﬂesh and bone’ (Randall-MacIver 1971: 84). Caton-
Thompson went further by demonstrating, with her Great Zimbabwe excav-
ations in 1929 at the Maund Ruin, now the Eastern Valley Enclosure
(Fig. 9.4), how a jumble of stone walls made sense when one included in the
plan the daga huts, of which they were the courtyard walls (Caton-Thompson
1971: plate 57; Garlake 1973: ﬁg. 3). Collett et al. (1992: ﬁgs. 2 and 3) show
the same for the Western and Central Valley Enclosures but from surface
evidence. However, it was not till the 1970s that attention again turned to
area excavation and that interest at last focused on the whole settlement, of
which the enclosures and their inhabitants formed only a part.
   Work by Thomas Huffman, in the 1970s, showed that the stone enclosures
at Great Zimbabwe were the principal structures within an extensive settle-
ment of daga huts (Fig. 9.5), and a plan (Fig. 9.6) was provided of the
entire site (Huffman 1981: ﬁg. 1). Huffman’s work led to a revision of
the population estimate for Great Zimbabwe made by Garlake in 1973.
Instead of a population of 1,000 to 2,500 adults (Garlake 1973: 195),
it was suggested that the population might have numbered 5,000 adults
(Sinclair 1984) and also that the total population was 10,000 (Morais and
Sinclair 1980: 351) and might have been as high as 11,000 or even 18,000
(Huffman 1986: 323; 1996: 125). The conclusion was inescapable: Great
Zimbabwe had a density of population sufﬁcient for it to be called a town
or city. Beach provided a description of what it might have been like,
commenting: ‘The effect of having so many people on a single site may easily
be imagined: this was urban living’ (Beach 1980: 46). His analogy with
London or Paris at a similar date was a salutary reminder of the environment
that could have existed at Great Zimbabwe. Manyanga et al. (2010: 584)

274
Fig. 9.4 Great Zimbabwe: the Maund Ruin. Above, plan of stone walls only. Below,
plan of stone walls and daga huts as revealed by excavation. After Garlake 1973: ﬁg. 3.


                                                                                          275
276




      Fig. 9.5 Commoner housing at Great Zimbabwe. After Huffman 2007: ﬁg. 21.4.
277
      Fig. 9.6 Plan of Great Zimbabwe showing stone structures and areas of daga huts. Note: The ‘Acropolis’ is
      more usually referred to as the ‘Hill Ruin’. After Huffman 1981: ﬁg. 1.
African Civilizations

were more speciﬁc and wondered ‘how waste disposal [including sewage]
was handled at such crowded places’ in southern Africa.
   The problem for archaeologists has always been that the sheer size of an
urban site makes it difﬁcult to get an overall picture. This is what makes the
investigations of Sinclair so important. Soil samples were collected at random
from more than 600 hectares, allowing geophysical analysis, measurement of
soil colour, and geochemical analysis of phosphate concentrations to be
carried out over the whole of the Great Zimbabwe site. In addition, more than
200 cores each of 50 millimetres in diameter were drilled across the centre of
the site, covering an area of about 20 hectares. To all of this data were added
observations from ﬁeld walking, local informants, and the records of previous
archaeological investigations, resulting in a series of maps that showed the
developmental history of Great Zimbabwe, covering both its growth and
its subsequent decline, from the fourth century AD to the nineteenth century.
This work provided a picture that would have taken many years of excavation
to obtain, and provided it with minimal impact on the archaeological deposits
(Sinclair et al. 1993: 710, 712–13).
   Yet if Great Zimbabwe was the scene of an urban development on the scale
now suggested, then the question arises of how it related to the other, smaller
zimbabwe-tradition sites. Insufﬁcient attention was formerly given to these
sites by archaeologists, but ﬁeldwork and excavation have thrown some light
on them. Chipadze’s Ruin at Harleigh Farm near Rusape, for instance, seems
to have been the earlier of two ruins at this place and excavation showed that
it comprised a small settlement with cultural afﬁnities to Great Zimbabwe.
Occupied from about AD 1300 to after 1500, and with an apparent emphasis
on cattle keeping, this settlement consisted of stone screening walls enclosing
areas within which were massive daga huts (Robins and Whitty 1966). It
seems that what the excavators investigated were the dwellings of a small
political or religious elite and that somewhere nearby must have been the rest
of the settlement in which lived the ordinary people.
   A similar impression is gained from other zimbabwe-tradition sites that have
been excavated. Thus both Nhunguza Ruin and Ruanga Ruin are small sites,
dated to about the ﬁfteenth century AD, where stone screening walls enclosed
only a small number of daga huts. Garlake was of the opinion that the adult
population of such enclosures could never have been more than thirty and
was probably more often nearer ten (Garlake 1973: 164). Several pieces of
evidence at the Nhunguza and Ruanga sites reinforce the impression that the
occupants of the stone-walled enclosures were merely an elite section of a
larger settlement. First, at Nhunguza the largest hut seems to have been for
a person of authority to sit in audience, backed by symbols of that authority
that were housed in an adjacent, secluded room. Second, at both Nhunguza

278
                                                 Social complexity in Zambezia

and Ruanga the pottery consisted of a limited range of vessels and excluded
cooking vessels and bowls for eating and serving. This has also been observed
at other zimbabwe-tradition sites, indicating that food was prepared outside
the stone enclosures, then brought into them and the vessels later removed.
Third, at both these sites there is a suggestion that there were other habitations
outside the stone enclosures. At Ruanga it is possible that people of a lesser
status were living on the Lower Platform, while at Nhunguza the remains of at
least six small huts were found outside the enclosure but were not investigated
(Garlake 1972). It is from the zimbabwe-tradition site of Manyikeni (Manek-
weni), however, that has come some of the best evidence for social differenti-
ation. There is extensive surface evidence for occupation outside the stone
enclosure (Garlake 1976a: 29), and excavation has conﬁrmed the presence of
huts in this peripheral area (Morais and Sinclair 1980: 352; Sinclair 1987:
91–9). In addition, analysis of the faunal remains indicated that whereas cattle
dominated the meat diet of the people living in the central enclosure and
immediately around it, sheep or goat and game dominated that of the people
living on the periphery of the site (Barker 1978).
   The elite status of those who lived within zimbabwe-tradition structures, or
the special function of those structures, is also suggested by excavations at the
sites of Lekkerwater (Tsindi) and Zvongombe. At Lekkerwater a small number
of daga huts nestled within stone enclosures on the top of a bare granite hill,
one of them with an internal dividing wall like that in the largest hut at
Nhunguza and two of them with ﬁnely moulded daga features, some with
complex relief decoration. Material culture, economy, and occupation from
the tenth to the nineteenth century associate the site with the overall
zimbabwe-tradition complex (Garlake 1973: plates 17 and 99; Rudd 1984;
Turner 1984). Like Nhunguza and Ruanga, the two zimbabwe-tradition sites
at Zvongombe show that this complex extended also to the northern
Zimbabwe Plateau, where it seems to have been imposed on the unrelated
Musengezi and Harare traditions, suggesting an expansion from a core area in
the south (Pwiti 1996: ﬁg. 42, table 20b). It is uncertain whether these two
sites, known as Zvongombe North and Zvongombe South (Fig. 9.7), were
contemporary, although both appear to have belonged to the ﬁfteenth century
AD. Several daga huts were located within the stone enclosures, and internal
dividing walls and moulded daga features were present (Soper and Pwiti
1992). As with other similar sites, the number of occupants of the Zvongombe
enclosures seems to have been small.
   Just as the stone structures at Great Zimbabwe can be understood only in
the context of the substantial number of people who lived outside them, so also
the associated smaller zimbabwe-tradition sites scattered over the landscape
need to be examined in the context of the overall settlement pattern of which

                                                                             279
African Civilizations




Fig. 9.7 Zvongombe South, Zimbabwe, reconstructed layout. Stone walls are shown
solid, daga huts in outline. dp, daga platform; small circles in A represent pots, small black
dots are postholes, and arrows indicate entrances. After Soper and Pwiti 1992: ﬁgs. 3 and 4.
                                                  Social complexity in Zambezia

they formed a part. On the Zimbabwe Plateau there are some sites that
are culturally and chronologically related to zimbabwe-tradition sites but have
few or no stone structures. Two relevant sites that have been excavated are
Chivowa Hill (which has very little stone walling) and Montevideo Ranch
(which has no walling), both quite near to Great Zimbabwe itself. These sites
yielded evidence of communities engaged in both pastoralism and (probably)
sorghum and millet cultivation, for whom cattle seem to have been particularly
important. They would appear to have been rural peasant communities that
were contemporary with the various zimbabwe-tradition sites (Sinclair 1984;
1987: 99–109). A similar situation was also revealed on part of the northern
Zimbabwe Plateau, when a random stratiﬁed sampling strategy was applied
to an area of approximately 12 by 10 kilometres around Zvongombe.
The ‘Centenary Survey’, as this ﬁeldwork project was called, showed that
whereas the zimbabwe-tradition stone structures of the area tended to cluster,
there were ‘unwalled sites ceramically related to the zimbabwes’ that were more
widely scattered (Soper 1990: 73). It was concluded that the evidence suggested
‘a group of more important GZ [Great Zimbabwe] communities, perhaps a
“political elite” . . . supported by a network of small subordinate settlements’
(Soper 1990: 74). Subsequently, Soper (1992) discussed the sociopolitical status
of the zimbabwe-tradition sites on the northern Zimbabwe Plateau, where they
appear to represent a cultural intrusion from the south, but found that the
evidence was inadequate for any conﬁdent inferences to be made. However, the
overall evidence from the various sites that are thought to be culturally related
to Great Zimbabwe suggests that there existed a graded series of settlements,
from capital city to regional centre to rural village. If this was the case, then it
seems likely that a formally organized state did exist on the Zimbabwe Plateau
during the second quarter of the second millennium. However, the manner of
its emergence remains one of the most signiﬁcant issues in the archaeology
of southern Africa (Kim and Kusimba 2008; Huffman 2010b).
   Radiocarbon dating and imports from the East African coast, of which
ceramics are the most signiﬁcant, have enabled archaeologists to piece together
a reasonably consistent chronology for the zimbabwe-tradition sites of Great
Zimbabwe style. This indicates that they had ceased to be important by the
end of the ﬁfteenth century and indeed that Great Zimbabwe had declined
sharply, at least as an urban centre, by the middle of that century. It used to be
thought that the site was virtually abandoned at that time, but it seems more
likely that it continued to be inhabited until the nineteenth century, although it
had lost both its economic and political importance and most of its population
(Huffman and Vogel 1991: 69; Collett et al. 1992: 157–8; Sinclair et al. 1993:
ﬁg. 43.2). However, more attention needs to be given to the archaeology
of Great Zimbabwe concerning the period after about 1450 (Pikirayi 2013a).

                                                                               281
African Civilizations

   Documentary and oral sources indicate that the kingdom of the Mwene
Mutapa, on the northern end of the Zimbabwe Plateau, was the immediate
successor of the state that had been centred on Great Zimbabwe, and archaeo-
logical research has provided some support for this. In the Mount Fura area,
Innocent Pikirayi investigated sites which he identiﬁed with the Mutapa state.
During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the Portuguese had trading posts
in this area, attracted, it would appear, by its gold resources. Excavations at the
large settlement site of Baranda produced imports of those and later dates,
including glazed ceramics from the Near East, the Far East, and Europe, as well
as large quantities of Indian glass beads and other imported glass. However,
indigenous burnished graphite pottery was far more abundant than imported
wares and is similar to pottery from zimbabwe-tradition sites at the time of their
maximum development. Smaller sites in the same locality told a similar story,
although less imported material was present. Although there was no indication
of building in stone at any of these sites, others of possibly later date and
different cultural tradition, located on hills in the vicinity, do have stone-built
enclosures that contain evidence of occupation and in some cases have loop-
holes, perhaps for ﬁrearms, but these are quite different from the stone struc-
tures of zimbabwe-tradition sites. Thus, some sites in this area seem to have
inherited parts of the zimbabwe cultural tradition, but sophisticated building in
stone was not one of them (Pikirayi 1992; 1993; Sinclair et al. 1993: 725–31).
   It was in the south-western part of the plateau, not its north, that the
zimbabwe tradition of building in stone was to survive and develop. The sites
of Khami, Danangombe (Dhlo Dhlo), and Naletale are remarkable examples
of this phenomenon. These and a number of similar sites belong to the period
from the ﬁfteenth to the nineteenth century AD. The stone structures typical
of this later period consist mainly of revetment walls for building platforms, on
which daga huts were erected. Belonging to the Khami style of the zimbabwe
tradition, these walls made considerable use of decorative features (Garlake
1973: 166–8, plates 16 and 103). The most extensively investigated site
is the ﬁfteenth- to seventeenth-century Khami, where Keith Robinson excav-
ated parts of a group of elite buildings, some of which were approached
by underground passages and many of which were provided with drains
(Robinson 1959: 105). Khami is thought to have been the capital of the Butua
State, associated with the Torwa dynasty (Huffman 1996: 51), where many
people might have moved after the decline of Great Zimbabwe. For this
reason, Huffman (1981: 15–16) used the settlement pattern at Khami to throw
light on the earlier one at Great Zimbabwe and so provided a plan of the Khami
site (Fig. 9.8). This demonstrates that Khami, like Great Zimbabwe, consisted
mainly of peasant housing, with the buildings of the elite occupying only a
small part of the total area of the settlement. Subsequently, Huffman (1996)

282
                                                    Social complexity in Zambezia




Fig. 9.8 Plan of Khami, showing stone structures and areas of daga huts. After Huffman
1981: ﬁg. 13.



                                                                                  283
African Civilizations

also used both Khami and the seventeenth- to nineteenth-century site of
Danangombe, which became the capital of the Changamire dynasty (Beach
1994: 120), to help explain the symbolic use of space within Great Zimbabwe
itself and even in the earlier Mapungubwe. However, whatever the actual
level of cultural continuity over this long period, it appears that state formation
and urban living had a long history in this area. Indeed, van Waarden has
studied what she identiﬁes as the Butua State, which occupied much of western
Zimbabwe and eastern Botswana from 1425 to 1830 and which ‘for four
centuries . . . was the largest and most powerful state in southern Africa’.
It collapsed only in the nineteenth century due to repeated Ndebele invasions
(van Waarden 2012).
   Building in stone also continued in the Nyanga area of the Eastern
Highlands, where numerous structures have been thought to date from the
sixteenth to the early nineteenth century AD, although the so-called ruin
complexes have been dated to the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries (Soper
1996). Nyanga stone building (p. 266) differs from that of the zimbabwe-
tradition sites, however, and it has been claimed that it has little relevance for
understanding the latter (Garlake 1973: 172). Nevertheless, it does form part
of the wider context within which Great Zimbabwe, Khami, and their related
sites should be considered.
   The economic basis of the relatively large populations, indicated by the
settlements with stone walling, was a combination of cereal agriculture and
cattle and small stock husbandry. These were societies in which cattle became
wealth and their possession gave power; cattle even determined the layout of
settlements and the symbolic use of space within them (Kuper 1980; 1982;
Evers 1984). The ‘Bantu Cattle Pattern’, as it has been called, can be discerned
in many sites, including the Toutswe settlements of north-east Botswana, which
date from about AD 600 to about 1300 and show evidence of a graded
settlement hierarchy based on the possession of large herds of cattle (Denbow
1984; 1986). Similar developments also took place in the Limpopo Valley from
the ninth century onwards, eventually giving rise to the important centre of
Mapungubwe, which by the thirteenth century had grown powerful and
wealthy from its participation in long-distance trade with the Indian Ocean
coast. At the peak of its power, 3,000 to 5,000 people are thought to have lived
at Mapungubwe, making it ‘the largest urban settlement in Southern Africa in
its time’ (Huffman 1996: 184). In conjunction with a number of associated
sites, it also seems that Mapungubwe became one of the earliest identiﬁable
states in the area (Hall 1987: 74–90). However, although it has been thought
that the zimbabwe-tradition sites were its successors, a reexamination of the
chronology of Great Zimbabwe has suggested that the latter actually over-
lapped with that of Mapungubwe (Chirikure et al. 2013a; 2013b).

284
                                              Social complexity in Zambezia

   There is archaeological evidence for precolonial mining, particularly for
gold, on the Zimbabwe Plateau. These ‘ancient workings’, as they have been
called, have been associated with the zimbabwe-tradition sites and it was
formerly suggested that the distribution of workings and ruins was similar
(Summers 1969: 137–41). Summers (1969: 105) listed 1,267 ancient work-
ings, most of which resulted from gold mining. Both alluvial and quartz
reef gold was mined, with stopes, shafts, and sometimes adits used to exploit
the latter. The miners rarely penetrated deeper than about 25 metres, because
of the harder rocks met at depth, as well as ventilation or drainage problems
(Phimister 1976). Nevertheless, it has been claimed that of the 3,041 kilo-
metres of gold reef pegged by European miners by 1894, some 611 kilometres
were covered by ‘ancient workings’. The mining of placer deposits, both
alluvial and eluvial, seems to have been important, and they were compara-
tively easy to exploit. Indeed, it has been suggested that placer deposits in
the vicinity inﬂuenced the location of Great Zimbabwe. However, the problem
with archaeological evidence for precolonial mining on the Zimbabwe Plateau,
which included mining for copper and iron as well as gold, is that so many of
the old workings were destroyed by mining early in the twentieth century.
   Because of this, the work of Lorraine Swan, looking at changes in the
proximity of settlements to gold mines (excluding alluvial workings), has
been particularly useful (Swan 1994). Although gold production seems to
have peaked from the twelfth to the early ﬁfteenth centuries (Phimister 1976:
16), she found ‘a close relationship’ between mines and ﬁrst-millennium
settlements in the north-east of the Zimbabwe Plateau and indications of a
movement of the latter towards the mines in the south-west between the
seventh and ninth centuries (Swan 1994: 125). She also showed that mining
was the work of a lower-status population living near the mines, while
smelting was carried out at the elite zimbabwe-tradition sites, from which
have come most of the gold artefacts that have been found. Furthermore,
Swan was able to excavate a rare surviving portion of backﬁll in a stope
at the Tebekwe Mine, in central Zimbabwe (Swan 1994: 103–16). This
provided information on hard-rock mining techniques and was dated by
radiocarbon to the mid-ﬁfteenth to mid-seventeenth centuries. Huffman
argued that gold mining did not develop on the plateau until the eleventh
century AD at the earliest and that the rise of the Great Zimbabwe state was
a direct consequence of that mining and of the gold trade with the East
African coast. Swan’s work, and the presence of marine shells and beads in
early to mid ﬁrst-millennium contexts on the Zimbabwe Plateau (Swan 1994:
72–3), suggests that gold mining actually began during the ﬁrst millennium
AD. Nevertheless, the greater part of the production of 7 to 9 million ounces
that Phimister (1976: 16–17) estimated for the period from the late tenth

                                                                         285
African Civilizations

century to the nineteenth seems to have been produced during the time of
greatest building activity at Great Zimbabwe, and the signiﬁcance of gold
mining for the zimbabwe phenomenon seems incontrovertible.


Subsistence economy
In the economy that supported urbanization and state developments in
Zambezia, livestock husbandry was particularly important, dominated by
cattle. Consider, for example, the analysis of a large quantity of animal bones
excavated from a midden on the lower slopes of the hill at Great Zimbabwe,
on the top of which is the so-called Hill Ruin. It was estimated that this
collection consisted of about 140,000 pieces of bone. Of these, 15,298 were
selected as easily recognizable; on examination it was found that all except
218 pieces came from cattle. The more recognizable material was also ana-
lysed for skeletal part, bone treatment and fragmentation, and minimum
number of individuals. It was concluded that cattle dominated the food
remains from the Hill Ruin and that more than 75 percent of the 1,330
animals represented were immature when killed. It also appeared that the
cattle had been butchered on the hilltop rather than elsewhere (Brain 1974).
  A similar emphasis on cattle has been found at other sites. At Ruanga Ruin the
animal bones excavated by Garlake indicated that mature domestic cattle were
the main source of meat, although smaller animals – domestic sheep, goats, or
small buck – were also eaten (Garlake 1972: 134). Cattle were the most
common animal at Harleigh Farm (Robins and Whitty 1966); Sinclair found
the same thing at Chivowa Hill and Montevideo Ranch (Sinclair 1984; 1987:
102, 108); and Turner the same thing at Lekkerwater (Tsindi) (Turner 1984). At
these sites sheep or goat and wild animals were also present but of considerably
less importance. The cattle seem to have been of the Sanga type, which are still
kept by the Shona people of the area today. Garlake suggested that transhumant
pastoralism for the intensive production of beef was a major factor in the
location of zimbabwe-tradition settlements, many of which were situated on
the edge of the tsetse-free highlands so as to exploit lowland grazing when it was
relatively tsetse-free during the dry seasons. Indeed, Garlake argued that such
specialist pastoralism is as likely to have formed part of the basis for the rise of
Great Zimbabwe and its associated sites as gold mining and long-distance trade,
to which the development has so often been attributed (Garlake 1978b).
Although his transhumance model has since been questioned (Thorp 1995:
73), there seems little doubt about the important role of cattle in the economy.
  Perhaps those immature cattle bones at the base of the hill at Great Zimbabwe
should make us pause. If the Hill Ruin was occupied by an elite group or if the
ethnohistorical evidence for cattle sacriﬁce collected by Carl Mauch in 1871 is

286
                                                  Social complexity in Zambezia

relevant for 400 to 600 years earlier (Brain 1974: 308–9), then the bones from
the hill midden might not constitute reliable evidence for the role of cattle in the
overall subsistence economy. Indeed, there is a general danger that faunal
evidence from within or near stone structures at zimbabwe-tradition sites will
throw light only on the diet or rituals of the elite. A comparison by Carolyn
Thorp of the age of cattle from the hill midden at Great Zimbabwe with the age
of cattle from an area of commoners’ houses in the valley showed that the
former indicated the killing of a signiﬁcantly larger number of young animals
(Thorp 1995: 73). Furthermore, it was found at Manyikeni (p. 279) that whilst
those people within and near the stone enclosure mainly ate beef, those living
on the edge of the site ate mainly sheep or goat and game (Barker 1978).
In addition, a sample of faunal material from Khami contained not only a
preponderance of cattle but also a wide variety of other species.
   The location and apparently continuous occupation of the zimbabwe-
tradition sites suggest that pastoralism was only a part of the subsistence
economy. Ethnohistorical evidence indicates that it was grain cultivation, par-
ticularly of sorghum and millet, which provided the basic staple foods. In
addition, there was probably a wide range of vegetables cultivated. Carbonized
seeds from Great Zimbabwe and from related sites of the Leopard’s Kopje
tradition (Robinson et al. 1961: 170) conﬁrm that sorghum was grown, as well
as ﬁnger millet (Eleusine coracana), pearl millet (Pennisetum americanum), and
a variety of beans (Voandzeia subterranea) and peas (Vigna spp.). Furthermore,
two grains of ﬁnger millet were recovered from deposits dated to the second
half of the ﬁrst millennium at the site of Kadzi, in the middle Zambezi Valley
(Pwiti 1996: 132). Also the eleventh- to fourteenth-century site of Malumba, in
southern Zimbabwe, yielded large quantities of sorghum. The role of livestock
in such mixed farming economies was largely to cushion the effect of crop
failure in bad years and, particularly in the case of cattle, to provide a means of
amassing wealth in a negotiable form, wealth that could form the basis of
power. Apparently, Bocarro (p. 264) was not exaggerating in the seventeenth
century when he claimed that most of the people in this area were ‘inclined to
agricultural and pastoral pursuits, in which their riches consist’.


Technology
Archaeological evidence from zimbabwe-tradition sites indicates considerable
technological expertise. Most obvious is building in stone; the construction of
free-standing, drystone walls, especially on the scale and of the quality of some of
those at Great Zimbabwe, requires skill. Admittedly the tabular nature of the
exfoliated granite provided a supply of superb building material, but the builders
knew how best to use it within their own technological limitations. Although they

                                                                               287
African Civilizations

never seem to have grasped fully the importance of bonding, either between
courses or between separate walls, their building technique, at its best, exhibited
remarkable sophistication. Walls were broad based to spread their load and
tapered to their tops. They were rubble ﬁlled, to economise on labour and
resources, but the faces of the walls, so vital to the success of such a technique,
were constructed with great care. Sharp corners and rectangular layouts were
avoided, and plans consisted of random curved forms. This emphasis on curves is
also evident in the distinctive architectural features that were constructed. Over-
all, the stone structures of the zimbabwe-tradition sites, and of Great Zimbabwe
particularly, imply remarkable technological skill. These structures indicate the
development, from an indigenous tradition, of what Garlake called ‘an architec-
ture that is unparalleled elsewhere in Africa or beyond’ (Garlake 1973: 50).
   However, the stone walls of the zimbabwe-tradition sites were merely one
component of the building technology. Fragmentary evidence from a number of
sites suggests that building in daga (or ‘mud’) was just as important as building in
stone. Indeed, it seems that originally much of the impressive stonework at Great
Zimbabwe would have been plastered with daga up to a height of some 2 metres
above the ground (Garlake 1973: 20). This material was used for a variety of
constructional purposes, including ﬂoors and other internal ﬁttings, and was
skilfully moulded into decorative patterns, as well as being beautifully ﬁnished
to a hard, smooth, almost polished surface. Other building skills of which we
have no direct evidence must have included wood working and thatching.
   An important aspect of the technology of Zambezia during the ﬁrst half of
the second millennium AD comprised mining and metallurgy. Archaeological
evidence (p. 285) indicates that mining was a widespread activity conducted on a
considerable scale, although in the case of gold mining it was limited in depth,
and recovery methods were inefﬁcient (Phimister 1976: 15). The metals that were
produced probably consisted of iron, copper, gold, and tin, and Great Zimbabwe
has yielded evidence of metal working in all of these. Iron working seems
to have been particularly well developed, producing a range of hoes, axes,
spearheads, arrowheads, knives, and other things. Excavations at two sites in
northern Zimbabwe, Swart Village, dated from 800 to 1200 AD, and Baranda,
dated from 1500 to 1700, have thrown light on smelting and smithing practices,
indicating both continuities and differences through time (Chirikure and Rehren
2006). Copper, bronze, and gold were used mainly for decorative purposes, often
in the form of wire made with the assistance of iron tongs and drawplates but also
as sheet or cast metal (Garlake 1973: 113–16). The gold-covered rhinoceros
ﬁgurine and other objects found in twelfth-century burials at Mapungubwe are
a sad reminder of the objects that must have been lost to looters, particularly
during the period 1895 to 1900 when more than 2,000 ounces (62,200 grams)
of gold were estimated to have been taken from ruin sites (Swan 1994: 70).

288
                                                Social complexity in Zambezia

   Other crafts indicated by the archaeological evidence from zimbabwe-tradition
sites include the manufacture of pottery, much of which had polished and
graphited exteriors. In addition, spinning, presumably of cotton, is suggested
by the large numbers of perforated discs of potsherd that have been found,
although they might have had other uses (Garlake 1973: 116–17). If they were
spindle whorls, then the presence of spinning would suggest that weaving was
taking place and that textile manufacture was of some signiﬁcance (Davison and
Harries 1980). The carving of soapstone is also worth noting, with most of the
evidence coming from Great Zimbabwe itself. Ritual bird ﬁgures, monoliths, ﬂat-
bottomed dishes, ﬁgurines, and open moulds for casting cross-shaped ingots of
copper were all carved from this easily worked and locally available stone. The
manner in which the soapstone was carved suggests a familiarity with wood
carving and is another reminder of the many crafts in perishable materials that
must also have existed at the zimbabwe-tradition settlements (Garlake 1973:
119–23, 130–1). There are, however, examples of ivory carving and bone
working from the site of Bambandyanalo (K2) and from nearby Mapungubwe,
dating from the end of the ﬁrst millennium and the beginning of the second
millennium AD (Hall 1987: 80–1). More durable are the many pottery ﬁgurines
of humans and animals, recovered from more than 200 sites and dating from
about the third century AD to the end of the nineteenth century (Matenga 1993).
   The technology associated with zimbabwe-tradition settlements indicates
that by the second quarter of the second millennium AD, there had developed
a degree of functional specialization within the society to which these settle-
ments belonged.


Social system
Zimbabwe-tradition sites provide many indications of social and economic
stratiﬁcation. The stone structures that characterize most of these sites are
symbols of privilege and power, in the opinion of Pikirayi (2013b) creating
elite power as well as reﬂecting it. They have no other obvious role, such as
defence. Rather, they seem to have been intended as containers, behind whose
high walls could be hidden both the living and the ceremonial areas of a ruling
elite. Indeed, the walls themselves demonstrate the power of the ruling group,
able to spend its surplus wealth on such conspicuous consumption and able to
exert the necessary control over substantial bodies of skilled and unskilled
labour. Although the work actually extended over some three centuries, a
British drystone building contractor has estimated that the structures at Great
Zimbabwe would take eighty-four men, working six days a week, two years to
complete (Reader 1997: 338). Furthermore, some of the items recovered from
within these stone-walled compounds conﬁrm the elevated status of their

                                                                           289
African Civilizations

occupants. Thus there are objects of gold, copper, bronze, or soapstone; there
are also exotic objects such as glass beads and, at Great Zimbabwe itself, glass
vessels and Islamic and Chinese ceramics, products of long-distance trade via
the East African coast. Moreover, there are signiﬁcant absences from the
artefacts found in the stone enclosures. Garlake remarked on the ‘extraordin-
arily limited range’ of pottery, comprising drinking and brewing/storage
vessels but lacking open bowls for cooking, serving, and eating and lacking
pots for fetching water. Garlake thought that this suggested a limited range of
domestic activities within the enclosures and pointed out that there is also
an almost complete absence of grindstones (Garlake 1973: 112–13). Add to
this the fact that many of the enclosures contained huts with ﬁnely ﬁnished
daga walls, at least one of which (at Nhunguza) seems to have been an
‘audience hut’, and the elite character of the occupants is almost certainly
established. The small populations of the enclosures provide further evidence
of this; Garlake estimated the total population of those at Great Zimbabwe
as between 100 and 200 adults and the population of enclosures at all the
other known zimbabwe-tradition sites at any one time as about 750 adults
(Garlake 1973: 195–6).
   By the 1970s archaeologists began to ask questions about the rest of the
population of these settlements. Evidence became available that the stone
enclosures were merely central structures within more extensive settlements,
which in the case of Great Zimbabwe might have had a total population of
18,000 people. With some justiﬁcation, Huffman referred to Great Zimbabwe
as southern Africa’s ﬁrst town. The ordinary townspeople lived in cramped
conditions (Fig. 9.5), at a density of about three times that of the elite. Further,
judging from the evidence at Manyikeni (p. 279), they did not eat so well.
However, there was probably already social differentiation amongst the
townspeople themselves, with functional specialization giving a different status
to craftsmen such as blacksmiths and builders.
   At Great Zimbabwe, at least, urbanization was already in progress. Further-
more, if this site is examined in the context of all the other zimbabwe-tradition
sites that are culturally and chronologically related, then it is possible to
discern a graded series of settlements that suggests the existence of a formally
organized state (p. 281). At one end of the scale was the capital at Great
Zimbabwe, with its large population controlled by a powerful elite; at the
other end were rural villages with their peasant communities. In between were
regional centres: smaller towns, each of which was controlled by its own elite
group that probably owed allegiance to that of the capital. It also seems
probable that the occupants of these settlements shared a similar worldview,
originating from Kuper’s ‘Bantu Cattle Pattern’ (p. 284) but developing into
something quite distinctive. The attempt by Huffman (1996) to reconstruct the

290
                                                     Social complexity in Zambezia




Fig. 9.9 Spatial analysis maps of Zimbabwe sites. Large map shows 50 km clustering level;
inset map shows 155 km clustering level and Garlake’s (1978b) Thiessen polygon study.
After Sinclair and Lundmark 1984: ﬁg. 5.


symbolism that shaped the material record at Great Zimbabwe and related
sites provides a stimulating picture of how society might have been organized,
although it remains difﬁcult to verify.


Population pressures
Spatial analysis (Fig. 9.9) of the distribution of zimbabwe-tradition sites on the
Zimbabwe Plateau (possibly the distribution of research rather than of sites) has
demonstrated a settlement pattern in which the population showed a marked
tendency to cluster. A similar analysis of Khami sites again shows obvious

                                                                                    291
African Civilizations

clustering but in a different place (Sinclair and Lundmark 1984; Sinclair 1987:
123–4). The locations of these clusters, which are thought to indicate the areas,
respectively, of the Great Zimbabwe and the Butua State, were presumably
inﬂuenced by environmental factors. Tsetse ﬂy, climatic variability, and differ-
ences in soil fertility must all have played a part in making some areas more
attractive to human settlement than others. For example, zimbabwe-tradition
sites tended to be on the southern edge of the plateau, which was high enough to
be tsetse-free, was within reach of lowland grazing only exploitable during its
relatively tsetse-free dry season, had local areas with a higher rainfall, and
possessed some areas of high soil fertility. As Pikirayi (2001a: 148) concluded:
‘Land was always an important issue in the past. It was necessary to control it
for its resources’. In addition, Tsheboeng (2001: 128) thought that ‘two vari-
ables appear to have been important in settlement location decision, namely
soils and water needs’. Although this picture was complicated by settlement
clusters of lesser importance in the mining areas of the central plateau, it appears
that the places most attractive to human settlement were relatively limited.
Many seem to have lain within what Beach (1994: 19–23) called ‘The Great
Crescent of population’. This could well have caused local population pressures
sufﬁcient to give rise to the social changes inherent in the processes of urbaniza-
tion and state formation. As Sinclair concluded, ‘pressure on land and the
accompanying possibility to control access to productive areas should be
included in the analysis of relations between élite and others and even of
differentiation within the élite itself’ (Sinclair 1987: 144).
   Some conﬁrmation of the existence of local population pressures
might, indeed, be provided by the eventual abandonment of Great Zimbabwe
itself. Both Garlake and Huffman were of the opinion that abandonment
resulted from environmental deterioration brought on by the large population,
and Sinclair (1987: 114, 116) thought that there was a 200-year periodicity
in the sociopolitical history of the area resulting from this factor, so that
Bambandyanalo–Mapungubwe, Great Zimbabwe, and Khami each lasted
for about that time. Certainly the large number of people that are now thought
to have lived in Great Zimbabwe must have placed a tremendous demand on
the natural resources of the surrounding area. Firewood would soon have
become locally unavailable, necessitating its laborious transport by head from
ever-increasing distances; wildlife to serve as a supplement to human diet
would have become scarce (Brain 1974: 309); and the relatively limited areas
of better soils must have been gradually exhausted by overcultivation and
overgrazing. As might have been the case with Aksum, it is possible that it
was overexploitation of the strong resource base of Great Zimbabwe that
brought about its destruction. Without fundamental changes in technology
and agricultural system, it was fated to destroy itself.

292
                                                Social complexity in Zambezia

Ideology
Religion seems to have permeated many aspects of Shona life, as suggested by
the numerous pottery ﬁgurines from Zimbabwe, widespread in space and time,
which have been discussed by Matenga (1993). Therefore, it is probable that
it was a contributory factor in the rise of Great Zimbabwe and of the state
that it seems to have controlled. Indeed, one of the two main schools of
thought concerning the origins of these developments sees religion as the major
factor in their initiation. However, our knowledge of Shona religion is drawn
from oral tradition and ethnography, and from such sources it is difﬁcult to
estimate its role in changes that took place some seven centuries ago, although
Huffman (1996) made a bold attempt to do so. According to Garlake (1973:
184), ‘Great Zimbabwe was very probably always a major religious centre’,
where Mwari, the Shona supreme god, was particularly revered and where
cults of the mhondoro, spirits associated with the ruling dynasties, also ﬂour-
ished (Garlake 1973: 174). Certainly there are archaeological features and
artefacts at Great Zimbabwe that suggest religious and ancestral associations –
particularly the monoliths, some surmounted by carved birds, most of which
originally stood in the Eastern Enclosure of the Hill Ruin. Furthermore,
Herbert (1996: 645) emphasized ‘the ideological dimensions of technology
and the negotiations over power’ represented by ‘the insignia of ofﬁce such as
spears, axes and double gongs’. However, there is no archaeological evidence
to support Garlake’s assumption that religion was ‘probably the most import-
ant single factor in bringing about the ﬁrst steps towards the cohesion, organ-
ization and stratiﬁcation of the society’, and Garlake himself recognized
this (1973: 184). Indeed, although Shona religious ideology might have been
important as a means of reinforcing the authority of a ruling elite, the hypoth-
esis that the rise of Great Zimbabwe and its associated sites was due to
a religious minority, of either migrant or local origin, is unconvincing. The
alternative is the trade hypothesis, which maintains that Zimbabwe was a
result of surplus wealth from the East African gold trade. This, at least, is an
hypothesis that is susceptible to archaeological evaluation.


External trade
Both Arabic and early Portuguese documentary sources mention the existence
of trade between the Sofala area (p. 251), on the southern coast of Mozam-
bique, and the interior. That area seems to have been a clearing house, where
trade goods from the Islamic world and from India and China were imported
for onward transmission to the interior, which exported primary products via
the same area. Most sought-after of those products was gold, although at the

                                                                           293
African Civilizations

time of the ﬁrst Portuguese contact ivory was another important export, and it
is probable that other commodities, including copper, were also handled. The
imports, according to the Portuguese, were principally cloth, beads, and glazed
ceramics. The source of the gold that passed through the Sofala area was said
by ibn Battuta, early in the fourteenth century, to be Yuﬁ in the land of the
Limiin, one month’s march from the coast (Freeman-Grenville 1975: 31), and it
has been suggested that the land of the Limiin was the Zimbabwe Plateau and
that Yuﬁ was Great Zimbabwe itself. A number of questions arise from this.
First: does the archaeological evidence at zimbabwe-tradition sites throw any
light on this trade? Second: to what extent was this trade unusual and to what
extent was it merely part of a complex network of trade that involved both
long-distance and interregional exchange? Third and most important: what
role, if any, did this trade play in the rise of Great Zimbabwe and its associated
sites? Is it really possible that the Zimbabwe Culture was simply an indigenous
reaction to external stimulus in the form of the East Coast gold trade?
   Archaeological evidence for trade between Zambezia and the East African
coast is abundant for the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries AD, when the
Portuguese had trading posts in the Zambezi Valley and on the northern part
of the plateau (Pikirayi 1993). For the earlier periods there is less evidence,
but some of the earliest comes from the site of Schroda, near the conﬂuence
of the Shashe and Limpopo Rivers, occupied between the eighth and tenth
centuries and containing imported glass beads as well as indications that
ivory was being worked and traded. In the same area the eleventh-century
site of Bambandyanalo (K2) has produced similar evidence, and by the
thirteenth century, glass beads and gold-covered objects from Mapungubwe
suggest trade in gold and ivory with the East Coast (Hall 1987: 75–85;
Huffman 1996: 175–80). Perhaps the most important evidence for trade,
however, comes from the ‘Renders Ruin’ at Great Zimbabwe itself, where a
hoard included a glazed Persian bowl of thirteenth- or fourteenth-century
date. With it were a number of Chinese celadon dishes, some sherds of a
Chinese stoneware vessel, another glazed Persian bowl, and fragments of
engraved and painted Near Eastern glass, all of about the same date. In
addition there were a piece of coral, an iron spoon, an iron lamp holder with
a copper suspension chain, a copper box, two copper ﬁnger rings, and two
small bronze bells. There were also several tens of thousands of glass beads,
some brass wire, and a quantity of cowrie shells. Hall excavated this hoard in
1903, but in 1941 Goodall found some 30,000 beads in another part of the
same ruin (Garlake 1973: 131–3). These exotic objects demonstrate that in
about the fourteenth century Great Zimbabwe was in contact with the
trading cities of the East African coast. The hoard has been interpreted as
part of the stock of a visiting Arab trader, but the diverse nature of the goods

294
                                                Social complexity in Zambezia

and their location within what might have been the royal wives’ living
area make it more likely that they were part of a royal repository (Huffman
1981: 6). The unique character of this collection suggests that it must have
had considerable prestige value for its owner. Indeed, as late as the beginning
of the sixteenth century imported Chinese porcelain was still reaching Great
Zimbabwe (Collett et al. 1992: 139, 157–8).
   Another piece of archaeological evidence for trading contacts between the
Zimbabwe Plateau and the coast consists of a coin minted in Kilwa probably
in the early fourteenth century. This coin was excavated at Great Zimbabwe
and appears to be the only one ever recovered from a scientiﬁc context at that
site. Of more use as evidence for trade with the coast, because they are more
common, are the large numbers of glass beads recovered both from Great
Zimbabwe and from many other zimbabwe-tradition sites. The ultimate origin
of these beads is unknown, but they are similar to beads found in the East
Coast cities and, like them, they came from the Indian Ocean trade (p. 256).
Indeed, beads from the earlier sites of Bambandyanalo and Mapungubwe have
been shown by rare earth element analysis to have been made at al-Fustat
in Egypt (Saitowitz et al. 1996). However, changes in the glass chemistry of
beads from southern African sites between the eighth and ﬁfteenth centuries
suggest different sources around the Indian Ocean at different times (Wood
2011). Cowries are also very occasionally found at other zimbabwe-tradition
sites, as well as at Great Zimbabwe. Otherwise, evidence of imports from the
coast is limited, although the appearance at zimbabwe-tradition sites of spindle
whorls, which are absent from earlier sites, has been interpreted as indicating
that the craft of spinning spread from the coast as a result of trading contacts
(Garlake 1973: 117). It should be no surprise that a trade in which textiles and
gold were the most important commodities has left relatively little archaeo-
logical evidence. Nevertheless, there is strong circumstantial evidence for the
importance of trading between the Zimbabwe Plateau and the coast. There
was a sudden and considerable increase in building activity at Great Zim-
babwe during the fourteenth century, at the same time that equally sudden and
considerable expansion was taking place in the cities of the East African coast,
particularly at Kilwa. Equally, the fortunes of both Great Zimbabwe and the
coastal cities declined at about the same time during the ﬁfteenth century.
The most likely explanation for such a coincidence of prosperity must be that
there was a ‘close economic connection’ (Garlake 1976b: 224). Sutton (1997)
has suggested that depression in the coastal economy actually began in the
second half of the fourteenth century, following a fall in the international
price of gold, possibly resulting from the Black Death of 1346 to 1349.
Thus one of the factors in the decline of Great Zimbabwe might have been
a reduced demand for gold on the ‘world’ market.

                                                                           295
African Civilizations

   The second question that was asked concerned the extent to which this
overseas trade was part of a more general network of long-distance and
interregional exchange. In addition to items that must have derived from the
East Coast trade, the Renders Ruin hoard contained a large quantity of
material that suggests the existence of a substantial internal African trade.
Thus there were about 30 kilograms of iron wire and about 100 kilograms of
iron hoes, axes, and chisels. With them were ‘cakes of copper’, ivory, two
unusual spearheads, three iron gongs, and three iron rods that were probably
strikers for the gongs. There were also a soapstone dish, twenty small pieces of
perforated gold sheathing, some gold wire, and a handful of gold beads
(Garlake 1973: 133). The gongs are bell shaped and were made of two sheets
of iron welded together round the ﬂanges, although welding seems not to have
been practised in Zambezia. Seven similar gongs have been found at Great
Zimbabwe and single examples have been found at Chumnungwa Ruins and
Danangombe (Dhlo Dhlo) Ruins. Such gongs are characteristic of parts of
Zambia, the Congo Basin, and West Africa, and it has been suggested that
their distribution indicates contact between different African states (Vansina
1969). Indeed, gongs of this type accompanied two of the burials at the
Zambezi Valley site of Ingombe Ilede, in Zambia (Fagan et al. 1969: 92–4),
and their presence at Great Zimbabwe presumably indicates trading connec-
tions with the Ingombe Ilede area. This probability is reinforced by the
discovery of single examples of cross-shaped copper ingots, of a characteristic
Ingombe Ilede form, at the zimbabwe-tradition site of Chumnungwa and at
another ruin site in the Great Zimbabwe area. Three similar ingots have also
been found in the Mtelegwa Ruin. It seems that during the fourteenth and
ﬁfteenth centuries the Ingombe Ilede people were mining copper on some scale,
and as there are salt deposits in their area, it is likely that they traded salt as
well as copper to the Zimbabwe Plateau. In exchange they probably took gold
beads and ornaments, and iron tools and weapons. The comparatively few
glass beads at Ingombe Ilede sites suggest that the trade was with other internal
African communities, rather than with the East Coast (Garlake 1976b: 224).
Furthermore, this Ingombe Ilede–Zimbabwe Plateau trade was probably just a
small part of a complex internal trading network, of which the rest has left
little archaeological evidence. Documentary and oral traditional sources indi-
cate a network of trade routes stretching deep into the interior (van Waarden
2012: ﬁg. 7.2). Brian Fagan demonstrated for the region north of the Zim-
babwe Plateau that the demand for raw materials, particularly iron, copper,
and salt, ensured the growth of such networks (Fagan 1969). As in other parts
of Africa, it is likely that internal trading of this sort substantially pre-dated
long-distance external trade. If this was the case, then the East Coast gold trade
probably took advantage of an existing trading network.

296
                                                 Social complexity in Zambezia

  The third and ﬁnal question concerned the role of the East Coast trade in
the rise of Great Zimbabwe and other zimbabwe-tradition sites. The quick
answer is that it was probably very important but that its role in the social
and economic changes that led to urbanization and state formation was to
facilitate rather than to originate. The cause of these developments was
deeper and more complex than a mere trade in luxuries, but without doubt
that trade provided the elite with prestige goods and with a form of wealth
that could be used to enhance their authority.


Conclusion
Great Zimbabwe and its related sites comprise the archaeological evidence for
social and political developments that took place in Zambezia during the ﬁrst
half of the second millennium AD. The stone structures that have dominated
archaeological research housed a small ruling elite, who governed settlements
varying in size from the capital city of Great Zimbabwe itself, with a popula-
tion of perhaps 18,000, to smaller regional towns. The authority of this elite
probably extended also to rural villages that were too small to justify elite
residences. The size of Great Zimbabwe would suggest that urbanization was
already in process, at least at this place. The presence of comparable elite
structures in so many of the other settlements would suggest that some
progress had also been made towards the formation of a state. Why and
how had this happened?
   The basic reason was almost certainly the successful subsistence agriculture of
this area. As a generally healthy environment that was tsetse-free and with
access to other areas that were seasonally tsetse-free, it supported a mixed
farming economy in which grain, vegetables, and livestock – particularly cattle –
all played a part. This combination of cultivation and livestock would have
helped to even out the effects of bad years and must inevitably have led to
an increase in the population. However, good soils were limited and it is
probable that the tsetse boundaries ﬂuctuated. Thus some areas must have been
more productive than others, and those who controlled such areas must in time
have come to control the less fortunate members of an expanding population.
   However, there were alternatives to agriculture: mining, trade, and crafts of
various sorts. The development of these activities provided some escape from
the problem of limited productive land. They also provided the emerging elite
with further sources of wealth that could be controlled and that were more
negotiable than land or cattle. In particular, it is likely that a far-reaching and
complex network of interregional trade in raw materials had developed within
south central Africa, before Indian Ocean merchants were able to beneﬁt from
it. How could the latter have known that there was gold to be had from the

                                                                              297
African Civilizations

relatively remote Zimbabwe Plateau, unless that gold was already reaching the
coast? Nevertheless, the gold trade with the East Coast must in time have
become extremely important in creating surplus wealth that further enhanced
the power of the Zimbabwe Plateau elite. Even the most conservative estimate
suggests that between 7 and 9 million ounces of gold were made available for
trade and internal consumption before the end of the nineteenth century
(Phimister 1976: 16–17). It is not difﬁcult to imagine the impact on Plateau
society of the volume of goods (particularly cloth and beads) that must have
been received in exchange prior to the middle of the second millennium AD.
It seems unlikely that the gold trade ‘caused’ the rise of Great Zimbabwe, but
nevertheless it must have had a great effect on it.
   The apparent reasons for the decline and abandonment of Great Zimbabwe
and its associated sites consist of a reversal of the factors that gave rise to their
growth. The gold trade declined, probably because of falling world prices and
the depletion of the more easily worked deposits on the Zimbabwe Plateau.
More important, however, the environment around Great Zimbabwe col-
lapsed: overcropped, overgrazed, overhunted, overexploited in every essential
aspect of subsistence agriculture, it ceased to be able to carry the concentration
of people to whom it had given rise. To begin to understand this episode of
growth and decay, it is essential to see it in the broadest possible context, in
spatial, temporal, and social, economic, and political circumstances. Great
Zimbabwe was only ever a mystery when viewed in isolation.




298
Chapter 10
Central Africa: the Upemba Depression,
Interlacustrine Region, and Far West
This book presents case studies of archaeological evidence for urbanization
and state formation in precolonial Africa. The choice of areas has been
dictated by the character of the archaeological evidence and by the extent of
archaeological research, resulting in an incomplete picture. Not only might
the individual case studies be unrepresentative of developments in the selected
areas, but also there were precolonial cities and states in Africa, known from
the evidence of ethnohistory or oral tradition, that are excluded. This omission
is because the relevant archaeological evidence is either absent or severely
limited.
   The basic problem is archaeological visibility (Connah 2008). Some mani-
festations of early urbanization and state formation in Africa are of such a
character that their archaeological investigation is peculiarly difﬁcult. For
instance, the capital city of Buganda (Gutkind 1963), a state near Lake
Victoria, was described in 1889 as ‘one of the great capitals of Africa’ (Ashe
1889: 52), but it was constructed totally of grass, wood, and other organic
materials and it moved frequently, particularly on the death of the Kabaka, the
ruler of Buganda (Gutkind 1960: 29). The sites of these large settlements are,
therefore, unlikely to have much depth of deposit or structural remains, and
no archaeological investigation of them has been attempted (the last two
are covered by modern Kampala). Thus there is no archaeological information
about a settlement that John Hanning Speke, its ﬁrst European visitor,
described as ‘a magniﬁcent sight. A whole hill was covered with gigantic huts
such as I had never seen in Africa before’ (Speke 1863: 283).
   There is, however, no reason why archaeologists should not be able to
investigate such short-lived settlements of ephemeral materials, as was done,
for example, at the South African site of Mgungundlovu (Parkington
and Cronin 1979). Provided that subsequent activity or erosion has not
destroyed the inevitably shallow evidence, survey and excavation techniques
do exist that enable information to be obtained from sites of this type.
Nevertheless, they have been seldom applied in Africa, and a lack of sophis-
tication in research design has led to the excavation of many larger African
settlement sites with structures of stone, ﬁred brick, or mud, while sites
with less substantial structural remains have been ignored. Although this
situation is now changing, there are large areas of Africa where political and
economic problems make it difﬁcult, and sometimes impossible, to conduct

                                                                           299
African Civilizations

archaeological ﬁeld research, so that the excavation of sites of supposed
low archaeological visibility still lacks the necessary attention.
   This could apply to many parts of Africa but is particularly relevant to a
huge area of the continent extending across the modern states of the Congo
Republic, Democratic Congo, Angola, Zambia, Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda,
and western Tanzania. This area straddles the equator, although situated
mostly to its south. Ethnohistorical and oral traditional evidence indicate that
it was the location of a succession of cities and states from at least the sixteenth
century AD onwards. Some of these, such as the Kingdom of Kongo in the
sixteenth century or the state of Buganda in the nineteenth century, clearly
impressed European visitors. The latter were often particularly interested in
the cities that they came across, such as Loango in what is now the Congo
Republic (Dapper 1686: 320–1). Nevertheless, archaeology has contributed
relatively little to our knowledge of precolonial cities and states in this part of
Africa. At its southern margin, for instance, the Lozi Kingdom is known from
oral history, not archaeology. For all periods in the enormous area covered by
equatorial rainforest there has been only ‘a meager scattering of excavated
archaeological sites’ (Vansina 1990: 8), although the situation is improving.
   For the Kingdom of Kongo, there is the site of its capital city, Mbanza
Kongo (São Salvador), in northern Angola (Fig. 10.1), but it has never been
excavated (de Maret 1982: 80). Indeed, excavated evidence relevant to the
Kongo state was for long limited to a cemetery at Mbanza Mbata, where elite
graves produced indications of European trading contacts during the seven-
teenth and eighteenth centuries (de Maret 1982: 82). However, there has now
been other ﬁeldwork that indicates the potential of archaeology to throw light
on this region during the last 400 to 500 years (Clist et al. 2013a; 2013b).
Nevertheless, archaeological evidence for Kongo, a state described in detail
in both contemporary accounts (e.g., Pigafetta 1591) and historical studies
(e.g., Randles 1968), remains limited. Further to the north, for example, the
city of Concobela (Ngombela) has been identiﬁed with the site of Kingabwa,
near Kinshasa, but it has since been destroyed by clay digging and covered by a
garbage dump (de Maret 1982: 83). Similarly, the mounds of Mashita Bansa,
the site of a city in south-central Democratic Congo, can tell us little, although
test excavations were carried out there in 1984. Even the excavation of some
of the royal tombs of Rwanda was of limited value, as the three graves
investigated contained burials of the late nineteenth and early twentieth cen-
turies. One of these was of Cyirima Rujugira, a king who had been dead since
the seventeenth or eighteenth century but was buried only in 1930 or 1931.
This burial was accompanied by numerous grave goods that had also
remained unburied until the twentieth century; these are of interest because
they included items symbolic of royalty (Van Noten 1972). A similar problem

300
                                                                          Central Africa




Fig. 10.1 Principal archaeological sites in Central Africa mentioned in the text. Note the
locations of the Upemba Depression and the Interlacustrine Region, for which see Figs. 10.2
and 10.4. Hatched areas are subject to inundation. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.

of limited time depth exists for the site of Ryamurari, the old capital of the
Ndorwa Kingdom in Rwanda. Remains of circular mud walls indicate the
king’s enclosure, and there are also cattle kraals built of cattle dung and
garbage, but excavation has produced radiocarbon dates of the eighteenth
and twentieth centuries (Van Noten 1982: 75).
  Fortunately there are two areas in Central Africa where archaeological
research has contributed signiﬁcantly to our knowledge of socioeconomic
and political developments over the last millennium or so. One of these is
the Upemba Depression, in south-east Democratic Congo, and the other is the
Interlacustrine Region, particularly the part in Uganda (Fig. 10.1). The ﬁrst

                                                                                      301
African Civilizations

has shed light on the origins of the Luba state, which is known to have existed
by the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (Reefe 1981: 60–1); the second has
provided information on the antecedents and early phases of several states
which oral tradition suggests might have developed by about the middle of the
second millennium AD (Sutton 1993). A third area, where archaeological
research has been more limited, consists of a vast area of Central Africa to
the west of the ﬁrst two areas (Vansina 2004). For convenience, it is called here
the ‘Far West’, and more is now known of its archaeology than previously.
Situated in the heart of Africa, the relative isolation of these three areas from
inﬂuences outside the continent makes it particularly likely that increasing
social complexity was the result of indigenous rather than external factors.
For this reason, it is especially important to examine the developments that
took place, recollecting in doing so that the three selected areas are merely
representative of a huge region for much of which there is little relevant
archaeological evidence.


Geographical location and environmental factors
Situated roughly 1,000 kilometres apart, the main two areas discussed here
have similarities but some differences (Winterbotham et al. 1944; Connah
1996). Both lie within the savanna that fringes the equatorial rainforest, the
Interlacustrine Region actually straddling the equator, the Upemba Depression
more than 8 south of it. This gives both areas an annual rainfall in many
places of about 1,000 millimetres, which tends to fall in two wet seasons.
However, climatic conditions are modiﬁed by altitude, with much of the
Interlacustrine Region being more than 1,000 metres above sea level and even
the Upemba Depression lying above 500 metres. In addition, there is a consid-
erable altitudinal range within each area: the northern one is bordered by both
the Western Rift Valley and the Ruwenzori Mountains, and the southern by
the Hakansson Mountains to its north-west and the Mitumba Mountains to its
south-east. The resulting environmental diversity of both areas is made even
more complex by the presence of major bodies of water: the Victoria Nile and
Lakes Victoria, Kyoga, Albert, George, Edward, and Kivu in the one case, and
the River Lualaba (the Upper Congo) and Lakes Upemba and Kisale in the
other. The Interlacustrine Region, however, is much larger than the Upemba
Depression, with a greater variety of environments, although only small parts
of the area have been investigated archaeologically. In addition, the Upemba
Depression is dominated by a vast ﬂoodplain through which runs the Lualaba
and to which archaeological research has so far been conﬁned. Contrasting
with the relatively dispersed natural resources of the Interlacustrine Region,
those of the Upemba Depression are markedly concentrated.

302
                                                                  Central Africa

   Less detail is known about the environment in the Far West, the third area
on which attention is focussed here and the archaeology of which is limited. Its
environment consists of a mix of rainforest, savanna, and grassland, through
which in this case ﬂow the Congo River and its tributaries (Vansina 2004:
map 6). There is marked variation in relief, soil fertility, and rainfall (Vansina
2004: maps 2, 3, and 5). Food production in about AD 1000 probably
consisted of agriculture, agropastoralism, cattle pastoralism, and foraging,
in appropriate environments (Vansina 2004: map 10). Population densities
between AD 1000 and 1500 were probably varied (Vansina 2004: map 16).
Like the Upemba Depression and the Interlacustrine Region, the Far West
offered both opportunities and constraints for human settlement, facilitating
an increase in sociopolitical complexity in some places but not in others.
   Compared with much of the African savanna, the ﬁrst two areas provided
environments rich in resources and attractive to human settlement. In the
Upemba Depression ﬁsh were particularly important, being the main export
of the area when Europeans ﬁrst visited it (de Maret 1982: 90). However,
fertile, well-watered, alluvial soils and access to mountain grasslands permitted
a mixed agricultural economy, to which hunting of the proliﬁc local game also
made a contribution. Maize, cassava, groundnuts, and sweet potatoes seem to
have been the main crops in recent times, but these were introductions from
the Americas since the sixteenth century; African millets and sorghum were
also important. In addition, bananas, originally from South-East Asia, were
grown, as were indigenous beans and cowpeas. Domesticated animals con-
sisted mainly of chickens and goats. In the Upemba Depression, farmers
controlled water levels with dams, and canoe channels were maintained to
give ﬁshermen access to open water (Reefe 1983: 163). So successful was the
human exploitation of the area that for centuries a ‘high population density
supported by the richness of the ecosystem, appears to have strongly con-
trasted with neighboring less-populated areas’ (de Maret 1997: 499). The
Upemba Depression seems to have become the heartland of the Luba people.
Occupants of the Interlacustrine Region, however, might have been even more
fortunate. Generally good rainfall, equatorial temperatures moderated by
altitude, and relatively fertile soils enabled the growing of a range of crops
that now include, amongst other things, ﬁnger millet, cassava, sweet potatoes,
beans, and above all bananas. Many varieties of the latter have been grown in
the area for a long time, particularly the vegetable banana known as matooke,
which in its cooked form has become a staple food for large numbers of
people. Given adequate rainfall, moderate heat all year round, and suitable
soil, bananas need only modest inputs of land and labour, will yield within ten
to eighteen months of planting, and can produce for thirty years or more
(Wrigley 1989). Furthermore, in the drier parts of the Interlacustrine Region

                                                                             303
African Civilizations

were some of Africa’s best grasslands, often free of tsetse, which supported
extensive pastoralism, particularly of cattle. In addition, the lakes and rivers of
the area yielded important supplies of ﬁsh, and until recent times there were
also substantial resources of wild game. Overall, this range of subsistence
choices, especially those based on bananas or cattle (Schoenbrun 1993), not
only supported local concentrations of population but also provided the
wealth and power that brought about sociopolitical changes leading to
the emergence of the Interlacustrine kingdoms.
   As well as an exceptional subsistence base, however, both of these areas
possessed other resources of importance. In the case of the Upemba Depres-
sion, to its south-east lies one of the richest and largest copper deposits in the
world, which extends some 400 kilometres from the extreme south-east of
Democratic Congo into northern Zambia (Winterbotham et al. 1944: 401–2).
There are also sources of iron ore and salt in the area (Reefe 1983: 162), and,
like the Interlacustrine Region, there would formerly have been substantial
supplies of ivory. For this latter region, however, it was iron and salt that were
the most important commodities, iron having been smelted in Rwanda,
Burundi, and north-west Tanzania for more than 2,000 years (Woodhouse
1998: 181) and salt having been produced at Katwe on Lake Edward and Kibiro
on Lake Albert probably for much of the second millennium AD (Connah 1996).
Given such resources and the transport potential of the rivers and lakes as well
as the relatively easy conditions of overland routes, both areas are likely to
have played an important part in the development of trading networks within
Central Africa, which must have further stimulated sociopolitical changes.
   Nevertheless, there were constraints, as even Winston Churchill realized in
1908 when eulogizing Uganda as ‘from end to end one beautiful garden’
(Churchill 1962: 60). Over the relatively short period for which written
records have been kept, both human and animal diseases have had major
demographic impacts, and it seems possible that the same was the case in the
remoter past. As in much of Africa where there are substantial bodies of water,
malaria, schistosomiasis, ﬁlariasis, and other scourges must have long been a
problem. In addition, as population densities increased in some parts of the
areas, so did the likelihood of disease transmission, particularly of gastrointest-
inal infections and intestinal parasites (Patterson 1993: 448). It was sleeping
sickness, however, that most impressed Churchill in the early years of the
twentieth century, which by the end of 1905 killed ‘considerably more than
two hundred thousand persons’ in parts of Uganda, out of a population
estimated at not more than 300,000 (Churchill 1962: 67). In the area between
Lakes George and Edward, an especially nightmarish situation developed. In
1891 rinderpest swept through this country, and most of the cattle and much
of the game died. The amount of thicket increased with the reduction of

304
                                                                 Central Africa

grazing, creating suitable environments for tsetse ﬂies, which in turn spread
trypanosomiasis that killed more cattle, and sleeping sickness that killed large
numbers of people. By 1912 the area was so badly affected that the British
colonial authorities removed much of the remaining population, as was
also done at about the same time in other areas along the eastern side of
Lake Albert and along the lower Victoria Nile. Large parts of these areas
became game reserves and national parks with very few inhabitants (Good
1972: 571–7; Uganda National Parks n.d.). Admittedly, colonial movements
of livestock and people triggered these epidemics; previously an ecological
balance could have existed between disease vectors, animals, and humans.
However, even the threat of these diseases must have constituted a constraint
on the distribution and density of population in these areas.
  A ﬁnal constraint in these areas might have resulted from the very popula-
tion densities to which the exceptional subsistence base, and other resources,
gave rise. At times the two areas might have supported some of the densest
populations in tropical Africa, particularly in Rwanda, Burundi, and parts
of Uganda. Increasing pressure on resources, especially competition for pro-
ductive land, could have produced intergroup violence in the absence of major
epidemics, substantial emigration, or fundamental technological change.
Although compounded by the sociopolitical dislocation of the colonial and
postcolonial experience, the explosion of violence in Rwanda in 1994 is a
reminder of the potential for self-destruction within dense human populations.
An estimated 500,000 to 850,000 people were killed over a period of about
three months – more than 10 percent of the population – and another 30 per-
cent were forced into exile (Reader 1997: 717–19). Political scientists, anthro-
pologists, and others might agonize about the reasons for this appalling series
of events, but one thing is clear: human beings can become a major constraint
to other human beings.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
The Kingdom of Kongo, in the Far West, was ﬁrst described by Portuguese
visitors in the late ﬁfteenth century AD (de Maret 1998), but for both the
Upemba Depression and the Interlacustrine Region historical documentation
is of limited time depth. The former became known to the outside world only
towards the end of the nineteenth century, and accounts of the latter area
began in the 1860s with the visits of Speke, Grant, and Baker (Winterbotham
et al. 1944: ﬁg. 36; Connah 1996: 1). It was indeed these writers who ﬁrst
brought some of the Interlacustrine states to international attention, providing

                                                                           305
African Civilizations

accounts of Karagwe, Buganda, and Bunyoro before the impact of European
colonial ambitions. Late-nineteenth-century and early-twentieth-century Euro-
pean visitors, ofﬁcials, soldiers, traders, missionaries, and scientists, not only
left writings that have become a source of ethnohistorical data for the Upemba
and Interlacustrine areas but also made some of the earliest records of their
oral traditions, a source of information for precontact periods. However, for
the Luba area, ‘individual tales yield only an occasional, tantalising glimpse of
what happened before about AD 1700’ (Reefe 1983: 165), and for the Inter-
lacustrine states, attempts to interpret the traditions about the supposed
former state of Kitara and the Bacwezi dynasty have generated an extensive
but inconclusive literature (Sutton 1993). It seems probable that these latter
sources refer to about the middle of the second millennium AD and concern
the antecedents of the states ﬁrst visited by Europeans in the 1860s, but
interpretations have ranged from seeing the Bacwezi as the rulers of an early
pastoral state (Oliver 1953) to arguing that they were merely mythical ﬁgures
(Wrigley 1958), and from suggesting that their origins lay in the ﬁrst millen-
nium AD (Berger 1980) to concluding that they belonged to the fourteenth and
ﬁfteenth centuries (Steinhart 1981: 118). Collectively, the documentary and
oral records seem unlikely to throw much light on sociopolitical developments
in these areas of Central Africa before, at best, the last four or ﬁve centuries.
A source of information with greater potential is the study of historical
linguistics, particularly concerning cultivated plants and domesticated animals.
Schoenbrun (1993), by setting his linguistic evidence in a broad interdisciplin-
ary context, has been able to suggest that banana farming and pastoralism
were already established in the Interlacustrine Region by the beginning of the
second millennium. He has also examined the possible social dimensions of
those agricultural developments. This has provided a useful set of hypotheses,
but the chronological validity of the evidence remains uncertain. Much the
same might be said for another potentially important source of information,
the genetic history of the plants and animals themselves. For example, it is
largely on the basis of such evidence, as well as linguistics, that De Langhe
et al. (1995) proposed that plantains reached the Interlacustrine Region, from
the other side of the Indian Ocean, by 2,500 years ago. In such matters we
need physical evidence, particularly evidence that can be subjected to absolute
dating.


Archaeological evidence
For the Upemba Depression (Fig. 10.2), archaeological evidence provides a
cultural sequence from the ﬁfth century AD to the beginning of the nineteenth
century and indicates the emergence of an hierarchical society by the end of the

306
                                                                      Central Africa




Fig. 10.2 Archaeological sites in the Upemba Depression, Democratic Congo. After de
Maret 1992: ﬁg. 48. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.


ﬁrst millennium (de Maret 1979). The sequence is supported by more than ﬁfty
radiocarbon dates (de Maret 1997: 499) and constitutes a most successful
piece of archaeological research. Unfortunately, however, the evidence consists
entirely of burials, clustered in cemeteries in the Upemba Depression, particu-
larly on the banks of Lake Kisale on the upper Lualaba River. Settlement sites
are known but appear to have only shallow deposits that have been extensively
disturbed by continuous occupation or cultivation. As a result, they have not
been excavated, but a total of more than 265 graves have been. These were
situated at the sites of Sanga, Katongo, Kamilamba, Kikulu, and Malemba
Nkulu (de Maret 1982: 89).
   The Upemba Depression sequence can, therefore, tell us little about early
urbanization in this area, but it is informative about social evolution and early
state emergence. This ﬁrst became apparent after the excavations of Jacques
Nenquin at Sanga in 1957 and of Jean Hiernaux in 1958, which produced
evidence of a remarkably sophisticated material culture from the seventh
to ninth century AD. Called by Nenquin the ‘Kisalian’, this culture was

                                                                                  307
African Civilizations

characterized by ﬁnely made and distinctive pottery, skilful metalworking in
both iron and copper, and graves containing evidence of accumulated wealth
(Nenquin 1963; Hiernaux et al. 1971). Later excavations at Sanga and at
other sites (de Maret 1979; 1982; 1992) revised Nenquin’s dating and placed
the Kisalian in its chronological context. The sequence thus established com-
menced in the ﬁfth century AD with the Kamilambian tradition, which was
replaced by the Early Kisalian tradition at the end of the eighth century. This,
in turn, was succeeded by the Classic Kisalian tradition in the eleventh century,
which was followed by the Kabambian tradition that appeared at the end of
the fourteenth century. The Kabambian has been divided into Kabambian
A and B, the latter ending at the beginning of the nineteenth century. The
latest of the archaeological evidence is, indeed, comparable with the material
culture of the Luba in recent times. Thus, as de Maret claimed, ‘It becomes
apparent that in establishing an Iron Age sequence in the Upemba rift one is
actually studying the emergence of the Luba Kingdom’ (de Maret 1979: 234).
   Anthropometric studies of the Sanga skeletons and of the present-day Luba,
which are said to show strong afﬁnities between the two, seem to support
this idea. In addition, the archaeological evidence suggests the gradual devel-
opment of social stratiﬁcation, political organization, and functional special-
ization. For example, as far back as the Early Kisalian, ceremonial iron axes
were placed in graves. These had handles decorated with nails and were much
like those later used by the Luba as symbols of authority. In one such Early
Kisalian grave, the deceased had also been buried with an iron anvil, another
symbol of power among Bantu-speaking peoples (Fig. 10.3). At Katoto, a
cemetery in the southern part of the Upemba Rift belonging to a tradition
approximately contemporaneous with the Kisalian, the richest graves included
not only ceremonial axes and anvils but also evidence of child sacriﬁces. Social
stratiﬁcation was further indicated in the Classic Kisalian by the unequal
distribution of grave goods between the various burials. It was observed that
the few graves that contained an unusually large number of pots also con-
tained uncommon things like cowries and ivory pendants. Furthermore, such
wealth appeared to be partly hereditary, because some children’s graves were
among the wealthiest (de Maret 1979; 1982).
   Following Bisson (1975), the development of political organization in the
Luba area might be inferred from the archaeological evidence for the use of
copper. This metal was particularly valued in much of Africa during precolo-
nial times, being variously used as a medium of exchange, for personal
adornment, for status symbols, and for cult objects (Herbert 1984). In the
Upemba Depression sequence (de Maret 1979) there is no evidence of copper
in the Kamilambian, and its ﬁrst appearance is in the Early Kisalian when there
were a few copper objects, mainly in the form of hammered bangles. It is very

308
                                                                          Central Africa




Fig. 10.3 Early Kisalian burial at Kamilamba, Democratic Congo. Note ceremonial
iron axe at left centre and iron anvil to left of skull. Reproduced by permission of Pierre
de Maret.




                                                                                      309
African Civilizations

common, however, in the Classic Kisalian, when it was used both for personal
ornaments and for some functional objects. Thus far it would appear that the
role of copper was principally as an indicator of wealth, prestige, and status.
With the Kabambian came a marked change; distinctive copper croisettes
(little crosses) appeared, probably originally as ingots but later used as cur-
rency. As time went by, these crosses grew smaller and more uniform in shape
(de Maret 1981), and it is thought that they might have ﬁrst been used as a
special-purpose currency (e.g., for buying wives) but gradually evolved into
a general-purpose unit of exchange. Thus the smaller, later crosses could have
been used for a variety of small purchases. The use of these crosses as a form
of money is suggested by evidence at Sanga, where they were often found in or
near the hands of the deceased; one grave containing 140 of the smallest
crosses had them tied in groups of ﬁve (Bisson 1975: 287). The presence of
such a currency would imply the existence of political sophistication.
   The craftsmanship indicated by the archaeological evidence for the Kisalian
suggests a degree of functional specialization by the early part of the second
millennium AD. The skilful handling of iron, copper, ivory, bone, and pottery
hints at the presence of professional artisans. The range of metalwork alone
is one of the most impressive in tropical Africa, including (for the Kisalian)
iron hoes, knives, axes, spears, arrows, harpoon heads, ﬁsh hooks, necklaces,
pendants with chains, together with copper artefacts such as belts, necklaces,
bangles, bracelets, small knives, spearheads, and ﬁsh hooks. There might have
been specialist traders bringing copper from the Copperbelt, some 200 kilo-
metres to the south-east (de Maret 1979).
   The relative proximity of one of the richest sources of copper in Africa must,
indeed, have played a part in the developments in south-east Democratic
Congo. From Kansanshi and Kipushi, in northern Zambia, Bisson (1976)
obtained precolonial evidence for both mining and smelting copper. Exploit-
ation of the Kansanshi deposits commenced possibly as early as the fourth
century AD, and there is evidence that copper was being smelted at a similar
date in the Lubumbashi region of south-east Democratic Congo (Anciaux de
Faveaux and de Maret 1984; de Maret 1985: 138). The Kansanshi evidence
led Bisson to reject the hypothesis sometimes advanced that Arab or Swahili
traders were responsible for both the origin of states and the start of large-scale
copper mining in this part of Africa. Similarly, de Maret argued that the
Kisalian evidence for an hierarchical society as early as the end of the ﬁrst
millennium AD ruled out long-distance trade as a possible cause of this
development. Rather, he saw a combination of ﬁshing, hunting, and agricul-
ture as permitting a high population density that ‘led to a need for political
integration’ (de Maret 1979: 234). Certainly, the evidence for the Classic
Kisalian is suggestive of some form of early state, and this in an area where

310
                                                                     Central Africa

throughout the earlier archaeological sequence the only indication of contact
with the outside world consists of a few glass beads and a small number of
marine shells from the Indian Ocean coast (Hiernaux et al. 1971: 55; 1972:
154–5; de Maret 1992: 170). Nevertheless, the possible role of internal trading
networks should not be forgotten; local exchanges of copper, iron, and salt
were probably particularly important (Fagan 1969). The people of the Classic
Kisalian might well have participated in such networks by trading dried ﬁsh
from the lakes and rivers of the Upemba Depression, as was still occurring
when Europeans ﬁrst entered the area (de Maret 1982: 90).
   Although important, the archaeological evidence from the Upemba Depres-
sion provides information on only a relatively small area. In the case of the
Interlacustrine Region the situation is rather better: the available information
is scattered but covers a larger geographical area and provides more varied
data (Fig. 10.4). Uganda, in particular, has had a long record of archaeological
research, unfortunately interrupted by periods of political instability during
the 1970s and 1980s. One of the most important of the nineteenth-century
states in this area was Buganda (from which modern Uganda takes its name),
although there is no archaeological evidence to throw light on the development
of Bugandan urbanization. However, the origins of urbanization elsewhere in
the Interlacustrine Region can be identiﬁed (p. 324). Also, Oliver (1959b) was
able to make a study of the Bugandan royal tombs and of their associated
human jaw-bone shrines. Other archaeological work has been carried out
on Ankole, also one of the Interlacustrine states. As with that of Buganda,
the capital of Ankole moved many times, but careful use of oral tradition
enabled Oliver (1959a) to identify a number of capital sites in the ﬁeld, which
were reexamined years later by Andrew Reid and Peter Robertshaw (1987).
Bweyorere, seemingly the largest, was excavated by Merrick Posnansky
(1968), demonstrating the difﬁculties of extracting useful information from
this type of site. It consists of a series of low banks on the top of a hill, forming
irregular, incomplete enclosures. The banks seem to be mainly of cattle dung,
and there are also several hollows that might have been cisterns. Posnansky
excavated thirty-one trenches into the site and was able to identify the remains
of the palace, a circular building of organic material over 15 metres in
diameter, which had been destroyed by ﬁre. The deposit was shallow, how-
ever, and no other habitation structures were found, although pottery and
bones were generally distributed. Oral tradition indicated occupation of this
site at three different periods: in the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth
centuries. Radiocarbon dating was in general agreement with this timespan.
Animal bones from the site indicated the importance of cattle to its occupants
but also suggested that hunting was common. Glass beads and fragments of
pottery pipes for smoking probably belonged to the latter part of the sequence.

                                                                                311
African Civilizations




Fig. 10.4 Principal archaeological sites and places in the Ugandan part of the
Interlacustrine Region. After Connah 1996: ﬁg. 2.2. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.


Posnansky concluded that Bweyorere represented ‘a large pastoral settlement
with evidence of a palace site’ but with a population of ‘probably no more than
a few hundred people’ and that it was ‘not a town’ (Posnansky 1968: 165,
173). Indeed, Reid and Robertshaw pointed out that, as the traditions say that
the site was occupied on several occasions, not all of it is likely to have been
occupied at the same time, so that this relatively large site ‘may be simply a
palimpsest of several small sites’. They concluded that further excavation of
such sites was unlikely to throw new light on ‘the establishment and organiza-
tion of the Ankole state’ (Reid and Robertshaw 1987: 87–8).

312
                                                                  Central Africa

   Of more value for the archaeological investigation of sociopolitical change in
western Uganda is a series of large earthwork enclosures to the north of
Ankole, extending from the Katonga River towards the south-eastern part of
Lake Albert, of which the best known are Kibengo, Munsa, and Bigo (Lanning
1953). Most investigated of these is Bigo, one of the most famous sites in east
Central Africa. It consists of some 10 kilometres of ditches and banks, enclos-
ing an area of about 5 square kilometres (Fig. 10.5). The earthworks form two
main enclosures, within the larger of which is a central group of smaller
enclosures. The height and width of bank and ditch vary greatly; the greatest
height from the bottom of the ditch to the top of the bank is more than 7
metres. Situated within and around the central enclosures are three large
mounds. Bigo was ﬁrst described in 1909, was ﬁrst mapped properly in
1921, and has been the subject of considerable published discussion. Tenuous
oral tradition ascribes the site to the so-called Bacwezi dynasty, whose uncer-
tain historical status has already been mentioned (p. 306). The site is associ-
ated with two smaller earthwork enclosures – Kagogo to its north-west and
Kasonko to its north-east – and with the large open settlement site at Ntusi
some 15 kilometres to its south-west (p. 315). All four of these sites are
situated within an area less than 20 kilometres across (Wayland 1934; Shinnie
1960; Posnansky 1969).
   Bigo has been excavated on two occasions: by Shinnie in 1957 (Shinnie
1960) and by Posnansky in 1960 (Posnansky 1969). These excavations indi-
cated that there was settlement at Bigo prior to the construction of the bank
and ditch system, and radiocarbon dates suggested an overall occupation date
in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries AD. Although few traces of timber
structures were found, Posnansky claimed to identify the location of a royal
enclosure (Posnansky 1969: 135), and Shinnie thought that ‘there was consid-
erable human occupation at the centre of the complex’ (Shinnie 1960: 27). The
excavated animal bones, however, revealed an emphasis on cattle; it seems
possible that the outer enclosures were intended for penning cattle rather than
for defence. There is some support for this: more attention seems to have been
given to digging the ditch than to constructing the bank, but the protection of
agricultural ﬁelds is also likely. Furthermore, as Posnansky suggested (1969:
145), it is also possible that the immensity of the earthworks was intended to
bestow prestige on those who lived there. Certainly they may be regarded as a
form of monumental construction: in one place Shinnie found the rock-cut
ditch to be nearly 4 metres deep (Shinnie 1960: 17), and Posnansky (1969:
144) estimated that more than 200,000 cubic metres of earth and rock had
been removed in making the ditches. The size and direction of the labour force
necessary to accomplish such work, together with the presence at this site of a
royal enclosure, would imply the existence of some degree of political

                                                                            313
314




      Fig. 10.5 Plan of earthworks at Bigo, Uganda. After Wayland 1934.
                                                                  Central Africa

centralization. It would appear that Bigo was a settlement of importance, the
centre perhaps of an emerging state.
  Such an assumption fails to recognize ‘the ability of non-stratiﬁed societies to
produce feats of construction over long periods of time’ (Reid 1996: 621), but
inevitably Bigo and the other earthwork sites have been interpreted as arch-
aeological evidence of a Bacwezi-ruled Kitara state. Of the other sites, only
Munsa and Kibengo have been subjected to archaeological investigation, ﬁrst
by E.C. Lanning (1955; 1960) and later by Peter Robertshaw (Robertshaw
1997). The earthworks at these sites were probably constructed in about the
ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries AD, at roughly the same time as those at Bigo,
although there is evidence of occupation at Munsa as early as around the tenth
century and at Kibengo from the late thirteenth to the mid-seventeenth cen-
tury. Like Bigo, cattle dominated the faunal remains at Munsa, but Kibengo
showed more variation and, like Bigo, lacked the evidence for smelting and
iron working present at Munsa. These and other differences between the sites
led Robertshaw and others to suggest that they might have acted as the centres
of three polities, rather than of a single one. Excavations have also been
conducted at shrine sites associated with the Bacwezi at both Mubende and
Kasunga, but the former produced only the remains of a small village dating to
the late thirteenth or fourteenth century, and the latter, which yielded both
occupation and burial evidence, might date to as late as the seventeenth
century.
  It is the site of Ntusi, with neither earthworks nor a demonstrated associ-
ation with the Bacwezi traditions, that has proved most informative so far as
sociopolitical changes in the ﬁrst half of the second millennium are concerned
(Sutton 1993; Reid 1996). Lanning (1970: 39) described it as ‘an ancient
capital site’, and, indeed, survey and excavations conducted by Andrew Reid
in the late 1980s and early 1990s showed that this open settlement site has
archaeological material scattered over approximately 100 hectares and was
occupied between the eleventh and ﬁfteenth centuries AD (Fig. 10.6).
Excavation of two large midden mounds and of an area associated with some
of the low banks that characterize the site produced large quantities of broken
pottery, a faunal assemblage dominated by young cattle, numerous grind-
stones, curved iron knives thought to have been for cereal harvesting, burnt
grain which appeared to be sorghum, storage pits probably for grain, evidence
of iron working, fragments of ivory of which some were worked, ostrich
eggshell beads, traces of circular houses dated to the fourteenth to ﬁfteenth
century (Fig. 10.7), and glass and cowrie shell beads indicating contact with
the Indian Ocean coast by about the thirteenth century. Thus Ntusi was ﬁrst
occupied earlier than Bigo, whose dates have been revised to the period from
the thirteenth to sixteenth century, but they apparently overlapped. Reid

                                                                             315
African Civilizations




Fig. 10.6 Plan of Ntusi, Uganda. After Sutton 1993: ﬁg. 4 based on a survey by
Andrew Reid in 1987–9.




316
                                                                          Central Africa




Fig. 10.7 Traces of fourteenth- to ﬁfteenth-century circular houses at Ntusi. Reproduced by
permission of Andrew Reid.


conducted a survey of 5 percent of 560 square kilometres around Ntusi and
Bigo and found more than ﬁfty other sites of second-millennium date, of which
several when excavated revealed faunal remains overwhelmingly dominated
by cattle. However, these sites were in general less than half a hectare in area,
and the lack of sites of intermediate size suggests that, by the fourteenth and
ﬁfteenth centuries, Ntusi was a chiefdom based on cattle pastoralism and
sorghum cultivation rather than a centralized state. A social hierarchy based
on cattle had perhaps not yet emerged, but the ﬁfteenth-century abandonment
of Ntusi and the construction of the Bigo earthworks might indicate that this
occurred subsequently. Perhaps Bigo, bordered by the Katonga River, offered
a more viable centre for cattle than the dry grassland area of Ntusi. The
existence near the latter site of the huge artiﬁcial depression and associated
mounds and banks known as the Bwogero, sometimes called the Ntusi ‘dams’,
suggests that this might indeed have been so (Fig. 10.6). Reid described this
rather suspect feature as ‘functionally ambiguous’ (1996: 623), but Sutton
(1985: 174) suggested that it resulted from exposing the water table for use
by cattle. If he was correct, then the scale of the feature (Reid thought that
almost 30,000 cubic metres of material had been removed) would suggest that
this activity continued for some centuries and that demand was extreme. In
such circumstances Ntusi could have been abandoned in favour of Bigo,

                                                                                      317
African Civilizations

particularly if cattle rather than a balance of pastoralism and cultivation were
becoming economically dominant. However, the Bwogero remains undated
and its association with the site of Ntusi has never been demonstrated.
   Comparable to Reid’s survey around Ntusi and Bigo were Robertshaw’s
investigations of the country south and west of Munsa. Some 130 archaeo-
logical sites were recorded, which all appeared to belong to the second millen-
nium AD. By comparing the sizes and locations of these sites and grouping
them on the basis of a statistical analysis of the pottery found on them,
Robertshaw was able to suggest how the state of Bunyoro had developed
in this area prior to the nineteenth century. Early settlements tended to
be small, but it appears that a hierarchy of sizes existed from about the
fourteenth century, some of the larger being protected with earthworks
by the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries. A period of ‘competing polities’
(Robertshaw 1994: 127) between about the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries
might eventually have led to collapse, which the Babito dynasty, the rulers of
Bunyoro when the ﬁrst Europeans arrived, were able to exploit. Thus Bunyoro
might have emerged only during the seventeenth or eighteenth century but the
sociopolitical changes that gave rise to it could have originated in the earlier
part of the second millennium (Robertshaw 1994). Support for this model
came from my excavations of the settlement site at Kibiro on the eastern shore
of Lake Albert, the salt production of which was so important to the economy
of nineteenth-century Bunyoro. The exploitation of this resource could also be
traced back to the early second millennium (Connah 1996). Furthermore,
evidence from the surface of other sites adjacent to the north-eastern part of
Lake Albert and along the lower part of the Victoria Nile suggests widespread
cultural homogeneity in this area over the last thousand years and gives some
idea of the background of Bunyoro’s development.
   Control of salt production and trading was probably of importance in the
rise of Bunyoro, but in the case of both this and other Interlacustrine states,
such as Buganda (Reid 2001; 2003; Reid and Young 2003), the smelting and
exchange of iron must also have been of signiﬁcance. In the Mwenge Kingdom
of western Uganda, this has been investigated archaeologically for the second
millennium AD (Iles 2013b). However, in the Buhaya area, in north-west
Tanzania, work by Peter Schmidt has shown that iron smelting was already
practised more than 2000 years before Europeans visited that area (Schmidt
and Avery 1996). Given its probable socioeconomic role, it is hardly surprising
that iron also took on political and religious symbolic meaning, so that iron
anvils were amongst the royal insignia of the states of Karagwe (now part of
Tanzania), Ankole, Buganda, and Rwanda.
   The third part of Central Africa discussed in this chapter is the Far West. Until
recently there was little archaeological evidence for the emergence of social

318
                                                                        Central Africa




Fig. 10.8 Axes and other iron artefacts in a burial on Corisco Island, Equatorial Guinea,
ﬁrst to second century AD. González-Ruibal et al. 2011, cover photograph. Reproduced by
permission of Alfredo González-Ruibal and Africa Magna Verlag, Frankfurt am Main.


complexity in this area, but this is changing. Most remarkable are sites on the
Island of Corisco, also known as Mandji, off the coast of Equatorial Guinea,
where burials dating from the ﬁrst to second century AD were accompanied by
iron axes, spearheads, anklets, bracelets, spoons, knives, sickle knives, and other
items, as well as complete pots (Fig. 10.8). Copper and bronze were notably
absent; it seems to have been the production of iron that provided a major
resource in this area (González-Ruibal et al. 2011; 2013). Little bone seems
to have survived from the burials, but the iron grave goods were well preserved
and possibly the graves had held both secondary and primary burials. The

                                                                                    319
African Civilizations

evidence from these sites has been associated with an ‘ancient and common
tradition’ identiﬁed by Vansina for Equatorial Africa, from which later develop-
ments grew (Vansina 1990: 71–100; González-Ruibal et al. 2013: 141).
It has been claimed that ‘the new archaeological data reveal the existence
of another core area for the emergence of inequalities in sub-Saharan Africa’
(González-Ruibal et al. 2011: 65). In this respect it is signiﬁcant that ‘special-
purpose currency’ is present amongst the iron artefacts from Corisco (González-
Ruibal et al. 2013: 129–30), suggesting that as in the Upemba Depression
a sophisticated economic and sociopolitical situation was developing.
  In their discussion of the Corisco evidence, González-Ruibal et al. (2011: 64)
refer to the Angolan site of Feti, ‘a royal tumulus’ dated to between the ninth
and thirteenth centuries AD, which also yielded iron hoes, knives, arrowheads,
spearheads, anvils, and hammers. Vansina (2004: 170) described this site as
‘one of the largest known ancient sites anywhere in West Central Africa’.
Consisting of several mounds, surrounding ditches, and stone walls, it was
7.5 hectares in extent; Vansina claimed that in its later stages it was ‘the capital
of a very large kingdom’. In spite of incompetent excavation during the 1940s
and subsequent destruction by a hydroelectric dam, the evidence from Feti
suggests the development of social complexity on the planalto (Benguela
Plateau) of Angola and in the wider Cuanza basin. Indeed, it was only one
of four sites that Vansina (2004: map 17) showed on a map of ‘Stone Ruins in
Angola’. According to some of his other maps, these ruins were in an area with
an ‘ancient population cluster’ and with both greater altitude and soil fertility
than adjacent areas (Vansina 2004: maps 2, 3, and 16). Clearly, this part of
Angola has considerable archaeological potential and needs further investi-
gation by excavators. However, this is the case for the most of the Far West as
identiﬁed here. In spite of detailed study of ceramic traditions associated with
the Kingdom of Kongo, for instance, archaeology has been unable as yet to
provide much information on its origins (Clist 2012). Nevertheless, ongoing
archaeological research promises to shed new light on the latter subject,
particularly regarding the role of copper exploitation in state development
(Clist et al. 2013a; 2013b; Nikis et al. 2013).


Subsistence economy
It is uncertain to what extent the two main areas discussed are representative
of Central Africa, but both have archaeological evidence for growing social
complexity. It is signiﬁcant that in both instances there seems to have been
a subsistence economy that was stronger than in surrounding regions. Mixed
farming, relying on the cultivation of cereal and other crops as well as on
the herding of domestic animals, was supplemented by ﬁshing and hunting.

320
                                                                  Central Africa

In the Upemba Depression ﬁshing was particularly important, but fertile
alluvial soils that were inundated seasonally provided a productive agricul-
tural base. Archaeological evidence limited to burials and a lack of infor-
mation from settlement sites makes it difﬁcult to assess the subsistence
economy, but clearly it was a successful one that supported a substantial
population. Direct evidence is sparse, but oil-palm nuts (Elaeis guineensis),
grain that was very probably ﬁnger millet (Eleusine [coracana?]), and the
bones of goats and chicken were found in various contexts, as well as ﬁsh
bones, mollusc shells, and bones from wild animals (de Maret 1992: 157,
170, 239–43).
  In the Interlacustrine Region there is more evidence, with probable sorghum
at Ntusi in the fourteenth to ﬁfteenth century; ﬁnger millet from an approxi-
mately fourteenth-century context at Kibiro; cattle dominating faunal evidence
at Ntusi, Bigo, Munsa, and other sites; and sheep or goats as important as
cattle at Kibiro (Posnansky 1969; Connah 1996; Reid 1996). In the more
fertile areas with higher rainfall, cereal cultivation was apparently supple-
mented by banana growing, although bananas are difﬁcult to identify in
the archaeological record. Impressions of banana pseudostems in slag from
iron-smelting sites in Buganda are ‘possibly only a hundred or so years old’
(Reid and Young 2003: 122), and claims of banana phytoliths from Munsa
dated to the fourth millennium BC (Lejju et al. 2006) have been questioned
(Neumann and Hildebrand 2009). Nevertheless, bananas seem to have had an
important role in the emergence of the Bugandan state, because of their low-
input and high-yield production (Reid 2001). Cattle herding so successfully
exploited the drier grasslands that it came to be sociopolitically if not econom-
ically dominant. It would appear that both these areas had a successful
subsistence base that was capable of producing a surplus that could be accu-
mulated: in the form of grain, dried ﬁsh, cattle, or small stock. Some parts
of these areas were probably able to support locally dense populations. Con-
cerning the subsistence economy of the Far West, archaeological evidence
remains sparse, although the ﬁrst-millennium BC site of Boso-Njafo, further
to the East, in the Inner Congo Basin, has produced grains of domesticated
pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum), suggesting a drier period than at present
(Kahlheber et al. 2014).


Technology
Archaeological evidence from the three areas of Central Africa discussed
indicates a sound technological base. Because the Upemba Depression and
Far West evidence consists of grave goods, with a high incidence of intact
artefacts, and the Interlacustrine Region evidence consists of material from

                                                                            321
African Civilizations

settlement sites, where items are often fragmented, our knowledge of technol-
ogy in the ﬁrst two areas is substantial. Metalworking, of both iron and (not in
the Far West) copper, was sophisticated. In the Upemba Depression the
carving of ivory and bone and the making of high-quality pottery also indicate
considerable craftsmanship, while evidence for basket making is a reminder of
skills using organic materials that have not survived.
   For the Interlacustrine Region we have more information on processes
than products. Thus numerous sites indicate skill in iron smelting and
smithing, and sites in north-west Tanzania have been claimed to show
evidence of a preheated air blast and a direct steel process, although these
claims might need qualiﬁcation (Killick 1996; Woodhouse 1998). Further-
more, the smelters of western Uganda between the fourteenth and twentieth
centuries must have been highly skilled; archaeological excavations and
ﬁeldwork in the Mwenge Kingdom suggest that metal yield was increased
by the addition of manganese oxide to the ore (Iles 2013b). A fourteenth-
century furnace excavated at Munsa is amongst the earliest evidence for iron
smelting in this region (Iles et al. 2014). Analysis of iron furnaces and other
remains from Kooki and Masindi, in western Uganda, has also shed light
on iron-working technology over the last three centuries (Iles 2013a). In
addition, the evidence from Kibiro demonstrates the existence, from early
in the second millennium, of a salt-making technique using the sun’s capillary
action on waterlogged deposits, producing salt of 97.6 percent purity
(Connah 1996). Salt was also made at Katwe, on Lake Edward, and at Lake
Bunyampaka, near Lake George, by the more usual solar evaporation tech-
nique, although it is unknown for how long this had been done prior to
its recording in the nineteenth century (Connah 1998a). In contrast, the
making of pottery was well established by the ﬁrst millennium AD, and
during the second millennium produced an impressive range of vessel forms.
Relatively late in the Kibiro sequence graphite slip was used on some high-
status items, requiring the mining of graphite for which evidence was found
at Kigorobya nearby (Connah 1996: 129, 180). The pottery is also techno-
logically informative in other ways: acquiring clay and tempers needed an
understanding of geology, making ﬂexible roulettes used in decoration
required a knowledge of plant ﬁbres, and the ﬁne carving of wooden roul-
ettes also used in decoration suggests the existence of wood-carving skills.
Finally, perhaps the most impressive aspect of the technology of the Inter-
lacustrine Region is indicated by the existence of the earthwork sites, of
which Bigo is the best known. Requiring the excavation of earth, the quarry-
ing of rock, and the construction of substantial banks of these materials,
something more than massed hoes and copious sweat was needed: civil
engineering skills must have been present.

322
                                                                  Central Africa

Social system
In all three of the areas reviewed there is archaeological evidence for
the emergence of a social hierarchy. Some of the Upemban burials were
accompanied by more grave goods than others, some even by child sacriﬁces,
and the existence of wealthy children’s graves suggested that wealth was
partly hereditary. Large numbers of high-quality pots, iron and copper arte-
facts, items of ivory, and even glass beads and cowrie shells from the Indian
Ocean coast were probably indicative of one or more elite groups. Further-
more, some graves contained probable symbols of power, such as an iron axe,
anvil, or bell, suggesting that the individuals with whom they were buried
were invested with political or sacred authority. Indeed, the eventual use of
copper croisettes as a form of currency suggests that a sophisticated political
structure had developed. It seems likely that several privileged groups that had
attained chieftain status, one of which by the eighteenth century founded
the Luba state, ruled a society of cultivators, herdsmen, and ﬁshermen. The
diverse technological skills indicated by the artefactual assemblage would
suggest that some degree of functional specialization also developed. In the
Far West, iron grave goods on the Island of Corisco, and at Feti where there
are earthworks and stone structures, with the latter also in other places,
suggest the emergence of social hierarchies during the ﬁrst and second
millennia AD.
  In the Interlacustrine Region it is the construction of large earthworks, with
all that this implies for control of resources, planning, and direction of labour,
that suggests the existence of powerful elites whose wealth was accumulated
in the form of cattle. In addition, at both Bigo and Bweyorere the sites of
supposed elite structures were found, and it is possible that the two large
midden mounds at Ntusi were associated with the dwellings of sociopolitical
leaders. That some members of society were wealthier and perhaps more
powerful than others is also suggested by several approximately eleventh-
century burials excavated at Munsa that were accompanied by the earliest
glass beads found in the area as well as by bracelets of iron and one of copper
(Robertshaw 1997: 13–14). Furthermore, the roughly fourteenth-century
female burial at Kibiro that had iron and copper jewellery with it, as well as
beads of glass and of freshwater shell, suggests that women as well as men
were among the elite (Connah 1996: 90–2). From the evidence of Robert-
shaw’s survey south and west of Munsa (Robertshaw 1994) and from Reid’s
research in and around Ntusi (Reid 1996), it seems likely that the process of
sociopolitical change followed much the same course as in the Upemba
Depression, with separate chiefdoms gradually giving way to a number
of Interlacustrine states by the eighteenth century. At the same time the


                                                                             323
African Civilizations

archaeological evidence for iron working, salt making, and perhaps other
activities suggests that some functional specialization was also occurring.
Finally, although the Upemba Depression and Far West lack evidence from
settlement sites that could throw light on the subject, at least in the Inter-
lacustrine Region the beginnings of urbanization were apparent. For example,
by the ﬁfteenth century Ntusi was an extensive settlement, probably covering
much of its approximately 100 hectares; round about the sixteenth century
the massive enclosures at Bigo might at times have sheltered large numbers of
people and their cattle; and in 1894 Kibiro was described as ‘the only
manufacturing town in [B]Unyoro’ (Thruston 1900: 143). Apparently all
three of the areas of Central Africa discussed had already attained a substan-
tial level of social complexity before the advent of sustained contact with
the outside world. Clearly, this was also the case for the Kingdom of Kongo,
in the Far West, which so impressed Portuguese visitors in the late ﬁfteenth
century.


Population pressures
A causative factor in these changes might have been localized population
pressures, which resulted in competition for an important but limited resource
that had stimulated population growth. Greater resources than were available
in adjacent areas characterized each of the areas discussed in this chapter. In
the Upemba Depression this could have been access to prime ﬁshing areas or to
fertile alluvial soils in an environment where ‘[d]ense populations had to
compete for the few stretches of land not inundated during the annual ﬂood’
(Reefe 1983: 163). In the Interlacustrine Region it is more likely to have been
access to dryland grazing rights and to the more fertile cultivable soils in higher
rainfall areas, but water for livestock and sources of salt, iron ore, and even
charcoal are also possibilities. For the Far West, specialized iron production
seems to have provided a major resource, and marked population clustering
has been claimed for the ﬁrst half of the second millennium AD (Vansina 2004:
map 16). It seems that exceptional natural resources might have promoted
population growth in areas that were so endowed but that such growth
inevitably led to competition for control of the best of those resources. Those
who succeeded in gaining that control could then accumulate a surplus in one
form or another and use this as a means of establishing authority over large
numbers of less fortunate people. However, these propositions have yet to be
tested with relevant archaeological evidence, and Parker Shipton argued that
in agrarian East Africa it was areas of low population pressure, not high
population pressure, that were characterized by the development of political
hierarchy (Shipton 1984).

324
                                                                Central Africa

Ideology
The archaeological evidence for the role of religious ideology in the socio-
political changes that took place in the Upemba Depression, the Interlacus-
trine Region, and the Far West is limited, although both oral tradition and the
ethnohistorical record suggest that it must have been an important contribu-
tory factor. In these areas, the placing of valuable and sometimes numerous
items as grave goods in burials indicates a concern with the spirit world, and
the collection of both secular and sacred objects placed with the 1930/1 burial
of the seventeenth- or eighteenth-century Rwandan king Cyirima Rujugira
suggests that this was particularly the case with state rulers (Van Noten 1972:
ﬁg. 8; 1982: ﬁg. 36). Evidence of the association of kingship and the sacred is
also provided by the large number of royal tombs in both Bunyoro and
Buganda, which were still maintained and venerated during the twentieth
century (Uganda 1967: 71). Indeed, in these states it was customary to remove
the mandible from the deceased and house it in a separate ‘jaw-bone shrine’,
speciﬁcally because it represented part of the credentials of his successor
(Oliver 1959b). It is possible that these various tombs and shrines extend
back to the ﬁfteenth century, but other shrines associated with the supposed
earlier Bacwezi rulers could be developments subsequent to these possibly
mythical ﬁgures. This might be the case at Mubende, Kasunga, and Masaka
Hill, and certainly is the case at Bigo where such a shrine seems to have
appeared only in the 1990s. Nevertheless, it is likely that those who ruled
emergent states in Central Africa based their power on the spiritual world as
well as on material resources. Indeed, de Maret (2012) focussed on the Far
West of Central Africa and on the Upemba Depression in his examination of
the role of ritual power in African kingship and in the emergence of political
complexity. For the Interlacustrine Region, the importance of belief systems is
indicated by the late-ﬁrst- to early-second-millennium AD Luzira Head
(Fig. 10.9), and associated terracottas, found near Kampala in Uganda
(Ashley and Reid 2008).


External trade
It has often been assumed that until late in the second millennium, Central
Africa remained so remote from the world outside the continent that external
long-distance trade could not have played a part in sociopolitical changes
(e.g., Connah 1996: 1, 213). Indeed, archaeological evidence indicates that
such changes were already in progress at an earlier date. However, the idea
of an isolated Central Africa needs modiﬁcation, particularly because of
its origin in the nineteenth century amongst Europeans who believed they

                                                                           325
African Civilizations




Fig. 10.9 Ceramic head from Luzira, near Kampala, Uganda. Late ﬁrst to early second
millennium AD. Ashley and Reid 2008: ﬁg. 2a. Copyright British Institute in Eastern Africa,
reproduced with permission.

were ending the timeless isolation of the continent’s heart. Can Central
Africa have been previously so isolated, when nineteenth-century European
visitors found American crops such as maize, cassava, sweet potatoes, and

326
                                                                   Central Africa

groundnuts already growing there? Furthermore, tobacco was also being
grown and was being smoked in pottery pipes that were similar in form to
pipes found in other parts of Africa and beyond (Shaw 1960). It might be
countered that none of these introductions is likely to pre-date the sixteenth
century, by which time the Portuguese were already present in the Kingdom of
Kongo. However, there is also the problem of bananas to explain, for it has
been proposed that they were introduced to Central Africa, from the other side
of the Indian Ocean, 2,500 years ago (De Langhe et al. 1995). Indeed,
a small amount of archaeological evidence does suggest that contacts with
the outside world go back to early in the second millennium AD. Such is the
approximate date of a few glass beads and a small number of marine shells
(from the Indian Ocean coast) that were found at the site of Katoto in the
Upemba Depression (Hiernaux et al. 1972: 154–5), while glass and cowrie shell
beads were excavated from a roughly thirteenth-century context at Ntusi and
glass beads from a grave of about the fourteenth century at Kibiro (Connah
1996: 90–2). In addition, glass beads were also recovered from several approxi-
mately eleventh-century burials at Munsa (Robertshaw 1997: 13–14). In short,
Central Africa was not totally isolated from the rest of the world, but the
evidence for long-distance trade from outside the continent before the middle
of the second millennium AD is tenuous. Surface collections from no less than
thirty-six sites in the Ugandan part of the Western Rift Valley, for instance,
produced only seven glass beads (Connah 1996: 213).
   In such circumstances, although isolation was not total, external trade
is unlikely to have been an important factor in the development of social
complexity. On the other hand, internal African trading networks, particu-
larly in salt, iron, and copper, could have played a signiﬁcant role in this
development. Salt was produced at Uvinza, in western Tanzania, from the
middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD (Sutton and Roberts 1968); at Ivuna, also in
western Tanzania, from early in the second millennium (Fagan and Yellen
1968); at Kibiro, in Uganda, from a similar date (Connah 1996); and at
Katwe, also in Uganda, from an unknown date prior to the nineteenth century
(Connah 1998a). Iron production was clearly important in the Interlacustrine
Region, and one of the world’s great copper deposits was already being
exploited in south-east Democratic Congo and northern Zambia. In addition,
it is probable that numerous other commodities were traded widely in Central
Africa, such as dried ﬁsh, millet, sorghum, charcoal, bark cloth, wild animal
skins, and ivory. With landscapes over which movement was relatively easy,
many trade goods could have travelled long distances as head loads, but this is a
land of lakes and rivers in which there is ethnohistorical evidence for substantial
development of water transport. In the course of a thousand years or more a
complex series of overlapping trading networks could have developed, of which

                                                                              327
African Civilizations

we still know very little, although Vansina (2004: map 12) thought that
trade routes could have already extended across the continent, from the Indian
Ocean to the Atlantic, by early in the second millennium AD. It was possibly
these that spread the bananas and the other new crops, as well as the
occasional glass beads and marine shells, all of them picked up at the periphery
of the networks from international sources. It might also have been these
internal trading networks that generated concentrations of wealth in particular
areas, brought disparate groups of people into contact, and stimulated compe-
tition and conﬂict, by these and other means contributing to the social,
political, and economic transformations that took place in some parts of
Central Africa.


Conclusion
The relative isolation of much of Central Africa from inﬂuences external
to the continent, until the middle of the second millennium AD, makes it
particularly important to understand the processes that led in some places to
state emergence and/or the growth of larger, denser settlements. Explanation
of such developments in this context might help us to comprehend similar
sociopolitical changes in other parts of Africa, and perhaps even elsewhere
in the world. Unfortunately, however, a relatively low level of archaeological
visibility and a very uneven distribution of archaeological research given
the huge area involved make it difﬁcult to draw any general conclusions.
Nevertheless, for the relatively small Upemba Depression, the larger but still
limited Interlacustrine Region, and parts of the Far West, there is sufﬁcient
archaeological evidence to throw a little light on the matter, assuming that
they can be taken as representative of Central Africa. Potentially highly
productive environments, with access to other major resources, distinguished
all these areas. In spite of the constraints of periodic disease and human
conﬂict, each of them could have supported locally dense populations sus-
tained by cereal, banana, and other cultivation; pastoralism; ﬁshing; and
hunting and with a varied metallurgy-based technology. The archaeological
evidence also suggests that increasingly hierarchical social systems were
developing during the ﬁrst half of the second millennium, stimulated by
competition for prime resources as population pressures increased in some
areas. Elite individuals were able to manipulate large groups of people,
legitimizing their position by assumption of ritual status but basing their
power on economic control. Extensive trading networks within Central
Africa are also likely to have played an important contributory part in these
developments, with only attenuated input from outside the continent. Many


328
                                                                Central Africa

commodities were probably involved, but the importance of salt (so keenly
sought for both human and livestock use), iron (the very basis of the technol-
ogy on which society depended), and copper (such a valued symbol
of status and means of exchange) can hardly be exaggerated. It is apparent
that all of these factors helped to shape the complex sociopolitical landscape,
which impressed nineteenth-century European explorers deep in the heart
of Africa.




                                                                           329
Chapter 11
Settlement growth and emerging polities:
South Africa
In this chapter, ‘South Africa’ describes the extremity of the continent south
of a line from the Limpopo River, in the east, to Walvis Bay, in the west.
It consists of the Republic of South Africa, together with southern parts of
Namibia, Botswana, and Mozambique, as well as Lesotho and Swaziland,
although attention will be limited to the ﬁrst of these modern states. Two
characteristics of the archaeology of this region are of relevance to the subject
of urban and state origins in Africa. First, environments in which trees were
rare or absent resulted in the use of drystone construction for parts of many
settlements, rendering them highly visible archaeologically, particularly
if subsequently abandoned during the turbulent history of recent centuries.
This allows detailed analysis of the layout of settlements and their relation-
ship to landscapes. Second, the sociopolitical developments that are the
subject of this book took place in South Africa within the last ﬁve hundred
years at most and in many cases more recently, so that both documentary
records and oral traditions are copious and valuable sources of information.
In addition, linguistic and genetic studies can provide information on the
relationships and movements of ethnic groups, to which investigations of
pottery and other aspects of material culture can contribute. Thus, in the
case of South Africa, we can examine processes of change for which there
is much less evidence in some other parts of the continent at earlier dates.
Not only can this throw light on the development of complexity in Africa as
a whole, but an investigation of the South African data also has global
relevance.


Geographical location and environmental factors
Mixed farming seems to have been well established in South Africa by the
middle of the second millennium AD. However, the western and south-
western parts of this huge area were too dry to grow African cereal crops
or had winter rainfall instead of the necessary summer rainfall. In those parts
of southern Africa, livestock-herding, hunter-gathering, or a combination of
the two remained the subsistence strategies until European colonization over
the last three hundred years or so. In contrast, to the east and north-east
both cultivation and livestock, particularly cattle, were important. This was
especially the case on the Highveld between the Vaal River and the Gariep

330
                                                                   South Africa

River (formerly the Orange River) and some way north of the Vaal. In this
area there are numerous deserted partly stone-built settlements belonging to
the last few centuries, and some of them were the scenes of substantial social
and political changes (Fig. 11.1). This is an area of temperate grassland,
in South Africa referred to as the Veld, a word meaning grassland and
open country. Indeed, the area is both of these, but it is also more than
1,000 metres above sea level, so that it has a relatively cool and healthy
climate. Much of it is good grazing country for livestock. It comprises two of
the ten biomes, or ecological zones, into which the South African environ-
ment can be divided (Mitchell 2002:15). These have been referred to as
‘Grassland’ and ‘Mixed Woodland Savanna’. Signiﬁcantly, the majority of
the archaeological sites discussed in this chapter are located within these
zones (Mitchell 2002: ﬁg. 12.2).
  In addition to livestock, both rainfall and soil in these zones are generally
suitable for cereal cultivation, with sorghum and pearl millet formerly grown
but after the seventeenth century increasingly maize, introduced from America.
The latter can yield up to three times as much as the indigenous cereals and
requires less labour for its cultivation. However, it needs 25 percent more rain,
and in an environment prone to rainfall ﬂuctuations and serious drought, this
was to have disastrous consequences (Mitchell 2002: 372). The existence of
such ﬂuctuations is why livestock became so important; cattle-keeping, in
particular, helped to protect against food shortages and provided a means of
accumulating wealth and gathering supporters by loaning animals. Under-
standably, cattle became the centre around which life revolved, even dictating
the layout of the settlements in which farmers lived, a layout known as the
Central Cattle Pattern that still characterizes patrilineal Eastern Bantu-
speaking people (Mitchell 2002: 179–280). Concerning this matter more is
known than usual, because many of the settlements were built partly in stone;
speciﬁcally they included extensive drystone enclosure walls whose ruins are
often still visible. As already mentioned, this was a response to the grassland
environment, for the general lack of trees meant that there was little wood
available for building, it being reserved for the framework of otherwise mud-
built houses; in some cases houses were even built of stone. Such was the
shortage of wood that dried dung had to be used for fuel in many places
(Chirikure et al. 2008: ﬁg. 5.2), and iron tools and weapons had to be obtained
by trade with other areas where there was sufﬁcient wood for smelting and
smithing. However, in spite of the rounded character of much of the land-
scape, there were also outcrops of rock that broke into pieces ideally suited for
building. Settlements were often located on the ridges formed by such out-
crops, giving ready access to building material as well as a commanding view
of the surrounding plains.

                                                                            331
African Civilizations




Fig. 11.1 Principal archaeological sites and places in South Africa mentioned in the
text, showing the distribution of the three types of stone-walled settlement units on the
South African Highveld. After Maggs 1976: ﬁg. 15 and Whitelaw 1997: ﬁg. 65. Drawn
by Joe LeMonnier.



332
                                                                  South Africa

Sources of information
Historical evidence
The earliest European settlements in South Africa were during the sixteenth
century, so that substantial historical documentation provides information on
African communities since that time (Theal 1964). Explorers, missionaries,
traders, and others recorded what they saw, and these ethnohistorical sources
indicate that urban development was already occurring in some places by the
nineteenth century. For example, in 1801 Truter and Somerville estimated the
number of huts at the Thlaping settlement of Old Lithako (which lacked stone
structures), in north-eastern Cape Province, to be between 2,000 and 3,000,
and the population between 10,000 and 15,000 (Walton 1956: 52). Further-
more, in 1835 Gardiner reckoned the number of inhabitants at the Zulu
capital of Mgungundlovu, in KwaZulu-Natal, at 5,500 (Parkington and
Cronin 1979: 136), and the later Zulu capital of Ondini is thought to have
housed up to 5,000 people at times during the 1870s (Watson and Watson
1990: 34). Neither of these places possessed stone structures. In the case of
Mgungundlovu, some of these visitors left plans and drawings of its layout, as
well as descriptions. Another important documentary source is the account by
John Campbell of his visit to Kaditshwene, the early nineteenth-century capital
of the Hurutshe group of the Tswana, in 1820. He estimated its population as
either 16,000 or 20,000; Stephen Kay, who visited in 1821, thought that it
contained 13,000 to 14,000 people. In comparison, an 1824 ofﬁcial census
recorded 18,668 occupants for Cape Town, the biggest colonial settlement at
that time (Boeyens 2000: 3).
  Historical documentation also provides evidence of state emergence, in
several of the more densely populated parts of South Africa, by the nineteenth
century. Best known is the Zulu kingdom, because of its violent conﬂict with
other ethnic groups and with European colonial interests. However, there were
also related Nguni polities and those of the Ndebele, Swazi, and others, which
appeared during and after the Mfecane, a period of wars and population
movements during the early nineteenth century (Fage and Verity 1978: 42).
Oral traditions are another important source of information concerning these
developments, and many of these traditions have been systematically recorded.
This has provided substantial information on the ethnic identities of many of
the people occupying the south-eastern part of South Africa, particularly the
Sotho-Tswana of the Highveld. Anthropological and ethnological investiga-
tions have further contributed to these contextual studies, so that much more is
understood about the development of sociopolitical complexity in South
Africa during the later second millennium AD than is the case for other parts


                                                                           333
African Civilizations

of Africa during earlier periods. A major factor contributing to this difference
was European settlement and trade, both of which expanded on an unpreced-
ented scale in South Africa during the nineteenth century.


Archaeological evidence
Some of the earliest archaeological evidence for the emergence of social com-
plexity in South Africa is in the Zoutpansberg Range, in what was formerly
the northern Transvaal (now Limpopo Province). This seems to be dated to the
ﬁfteenth century AD. Some sites with drystone structures in this region have
similarities to the zimbabwe-tradition sites of Zambezia, notable examples being
Dzata and Machemma. These are situated in a region later associated with the
Venda, whose culture has been used to interpret symbolism at Great Zimbabwe
(Huffman 1996). The Zoutpansberg had metal ores, good soils and pasture, and
formerly abundant game, particularly elephants, and it is thought to be where
the Sotho-Tswana people originated (Whitelaw 1997: 451). This was during
a period with a cooler, drier climate; in some parts of South Africa, severe
aridity probably occurred. As a consequence, farmers apparently had little
interest in the Highveld, and it was probably only the increasing importance
of cattle in their economy that led to substantial settlement in this zone. This
occurred from about 1300; the site of Moor Park, in KwaZulu-Natal, is
dated from the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries and consisted of a stone-walled
enclosed hilltop, with evidence of domesticated cattle and sorghum cultivation
(Mitchell 2002: 348; Huffman 2007: 33–4). Subsequently, a warmer, wetter
period with more regular summer rains, which provided favourable conditions
for cereal cultivation, might also have encouraged increased settlement of this
high country. Radiocarbon dates suggest that this could have happened as late
as the seventeenth century (Mitchell 2002: 348–9), although formerly a date
two centuries earlier was suggested (Maggs 1976: 320). It was at this time
that the earliest of many stone-walled settlements were built, in the north-
eastern corner of the southern Highveld. Each of these consisted of a cluster of
settlement units with layouts known to archaeologists as Type N (Fig. 11.2),
after a site at Ntsuanatsatsi, in Free State Province. These settlement units had a
central ring of circular livestock enclosures which were connected by walling to
form a large secondary enclosure, outside of which were houses of reeds and
mud, the whole complex being surrounded by a low outer wall. The layout
allowed livestock to be penned in the centre of the unit, away from the living
area around the huts. Each settlement unit seems to have housed an extended
family and its livestock; settlements consisted of as many as a hundred such
units, possibly containing up to 1,500 people. However, these early settlements
were widely spaced compared with later ones, suggesting that the overall

334
                                                                          South Africa




Fig. 11.2 Types of stone-walled settlement units on the South African Highveld. After
Maggs 1976: ﬁg. 16. Copyright Taylor & Francis Ltd: www.tandfonline.com.

population was still small. Excavation has produced broken pottery, clay ﬁgur-
ines of cattle, iron and bone tools, bones of both domesticated and wild animals,
stone platforms for grain bins, and indications that the houses were dome-like
structures, sometimes with paved ﬂoors (Maggs 1976).
                                                                                    335
African Civilizations

  After some time, the layout of the individual settlement units changed to one
that is referred to by archaeologists as Type V (Fig. 11.2). Settlements consist-
ing of units with this plan were much more common and more widespread
than the earlier form and were located in areas with the best arable and grazing
land, in part overlapping the distribution of Type N units. Each Type
V settlement unit was made up of circular enclosures arranged in a rough
circle and joined by connecting walls to form one large enclosure. The outer
wall of the Type N units was no longer present, and the circular houses, which
were sometimes of corbelled stone, were either in the open outside the large
enclosure or formed part of the enclosure. Settlements comprising clusters of
such units in some cases housed many hundreds of inhabitants. Occasional
differences in the sizes of individual settlement units suggest that differences in
wealth and power were developing within these communities. Furthermore,
settlements were now closer together, indicating an increase in the overall
population compared with the earlier period, and older settlements continued
to be occupied or were reoccupied, stone from Type N settlement units often
being robbed to build in the new style. Type V settlement units date from the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and excavations at the settlement site of
Makgwareng, in the Free State, have provided information on the history of
one of them. In this case the earliest occupants built enclosures of reeds, not
stone, and constructed houses of mud-plastered reeds. Eventually these were
replaced by ﬁve large stone enclosures that were linked to form a secondary
enclosure, around which were six stone houses. In this form, the Makgwareng
settlement unit was probably occupied by eighteen to forty-ﬁve people, com-
prising a family homestead, but subsequently additional houses were built,
suggesting that the number of occupants had increased. The end was appar-
ently sudden and violent, with iron tools and weapons abandoned at the site.
Like many other settlements with Type V units, it seems to have been des-
troyed during the widespread warfare that engulfed this part of southern
Africa in the early nineteenth century (Maggs 1976).
  In the north-west of the Free State was yet another design of settlement unit,
which archaeologists have called Type Z (Fig. 11.2). At the centre of each of
these units was a compact group of circular enclosures for livestock; surround-
ing these were eight to twenty circular houses, often with front and back semi-
circular courtyards. The houses were different from those of either Type N or
Type V settlement units. Apparently they had thatched conical roofs supported
mainly by a ring of poles set outside the mud wall of the building itself, thus
providing it with a veranda. Again, these settlement units were grouped
together into settlements, of which one particularly large example at Matloang
has been surveyed and partly excavated. At that place, tightly packed houses
and livestock enclosures extended for more than a kilometre along a ridge and

336
                                                                     South Africa

might have had a population of more than 1,000 people. Such settlements
were probably occupied during the eighteenth century, but the earliest of them
might be older. When oral traditions, historical accounts, and linguistic data
are compared with the archaeological evidence, it appears that all three types
of settlement unit were probably built by speakers of Sotho-Tswana languages
but that whereas both Type N and Type V were the work of Sotho people, the
ﬁrst style developing into the second, Type Z settlement units were built by
Tswana people. Thus it seems that the differences in layout amongst the stone
ruins of the Highveld reﬂect differences in its past populations (Maggs 1976).
  During the 1960s and 1970s, the classiﬁcation of the stone-walled structures
discussed above was based on aerial photographs. More recently, technologies
such as Google Earth satellite imagery and Geographic Information System
software have allowed more sophisticated analysis of such sites. Remotely
sensed settlement data from the Suikerbosrand Nature Reserve near Johannes-
burg have shown signiﬁcant changes in settlement patterns from dispersed
homesteads to nucleated towns during the last two or three centuries before
the colonial period. These changes are similar to those in other stone-walled
structures, where they have been interpreted as indicating an evolution in
social, political, and economic complexity. It is thought that climatic stress
and conﬂict might have helped bring about these changes in settlement pat-
terns. Structures have been classiﬁed into three groups: Group I dates from the
ﬁfteenth to the seventeenth century and Groups II and III from the seventeenth
to the nineteenth, although Group III might have been chronologically inter-
mediate between Groups I and II (Sadr and Rodier 2012).
  During the eighteenth century some Tswana settlements in the western
Transvaal (now North-West Province) grew to a remarkable size, culminating
in populations of 10,000 people or more. Kaditshwene appears to have been
one of the largest, with a population in the early nineteenth century approach-
ing 20,000, making it similar in size to contemporary Cape Town (Boeyens
2000: 3). Molokwane, also in North-West Province, dating from the beginning
of the eighteenth century, is thought to have been even larger. It was a
settlement 3 kilometres in length, averaging 1.5 kilometres in width and with
an area of approximately 4 to 5 square kilometres. It has to be regarded as
urban in character, although it was called a ‘village’ by its investigator, who
also described it as ‘the largest stone-walled archaeological site in South Africa’
(Pistorius 1992: 17). Excavation of one of its smaller settlement units, covering
an area of 1 hectare and loosely comparable in layout to the Type Z units, has
provided a valuable picture of the life of its occupants (Fig. 11.3). Over
79 percent of the meat consumed came from domestic animals, cattle outnum-
bering sheep and goats, and there was evidence for the preparation of plant
food, including grain. In addition, the internal arrangements of the settlement

                                                                              337
338




      Fig. 11.3 Plan of excavated stone-walled settlement unit SEL1 at Molokwane, North-West Province, South Africa.
      The layout consists of an outer wall enclosing dwellings, central kraal complexes, and an intervening unenclosed space.
      After Pistorius 1992: ﬁg. 7.
                                                                      South Africa

unit shed light on the social structure of its inhabitants as well as on their daily
activities. Considered as a whole, this huge settlement and others like it
indicate increasing centralization of economic and political power by local
rulers, at least partly in response to growing instability. Population expansion,
partly fuelled by the introduction of maize, had led to greater competition
between chiefdoms for arable land and grazing and to more frequent cattle
raiding as a means of augmenting wealth. In addition, the onset of drought
made the situation even worse, setting the stage for disaster (Antonites and
Antonites 2014).
  During the early nineteenth century there erupted a series of wars and
population movements that originated in KwaZulu-Natal but subsequently
affected much of south-eastern Africa. Known as the Mfecane by the Nguni,
meaning ‘the crushing’, this explosion of violence seems to have been princi-
pally sparked by intense competition for the control of resources, particularly
those sought by European traders at Delagoa Bay, the location of the Mozam-
bique port formerly known as Lourenço Marques (now Maputo). Slaves
appear to have been one of those resources, but ivory was the principal one,
as much as 50 tonnes (representing about 500 elephants) being exported each
year from 1750 to 1790. This was mainly in exchange for glass beads, cloth,
and brass. Such imports increased the wealth and power of those rulers who
gained access to them, and the competition for elephants grew ever more
intense as they became more difﬁcult to ﬁnd. In addition, there were the effects
of population growth, resulting from the cultivation of maize, as mentioned
earlier. Several severe drought episodes as well as crop rust and cattle disease
made the situation even worse. Out of the resulting chaos emerged the Zulu
state, centred in KwaZulu-Natal, but for the settlements of the Highveld the
period has been remembered as the Difaqane by the Sotho-Tswana, meaning
‘the scattering of tribes’. As European settlers moved north in the so-called
Great Trek of the late 1830s, they found only deserted stone ruins in many
places, not the thriving communities of people and animals that had formerly
existed (Mitchell 2002: 369–79).
  The increasing number and size of the stone-walled sites of the Highveld can
be regarded as indications of urban development. Furthermore, the emergence
of powerful centralized polities, such as that of the Zulus, out of the chaos of
the Mfecane is a remarkable example of state development. In the Zulu case
this was centred on a permanent army of young men of a given age, based in
purpose-built military homesteads. Warfare enabled control of land, cattle,
food, and agricultural labour, while the king controlled iron production and
imported prestige goods. The success of the Zulu state is indicated by the Battle
of Isandlwana in 1879, when the Zulus inﬂicted one of the most devastating
defeats suffered by a British Army during colonial wars in Africa. Later that

                                                                               339
African Civilizations

year the British retaliated at the Battle of Ulundi, breaking the military power
of the Zulu nation by defeating its army, destroying the capital of Zululand,
Ulundi, and capturing the Zulu king, Cetshwayo. The existence of the Zulu
state had been brief, but it was an impressive example of indigenous state
development in Africa.
   The ruins of other stone-walled settlements exist in the south-east of South
Africa, although individual settlement units are often relatively small. Never-
theless, as already seen, in some instances the dense distribution of such
structures and the size of some of them suggest the presence of substantial
populations, with the potential for urban growth and state development. Such
is the case in the Rustenburg region of North-West Province (Hall et al. 2008)
and on the Mpumalanga Escarpment in Mpumalanga Province (Delius and
Schoeman 2008). It was this potential that was most famously realized in the
case of the Zulu; fortunately there are two sites of Zulu state capitals that have
been investigated archaeologically. These are Mgungundlovu, in KwaZulu-
Natal, occupied from 1829 to 1838 (Parkington and Cronin 1979), and the
later capital of Ondini, dating from 1873 to 1879, in the same general area
(Watson and Watson 1990). Each of these are thought to have housed about
5,000 people at times, and although they both lacked stone structures, they
were clearly impressive settlements. Mgungundlovu had an area of about 22.5
hectares and a circumference of about 1.7 kilometres; Ondini covered about
35 hectares. Because they were constructed in timber, reed, and thatch and in
both cases had been destroyed by ﬁre, hut ﬂoors were ﬁred brick-hard, enab-
ling excavation at Mgungundlovu to uncover the plans and layout of many
huts as well as some of their internal details. At Ondini, excavation concen-
trated instead on midden deposits, permitting a detailed study of faunal
remains. On the basis of the meat weights estimated from the bones recovered,
cattle overwhelmingly dominated the animal input of the diet. This was as
expected from historical evidence for the major role of cattle in Zulu society at
that time, providing hides for shields and clothing, as well as food, and also
individual wealth for acquiring wives and for ritual and religious ceremonies.
Together, the sites of Mgungundlovu and Ondini have contributed an import-
ant insight into the character of nineteenth-century capitals in South Africa,
enabling both urban and state development to be better understood.


Subsistence economy
Historical documentation and oral traditions indicate that mixed farming,
consisting of cereal cultivation and livestock herding, was the basis of the
subsistence economy of the stone-walled and related settlements of south-east
South Africa. Perhaps as a result, relatively little attention appears to have been

340
                                                                     South Africa

given to archaeobotanical evidence from excavations. Nevertheless, carbonized
remains of sorghum, cowpeas, tsamma melons, and (from the eighteenth cen-
tury onwards) maize have been recorded, as well as granaries and grain bins for
storage. In addition, different forms of grindstones, used to prepare the grains as
food, indicate the change from sorghum and millet growing to maize growing
(Huffman 2007: 453–4; Antonites and Antonites 2014). More attention has
been given to the meat supply, which overwhelmingly depended on cattle,
although goats and sheep were kept and hunting and wild plant foods continued
to be signiﬁcant resources (Mitchell 2002: 349). In contrast, the importance of
cultivation to the economy is conﬁrmed by the distribution of stone-walled
structures relative to the best arable soils. This suggests ‘a strong correlation
between political courts and the best farmlands’ (Sadr and Rodier 2012: 1038).
Although it is apparent that population growth, drought, and both animal and
plant disease did cause periodic crises, the very existence of a growing popula-
tion suggests that the subsistence economy was sound.


Technology
Two aspects of the technology of the Highveld and related settlements were
particularly important. One was the building skill evident in the drystone
structures at many sites, as well as in the use of reeds, mud, and thatch to
produce serviceable and attractive houses. By the early nineteenth century, if
not before, numerous houses in Tswana settlements were even provided with
the sophistication of sliding doors. European visitors recorded these, and
excavators have found the grooves in which they ran, as well as the remains
of wood from the doors themselves. In addition, contemporary accounts
mention ﬁnely polished mud ﬂoors, verandas, courtyards, internally plastered
walls and ceilings, a void in the conical roof above the ceiling (presumably for
insulation), painted decorations, and the general cleanliness of the houses
(Maggs 1993). Clearly the occupants of these settlements were accomplished
builders with a pride in their work. The second aspect of technology that
deserves attention was metalworking, from the early second millennium AD,
including both iron and copper smelting and manufacturing (Fig. 11.4) and
mining to obtain the necessary ores (Hall et al. 2006). Tin was also mined and
alloyed with copper to produce bronze (Huffman 2007: 87–8). At Rooiberg,
in the Southern Waterberg of Limpopo Province, is the only source in southern
Africa of cassiterite (a tin oxide) that has provided evidence of its mining
before European colonization (Bandama et al. 2013). Because of the shortage
of wood in many areas, communities with access to fuel for smelting and
smithing, as well as the necessary ores, specialized in metalworking. They then
traded their products to populations whose lack of fuel prevented such work

                                                                              341
342




      Fig. 11.4 The central part of the settlement of Marothodi, North-West Province, South Africa, showing the location of copper- and
      iron-working areas in relation to the homesteads. After Hall et al. 2006: ﬁg. 2. Reproduced by permission of Africa Magna
      Verlag, Frankfurt am Main.
                                                                    South Africa

(Chirikure et al. 2008). A wide range of utilitarian iron goods was produced
for both agriculture and warfare; copper (and sometimes bronze) was used for
personal adornment. Other signiﬁcant aspects of technology included the
manufacture of salt and the mining of ochre (Huffman 2007: 90–1). There
was also the production of ﬁne pottery and the making of leather goods such
as clothing and shields. In addition, the Lydenburg Head and associated
artefacts from Mpumalanga Province (Huffman 2007: 67), although earlier
in date than the period discussed here, indicate a tradition of technical skill in
the forming and ﬁring of terracotta sculpture. Overall, archaeological and
other evidence suggests that the occupants of the stone-walled and related
settlements had a sophisticated technology and that a degree of functional
specialization had already developed within a context of sociopolitical change.


Social system
The archaeological evidence, like the documentary and oral evidence, indi-
cates the existence of a hierarchical society of chiefs and kings based on
populations of subsistence farmers. If the clusters of stone-walled settlement
units consisted of those occupied at the same time, then the larger clusters
represented larger settlements, and it is thought that the size of settlements
reﬂected wealth and political power. Large middens also indicate greater
political power, as they represent court, rather than household garbage.
Sadr and Rodier (2012) used the ranked sizes of individual settlements to
suggest the relative political and economic stratiﬁcation of their different
settlement groups. Clearly, varying degrees of urbanism were developing
amongst the Sotho-Tswana, as well as state formation at different levels.
For these changes to take place, social organization based on age sets and
circumcision-initiation schools tended to be replaced by militaristic govern-
ance, of which Shaka’s Zulu state was the best known example. Young men
of similar age were formed into regiments that lived together, were not
allowed to marry until they had served in action, and were under the control
of commanders answerable to the king. In addition, lineage heads lost power
to an elite centred on the royal lineage (Mitchell 2002: 372–3). This was a
state produced by interethnic conﬂict and dependant on warfare; it was
inevitable that it should eventually collapse when confronted by expanding
European interests in southern Africa, in spite of ﬁelding an army of 20,000
at the Battle of Ulundi. Assegais (short iron-tipped stabbing spears) and
obsolete or captured ﬁrearms were no match for late-nineteenth-century
European military technology. Although polities similar to that of the Zulu
emerged or began to emerge amongst other people, they also were swept
away in the sociopolitical maelstrom of nineteenth-century southern Africa.

                                                                             343
African Civilizations

Population pressures
The Mfecane appears to have been largely the consequence of population
increase during agriculturally productive periods, followed by drought and
food shortages leading to severe sociopolitical dislocation. The adoption of
maize, more productive than sorghum or millet but more vulnerable to ﬂuctu-
ations in rainfall (p. 331), is thought to have contributed to this crisis.
Although competition for access to overseas trade was another cause of the
violence that erupted, there seems little doubt that the Mfecane was itself an
indication of population pressures in southern Africa during the nineteenth
century. More people meant less food, a shortage that could be relieved only
by taking other people’s food, by force if necessary. Archaeological evidence
for population stress is present amongst Bokoni settlements of the Mpuma-
langa Escarpment, dated to within the last 400 years. These settlements are
remarkable because ‘not only are the homesteads preserved but there are also
networks of linking roads and vast areas of agricultural terraces’ (Maggs
2008: 173). It has been suggested that such developments represent ‘islands
of agricultural intensiﬁcation’, capable of supporting larger populations
(Maggs 2008: 178–9); part of the Lydenburg valley, for example, had a
maximum population of perhaps 19,000 to 57,000 (Maggs 2008: 172–3).
It seems that population pressures did contribute to the development of
sociopolitical complexity in this part of southern Africa.


Ideology
Little appears to have been known of Sotho-Tswana religious beliefs and
practices until the nineteenth century, when Christian missionary endeavour
was already transforming traditional ideas as well as misunderstanding them.
Shamanism, in which altered states of consciousness enabled interaction with
the spirit world, with ancestors acting as intermediaries, seems to have been
central to these ideas. Herbalist healers and diviners functioned as shamans,
spiritual counsellors, and protectors against evil spirits and black magic. Polit-
ical leaders were often expected to preside over rituals of fertility, rain making,
and warfare that strengthened the people and the land. In many African
societies, kingship was essentially divine kingship, in which ‘“ceremonies”
and the importance of the “following of people” were at the core of the notion
of power’ (de Maret 2012: 315). As de Maret stressed, it is necessary to
recognize sacred power in the archaeological record, focussing on palaces,
cities, burials, and regalia. In the case of the Sotho-Tswana occupants of the
stone-walled settlements in south-eastern South Africa, aspects of such evidence
do show religious ideology providing the basis of political control.

344
                                                                    South Africa

Archaeological evidence of the role of ideology in the functioning of these
societies is also present in the form of rain-making sites (Huffman 2007: 71–3).


External trade
By the nineteenth century, international maritime activity along South Africa’s
eastern coast had stimulated a major expansion of its external trade. The Sotho-
Tswana stone-walled settlements and adjacent areas, although inland, were
within relatively easy reach of that coast, where Delagoa Bay (now Maputo)
provided access to international markets and suppliers. The most important
African export commodity was probably ivory, to satisfy a growing European
demand for piano keys and a variety of other items, as well as for raw material to
feed a long-standing tradition of ivory carving. Slaves were another export, along
with rhinoceros horn, gold, tin, skins, and African exotica. In addition, visiting
ships needed provisions, particularly meat, with European and American whalers
calling at Delagoa Bay for that purpose. In exchange, glass beads, cloth, brass,
ceramics, and other manufactured goods were imported, providing wealth that
rulers and associated elite could use to accumulate more cattle and therefore
strengthen their power base. Signiﬁcantly, the Zulu state, the most successful
and aggressive polity in the coastal region, was adjacent to Delagoa Bay. As
already stated, competition for access to overseas trade is thought to have been a
contributory factor to the violence that erupted in the Mfecane, for which the
Zulus have often been blamed. Another view is that the Zulu part in this was a
defensive response by Shaka to slave raiding from Delagoa Bay and aggression
from Cape Colony (Cobbing 1988; Gordon 2009), but this interpretation has
been questioned (Mitchell 2002: 370). Whatever the case, it seems that external
trade played a part in the sociopolitical developments that occurred.
  As in other parts of Africa, however, the role of external trade must be seen
in the context of indigenous African trading networks. Differential distribution
of resources meant that there was a complex internal network of trade in iron,
copper, salt, specularite, pigments, animal skins, feathers, ostrich eggshell
beads, a variety of foodstuffs, and other things (Mitchell 2002). Any consider-
ation of the part that trade played in the development of sociopolitical com-
plexity in parts of southern Africa must consider internal trade as well as
external trade and the interaction between the two.


Conclusion
The Highveld and associated areas of South Africa have large numbers of
archaeological sites that constitute the remains of farming settlements dating
to only the last few centuries. Drystone construction ensures the archaeological

                                                                             345
African Civilizations

visibility of many of these sites, and both documentary records and oral
traditions are informative. Consequently, we are provided with an opportunity
to see the emergence of aspects of sociopolitical complexity actually in
progress. Study of evidence from this recent past reveals examples of the
beginnings of urbanization and of state formation. These nineteenth-century
developments were inevitably hesitant, constrained as they were by indigenous
political instability and growing colonial interference, but they do enable us to
see the circumstances in which the changes took place.
  To begin with, relatively good soil and pasture in some areas supported
mixed farming, to which cereals and cattle herding were the main contributors
and which in some instances involved intensive production. This resulted
in both population increase and greater local population density, so that the
number of settlements and their individual sizes became greater. Furthermore,
some of the occupants of these settlements had technological skills, particu-
larly in building with stone, mud, and organic materials, and in metal mining,
smelting, and manufacture, resulting in a degree of functional specialization.
However, population size and density contributed to the growth of a hierarch-
ical social system that was based on subsistence farming, varying in scale from
small chiefdoms to emergent states. Unfortunately, population pressures also
caused social instability, a situation made worse by the introduction of maize,
a cereal with a greater yield than sorghum or millet but vulnerable to the
periodic droughts of the region. Religious ideology provided the basis of
political control by rulers, but this was often weakened by severe competition
for resources. In addition, access to commodities from external trade and to
the means of paying for these brought on serious interethnic conﬂict. Added
to the violence and disruption that resulted was the increasing pressure of
colonial settlement. In the end, the South African evidence shows not only
how sociopolitical complexity can develop but also how it can fail.




346
Chapter 12
What are the common denominators?


The examples of African precolonial urbanization and state formation dis-
cussed in Chapters 2 to 11 come from a wide range of environments. These
include river valley, such as Egypt and Nubia; mountain plateau, for example,
Aksum and Zambezia; savanna plain, for instance, Kano; rainforest, such as
Ife and Central Africa; maritime fringe, as with the Swahili coast; grassland,
such as the South African Highveld; and desert margins, for example, North
Africa. The geographical locations of these developments within the continent
are equally diverse. Egypt and Nubia were so positioned that they had sub-
stantial and long-standing contacts with the eastern Mediterranean. Aksum
was situated beside a major trade route between the Mediterranean world and
the lands of the Indian Ocean. Zambezia also had contact with Indian Ocean
trade, although more remotely. The West African savanna, on the other hand,
was separated from the outside world by one of the greatest deserts on earth,
the traversal of which weakened external cultural inﬂuences. This was even
more the case in the West African forest, situated far to the south of the desert
margins and backed by the empty Atlantic Ocean that for many centuries was
a more effective barrier than the Sahara. Different again were the cities and
towns of the East African coast, which looked out on the Indian Ocean
that provided links with distant but technologically sophisticated cultures.
More remote from such contacts was Central Africa, which had relatively
little contact with the outside world until quite late, as was also the case for the
South African Highveld. North Africa looked north to the heart of the ancient
world but also south into the Sahara, with some remarkable adaptations to its
extreme environments. Such environmental and geographical diversity would
suggest that we must look elsewhere for any common factors that might
explain the appearance of social complexity in some parts of the African
continent and, equally, its failure to appear in other parts.
   Nevertheless, each area had its own characteristic environmental and
geographical opportunities. In every case there were also environmental con-
straints, but the ingenuity of human culture partly mitigated their impact.
Nowhere is this more starkly illustrated than on the middle Nile; on the one
hand, the river offered life, but on the other hand, parts of the surrounding
environment were so dry as to be scarcely habitable. Yet by means of a
combination of irrigation, rainfed cultivation, and pastoralism, human popu-
lations were able to exploit both the river and the adjacent savanna and

                                                                               347
African Civilizations

desert margins. So successfully were the environmental constraints overcome
that this area was the scene of some of Africa’s earliest states and cities and a
long succession of such developments. A similar interplay of environmental
opportunity, environmental constraint, and human culture can be discerned
(to varying extents) in each of the cases that have been considered. This
interplay was a dynamic one, and its outcome in each case was normally in
favour of the human inhabitants, except when episodic imbalance threatened
collapse of the often delicately balanced system. However, this does not go
very far in explaining the emergence of social complexity in Africa; obviously,
human beings thrive better in some places than in others, but this is no reason
why they should build cities or create states.
  However, it is the numbers of people who thrived that might be signiﬁcant.
Population sizes and densities in the relevant areas seem to have been higher
than was usual in this generally thinly populated continent. As a result,
localized population pressures probably developed, but all of the areas dis-
cussed had a strong subsistence base with potential for a storable, transport-
able surplus that could normally alleviate such pressures. Most people were
agriculturalists, growing a range of food plants suited to local environments
and keeping livestock, though the latter was limited by trypanosomiasis in the
West African forest and in some other parts of Africa. The importance of
pastoralism (Smith 1992) can hardly be overstated: herds of cattle and ﬂocks
of sheep and goats converted grass into wealth during good years and could
provide relief from starvation when crops failed in bad years. The farmers and
the pastoralists were often different groups of people, interacting with one
another, but from this symbiosis came strength, just as weakness resulted from
their periodic conﬂicts. In addition, in some areas there was an intensiﬁcation
of agricultural strategy, and this in a continent where agricultural systems have
tended to be extensive rather than intensive. Thus, on the middle Nile more
efﬁcient irrigation was achieved by introducing the ox-driven waterwheel; in
the Inland Niger Delta of Mali recessional cultivation of rice was developed;
and in the Ethiopian Highlands slopes were terraced and water-storage dams
constructed. Developments of this sort would suggest that populations in such
areas were indeed increasing, creating a demand for more food and for more
labour to produce it. It is surely signiﬁcant that people became such an
important trade commodity in some parts of Africa; slaves have a long history
in the continent for both export and internal use. In Africa, as elsewhere in the
world, one should remember George Orwell’s remark about ‘those hundreds
of millions of slaves on whose backs civilization rested generation after
generation’ (Orwell 1966: 238).
  In each of the areas considered, the exploitation of resources included
not only a mixed agricultural strategy but also a varied and sometimes

348
                                         What are the common denominators?

sophisticated metallurgically based technology. Most of the relevant societies
were proﬁcient in the working of iron; iron technology has been extremely
important in Africa as an enabling and intensifying agent during the last two
millennia or so. Without iron, the farmers of the West African forest could not
have exploited their heavily vegetated environment as successfully as they did,
nor could the occupants of Bigo in Uganda have dug such impressive rock-cut
ditches. Iron provided both the tools to exploit available resources and the
weapons to discourage others who coveted them. In addition to iron working
and other metallurgical skills, the technology of the groups of people discussed
in this book covered a range of abilities. Although engineering knowledge of
the sort indicated by the Aksumite stelae seems to have been unusual, there
was, nevertheless, a widespread understanding of building techniques, in
stone, ﬁred brick, mud-brick, coursed mud, wood, grass, and in other organic
materials. Building technology was both diverse and accomplished. Further-
more, there appear to have been other crafts, including pottery making, wood
working, textile production, and leather working. In some instances, there
must also have been people with skills speciﬁc to the region, such as boat
builders and sailors on the middle Nile or the East African coast, and scribes
in Meroë or Aksum where indigenous alphabets were developed. When it
is considered that a number of the cases studied also have evidence of religious
functionaries, government ofﬁcials, and specialist traders, it becomes apparent
that some degree of functional specialization was probably present in the areas
examined.
   Inevitably, some resources were more limited than others, and as Haas
(1982: 151) claimed, it is control of resources that gives rulers their power
(p. 7). All of the cases examined in this book show unmistakable signs of the
emergence of an elite who told other people what to do. The question is, what
were the vital resources that they controlled? Most commonly this has been
answered by pointing to the existence of raw materials such as gold, ivory, and
other things that commanded a high price on the world market. Control of
these meant control of long-distance trade, and control of such trade provided
prestige and wealth. Thus appeared the African elites; thus developed the cities
and the states. The problem with this explanation is not that it is incorrect but
that it is wrongly timed. Looking at the archaeological evidence in North
Africa, on the middle Nile, in the Ethiopian Highlands, or along the East
African coast, it is clear that external long-distance trade did sometimes play
a major role in African urbanization and state formation, but it seems that this
was as an intensiﬁer rather than as an originator. We now have evidence that
suggests an indigenous origin for the development of social complexity on
the East African coast; the earliest urbanization in the West African savanna
pre-dates the growth of large-scale trans-Saharan trade; and in Central Africa

                                                                            349
African Civilizations

there are signs of increasing social complexity at a time before there was
any substantial long-distance trade with the outside world. Furthermore,
neither Zambezia nor the West African forest has evidence for early long-
distance trade on a large scale, and even in the middle Nile and the Ethiopian
Highlands the origins of sociopolitical changes seem to have pre-dated such
a development.
   If external long-distance trade was merely an intensiﬁer of changes that had
already commenced, then the question remains of what started them. There
seem to be two possibilities. The ﬁrst is that extensive internal trading net-
works preexisted external trading contacts and that African elites ﬁrst gained
power by controlling resources within such internal exchange systems.
Copper, iron, and salt are likely to have been amongst these resources, but
there could have been many more, including the gold and ivory that subse-
quently became so vital to the overseas trade. Indeed, the earliest commodities
to be exchanged by internal trade were probably foodstuffs and other plant
and animal resources. The ecological diversity of much of Africa makes this
likely, and, in fact, the movement of such commodities has remained signiﬁ-
cant down to modern times. For example, shea butter has been exported from
northern Nigeria to the south of that country, whilst kola nuts travelled in the
opposite direction (Shaw 1984: 156); Africa has many other, similar instances
of resource exchange. Although archaeology tends to be silent on perishable
goods, there is some indication that early internal trading networks did exist,
particularly in Central Africa, West Africa, and Ethiopia. This being the case,
it seems likely that external long-distance trade merely plugged into the extant
circuitry of the internal networks.
   A second possible explanation is that elite power was ﬁrst acquired by the
control of land – not any land but land with an unusually high production
potential. The role of this factor is seen as possibly complementary to that of
internal trade, rather than as an alternative to it. Given the relatively poor
quality of many African soils, together with their often moisture-stressed
condition, and given expanding populations in some places, the greatest
competition was likely to be around land which was more highly productive.
In all of the case studies examined, it is possible to ﬁnd indications that such
land might have existed. Thus, in an environment surrounded by desert, the
lower Nile had seasonal ﬂoods carrying fertile silt, which beneﬁtted some
places more than others. In the middle Nile area, fertile silts that could be
reached by the available irrigation technology were limited, and the propor-
tion of each year for which they could be watered varied with location. As a
result, some areas of land must have been more productive than others. On the
north-eastern Ethiopian plateau, some soils were more fertile than others and
more suitable for plough cultivation of cereals, giving them a signiﬁcant role

350
                                         What are the common denominators?

during episodes of famine. The generally water-stressed environment of the
West African savanna gave the limited areas available for recessional cultiva-
tion, such as parts of the Inland Niger Delta, a particular importance. In the
West African forest, it seems to have been the upper interﬂuves and the forest–
savanna ecotonal areas that provided the best farmlands, and these were
limited. For the East African coast it was a matter of fertile soils and
water availability, some areas being better provided for than others. On the
Zimbabwe Plateau, it was again a matter of soils, where some soils were
particularly fertile in an otherwise rocky area with granite-derived soils of
poor fertility. For the Upemba Depression it was access to seasonally inun-
dated fertile alluvium and to the most productive ﬁshing grounds. In the
Interlacustrine Region, in areas of good rainfall it was control of the best
soils for cultivation, and in drier areas it was control of the best grazing lands
for cattle. In both North and South Africa there were also areas with more
rainfall or better pasture.
  So it is possible that the crucial common factor underlying the emergence of
African elites was access to, and control of, more highly productive land. If this
was the case, then we have an indigenous explanation for the origin of social
complexity in some parts of Africa. Doubtless, local trading networks also
played an important role, and, clearly, external long-distance trade eventually
came to act as an intensifying agent of signiﬁcance. Nevertheless, this ‘pro-
ductive land hypothesis’, as it might be called, does provide an originating
agent, within each locality, of the developments that we are seeking to under-
stand. It also provides an hypothesis that is testable, as ﬁeld research pro-
gresses. Nevertheless, those who argue that control of people was more
important than control of land have challenged this explanation (Edwards
1994: 9; Peel 2000: 515). After all, they claim, in the past there was no
shortage of land in an essentially underpopulated Africa, but their argument
fails to allow for the extensive areas of the continent where land is of limited
use due to low fertility, rocky surfaces, hard topsoils of laterite (clay high in
iron oxides), and other factors. In reality, a combination of land and people
as a controllable resource has greater explanatory value; land is needed to
support increasing numbers of people, but increasing numbers of people are
needed to make the land productive.
  With the emergence of an elite, a social hierarchy also developed. All of the
archaeological examples that have been examined show signs of such social
differentiation to a greater or lesser degree. There were clearly those few who
were in charge and those masses who did what they were told. Less easy to
recognize are the people in the middle, who acted on behalf of the elite but
were neither of their ranks nor of the labouring majority. Whatever the details
of the hierarchy, however, in each of the cases reviewed in this book it was

                                                                             351
African Civilizations

legitimized and reinforced by one form or another of religious ideology. In all
instances, the earliest manifestations of this were indigenous, presumably
animistic, religions, but in cases where there was prolonged contact with the
outside world Christianity or Islam eventually replaced these. Whatever its
form, however, it does seem that in each case the spiritual came to the aid of
the material. That is to understate the importance of African indigenous
religions, particularly during the earlier phases of the processes with which
this book is concerned. Such religions were often a means of manipulating
the forces believed to control fertility, in all senses of that word, and therefore
gave power to those who were thought to be able to do this. In that case, the
role of religion could have been much more than merely validating the author-
ity of those who had acquired power by other means; African power holders
were frequently priests themselves. As such, they could indeed have claimed
control of the best land and of the people to work it, or of the internal
exchange systems, or even, eventually, of their end of external long-distance
trade networks, and who would have been prepared to deny them? As for
the ordinary people, they needed to be assured that the sun would really rise
tomorrow and the rain fall when needed, and in exchange they had no choice
but to accept their condition.
   This book has been more concerned with archaeological evidence than with
theoretical matters, which often generate esoteric explanations incomprehen-
sible to people in general and difﬁcult even for some anthropologists and
sociologists to understand. Its objective has been to explain how we know
what we think we know. Nevertheless, any attempt to identify the main factors
that gave rise to the cities and states of precolonial Africa has theoretical
implications. For example, it appears that the power theory of state formation
advocated by Haas (p. 7) does help us to understand the African situation and
therefore does have some explanatory value. Furthermore, it seems that Lons-
dale (p. 7) was correct in concluding that state formation in Africa was a very
slow process, involving the coercive centralization of power and resulting from
local politics, not from external ideas. This being the case, one is inclined to
agree with Renfrew (p. 7) that the division into ‘pristine’ and ‘secondary’
states, which has so often been made, is a meaningless exercise. It was
Renfrew’s insistence that ‘to understand the origins and development of any
civilization’ it is necessary to look at its local conditions, which suggested an
analytical framework for each chapter of this book, hence the repeated sub-
sections examining those conditions.
   What of the idea of heterarchy, instead of hierarchy, as a basis for socio-
political organization? This has been advanced as an alternative model for the
development of complexity (p. 160), a model in which society is most simply
described as organized horizontally rather than vertically (McIntosh 2005: 187).

352
                                          What are the common denominators?

It is an important idea but one that appears to depend on a lack of evidence
for hierarchy rather than on the presence of positive evidence for heterarchy.
Probably such evidence will become available only after there has been much
more extensive excavation of relevant urban sites.
   Unfortunately, all the attempted explanations for the origins of social com-
plexity that have been discussed above are somewhat mechanistic; in terms
of argument it is a case of A plus B plus C must equal D, but surely the reality is
more complex than that. Inevitably there is a temptation to claim that the
problem is insoluble, simply because it is so complex and involves so many
interrelated factors whose associations are obscure. In the end it is perhaps
Jared Diamond who has come nearest to an explanation that is both coherent
and comprehensible. He argues that as the size of human groups increases,
‘Considerations of conﬂict resolution, decision making, economics, and space
thus converge in requiring large societies to be centralized’ (Diamond 1998:
288). In short, increasing levels of social complexity become essential if larger
and larger groups of people are to live together successfully. For sure, the
other factors discussed in this book are important contributors to change –
subsistence, technology, social system, population pressures, ideology, and
external trade – they provide what Diamond calls ‘autocatalysis’ (Diamond
1998: 285), a condition where the individual factors stimulate each other
and collectively trigger the developments that we seek to understand but do
not individually cause them (‘catalysis of a reaction by one of its products’,
Concise Oxford English Dictionary 2011: 88).
   Clearly the development of cities and the formation of states in Africa were
not aspects of a single process; not all cities were capitals of signiﬁcant states
and not all states had large, static centres of population. Nevertheless, they
were both important manifestations of precolonial complex societies, and it is
sometimes difﬁcult to discuss them in isolation. Centralization of power, social
stratiﬁcation, functional specialization, and other related developments,
together with population growth and population pressures, are phenomena
that can be associated with both the appearance of cities and the emergence of
states. Furthermore, their separate identiﬁcation in the archaeological record
can be particularly difﬁcult. In some cases we do have physical evidence for
the existence of settlements in which relatively large numbers of people were
congregated; whether they are called large villages, towns, or even cities, the
important point is that they were relatively dense aggregations of population,
recalling Mabogunje’s straightforward deﬁnition of urbanization (p. 6). More
ambiguous, however, are the instances of archaeological evidence that might
suggest the extension of political authority, or at least some commonality of
culture, over a substantial geographical area. Indeed, even in the minds of
some of the African people involved, it seems that the ideas of city and state

                                                                              353
African Civilizations

might at times have been inextricably associated. Thus, in 1893, Lugard found
it necessary to emphasize the close association of state, ruler, and city in the
case of Buganda: ‘The Waganda consider their country to be where the King is,
and if no Kabaka of the Royal blood is installed in Mengo [the capital], the
result would be a break-up of the people’ (Lugard 1893: 36). It is with
the opposite process of the coming together of people in tropical Africa that
this book has been concerned.
   In the African case this coming together occurred in a diversity of forms.
Varied in their indigenous origins, states were also variously inﬂuenced by
Pharaonic Egypt, by the ancient Mediterranean, by the Christian world,
by Islamic North Africa, by Indian Ocean traders, and by each other. Urban
centres also showed considerable variety: some were densely occupied for long
periods, some only brieﬂy occupied, some completely mobile, some with
transient residence from season to season and year to year, and some with
dispersed settlement covering enormous areas. Such diversity would suggest
that the physical evidence for African social complexity would merit far more
attention from archaeologists than it has yet had and that the African devel-
opments might have a far greater role in the formation of global social theory
than has yet been the case.




354
References

Abungu, G.H.O. 1995. Agriculture and settlement formation along the East African
    coast. Azania 29–30, 248–56.
Abungu, G.H.O., and Mutoro, H.W. 1993. Coast–interior settlements and social
    relations in the Kenya coastal hinterland. In The archaeology of Africa: food,
    metals and towns, ed. T. Shaw, P. Sinclair, B. Andah, and A. Okpoko, 694–704.
    Routledge, London and New York.
Adams, R.McC. 1981. Heartland of cities: surveys of ancient settlement and land use
    on the central ﬂoodplain of the Euphrates. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
    and London.
Adams, W.Y. 1961. The Christian potteries at Faras. Kush 9, 30–43.
  1974. Sacred and secular polities in ancient Nubia. World Archaeology 6(1), 39–51.
  1976. Meroitic north and south: a study in cultural contrasts. Meroitica 2, 11–26.
  1977. Nubia: corridor to Africa. Allen Lane, London. (Reprinted 1984.)
  1981. Ecology and economy in the Empire of Kush. Zeitschrift für Ägyptische
    Sprache 108, 1–12.
  1982. Qasr Ibrim: an archaeological conspectus. In Nubian studies: proceedings
    of the Symposium for Nubian Studies, Selwyn College, Cambridge, 1978, ed.
    J.M. Plumley, 25–33. International Society for Nubian Studies, Aris & Phillips,
    Warminster, UK.
  1984. The ﬁrst colonial empire: Egypt in Nubia, 3200–1200 BC. Comparative
    Studies in Society and History 26(1), 36–71.
 1994. Castle-houses of late medieval Nubia. Archéologie du Nil Moyen 6, 11–46.
 1996. Qasr Ibrim: The Late Mediaeval period. Egypt Exploration Society, Excav-
    ation Memoir 59, London.
 2000. Meinarti I: The Late Meroitic, Ballaña and transitional occupation. Sudan
    Archaeological Research Society Publication Number 5. BAR International Series
    895, Archaeopress, Oxford.
 2001. Meinarti II: The Early and Classic Christian phases. Sudan Archaeological
    Research Society Publication Number 6, London. (Also forms BAR International
    Series 966.)
 2002. Meinarti III: The Late and Terminal Christian phases. Sudan Archaeological
    Research Society Publication Number 9. BAR International Series 1072, Archaeo-
    press, Oxford.
 2009. The churches of Nobadia, 2 vols. Sudan Archaeological Research Society
    Publication Number 17. BAR International Series 2000, Archaeopress, Oxford.
 2011. Kulubnarti I: the architectural remains. Sudan Archaeological Research Soci-
    ety Publication Number 18. BAR International Series 2241, Archaeopress,
    Oxford.



                                                                               355
References

Adelaar, K.A. 1996. Malagasy culture-history: some linguistic evidence. In The Indian
     Ocean in antiquity, ed. J. Reade, 487–500. Kegan Paul International, London and
     New York.
Africanus, Leo. 1896. The history and description of Africa, 3 vols., ed. R. Brown.
     Hakluyt Society, London.
Agbaje-Williams, B. 1990. Oyo ruins in NW Yorubaland, Nigeria. Journal of Field
     Archaeology 17 (3), 367–73.
Ahmed, K.A. 1984. Meroitic settlement in the Central Sudan. BAR International Series
     197, Oxford.
Alexander, J. 1988. The Saharan divide in the Nile Valley: the evidence from Qasr
     Ibrim. African Archaeological Review 6, 73–90.
   1993a. Beyond the Nile: the inﬂuence of Egypt and Nubia in Sub-Saharan Africa.
     Expedition 35(2), 51–61.
   1993b. The salt industries of West Africa: a preliminary study. In The archaeology
     of Africa: food, metals and towns, ed. T. Shaw, P. Sinclair, B. Andah, and
     A. Okpoko, 652–7. Routledge, London and New York.
   1995. The Turks on the Middle Nile. Archéologie du Nil Moyen 7, 15–35.
   2001. Islam, archaeology and slavery in Africa. World Archaeology 33(1), 44–60.
Allen, J. de V. 1982. The ‘Shirazi’ problem in East African coastal history. In From Zinj
     to Zanzibar: studies in history, trade and society on the eastern coast of Africa
     (Paideuma 28), ed. J. de V. Allen and T.H. Wilson, 9–27.
   1983. Shungwaya, the Mijikenda, and the traditions. International Journal of
     African Historical Studies 16(3), 455–85.
   1993. Swahili origins: Swahili culture and the Shungwaya phenomenon. James
     Currey, London.
Allibert, C., and Vérin, P. 1996. The early pre-Islamic history of the Comores Islands:
     links with Madagascar and Africa. In The Indian Ocean in antiquity, ed. J. Reade,
     461–70. Kegan Paul International, London and New York.
Allibert, C., Argant, A., and Argant, J. 1990. Le site de Dembeni (Mayotte, Archipel
     des Comores) Mission 1984. Etudes Océan Indien 11. Archéologie des Comores:
     I: Maore et Ngazidja. Institut des Langues et Civilisations Orientales, Paris,
     63–172.
Allison, P.A. 1962. Historical inferences to be drawn from the effect of human
     settlement on the vegetation of Africa. Journal of African History 3(2), 241–9.
Alpern, S.B. 2005. Did they or didn’t they invent it? Iron in sub-Saharan Africa.
     History in Africa 32, 41–94.
al-Sa’di. 1964. Tarikh es-Soudan, texte Arabe édité et traduit par O. Houdas. Adrien-
     Maisonneuve, Paris.
Anciaux de Faveaux, E., and de Maret, P. 1984. Premières datations pour la fonte du
     cuivre au Shaba (Zaïre). Bulletin de la Société Royale Belge d’Anthropologie et de
     Préhistoire 95, 5–20.
Anderson, D.M., and Rathbone, R. (eds.) 2000. Africa’s urban past. James Currey,
     Oxford.
Andrews, F.W. 1948. The vegetation of the Sudan. In Agriculture in the Sudan, ed.
     J.D. Tothill, 32–61. Oxford University Press, London.
Anfray, F. 1967. Matara. Annales d’Ethiopie 7, 33–88.


356
                                                                           References

  1968. Aspects de l’archéologie éthiopienne. Journal of African History 9(3), 345–66.
  1972a. L’archéologie d’Axoum en 1972. Paideuma 18, 60–78.
  1972b. Fouilles de Yeha. Annales d’Ethiopie 9, 45–64.
  1973. Nouveaux sites antiques. Journal of Ethiopian Studies 11(2), 13–27.
  1974. Deux villes Axoumites: Adoulis et Matara. IV Congresso Internazionale di
    Studi Etiopici (Roma, 10–15 aprile 1972). Tomo I, Accademia Nazionale Dei
    Lincei, Roma, 745–65 et planche I–VI.
  1981. The civilization of Aksum from the ﬁrst to the seventh century. In
    General history of Africa, vol. 2: Ancient civilizations of Africa, ed. G. Mokhtar,
    362–80. Heinemann, University of California, UNESCO; London, Berkeley,
    Paris.
  1990. Les Anciens Ethiopiens: siecles d’histoire. Armand Colin, Paris.
Annequin, G. 1965. Château de Gouzara. Annales d’Ethiopie 6, 22–5.
Anquandah, J. 1982. Rediscovering Ghana’s past. Longman, Harlow; Sedco, Accra.
  1993. Urbanization and state formation in Ghana during the Iron Age. In The
    archaeology of Africa: food, metals and towns, ed. T. Shaw, P. Sinclair, B. Andah,
    and A. Okpoko, 642–51. Routledge, London and New York.
Antonites, A., and Antonites, A.R. 2014. The archaeology of farming communities in
    South Africa: a review. In Archaeology of African plant use, ed. C.J. Stevens,
    S. Nixon, M.A. Murray, and D.Q. Fuller, 225–32. Left Coast Press, Walnut
    Creek, CA.
Ashe, R.P. 1889. Two Kings of Uganda. Sampson Low, London.
Ashley, C., and Reid, A. 2008. A reconsideration of the ﬁgures from Luzira. Azania 43,
    95–123.
Aubet, M.E. 2001. The Phoenicians and the West: politics, colonies and trade, 2nd ed.
    Translated by M. Turton. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Ayele Tarekegn 1996. Aksumite burial practices, the ‘Gudit Stelae Field’, Aksum. In
    Aspects of African archaeology: papers from the 10th Congress of the PanAfrican
    Association for Prehistory and Related Studies, ed. G. Pwiti and R. Soper,
    611–19. University of Zimbabwe, Harare.
Babalola, A.B. 2011. Archaeological investigation at Ile-Ife, southwest Nigeria: a
    preliminary report on the 2010 test excavations. Nyame Akuma 76, 33–46.
Badenhorst, S., Sinclair, P., Ekblom, A., and Plug, I. 2011. Faunal remains from
    Chibuene, an Iron Age coastal trading station in central Mozambique. Southern
    African Humanities 23, 1–15 (KwaZulu-Natal Museum).
Baines, J. 1983. Literacy and Ancient Egyptian society. Man 18(3), 572–99.
Baines, J., and Malek, J. 2000. Cultural atlas of Ancient Egypt (rev. ed.). Checkmark
    Books, New York.
Bandama, F., Chirikure, S., and Hall, S. 2013. Ore souces, smelters and archaeome-
    tallurgy: exploring Iron Age metal production in the Southern Waterberg, South
    Africa. Journal of African Archaeology 11(2), 243–67.
Bard, K.A. 2000. The emergence of the Egyptian state (c.3200–2686 BC). In The
    Oxford history of ancient Egypt, ed. I. Shaw, 61–88. Oxford University Press,
    Oxford.
Bard, K.A., and Fattovich, R. 1993. The 1993 excavations at Ona Enda Aboi Zague
    (Aksum, Tigray). Nyame Akuma 40, 14–17.


                                                                                  357
References

Bard, K.A., Fattovich, R., Manzo, A., and Perlingieri, C. 1997. Archaeological investi-
     gations at Bieta Giyorgis (Aksum), Ethiopia: 1993–1995 ﬁeld seasons. Journal of
     Field Archaeology 24(4), 387–403.
Bard, K.A., Coltorti, M., DiBlasi, M.C., Dramis, F., and Fattovich, R. 2000. The
     environmental history of Tigray (Northern Ethiopia) in the Middle and Late
     Holocene: a preliminary outline. African Archaeological Review 17(2), 65–86.
Bard, K.A., Fattovich, R., Manzo, A., and Perlingieri, C. 2014. The chronology of
     Aksum (Tigrai, Ethiopia): a view from Bieta Giyorgis. Azania: Archaeological
     Research in Africa 49(3), 285–316.
Barker, G. 1978. Economic models for the Manekweni Zimbabwe, Mozambique.
     Azania 13, 71–100.
Barnett, R., Yamaguchi, N., Shapiro, B., and Sabin, R. 2008. Ancient DNA analysis
     indicates the ﬁrst English lions originated from North Africa. Contributions to
     Zoology 77(1), 7–16.
Barnett, T. 1999. Quiha rock shelter, Ethiopia: implications for domestication. Azania
     34, 10–24.
Barth, H. 1857–8. Travels and discoveries in North and Central Africa: being a journal
     of an expedition undertaken under the auspices of H.B.M.’s Government in the
     years 1849–1855, 5 vols. Longman, Brown, Green, Longmans, & Roberts,
     London.
Bascom, W. 1955. Urbanization among the Yoruba. The American Journal of
     Sociology 60(5), 446–54.
  1959. Urbanism as a traditional African pattern. Sociological Review (NS) 7, 29–43.
Beach, D. 1980. The Shona and Zimbabwe 900–1850. Heinemann, London.
  1994. The Shona and their neighbours. Blackwell, Oxford, UK, and Cambridge, MA.
  1998. Cognitive archaeology and imaginary history at Great Zimbabwe. Current
     Anthropology 39(1), 47–72.
Beach, D., Bourdillon, M.F.C., Denbow, J., Hall, M., Lane, P., Pikirayi, I., Pwiti, G.,
     and Huffman, T.N. 1997. Review feature: Snakes and crocodiles: power
     and symbolism in ancient Zimbabwe, by Thomas N. Huffman. South African
     Archaeological Bulletin 52, 125–43.
Beaujard, P. 2007. East Africa, the Comoros Islands and Madagascar before the
     sixteenth century: on a neglected part of the world system. Azania 42, 15–35.
  2011. The ﬁrst migrants to Madagascar and their introduction of plants: linguistic
     and ethnological evidence. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 46(2),
     169–89.
Bedaux, R.M.A., Constandse-Westermann, T.S., Hacquebord, L., Lange, A.G., and
     van der Waals, J.D. 1978. Recherches archéologiques dans le Delta Intérieur du
     Niger (Mali). Palaeohistoria 20, 91–220.
Bedigian, D. 2003. Sesame in Africa: origin and dispersals. In Food, fuel and ﬁelds;
     progress in African archaeobotany, ed. K. Neumann, A. Butler, and S. Kahlheber,
     17–36. Heinrich-Barth-Institut, Köln.
Bellamy, C.V. 1904. A West African smelting house. Journal of the Iron and Steel
     Institute 66, 99–126.
Benco, N.L. (ed.) 2004. Anatomy of a medieval Islamic town: Al-Basra, Morocco.
     BAR International Series 1234, Archaeopress, Oxford.


358
                                                                           References

Bent, J.T. 1893. The sacred city of the Ethiopians. Longmans, Green, and Co., London.
  1896. The ruined cities of Mashonaland, New edition (Reissue). Longmans,
     London.
Berger, I. 1980. Deities, dynasties, and oral tradition: the history and legend of the
     Abacwezi. In The African past speaks: essays on oral tradition and history, ed.
     J.C. Miller, 60–81. Dawson, Folkestone.
Berthier, S. 1997. Recherches archéologiques sur la capitale de l’empire de
     Ghana: étude d’un secteur d’habitat à Koumbi Saleh, Mauritanie. Campagnes
     II–III–IV–V (1975–1976) – (1980–1981), Cambridge Monographs in African
     Archaeology 41, BAR International Series 680, Oxford.
Bisson, M.S. 1975. Copper currency in central Africa: the archaeological evidence.
     World Archaeology 6(3), 276–92.
  1976. The prehistoric coppermines of Zambia. Ph.D. thesis, University of Califor-
     nia, University Microﬁlms International, Santa Barbara.
Bivar, A.D.H., and Shinnie, P.L. 1962. Old Kanuri capitals. Journal of African History
     3(1), 1–10.
Blake, J.W. 1942. Europeans in West Africa, 1450–1560, 2 vols. Hakluyt, London.
Blench, R. 1993. Ethnographic and linguistic evidence for the prehistory of African
     ruminant livestock, horses and ponies. In The archaeology of Africa: food,
     metals and towns, ed. T. Shaw, P. Sinclair, B. Andah, and A. Okpoko, 71–103.
     Routledge, London and New York.
  2000. African minor livestock species. In The origins and development of African
     livestock: archaeology, genetics, linguistics and ethnography, ed. R.M. Blench and
     K.C. MacDonald, 314–38. UCL Press, London.
  2006. Archaeology, language, and the African past. AltaMira Press, Lanham, MD.
  2007. New palaeozoogeographical evidence for the settlement of Madagascar.
     Azania 42, 69–82.
Blench, R.M., and MacDonald, K.C. (eds.) 2000. The origins and development of
     African livestock: archaeology, genetics, linguistics and ethnography. UCL Press,
     London.
Bloom, J.M. 2007. Arts of the city victorious: Islamic art and architecture in Fatimid
     North Africa and Egypt. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
Boeyens, J.C.A. 2000. In search of Kaditshwene. South African Archaeological
     Bulletin 55, 3–17.
Boisragon, A. 1897. The Benin Massacre. Methuen, London.
Bonnet, C. 1992. Excavations at the Nubian royal town of Kerma: 1975–91. Antiquity
     66, 611–25.
  1997.The Kingdom of Kerma: 2500–1500 BC. In Sudan: ancient kingdoms of
     the Nile, ed. D. Wildung, 87–116. Flammarion, Paris and New York.
Bonnet, C. (ed.) 1990. Kerma, royaume de Nubie. Mission archéologique de l’Univer-
     sité de Genève au Soudan, Genève.
Bonnet, C., and Valbelle, D. 2006. The Nubian Pharaohs: black kings on the Nile. The
     American University in Cairo Press, Cairo and New York.
  2014. La ville de Kerma, une capitale nubienne au sud de l’Egypte. Favre, Lausanne.
Bosman, W. 1967. A new and accurate description of the coast of Guinea, 4th ed.
     Cass, London, (1st English ed. 1705).


                                                                                  359
References

Boullier, C., Person, A., Saliège, J.-F., and Polet, J. 2002–3. Bilan chronologique de la
     culture Nok et nouvelles datations sur des sculptures. Afrique: Archéologie and
     Arts 2, 9–28.
Bourriau, J. 1991. Relations between Egypt and Kerma during the Middle and New
     Kingdoms. In Egypt and Africa: Nubia from prehistory to Islam, ed. W.V. Davies,
     129–44. British Museum Press, London.
Bovill, E.W. 1968. The golden trade of the Moors, 2nd ed. Oxford University Press,
     London.
Bowdich, T.E. 1966. Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee, 3rd ed. Cass,
     London (1st ed. 1819).
Bradbury R.E. 1957. The Benin Kingdom and the Edo-speaking peoples of south-
     western Nigeria. International African Institute, London.
  1959. Chronological problems in the study of Benin history. Journal of the Histor-
     ical Society of Nigeria 1(4), 263–87.
Bradley, R.J. 1982. Varia from the city of Meroë. Meroitica 6, 163–70.
Brain, C.K. 1974. Human food remains from the Iron Age at Zimbabwe. South
     African Journal of Science 70, 303–9.
Breunig, P. 1996. The 8000-year-old dugout canoe from Dufuna (NE Nigeria). In
     Aspects of African archaeology: papers from the 10th Congress of the PanAfrican
     Association for Prehistory and Related Studies, ed. G. Pwiti and R. Soper, 461–8.
     University of Zimbabwe, Harare.
Breunig, P., Neumann, K., and Van Neer, W. 1996. New research on the Holocene
     settlement and environment of the Chad Basin in Nigeria. African Archaeological
     Review 13(2), 111–45.
Broberg, A. 1995. New aspects of the medieval towns of Benadir in southern Somalia:
     topography, climate and population. In Islamic art and culture in Sub-Saharan
     Africa, ed. K. Ådahl and B. Sahlström, 111–22. Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis,
     Figura Nova Series 27, Uppsala.
Brooks, G.E. 1998. Climate and history in West Africa. In Transformations in Africa:
     essays on Africa’s later past, ed. G. Connah, 139–59. Leicester University Press,
     London and Washington.
Brown, H. 1996. The coins. In Shanga: the archaeology of a Muslim trading commu-
     nity on the coast of East Africa, ed. M. Horton, 368–75. Memoir 14, British
     Institute in Eastern Africa, London.
Brunk, K., and Gronenborn, D. 2004. Floods, droughts, and migrations: the effects of
     Late Holocene lake level oscillations and climate ﬂuctuations on the settlement
     and political history in the Chad Basin. In Living with the lake: perspectives on
     history, culture and economy of Lake Chad, ed. M. Krings and E. Platte, 101–32.
     Studien zur Kulturkunde 121, Rüdiger Köppe Verlag, Köln.
Buchanan, K.M., and Pugh, J.C. 1955. Land and people in Nigeria: the human
     geography of Nigeria and its environmental background. University of London
     Press, London.
Bulliet, R.W. 1975. The camel and the wheel. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
     MA.
Butzer, K.W. 1981. Rise and fall of Axum, Ethiopia: a geo-archaeological interpret-
     ation. American Antiquity 46(3), 471–95.


360
                                                                           References

Buxton, D.R. 1970. The Abyssinians. Thames and Hudson, London.
  1971. The rock-hewn and other medieval churches of Tigré Province, Ethiopia.
    Archaeologia 103, 33–100.
Buxton, D.R., and Matthews, D. 1974. The reconstruction of vanished Aksumite
    buildings. Rassegna di Studi Etiopici 25, 53–77 and ﬁgs. 1–31.
Calabrese, J.A. 2007. The emergence of social and political complexity in the Shashi-
    Limpopo Valley of southern Africa, AD 900 to 1300: ethnicity, class, and polity.
    BAR International Series 1617, Archaeopress, Oxford.
Calvocoressi, D., and David, N. 1979. A new survey of radiocarbon and thermolumin-
    escence dates for West Africa. Journal of African History 20(1), 1–29.
Camps, G. 1982. Le cheval et le char dans la préhistoire Nord-Africaine et Saharienne.
    In Les chars préhistoriques du Sahara, ed. G. Camps and M. Gast, 9–22.
    Université de Provence, Aix-en-Provence.
Caney, R.W., and Reynolds, J.E. 1976. Reed’s marine distance tables, 3rd ed. Reed,
    London.
Cappers, R.T.J. 2006. Roman foodprints at Berenike: archaeobotanical evidence of
    subsistence and trade in the Eastern Desert of Egypt. Monograph 55, Cotsen
    Institute of Archaeology, University of California, Los Angeles.
Carneiro, R.L. 1970. A theory of the origin of the state. Science 169: 733–8.
Carter, P.L., and Foley, R. 1980. A report on the fauna from the excavations at Meroë,
    1967–1972. Appendix B in The capital of Kush 1: Meroë excavations 1965–1972,
    (Meroitica 4), ed. P.L. Shinnie and R.J. Bradley, 298–312. Akademie-Verlag, Berlin.
Casey, J. 1998. The ecology of food production in West Africa. In Transformations in
    Africa: essays on Africa’s later past, ed. G. Connah, 46–70. Leicester University
    Press, London and Washington.
  2010. Between the Forest and the Sudan: the dynamics of trade in Northern
    Ghana. In West African archaeology: new developments, new perspectives, ed.
    P. Allsworth-Jones, 83–92. BAR International Series 2164, Archaeopress, Oxford.
Casson, L. 1989. The Periplus Maris Erythraei: text with introduction, translation,
    and commentary, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Caton-Thompson, G. 1971. The Zimbabwe culture: ruins and reactions, 2nd ed. Cass,
    London (1st ed. 1931).
Chaix, L. 2013. The fauna from the UNO/BU excavations at Bieta Giyorgis (Aksum) in
    Tigray, Northern Ethiopia: campaigns 1995–2003; Pre-Aksumite, 700–400 BC
    to Late Aksumite, AD 800–1200. Journal of African Archaeology 11(2), 211–41.
Chami, F.A. 1994. The Tanzanian coast in the ﬁrst millennium AD: an archaeology of
    the iron-working, farming communities, Studies in African Archaeology 7. Socie-
    tas Archaeologica Upsaliensis, Uppsala.
  1995. The ﬁrst millennium AD on the East Coast: a new look at the cultural
    sequence and interactions. Azania 29–30, 232–7.
  1999a. Graeco-Roman trade link and the Bantu migration theory. Anthropos:
    Internationale Zeitschrift für Völker-und Sprachenkunde 94(1/3), 205–15.
  1999b. Roman beads from the Ruﬁji Delta, Tanzania: ﬁrst incontrovertible
    archaeological link with the Periplus. Current Anthropology 40(2), 237–41.
Chami, F.A., and Msemwa, P.J. 1997. A new look at culture and trade on the Azanian
    coast. Current Anthropology 38(4), 673–7.


                                                                                  361
References

Chandler, T., and Fox, G. 1974. 3000 years of urban growth. Academic Press, New
     York and London.
Chikwendu, V.E., Craddock, P.T., Farquhar, R.M., Shaw, T., and Umeji, A.C. 1989.
     Nigerian sources of copper, lead and tin for the Igbo-Ukwu bronzes. Archaeome-
     try 31(1), 27–36.
Childe, V.G. 1950. The urban revolution. The Town Planning Review 21: 3–17.
  1957. Civilization, cities and towns. Antiquity 31 (121), 36–8.
Chirikure, S., and Pikirayi, I. 2008. Inside and outside the dry stone walls: revisiting the
     material culture of Great Zimbabwe. Antiquity 82 (318), 976–93.
Chirikure, S., and Rehren, T. 2006. Iron smelting in pre-colonial Zimbabwe: evidence
     for diachronic change from Swart Village and Baranda, northern Zimbabwe.
     Journal of African Archaeology 4(1), 37–54.
Chirikure, S., Hall, S., and Maggs, T. 2008. Metals beyond frontiers: exploring the
     production, distribution and use of metals in the Free State grasslands, South
     Africa. In Five hundred years rediscovered: southern African precedents and
     prospects, ed. N. Swanepoel, A. Esterhuysen, and P. Bonner, 87–101. Wits
     University Press, Johannesburg.
Chirikure, S., Manyanga, M., Pikirayi, I., and Pollard, M. 2013a. New pathways
     of sociopolitical complexity in southern Africa. African Archaeological Review
     30(4), 339–66.
Chirikure, S., Pollard, M., Manyanga, M., and Bandama, F. 2013b. A Bayesian
     chronology for Great Zimbabwe: re-threading the sequence of a vandalised
     monument. Antiquity 87 (337), 854–72.
Chittick, N. 1965. The ‘Shirazi’ colonization of East Africa. Journal of African History
     6(3), 275–94.
  1971. The coast of East Africa. In The African Iron Age, ed. P.L. Shinnie, 108–41.
     Clarendon Press, Oxford.
  1974. Kilwa: an Islamic trading city on the East African coast, 2 vols. British
     Institute in Eastern Africa, Memoir 5, Nairobi.
  1981. The Periplus and the spice trade. Azania 16, 185–90.
  1984. Manda: excavations at an island port on the Kenya coast, Memoir 9, British
     Institute in Eastern Africa, Nairobi.
Christides, V. 2000. Byzantine Libya and the march of the Arabs towards the
     West of North Africa. BAR International Series 851, John and Erica Hedges,
     Oxford.
Churchill, W.S. 1962 [ﬁrst published 1908]. My African journey. Heron Books.
Cissé, M., McIntosh, S.K., Dussubieux, L., Fenn, T., Gallagher, D., and Smith, A.C.
     2013. Excavations at Gao Saney: new evidence for settlement growth, trade, and
     interaction on the Niger Bend in the ﬁrst millennium CE. Journal of African
     Archaeology 11(1), 9–37.
Claessen, H.J.M., and Oosten, J.G. (eds.) 1996. Ideology and the formation of early
     states. Brill, Leiden.
Claessen, H.J.M., and Skalník, P. (eds.) 1978. The early state. Mouton, The Hague.
Claessen, H.J.M., and van de Velde, P. (eds.) 1987. Early state dynamics. Brill, Leiden.
Clarke, S. 1912. Christian antiquities in the Nile Valley: a contribution towards the
     study of the ancient churches. Clarendon Press, Oxford.


362
                                                                            References

Clist, B. 2012. Pour une archéologie du royaume Kongo: la tradition de Mbafu.
     Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 47(2), 175–209.
Clist, B., de Maret, P., de Schryver, G. M., Kaumba, M., Matonda, I., Cranshof, E.,
     and Bostoen, K. 2013a. The KongoKing Project: 2012 ﬁeldwork report from the
     Lower Congo Province (DRC). Nyame Akuma 79, 60–73.
Clist, B., de Maret, P., Livingstone-Smith, A., Cranshof, E., Kaumba, M., Matonda, I.,
     Mambu, C., Yogolelo, J., and Bostoen, K. 2013b. The KongoKing Project:
     2013 ﬁeldwork report from the Lower Congo Province (DRC). Nyame Akuma
     80, 22–31.
Clover, F.M. 1993. The Late Roman West and the Vandals. Variorum, Ashgate
     Publishing Limited, Aldershot, UK.
Cobbing, J. 1988. The Mfecane as alibi: thoughts on Dithakong and Mbolompo.
     Journal of African History 29(3), 487–519.
Cohen, R., and Service, E.R. (eds.) 1978. Origins of the state: the anthropology of
     political evolution. Institute for the Study of Human Issues, Philadelphia.
Collett, D.P., Vines, A.E., and Hughes, E.G. 1992. The chronology of the Valley
     Enclosures: implications for the interpretation of Great Zimbabwe. African
     Archaeological Review 10, 139–61.
Collins, M.O. (ed.) 1965. Rhodesia: its natural resources and economic development.
     M.O. Collins, Salisbury, Rhodesia.
Concise Oxford English Dictionary, 12th edition. 2011. Oxford University Press,
     Oxford.
Connah, G. 1975. The archaeology of Benin. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
  1981. Three thousand years in Africa: Man and his environment in the Lake Chad
     region of Nigeria. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
  1985. Agricultural intensiﬁcation and sedentism in the ﬁrki of N.E. Nigeria.
     In Prehistoric intensive agriculture in the tropics, ed. I.S. Farrington, 765–85.
     BAR International Series 232, Oxford.
  1987. African civilizations: precolonial cities and states in tropical Africa: an arch-
     aeological perspective. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
  1996. Kibiro: the salt of Bunyoro, past and present. Memoir 13, British Institute in
     Eastern Africa, London.
  1998a. Resource exploitation and population aggregation: the case of Kibiro.
     In The development of urbanism from a global perspective, ed. P. Sinclair,
     Department of Archaeology and Ancient History, Uppsala University, Sweden.
     www.arkeologi.uu.se/Forskning/Publikationer/Digital/Development_of_Urbanism/
     Accessed 4 November 2014.
  1998b. Static image, dynamic reality. In Transformations in Africa: essays on
     Africa’s later past, ed. G. Connah, 1–13. London and Washington, Leicester
     University Press.
  2000a. African city walls: a neglected source? In Africa’s urban past, ed.
     D.M. Anderson and R. Rathbone, 36–51. James Currey, Oxford.
  2000b. Contained communities in tropical Africa. In City walls: the urban enceinte
     in global perspective, ed. J. Tracy, 19–45. Cambridge University Press, New York.
  2008. Urbanism and the archaeological visibility of African complex societies.
     Journal of African Archaeology 6(2), 233–41.


                                                                                    363
References

Conrad, D.C. 1994. A town called Dakajalan: the Sunjata tradition and the question
    of ancient Mali’s capital. Journal of African History 35(3), 355–77.
Coursey, D.G. 1980. The origins and domestication of yams in Africa. In West African
    culture dynamics: archaeological and historical perspectives, ed. B.K. Swartz and
    R.E. Dumett, 67–90. Mouton, The Hague.
Craddock, P.T., and Picton, J. 1986. Medieval copper alloy production and West
    African bronze analyses — Part II. Archaeometry 28(1), 3–32.
Craddock, P.T., Ambers, J., Hook, D.R., Farquhar, R.M., Chikwendu, V.E., Umeji,
    A.C., and Shaw, T. 1997. Metal sources and the bronzes from Igbo-Ukwu,
    Nigeria. Journal of Field Archaeology 24(4), 405–29.
Crosby, A.W. 1986. Ecological imperialism: the biological expansion of Europe,
    900–1900, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Crossland, Z. 2001. Time and the ancestors: landscape survey in the Andrantsay
    region of Madagascar. Antiquity 75 (290), 825–36.
Curtis, M.C. 2009. Relating the Ancient Ona Culture to the wider Northern Horn:
    discerning patterns and problems in the archaeology of the ﬁrst millennium BC.
    African Archaeological Review 26(4), 327–50.
Dahalani, S.A. 1992. Itsandramdjini: espace et société. In Urban origins in Eastern
    Africa: proceedings of the 1991 workshop in Zanzibar, ed. P.J.J. Sinclair and
    A. Juma, 180–6. Central Board of National Antiquities, Stockholm.
Dalziel, J.M. 1937. The useful plants of west tropical Africa. Crown Agents for the
    Colonies, London.
D’Andrea, A.C., Klee, M., and Casey, J. 2001. Archaeobotanical evidence for pearl
    millet (Pennisetum glaucum) in sub-Saharan West Africa. Antiquity 75 (288),
    341–8.
D’Andrea, A.C., Logan, A.L., and Watson, D.J. 2006. Oil palm and prehistoric subsist-
    ence in tropical West Africa. Journal of African Archaeology 4(2), 195–222.
D’Andrea, A.C., Manzo, A., Harrower, M.J., and Hawkins, A.L. 2008. The Pre-
    Aksumite and Aksumite settlement of NE Tigrai, Ethiopia. Journal of Field
    Archaeology 33(2), 151–76.
Daniel, G. 1968. The ﬁrst civilizations: the archaeology of their origins. Thames and
    Hudson, London.
Dapper, O. 1686. Description de l’Afrique . . . Traduite du Flamand, Chez Wolfgang,
    Waesberge, Boom & van Someren, Amsterdam.
Dark, P.J.C. 1973. An introduction to Benin art and technology. Clarendon Press,
    Oxford.
Darling, P.J. 1982. Ancient linear earthworks of Benin and Ishan, Southern Nigeria,
    2 vols. Ph.D. thesis, University of Birmingham.
  1984. Archaeology and history in southern Nigeria, 2 vols. Cambridge Monographs
    in African Archaeology 11, BAR International Series 215(i) and (ii), Oxford.
  1988. Emerging towns in Benin and Ishan (Nigeria) AD 500–1500. In State and
    society: the emergence and development of social hierarchy and political centraliza-
    tion, ed. J. Gledhill, B. Bender, and M.T. Larsen, 121–36. Unwin Hyman, London.
  1998. A legacy in earth – ancient Benin and Ishan, southern Nigeria. In Historical
    archaeology in Nigeria, ed. K.W. Wesler, 143–97. Africa World Press, Trenton
    and Asmara.


364
                                                                           References

Datoo, B.A. 1970. Rhapta: the location and importance of East Africa’s ﬁrst port.
    Azania 5, 65–75.
Davies, V., and Friedman, R. 1999. Egypt. British Museum Press, London.
Davison, P., and Harries, P. 1980. Cotton weaving in south-east Africa: its history and
    technology. Textile History 11, 175–92.
de Contenson, H. 1961. Les fouilles à Ouchatei Golo, près d’Axoum, en 1958. Annales
    d’Éthiopie 4, 3–14.
  1962. Les monuments d’art Sud-Arabe découverts sur le site de Haoulti (Ethiopie) en
    1959. Syria: Revue d’art oriental et d’archéologie 39, 64–87.
  1981. Pre-Aksumite culture. In General history of Africa, vol. 2: Ancient civiliza-
    tions of Africa, ed. G. Mokhtar, 341–61. Heinemann, University of California,
    UNESCO; London, Berkeley, Paris.
De Langhe, E., Swennen, R., and Vuylsteke, D. 1995. Plantain in the early Bantu
    world. Azania 29–30, 147–60.
Delius, P., and Schoeman, M.H. 2008. Revisiting Bokoni: populating the stone ruins
    of the Mpumalanga Escarpment. In Five hundred years rediscovered: southern
    African precedents and prospects, ed. N. Swanepoel, A. Esterhuysen, and
    P. Bonner, 135–67. Wits University Press, Johannesburg.
de Maret, P. 1979. Luba roots: the ﬁrst complete Iron Age sequence in Zaïre. Current
    Anthropology 20(1), 233–5.
  1981. L’évolution monétaire du Shaba Central entre le 7e et le 18e siècle. African
    Economic History 10, 117–49.
  1982. The Iron Age in the west and south. In The archaeology of Central Africa, ed.
    F. Van Noten, 77–96. Akademische Druck – und Verlagsanstalt, Graz, Austria.
  1985. Recent archaeological research and dates from Central Africa. Journal of
    African History 26, 129–48.
  1992. Fouilles archéologiques dans la vallée du Haut-Lualaba, Zaïre III: Kami-
    lamba, Kikulu, et Malemba-Nkulu, 1975. Musée Royal de l’Afrique Centrale,
    Tervuren, Belgium.
  1997. Savanna states. In Encyclopedia of precolonial Africa: archaeology, history,
    languages, cultures, and environments, ed. J.O. Vogel, 496–501. AltaMira Press,
    Walnut Creek, CA.
  1998. Urban origins in central Africa: the case of Kongo. In The development
    of urbanism from a global perspective, ed. P. Sinclair, Department of Archae-
    ology and Ancient History, Uppsala University, Sweden. www.arkeologi.uu.
    se/Forskning/Publikationer/Digital/Development_of_Urbanism/ Accessed 4
    November 2014.
  2012. From kinship to kingship: an African journey into complexity. Azania:
    Archaeological Research in Africa 47(3), 314–26.
Denbow, J.R. 1984. Cows and kings: a spatial and economic analysis of a hierarchical
    Early Iron Age settlement system in eastern Botswana. In Frontiers: southern
    African archaeology today, ed. M. Hall, G. Avery, D.M. Avery, M.L. Wilson,
    and A.J.B. Humphreys, 24–39. Cambridge Monographs in African Archaeology
    10, BAR International Series 207, Oxford.
  1986. A new look at the later prehistory of the Kalahari. Journal of African History
    27, 3–28.


                                                                                  365
References

  1999. Material culture and the dialetics of identity in the Kalahari: AD 700–1700.
    In Beyond chiefdoms: pathways to complexity in Africa, ed. S.K. McIntosh,
    110–123. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Denham, D., Clapperton, H., and Oudney, W. 1826. Narrative of travels and discov-
    eries in Northern and Central Africa, in the years 1822, 1823, and 1824. Murray,
    London.
Desplagnes, L. 1903. Etude sur les Tumuli du Killi, dans la région de Goundam.
    L’Anthropologie 14, 151–72.
  1951. Fouilles du tumulus d’El Oualedji (Soudan); annoté par R. Mauny. Bulletin de
    l’IFAN, Dakar, 13(4), 1159–73.
de Voogt, A. 2010. Mancala players at Palmyra. Antiquity 84 (326), 1055–66.
Dewar, R.E. 1996. The archaeology of the early settlement of Madagascar. In The
    Indian Ocean in antiquity, ed. J. Reade, 471–86. Kegan Paul International,
    London and New York.
Dewar, R.E., and Wright, H.T. 1993. The culture history of Madagascar. Journal of
    World Prehistory 7(4), 417–66.
Diamond, J. 1998. Guns, germs and steel: a short history of everybody for the last
    13,000 years. Vintage, London.
Donley, L.W. 1982. House power: Swahili space and symbolic markers. In Symbolic
    and structural archaeology, ed. I. Hodder, 63–73. Cambridge University Press,
    Cambridge
  1987. Life in the Swahili town house reveals the symbolic meaning of spaces and
    artefact assemblages. African Archaeological Review 5, 181–92.
Donley-Reid, L.W. 1990. A structuring structure: the Swahili house. In Domestic
    architecture and the use of space: an interdisciplinary cross-cultural study, ed.
    S. Kent, 114–26. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Dowler, A. 2011. Introduction. In Money, trade and trade routes in Pre-Islamic North
    Africa, ed. A. Dowler and E.R. Galvin, 1–10. Research Publication 176, British
    Museum, London.
Dualeh, A. 1996. The origins and development of Mogadishu AD 1000 to 1850:
    a study in urban growth along the Benadir coast of southern Somalia. Studies in
    African Archaeology 12, Uppsala.
Duarte, R.T. 1993. Northern Mozambique in the Swahili world: an archaeological
    approach. Studies in African Archaeology 4, Central Board of National Antiqui-
    ties, Sweden, Eduardo Mondlane University, Mozambique, and Uppsala Univer-
    sity, Uppsala.
Dueppen, S.A. 2011. Early evidence for chickens at Iron Age Kirikongo (c.AD
    100–1450), Burkina Faso. Antiquity 85 (327), 142–57.
  2012. Egalitarian revolution in the savanna: the origins of a West African political
    system. Equinox Publishing, Shefﬁeld, UK.
Duffey, A. 2012. Mapungubwe: interpretation of the gold content of the Original
    Gold Burial M1, A620. Journal of African Archaeology 10(2), 175–87.
Dunbabin, K.M.D. 1978. The mosaics of Roman North Africa. Clarendon Press,
    Oxford.
Dunham, D. 1950. The royal cemeteries of Kush, vol. 1: El Kurru. Harvard University
    Press, Cambridge, MA.


366
                                                                             References

   1955. The royal cemeteries of Kush, vol. 2: Nuri. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, MA.
Earle, T. 1997. How chiefs come to power: the political economy in prehistory.
      Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.
Edwards, D.N. 1989. Archaeology and settlement in Upper Nubia in the 1st millen-
      nium AD. Cambridge Monographs in African Archaeology 36, BAR International
      Series 537, Oxford.
  1994. Power and the state in the Middle Nile: Meroe in context. An example for
      the study of state development in Sudanic Africa. Archaeological Review from
      Cambridge 13(1), 5–19.
  1996. The archaeology of the Meroitic state: new perspectives on its social and
      political organisation. Cambridge Monographs in African Archaeology 38, BAR
      International Series 640, Tempus Reparatum, Oxford.
  2004. The Nubian past: an archaeology of the Sudan. Routledge, London.
  2007. The archaeology of Sudan and Nubia. Annual Review of Anthropology 36,
      211–28.
Effah-Gyamﬁ, K. 1979. Bono Manso archaeological research project. West African
      Journal of Archaeology 9, 173–86.
  1985. Bono Manso: an archaeological investigation into early Akan urbanism.
      University of Calgary Press, Calgary.
  1986. Ancient urban sites in Hausaland. West African Journal of Archaeology 16,
      117–34.
Egharevba, J. 1968. A short history of Benin, 4th ed. Ibadan University Press, Ibadan.
Ehret, C. 2002. The civilizations of Africa: a history to 1800. James Currey, Oxford.
Eisenstadt, S.N., Abitbol, M., and Chazan, N. (eds.) 1988. The early state in African
      perspective: culture, power and division of labor. Brill, Leiden.
Ellis, W. 1859. Three visits to Madagascar during the years 1853–1854–1856. Includ-
      ing a journey to the capital. With notices of the natural history of the country and
      of the present civilisation of the people. John Murray, London.
Elzein, I.S. 2004. Islamic archaeology in the Sudan. Cambridge Monographs in
      African Archaeology 60, BAR International Series 1289, Archaeopress, Oxford.
Emery, W.B. 1938. The royal tombs of Ballana and Qustul, 2 vols. Government Press,
      Cairo.
  1948. Nubian treasure: an account of the discoveries at Ballana and Qustul.
      Methuen, London.
  1965. Egypt in Nubia. Hutchinson, London.
Ennahid, S. 2002. Political economy and settlement systems of medieval northern
      Morocco: an archaeological-historical approach. BAR International Series 1059,
      Archaeopress, Oxford.
Ethiopian Mapping Authority. 1988. National atlas of Ethiopia. Ethiopian Mapping
      Authority, Addis Abebe.
Eve, S. 2014. An undiscovered county? New ﬁeld systems found on the South Downs.
      Past: the newsletter of the Prehistoric Society 78, 3–5.
Evers, T.M. 1984. Sotho-Tswana and Moloko settlement patterns and the Bantu
      Cattle Pattern. In Frontiers: southern African archaeology today, ed. M. Hall,
      G. Avery, D.M. Avery, M.L. Wilson, and A.J.B. Humphreys, 236–47. Cambridge
      Monographs in African Archaeology 10, BAR International Series 207, Oxford.


                                                                                     367
References

Exell, K. 2011. Egypt in its African context: proceedings of the conference held at
     The Manchester Museum, University of Manchester, 2–4 October 2009. BAR
     International Series 2204, Archaeopress, Oxford.
Eyo, E. 1974. Odo Ogbe Street and Lafogido: contrasting archaeological sites in Ile-Ife,
     Western Nigeria. West African Journal of Archaeology 4, 99–109.
Fabre, J.-M. 2009. La métallurgie du fer au Sahel burkinabé à la ﬁn du 1er millénaire
     AD. In Crossroads/Carrefour Sahel: cultural and technological developments in
     ﬁrst millennium BC/AD West Africa, ed. S. Magnavita, L. Koté, P. Breunig, and
     O.A. Idé, 167–78. Africa Magna Verlag, Frankfurt am Main.
Fagan, B.M. 1969. Early trade and raw materials in south central Africa. Journal of
     African History 10(1), 1–13.
Fagan, B.M., and Yellen, J.E. 1968. Ivuna: ancient salt-working in southern Tanzania.
     Azania 3, 1–43.
Fagan, B.M., Phillipson, D.W., and Daniels, S.G.H. 1969. Iron Age cultures in Zambia
     (Dambwa, Ingombe Ilede and the Tonga), vol. 2. Chatto and Windus, London.
Fage, J.D., and Verity, M. 1978. An atlas of African history, 2nd ed. Edward Arnold,
     London.
Fagg, W. 1963. Nigerian images. Lund Humphries, London.
Fattovich, R. 1990. Remarks on the Pre-Aksumite Period in northern Ethiopia. Journal
     of Ethiopian Studies 23, 1–33.
   1991. At the periphery of the empire: the Gash Delta (Eastern Sudan). In Egypt and
     Africa: Nubia from prehistory to Islam, ed. W.V. Davies, 40–8. British Museum
     Press, London.
   2009. Reconsidering Yeha, c.800–400 BC. African Archaeological Review 26(4),
     275–90.
   2010. The development of ancient states in the Northern Horn of Africa, c.3000
     BC–AD 1000: an archaeological outline. Journal of World Prehistory 23(3),
     145–75.
Fauvelle-Aymar, F.X., Bruxelles, L., Mensan, R., Bosc-Tiessé, C., Derat, M.-L., and
     Fritsch, E. 2010. Rock-cut stratigraphy: sequencing the Lalibela churches.
     Antiquity 84 (326): 1135–50.
Feinman, G.M., and Manzanilla, L. 2000. Cultural evolution: contemporary view-
     points. Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New York.
Fenn, T.R., Killick, D.J., Chesley, J., Magnavita, S., and Ruiz, J. 2009. Contacts
     between West Africa and Roman North Africa: archaeometallurgical results from
     Kissi, northeastern Burkina Faso. In Crossroads/Carrefour Sahel: cultural
     and technological developments in ﬁrst millennium BC/AD West Africa, ed.
     S. Magnavita, L. Koté, P. Breunig, and O.A. Idé, 119–46. Africa Magna Verlag,
     Frankfurt am Main.
Fentress, E. 2011. Slavers on chariots. In Money, trade and trade routes in Pre-Islamic
     North Africa, ed. A. Dowler and E.R. Galvin, 65–71. Research Publication 176,
     British Museum, London.
Filipowiak, W. 1969. L’expédition archéologique Polono-Guinéenne à Niani, en 1968.
     Africana Bulletin 11, 107–17.
Finneran, N. 2002. The archaeology of Christianity in Africa. Tempus, Stroud,
     Gloucestershire, UK.


368
                                                                           References

   2007. The archaeology of Ethiopia. Routledge, London and New York.
   2009. Settlement archaeology and oral history in Lasta, Ethiopia: some preliminary
     observations from a landscape study of Lalibela. Azania: Archaeological Research
     in Africa 44(3), 281–91.
   2012. Lalibela in its landscape: archaeological survey at Lalibela, Lasta, Ethiopia,
     April to May 2009. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa. 47(1), 81–98.
Flannery, K.V. 1999. Process and agency in early state formation. Cambridge Arch-
     aeological Journal 9, 3–21.
Flannery, K.[V.], and Marcus, J. 2012. The creation of inequality: how our prehistoric
     ancestors set the stage for monarchy, slavery, and empire. Harvard University
     Press, Cambridge, MA.
Fleisher, J. 2013. Performance, monumentality and the ‘built exterior’ on the eastern
     African Swahili coast. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 48(2), 263–81.
Fleisher, J., and LaViolette, A. 1999. Elusive wattle-and-daub: ﬁnding the hidden
     majority in the archaeology of the Swahili. Azania 34, 87–108.
Fleisher, J., and Wynne-Jones, S. 2011. Ceramics and the early Swahili: deconstructing
     the early Tana Tradition. African Archaeological Review 28(4), 245–78.
   2012. Finding meaning in ancient Swahili spatial practices. African Archaeological
     Review 29(2–3), 171–207.
Fleisher, J., Wynne-Jones, S., Steele, C., and Welham, K. 2012. Geophysical survey at
     Kilwa Kisiwani, Tanzania. Journal of African Archaeology 10(2), 207–20.
Fletcher, R. 1995. The limits of settlement growth: a theoretical outline. Cambridge
     University Press, Cambridge.
   1998. African urbanism: scale, mobility and transformations. In Transformations in
     Africa: essays on Africa’s later past, ed. G. Connah, 104–38. Leicester University
     Press, London and Washington.
Flight, C. 1975. Gao, 1972: ﬁrst interim report: a preliminary investigation of the
     cemetery at Sané. West African Journal of Archaeology 5, 81–90.
Forman, W., Forman, B., and Dark, P. 1960. Benin art. Hamlyn, London.
Forssman, T., Page, B., and Selier, J. 2014. How important was the presence of
     elephants as a determinant of the Zhizo settlement of the Greater Mapungubwe
     Landscape? Journal of African Archaeology 12(1), 75–87.
Fouché, L. 1937. Mapungubwe: ancient Bantu civilization on the Limpopo. Cam-
     bridge University Press, Cambridge.
Freeman-Grenville, G.S.P. 1975. The East African coast: select documents from the
     ﬁrst to the earlier nineteenth century, 2nd ed. Collings, London.
Freestone, I.C. 2006. An indigenous technology? A commentary on Lankton et al.
     ‘Early primary glass production in southern Nigeria’. Journal of African Archae-
     ology 4(1), 139–41.
Fried, M.H. 1967. The evolution of political society: an essay in political anthropol-
     ogy. Random House, New York.
Fulford, M.G. 1989. To east and west: the Mediterranean trade of Cyrenaica and
     Tripolitania in antiquity. Libyan Studies 20, 169–91.
Fuller, D.Q. 2003. Pharaonic or Sudanic? Models for Meroitic society and change.
     In Ancient Egypt in Africa, ed. D. O’Connor and A. Reid, 169–84. Left Coast
     Press, Walnut Creek, CA.


                                                                                  369
References

  2014. Agricultural innovation and state collapse in Meroitic Nubia: the impact of the
    Savannah Package. In Archaeology of African plant use, ed. C.J. Stevens, S. Nixon,
    M.A. Murray, and D.Q. Fuller, 165–77. Left Coast Press, Walnut Creek, CA.
Gallay, A. 2010. Sériation chronologique de la céramique mégalithique Sénégambi-
    enne (Sénégal, Gambie), 700 cal BC–1700 cal AD. Journal of African Archae-
    ology 8(1), 99–129.
Gallay, A., Pignat, G., and Curdy, P. 1982. Mbolop Tobé (Santhiou Kohel, Sénégal):
    contribution à la connaissance du mégalithisme sénégambien. Archives suisses
    d’anthropologie générale (Genève) 46(2), 217–59.
Gallay, A., Huysecom, E., Honegger, M., and Mayor, A. 1990. Hamdallahi, capitale
    de l’Empire peul du Massina, Mali. Première fouille archéologique, études histor-
    iques et ethnoarchéologiques. Sonderschriften des Frobenius-Instituts 9, Franz
    Steiner, Stuttgart.
Gardner, G.A. 1963. Mapungubwe, vol. 2. Van Schaik, Pretoria.
Garlake, P.S. 1966. The early Islamic architecture of the East African coast. Memoir 1,
    British Institute in Eastern Africa, Oxford University Press, London.
  1972. Excavations at the Nhunguza and Ruanga Ruins in northern Mashonaland.
    South African Archaeological Bulletin 27, 107–43.
  1973. Great Zimbabwe. Thames and Hudson, London.
  1974. Excavations at Obalara’s Land, Ife: an interim report. West African Journal of
    Archaeology 4, 111–48.
  1976a. An investigation of Manekweni, Mozambique. Azania 11, 25–47.
  1976b. Great Zimbabwe: a reappraisal. In Proceedings of the Panafrican Congress
    of Prehistory and Quaternary Studies: 7th Session, Addis Ababa, December 1971,
    ed. B. Abebe, J. Chavaillon, and J.E.G. Sutton, 221–6. Provisional Military
    Government of Socialist Ethiopia, Ministry of Culture, Addis Ababa.
  1977. Excavations on the Woye Asiri family land in Ife, Western Nigeria. West
    African Journal of Archaeology 7, 57–96.
  1978a. The kingdoms of Africa. Elsevier–Phaidon, Oxford.
  1978b. Pastoralism and Zimbabwe. Journal of African History 19(4), 479–93.
  2002. Early art and architecture in Africa. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Garrard, T.F. 1982. Myth and metrology: the early trans-Saharan gold trade. Journal
    of African History 23(4), 443–61.
Garstang, J., Sayce, A.H., and Grifﬁths, F.W. 1911. Meroë, the city of the Ethiopians.
    Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Gauthier-Pilters, H., and Dagg, A.I. 1981. The camel: its evolution, ecology, behavior,
    and relationship to man. University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London.
Gautier, A., and Van Neer, W. 2005. The continuous exploitation of wild animal
    resources in the archaeozoological record of Ghana. Journal of African Archae-
    ology 3(2), 195–212.
Gerster, G. 1970. Churches in rock: early Christian art in Ethiopia. Translated by
    R. Hosking. Phaidon, London.
Ghaidan, U. (ed.) 1976. Lamu: a study in conservation. East African Literature
    Bureau, Nairobi.
Gibbon, E. 1952. The decline and fall of the Roman Empire, 2 vols. Encyclopaedia
    Britannica, Chicago.


370
                                                                           References

Godlewski, W. 1991. Old Dongola 1988–1989: House PCH 1. Archéologie du Nil
     Moyen 5, 79–101.
Godlewski, W., and Medeksza, S. 1987. The so-called mosque building in Old
     Dongola (Sudan): a structural analysis. Archéologie du Nil Moyen 2, 185–205.
González-Ruibal, A., Gelabert, L.P., and Mañé, A.V. 2011. Early Iron Age burials
     from Equatorial Guinea: the sites of Corisco Island. Journal of African Archae-
     ology 9(1), 41–66.
González-Ruibal, A., Sánchez-Elipe, M., and Otero-Vilariño, C. 2013. An ancient and
     common tradition: funerary rituals and society in Equatorial Guinea (ﬁrst–twelfth
     centuries AD). African Archaeological Review 30(2), 115–43.
Good, C.M. 1972. Salt, trade, and disease: aspects of development in Africa’s northern
     Great Lakes Region. International Journal of African Historical Studies 5(4),
     543–86.
Goodwin, A.J.H. 1957. Archaeology and Benin architecture. Journal of the Historical
     Society of Nigeria 1(2), 65–85.
Gordon, D. 2009. A revisionist view of Shaka (book review). Journal of African
     History 50(2), 315–16.
Gore, C. 2007. Art, performance and ritual in Benin City. Edinburgh University Press,
     Edinburgh.
Green, M.M. 1947. Ibo village affairs: chieﬂy with reference to the village of Umueke
     Agbaja. Sidgwick and Jackson, London.
Griffeth, R. 2000. The Hausa city-states from 1450 to 1804. In A comparative study of
     thirty city-state cultures, ed. M.H. Hansen, 483–506. The Royal Danish Academy
     of Sciences and Letters, Copenhagen.
Grifﬁth, F. Ll. 1922. Oxford excavations in Nubia. Annals of Archaeology and
     Anthropology 9, Liverpool Institute of Archaeology, Liverpool University Press,
     Liverpool.
Gronenborn, D. 2001. Princedoms along the lakeshore. Historical-archaeological
     investigations considering the development of complex societies in the southern
     Chad Basin. Berichte des Sonderforschungsbereichs 268, Band 14, 55–69.
  (ed.) 2011. Gold, Sklaven und Elfenbein: Mittelalterliche Reiche im Norden Nigerias
     [Gold, slaves, and ivory: Medieval empires in northern Nigeria], parallel texts in
     German and English. Verlag des Römisch-Germanischen Zentralmuseums, Mainz.
Gronenborn, D., Adderley, P., Ameje, J., Banerjee, A., Fenn, T., Liesegang, G., Haase,
     C.-P., Usman, Y.A., and Patscher, S. 2012. Durbi Takusheyi: a high-status burial
     site in the western Central bilad al-sudan. Azania: Archaeological Research in
     Africa, 47(3), 256–71.
Grzymski, K. 1984. Population estimates from Meroitic architecture. Meroitica 7,
     287–9.
Gutkind, P.C.W. 1960. Notes on the kibuga of Buganda. Uganda Journal 24(1),
     29–43.
  1963. The royal capital of Buganda. Mouton, The Hague.
Håland, R. 1980. Man’s role in the changing habitat of Mema during the old kingdom
     of Ghana. Norwegian Archaeological Review 13, 31–46.
Haaland [Håland], R. 1994–1995. Dakawa: an early Iron Age site in the Tanzanian
     hinterland. Azania 29–30, 238–47.


                                                                                  371
References

Haas, J. 1982. The evolution of the prehistoric state. New York University Press,
    New York.
Haase, C.-P. 2011. The metal bowl from Tumulus 7. In Gold, Sklaven und Elfenbein:
    Mittelalterliche Reiche im Norden Nigerias [Gold, slaves, and ivory: Medieval
    empires in northern Nigeria], parallel texts in German and English, ed.
    D. Gronenborn, 103. Verlag des Römisch-Germanischen Zentralmuseums, Mainz.
Hall, M. 1987. The changing past: farmers, kings and traders in southern Africa,
    200–1860. David Philip, Johannesburg.
Hall, R.N. 1905. Great Zimbabwe. Methuen, London.
Hall, S., Anderson, M., Boeyens, J., and Coetzee, F. 2008. Towards an outline of the
    oral geography, historical identity and political economy of the late precolonial
    Tswana in the Rustenburg region. In Five hundred years rediscovered: southern
    African precedents and prospects, ed. N. Swanepoel, A. Esterhuysen, and
    P. Bonner, 55–85. Wits University Press, Johannesburg.
Hall, S., Miller, D., Anderson, M., and Boeyens, J. 2006. An exploratory study of
    copper and iron production at Marothodi, an early 19th century Tswana town,
    Rustenburg District, South Africa. Journal of African Archaeology 4(1), 3–35.
Harlan, J.R., and Pasquereau, J. 1969. Décrue agriculture in Mali. Economic Botany
    23(1), 70–4.
Harris, D.R. 1976. Traditional systems of plant food production and the origins
    of agriculture in West Africa. In Origins of African plant domestication, ed.
    J.R. Harlan, J.M.J. de Wet, and A.B.L. Stemler, 311–56. Mouton, The Hague.
Hassan, F.A. 1997. Holocene palaeoclimates of Africa. African Archaeological Review
    14(4), 213–30.
  2007. The Aswan High Dam and the International Rescue Nubia Campaign.
    African Archaeological Review 24(3/4), 73–94.
  (ed.) 2002. Droughts, food and culture: ecological change and food security in
    Africa’s later prehistory. Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New York.
Helm, R., Crowther, A., Shipton, C., Tengeza, A., Fuller, D., and Boivin, N. 2012.
    Exploring agriculture, interaction and trade on the eastern African littoral: prelimin-
    ary results from Kenya. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 47(1), 39–63.
Hendrickx, S., and Vermeersch, P. 2000. Prehistory: from the Palaeolithic to the
    Badarian culture (c. 700,000–4000 BC). In The Oxford history of ancient Egypt,
    ed. I. Shaw, 17–43. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Herbert, E.W. 1984. Red gold of Africa: copper in precolonial history and culture,
    University of Wisconsin Press, Madison.
  1996. Metals and power at Great Zimbabwe. In Aspects of African archaeology:
    papers from the 10th Congress of the PanAfrican Association for Prehistory and
    Related Studies, ed. G. Pwiti and R. Soper, 641–7. University of Zimbabwe, Harare.
Hiernaux, J., de Longrée, E., and De Buyst, J. 1971. Fouilles archéologiques dans la
    vallée du Haut-Lualaba. I Sanga 1958. Musée Royal de l’Afrique Centrale,
    Tervuren, Belgium.
Hiernaux, J., Maquet, E., and De Buyst, J. 1972. Le cimetière protohistorique de
    Katoto (Vallée du Lualaba, Congo-Kinshasa). In Congrès panafricain de préhis-
    toire, Dakar 1967: Actes de 6e session, ed. H.J. Hugot, 148–58. Les Imprimeries
    Réunies de Chambéry, Chambéry.


372
                                                                         References

Hinkel, F.W. 2000. The Royal Pyramids of Meroe. Architecture, construction and
    reconstruction of a sacred landscape. Sudan and Nubia 4, 11–26 and plates
    X–XV.
Hogendorn, J., and Johnson, M. 1986. The shell money of the slave trade. Cambridge
    University Press, Cambridge.
Holl, A.F.C. 1985. Background to the Ghana Empire: archaeological investigations on
    the transition to statehood in the Dhar Tichitt region (Mauritania). Journal of
    Anthropological Archaeology 4, 73–115.
  1996. Genesis of central Chadic polities. In Aspects of African archaeology:
    papers from the 10th Congress of the PanAfrican Association for Prehistory and
    Related Studies, ed. G. Pwiti and R. Soper, 581–91. University of Zimbabwe,
    Harare.
  2006. West African early towns: archaeology of households in urban landscapes.
    University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
  2009. Iron metallurgy in West Africa: an early iron smelting site in the Mahoun
    Bend, Burkina Faso. In Crossroads/Carrefour Sahel: cultural and technological
    developments in ﬁrst millennium BC/AD West Africa, ed. S. Magnavita, L. Koté,
    P. Breunig, and O.A. Idé, 59–68. Africa Magna Verlag, Frankfurt am Main.
Home, R. 1982. City of Blood revisited: a new look at the Benin expedition of 1897.
    Collings, London.
Horton, M. 1986. Asiatic colonization of the East African coast: the Manda evidence.
    Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Pt 2, 201–13.
  1987a. Early Muslim trading settlements on the East African coast: new evidence
    from Shanga. Antiquaries Journal 67, 290–323.
  1987b. The Swahili Corridor. Scientiﬁc American 257(3), 76–84.
  1996. Shanga: the archaeology of a Muslim trading community on the coast of East
    Africa, Memoir 14, British Institute in Eastern Africa, London.
Horton, M., and Blurton, T.R. 1988. ‘Indian’ metalwork in East Africa: the bronze
    lion statuette from Shanga. Antiquity 62 (234), 11–23.
Horton, M., and Middleton, J. 2000. The Swahili: the social landscape of a mercantile
    society. Blackwell, Oxford.
Horton, M., and Mudida, N. 1993. Exploitation of marine resources: evidence for the
    origin of the Swahili communities of east Africa. In The archaeology of Africa:
    food, metals and towns, ed. T. Shaw, P. Sinclair, B. Andah, and A. Okpoko,
    673–93. Routledge, London and New York.
Horton, M., Brown, H.M., and Oddy, W.A. 1986. The Mtambwe hoard. Azania 21,
    115–23 and plate 1.
Hoyos, D. 2010. The Carthaginians. London and New York, Routledge.
Huffman, T.N. 1981. Snakes and birds: expressive space at Great Zimbabwe,
    Inaugural lecture, University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg. Witwatersrand
    University Press, Johannesburg. (Also published in 1981 in African Studies
    40(2), 131–50.)
  1982. Archaeology and ethnohistory of the African Iron Age. Annual Review of
    Anthropology 11, 133–50.
  1986. Iron Age settlement patterns and the origins of class distinction in southern
    Africa. Advances in World Archaeology 5, 291–338.


                                                                                373
References

   1996. Snakes and crocodiles: power and symbolism in ancient Zimbabwe, Witwa-
      tersrand University Press, Johannesburg.
   2007. Handbook to the Iron Age: the archaeology of pre-colonial farming
      societies in southern Africa. University of KwaZulu-Natal Press, Scottsville,
      South Africa.
   2009. Mapungubwe and Great Zimbabwe: the origin and spread of social complex-
      ity in southern Africa. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 28, 37–54.
   2010a. Revisiting Great Zimbabwe. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa
      45(3), 321–8.
   2010b. State formation in southern Africa: a reply to Kim and Kusimba. African
      Archaeological Review 27(1), 1–11.
Huffman, T.N., and Hanisch, E.O.M. 1987. Settlement hierarchies in the northern
      Transvaal: zimbabwe ruins and Venda history. African Studies 46, 79–116.
Huffman, T.N., and Vogel, J.C. 1991. The chronology of Great Zimbabwe. South
      African Archaeological Bulletin 46, 61–70.
Hull, R.W. 1976. African cities and towns before the European conquest. New York,
      Norton.
Hunwick, J. 1971. Songhay, Bornu and Hausaland in the sixteenth century. In History
      of West Africa, vol. 1, ed. J.F.A. Ajayi and M. Crowder, 202–39. Longman,
      London.
Hurst, H. 1979. Excavations at Carthage 1977–8: fourth interim report. Antiquaries
      Journal 59(1), 19–49.
Iles, L. 2013a. Analysis of iron working remains from Kooki and Masindi, western
      Uganda. Nyame Akuma 80, 43–58.
   2013b. The development of iron technology in precolonial western Uganda. Azania:
      Archaeological Research in Africa 48(1), 65–90.
Iles, L., Robertshaw, P., and Young, R. 2014. A furnace and associated ironworking
      remains at Munsa, Uganda. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 49(1), 45–63.
Iliffe, J. 1995. Africans: the history of a continent. Cambridge University Press,
      Cambridge.
Insoll, T. 1995. A cache of hippopotamus ivory at Gao, Mali; and a hypothesis of its
      use. Antiquity 69 (263), 327–36.
   1996a. Islam, archaeology and history: Gao region (Mali) ca. AD 900–1250.
      Cambridge Monographs in African Archaeology 39, BAR International Series
      647, Tempus Reparatum, Oxford.
   1996b. Settlement and trade in Gao, Mali. In Aspects of African archaeology: papers
      from the 10th Congress of the PanAfrican Association for Prehistory and Related
      Studies, ed. G. Pwiti and R. Soper, 663–9. University of Zimbabwe, Harare.
   1999. The archaeology of Islam. Blackwell, Oxford.
   2003. The archaeology of Islam in sub-Saharan Africa. Cambridge University Press,
      Cambridge.
Insoll, T., and Shaw, T. 1997. Gao and Igbo-Ukwu: beads, interregional trade, and
      beyond. African Archaeological Review 14(1), 9–23.
Insoll, T., Polya, D.A., Bhan, K., Irving, D., and Jarvis, K. 2004.Towards an under-
      standing of the carnelian bead trade from Western India to sub-Saharan Africa:
      the application of UV-LA-ICP-MS to carnelian from Gujarat, India, and West
      Africa. Journal of Archaeological Science 31, 1161–73.
374
                                                                             References

Jaabiri, F., and Yahia, B. 2000. Le Mzâb Cité-état. In A comparative study of thirty
     city-state cultures, ed. M.H. Hansen, 445–62. The Royal Danish Academy of
     Sciences and Letters, Copenhagen.
Jahadhmy, A.A. 1981. Learner’s Swahili-English, English-Swahili Dictionary, Evans,
     London.
Jakobielski, S. 1982. Polish excavations at Old Dongola in 1976 and 1978. In Nubian
     studies: proceedings of the Symposium for Nubian Studies, Selwyn College,
     Cambridge 1978, ed. J.M. Plumley, 116–26. International Society for Nubian
     Studies, Aris & Phillips, Warminster, UK.
Jansen, M. 1989. Water supply and sewage disposal at Mohenjo-Daro. World Archae-
     ology 21(2), 177–92.
Jesse, F., Kröpelin, S., Lange, M., Pöllath, N., and Berke, H. 2004. On the periphery of
     Kerma – The Handessi Horizon in Wadi Hariq, Northwestern Sudan. Journal
     of African Archaeology 2(2), 123–64.
Johnson, M. 1970a. The cowrie currencies of West Africa, Part I. Journal of African
     History 11(1), 17–49.
  1970b. The cowrie currencies of West Africa, Part II. Journal of African History
     11(3), 331–53.
Johnson, S. 1921. The history of the Yorubas. Routledge, London.
Joire, J. 1955. Découvertes archéologiques dans la région de Rao (Bas-Sénégal).
     Bulletin de l’IFAN, Dakar, 17(B), 249–333.
Juma, A.M. 1996. The Swahili and the Mediterranean worlds: pottery of the late
     Roman period from Zanzibar. Antiquity 70, 148–54.
Kaegi, W.E. 2010. Muslim expansion and Byzantine collapse in North Africa.
     Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Kahlheber, S., Bostoen, K., and Neumann, K. 2009. Early plant cultivation in
     the Central African rain forest: ﬁrst millennium BC pearl millet from south
     Cameroon. Journal of African Archaeology 7(2), 253–72.
Kahlheber, S., Eggert, M.K.H., Seidensticker, D., and Wotzka, H.-P. 2014. Pearl millet and
     other plant remains from the Early Iron Age site of Boso-Njafo (Inner Congo Basin,
     Democratic Republic of the Congo). African Archaeological Review 31(3), 479–512.
Kea, R.A. 2000. City-state culture on the Gold Coast: the Fante city–state federation in
     the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In A comparative study of thirty city-
     state cultures, ed. M.H. Hansen, 519–30. The Royal Danish Academy of Sciences
     and Letters, Copenhagen.
  2012. The local and the global: historiographical reﬂections on West Africa in the
     Atlantic Age. In Power and landscape in Atlantic West Africa: archaeological
     perspectives, ed. J.C. Monroe and A. Ogundiran, 339–75. Cambridge University
     Press, Cambridge.
Keay, R.W.J. 1959. Vegetation map of Africa south of the Tropic of Cancer. Oxford
     University Press, London.
Kemp, B.J. 1991. Ancient Egypt: anatomy of a civilization. Routledge, London.
  2013. The city of Akhenaten and Nefertiti: Amarna and its people. Paperback
     edition, Thames and Hudson, London.
Kendall, T. 1991. The Napatan palace at Gebel Barkal: a ﬁrst look at B1200. In Egypt
     and Africa: Nubia from prehistory to Islam, ed. W.V. Davies, 302–13. British
     Museum Press, London.
                                                                                     375
References

  1997. Kerma and the Kingdom of Kush 2500–1500 BC: the archaeological discov-
     ery of an ancient Nubian empire. Smithsonian Institution, Washington.
Kenrick, P. 1986. Excavations at Sabratha 1948–1951. The Society for the Promotion
     of Roman Studies, London.
  2009. Libya Archaeological Guides: Tripolitania. Silphium Press, London.
  2013. Libya Archaeological Guides: Cyrenaica. Silphium Press, London.
Kiéthéga, J.-B. 1983. L’or de la Volta Noire: archéologie et histoire de l’exploitation
     traditionnelle (Région de Poura, Haute-Volta), Karthala, Paris.
Killick, D. 1996. On claims for ‘advanced’ ironworking technology in precolonial
     Africa. In The culture and technology of African iron production, ed.
     P.R. Schmidt, 247–66. University Press of Florida, Gainesville.
  2004. What do we know about African iron working? Journal of African Archae-
     ology 2(1), 97–112.
Kim, N.C., and Kusimba, C.M. 2008. Pathways to social complexity and state formation
     in the southern Zambezian region. African Archaeological Review 25(3/4), 131–52.
Kirkman, J.S. 1954. The Arab city of Gedi: excavations at the Great Mosque. Archi-
     tecture and ﬁnds. Oxford University Press, London.
  1963. Gedi: the Palace. Mouton & Co., The Hague.
  1964. Men and monuments on the East African coast. Lutterworth Press, London.
  1966. Ungwana on the Tana. Mouton & Co., The Hague.
  1975. Some conclusions from archaeological excavations on the coast of Kenya,
     1948–1966. In East Africa and the Orient: cultural syntheses in pre-colonial
     times, ed. N. Chittick and R.I. Rotberg, 226–47. Africana Publishing Company,
     New York and London.
Klee, M., and Zach, B. 1999. The exploitation of wild and domesticated food plants at
     settlement mounds in north-east Nigeria (1800 cal BC to today). In The exploit-
     ation of plant resources in Ancient Africa, ed. M. van der Veen, 81–88. New
     York, Kluwer Academic/Plenum.
Kluckhohn, C. 1960. The moral order in the expanding society. In City invincible: a
     symposium on urbanization and cultural development in the ancient Near East,
     ed. C.H. Kraeling and R.M. Adams, 391–404. Chicago University Press, Chicago.
Kobishchanov, Y.M. 1979. Axum, ed. J.W. Michels. Translated by L.T. Kapitanoff.
     Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park and London.
Kobish[ch]anov, Y.M. 1981. Aksum: political system, economics and culture, ﬁrst to
     fourth century. In General history of Africa, vol. 2: Ancient civilizations of Africa,
     ed. G. Mokhtar, 381–400. Heinemann, University of California, UNESCO;
     London, Berkeley, Paris.
Kraeling, C.H. 1962. Ptolemais: city of the Libyan Pentapolis. Chicago University
     Press, Chicago.
Krencker, D. 1913. Deutsche Aksum-Expedition, Band 2. Georg Reimer, Berlin.
Krencker, D., Kruger, E., Lehmann, H., and Wachtler, H. 1929. Die trierer Kaiserther-
     men, Benno Filser, Augsburg.
Kubiak, W.B. 1987. Al-Fustat: its foundation and early urban development. The
     American University in Cairo Press, Cairo.
Kuper, A. 1980. Symbolic dimensions of the Southern Bantu homestead. Africa 50(1),
     8–23.


376
                                                                           References

  1982. Wives for cattle: bridewealth and marriage in southern Africa. Routledge and
     Kegan Paul, London.
Kusimba, C.M. 1999. The rise and fall of Swahili states. AltaMira Press, Walnut
     Creek, CA.
Kusimba, C.M., Kusimba, S.B., and Wright, D.K. 2005. The development and collapse
     of precolonial ethnic mosaics in Tsavo, Kenya. Journal of African Archaeology
     3(2), 243–65.
Kusimba, C.M., Kusimba, S.B., and Dussubieux, L. 2013. Beyond the coastalscapes:
     preindustrial social and political networks in East Africa. African Archaeological
     Review 30(4), 399–426.
Lacovara, P. 1991. The stone vase deposit at Kerma. In Egypt and Africa: Nubia
     from prehistory to Islam, ed. W.V. Davies, 118–28. British Museum Press,
     London.
Lambert-Zazulak, P. 2000. The International Ancient Egyptian Mummy Tissue Bank
     at the Manchester Museum. Antiquity 74 (283), 44–8.
Lancel, S. 1995. Carthage: a history. Translated by A. Nevill. Blackwell, Oxford.
Lankton, J.W., Ige, O.A., and Rehren, T. 2006. Early primary glass production in
     southern Nigeria. Journal of African Archaeology 4(1), 111–38.
Lanning, E.C. 1953. Ancient earthworks in western Uganda. Uganda Journal 17(1),
     51–62.
  1955. The Munsa earthworks. Uganda Journal 19(2), 177–82.
  1960. The earthworks at Kibengo, Mubende District. Uganda Journal 24(2),
     183–96.
  1970. Ntusi: an ancient capital site in western Uganda. Azania 5, 39–54.
LaViolette, A. 1996. Report on excavations at the Swahili site of Pujini, Pemba Island,
     Tanzania. Nyame Akuma 46, 72–83.
LaViolette, A., and Fleisher, J. 2005. The archaeology of sub-Saharan urbanism:
     cities and their countrysides. In African archaeology: a critical introduction, ed.
     A.B. Stahl, 327–52. Blackwell, Oxford.
  2009. The urban history of a rural place: Swahili archaeology on Pemba Island,
     Tanzania, 700–1500 AD. International Journal of African Historical Studies
     42(3), 433–55.
Law, R. 1978. Slaves, trade, and taxes: the material base of political power in
     pre-colonial West Africa. Research in Economic Anthropology 1, 37–52.
  1980a. The horse in West African history. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
  1980b. Wheeled transport in pre-colonial West Africa. Africa 50(3), 249–62.
Leclant, J. 1973. Glass from the Meroitic necropolis of Sedeinga (Sudanese Nubia).
     Journal of Glass Studies 15, 52–68.
Lehner, M. 1997. The complete pyramids. Thames and Hudson, London.
Lejju, B.J., Robertshaw, P., and Taylor, D. 2006. Africa’s earliest bananas? Journal of
     Archaeological Science 33(1), 102–113.
Lenoble, P., and Sharif, N.M. 1992. Barbarians at the gates? The royal mounds of
     El Hobagi and the end of Meroë. Antiquity 66, 626–35.
Leslie, M., and Maggs, T. (eds.) 2000. African naissance: the Limpopo Valley
     1000 years ago. The South African Archaeological Society, Goodwin Series vol. 8.
Levtzion, N. 1973. Ancient Ghana and Mali. Methuen, London.


                                                                                   377
References

Livingstone, F.B. 1967. The origin of the sickle-cell gene. In Reconstructing African culture
     history, ed. C. Gabel and N.R. Bennett, 139–66. Boston University Press, Boston.
Lloyd, A.B. 2000. The Ptolemaic Period (332–30 BC). In The Oxford history of
     ancient Egypt, ed. I. Shaw, 395–421. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Lonsdale, J. 1981. States and social processes in Africa: a historiographical survey.
     African Studies Review 24(2 and 3), 139–225.
Lovejoy, P.E. 1986. Salt of the desert sun: a history of salt production and trade in the
     central Sudan. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Lucas, A., and Harris, J.R. 1962. Ancient Egyptian materials and industries, 4th ed.
     Edward Arnold, London.
Lugard, F.D. 1893. In British Parliamentary Papers. Africa. No. 2 (1893). C.–6848,
     1–102.
  1903. Northern Nigeria: report for 1902. Colonial Reports: Annual, No. 409, His
     Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce, London.
Lull, V., and Micó, R. 2011. Archaeology of the origin of the state: the theories.
     (Translated by P. Smith.) Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Mabogunje, A.L. 1968. Urbanization in Nigeria. University of London Press, London.
Macamo, S.L., and Duarte, R.T. 1996. Oral tradition and the Songo Ruins. In Aspects
     of African archaeology: papers from the 10th Congress of the PanAfrican Associ-
     ation for Prehistory and Related Studies, ed. G. Pwiti and R. Soper, 561–3.
     University of Zimbabwe, Harare.
MacDonald, K.C. 1995. Analysis of the mammalian, avian, and reptilian remains. In
     Excavations at Jenné-jeno, Hambarketolo, and Kaniana (Inland Niger Delta,
     Mali), the 1981 season, ed. S.K. McIntosh, 291–318. University of California
     Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles.
  1998. Before the Empire of Ghana: pastoralism and the origins of cultural complex-
     ity in the Sahel. In Transformations in Africa: essays on Africa’s later past, ed.
     G. Connah, 71–103. Leicester University Press, London and Washington.
  2011. A view from the South: Sub-Saharan evidence for contacts between North
     Africa, Mauritania and the Niger, 1000 BC–AD 700. In Money, trade and trade
     routes in Pre-Islamic North Africa, ed. A. Dowler and E.R. Galvin, 72–82.
     Research Publication 176, British Museum, London.
MacDonald, K.C., and MacDonald, R.H. 1999. The origins and development of
     domesticated animals in arid West Africa. In The origins and development
     of African livestock, ed. R.M. Blench and K.C. MacDonald, University College
     London and Routledge, London.
MacEachern, S., and David, N. 2013. Monumental architecture in mountain land-
     scapes: the diy-geδ-bay sites of northern Cameroon. Azania: Archaeological
     Research in Africa 48(2), 241–62.
McEvedy, C., and Jones, R. 1978. Atlas of world population history. Penguin Books,
     Harmondsworth, UK.
McIntosh, R.J. 1998. The peoples of the Middle Niger: the Island of Gold, Blackwell,
     Oxford.
  1999. Western representations of urbanism and invisible African towns. In Beyond
     chiefdoms: pathways to complexity in Africa, ed. S.K. McIntosh, 56–65.
     Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.


378
                                                                         References

 2005. Ancient Middle Niger: urbanism and the self-organizing landscape. Cam-
   bridge University Press, Cambridge.
McIntosh, S.K. 1994. Changing perceptions of West Africa’s past: archaeological
   research since 1988. Journal of Archaeological Research 2(2), 165–98.
 1999. Pathways to complexity: an African perspective. In Beyond chiefdoms: path-
   ways to complexity in Africa, ed. S.K. McIntosh, 1–30. Cambridge University
   Press, Cambridge.
McIntosh, S.K. (ed.) 1995. Excavations at Jenné-jeno, Hambarketolo, and Kaniana
   (Inland Niger Delta, Mali), the 1981 season. University of California Press,
   Berkeley and Los Angeles.
McIntosh, S.K., and Bocoum, H. 2000. New perspectives on Sincu Bara, a ﬁrst
   millennium site in the Senegal Valley. African Archaeological Review 17(1), 1–43.
McIntosh, S.K., and McIntosh, R.J. 1979. Initial perspectives on prehistoric subsist-
   ence in the Inland Niger Delta (Mali). World Archaeology 11(2), 227–43.
 1980. Prehistoric investigations in the region of Jenné, Mali, 2 vols. Cambridge
   Monographs in African Archaeology 2, BAR International Series 89(i) and (ii),
   Oxford.
 1984. The early city in West Africa: towards an understanding. African Archaeo-
   logical Review 2, 73–98.
 1986. Recent archaeological research and dates from West Africa. Journal of
   African History 27, 413–42.
 1993a. Cities without citadels: understanding urban origins along the middle Niger.
   In The archaeology of Africa: food, metals and towns, ed. T. Shaw, P. Sinclair,
   B. Andah, and A. Okpoko, 622–41. Routledge, London and New York.
 1993b. Field survey in the tumulus zone of Senegal. African Archaeological Review
   11, 73–107.
McIntosh, S.K., McIntosh, R.J., and Bocoum, H. 1992. The Middle Senegal Valley
   Project: preliminary results from the 1990–91 ﬁeld season. Nyame Akuma 38,
   47–61.
Mack, J. 2007. The land viewed from the sea. Azania 42, 1–14.
McLeod, M.D. 1981. The Asante. British Museum, London.
Maggs, T. 1976. Iron Age patterns and Sotho history on the southern Highveld: South
   Africa. World Archaeology 7(3), 318–32.
 1993. Sliding doors at Mokgatle’s, a nineteenth century Tswana town in the central
   Transvaal. South African Archaeological Bulletin 48, 32–6.
 2008. The Mpumalanga Escarpment settlements: some answers, many questions. In
   Five hundred years rediscovered: southern African precedents and prospects, ed.
   N. Swanepoel, A. Esterhuysen, and P. Bonner, 169–81. Wits University Press,
   Johannesburg.
Magnavita, C., Breunig, P., Ameje, J., and Posselt, M. 2006. Zilum: a mid-ﬁrst
   millennium BC fortiﬁed settlement near Lake Chad. Journal of African Archae-
   ology 4(1), 153–69.
Magnavita, S. 2003. The beads of Kissi, Burkina Faso. Journal of African Archaeology
   1(1), 127–38.
 2008. The oldest textiles from Sub-Saharan West Africa: woolen facts from Kissi,
   Burkina Faso. Journal of African Archaeology 6(2), 243–57.


                                                                                379
References

Maisels, C. 2010. The archaeology of politics and power: where, when and why the
    ﬁrst states formed. Oxbow Books, Oxford.
Majno, G. 1975. The healing hand: man and wound in the Ancient World. Harvard
    University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Maliphant, G.K., Rees, A.R., and Roese, P.M. 1976. Defence systems of the Benin
    empire – Uwan. West African Journal of Archaeology 6, 121–30.
Manson-Bahr, P.E.C., and Apted, F.I.C. 1982. Manson’s tropical diseases, 18th ed.
    Baillière Tindall, London.
Manton, E.L. 1988. Roman North Africa. Seaby, London.
Manyanga, M. 2007. Resilient landscapes: socio-environmental dynamics in the
    Shashi-Limpopo Basin, southern Zimbabwe c. AD 800 to the present. Uppsala
    University, Sweden.
Manyanga, M., Pikirayi, I., and Chirikure, S. 2010. Conceptualising the urban mind in
    pre-European southern Africa: rethinking Mapungubwe and Great Zimbabwe.
    In The urban mind: cultural and environmental dynamics, ed. P.J.J. Sinclair,
    G. Nordquist, F. Herschend, and C. Isendahl, 573–90. African and Comparative
    Archaeology, Department of Archaeology and Ancient History, Uppsala Univer-
    sity, Uppsala, Sweden.
Marcus, H.G. 2002. A history of Ethiopia. Updated edition, University of California
    Press, Berkeley.
Matenga, E. 1993. Archaeological ﬁgurines from Zimbabwe. Studies in African
    Archaeology 5, Uppsala University, Sweden, and Queen Victoria Museum,
    Zimbabwe.
 1998. The soapstone birds of Great Zimbabwe: symbols of a nation, African
    Publishing Group, Harare.
Matthews, D., and Mordini, A. 1959. The monastery of Debra Damo, Ethiopia.
    Archaeologia 97, 1–58.
Mattingly, D.J. 1994. Tripolitania. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI.
 2011. The Garamantes of Fazzan: an early Libyan state with trans-Saharan
    connections. In Money, trade and trade routes in Pre-Islamic North Africa, ed.
    A. Dowler and E.R. Galvin, 49–60. Research Publication 176, British Museum,
    London.
 (ed.) 2013. The archaeology of Fazzān: Volume 4, survey and excavations at Old
    Jarma. Society for Libyan Studies Monograph 9, Department of Antiquities,
    Tripoli; Society for Libyan Studies, London.
Mattingly, D.J., and Sterry, M. 2013. The ﬁrst towns in the central Sahara. Antiquity
    87 (336), 503–18.
Maund, E.A. 1890. Zambezia, the new British Possession in Central South Africa.
    Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society and Monthly Record of Geog-
    raphy. New Monthly Series 12(11), 649–55.
Mauny, R. 1961. Tableau géographique de l’Ouest Africain au Moyen-Age d’après
    les sources écrites, la tradition et l’archéologie. Mémoires de l’IFAN 61, Dakar.
 1970. Les siècles obscurs de l’Afrique noire: histoire et archéologie. Fayard.
 1978. Trans-Saharan contacts and the Iron Age in West Africa. In The Cambridge
    history of Africa, vol. 2, ed. J.D. Fage, 272–341. Cambridge University Press,
    Cambridge.


380
                                                                         References

Mayor, A. 1996. Hamdallahi, capital of the Fulani empire of Macina, Mali: a multi-
    disciplinary approach. In Aspects of African archaeology: papers from the 10th
    Congress of the PanAfrican Association for Prehistory and Related Studies, ed.
    G. Pwiti and R. Soper, 671–80. University of Zimbabwe, Harare.
Meillassoux, C. 1991. The anthropology of slavery: the womb of iron and gold.
    Athlone Press, London.
Meister, C., and Eggert, M.K.H. 2008. On the Early Iron Age in southern Cameroon:
    the sites of Akonétye. Journal of African Archaeology 6(2), 183–202.
Meskell, L. 2002. Private life in New Kingdom Egypt. Princeton University Press,
    Princeton, NJ.
Meyboom, P.G.P. 1995. The Nile Mosaic of Palestrina: early evidence of Egyptian
    religion in Italy. Brill, Leiden.
Michels, J.W. 2005. Changing settlement patterns in the Aksum–Yeha region of Ethi-
    opia: 700 BC– AD 850. BAR International Series 1446, Archaeopress, Oxford.
Miller, D., Desai, N., and Lee-Thorp, J. 2000. Indigenous gold mining in southern
    Africa: a review. In African naissance: the Limpopo Valley 1000 years ago, ed.
    M. Leslie and T. Maggs, 91–9. The South African Archaeological Society, Good-
    win Series vol. 8.
Miller, J.I. 1969. The spice trade of the Roman Empire, 29 BC to AD 641, Oxford
    University Press, London.
Mitchell, P. 2002. The archaeology of southern Africa. Cambridge University Press,
    Cambridge.
 2004. Towards a comparative archaeology of Africa’s islands. Journal of African
    Archaeology 2(2), 229–50.
 2005. African connections: an archaeological perspective on Africa and the wider
    world. AltaMira Press, Walnut Creek, CA.
Mitchell, P., and Lane, P. (ed.) 2013. The Oxford handbook of African archaeology.
    Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Monod, T. 1969. Le ‘Macden Ijâfen’: une épave caravanière ancienne dans la Majâbat
    Al-Koubrâ. In Actes du Premier Colloque international d’Archéologie africaine,
    1966. Fort-Lamy, 286–320.
Monroe, J.C. 2012. Building the state in Dahomey: power and landscape in the Bight
    of Benin. In Power and landscape in Atlantic West Africa: archaeological perspec-
    tives, ed. J.C. Monroe and A. Ogundiran, 191–221. Cambridge University Press,
    Cambridge.
 2013. The archaeology of the precolonial state in Africa. In The Oxford handbook
    of African archaeology, ed. P. Mitchell and P. Lane, 703–22. Oxford University
    Press, Oxford.
 2014. The precolonial state in West Africa: building power in Dahomey. Cambridge
    University Press, New York.
Monroe, J.C., and Ogundiran, A. 2012. Power and landscape in Atlantic West Africa:
    archaeological perspectives. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Moody, H.L.B. [1970]. The walls and gates of Kano City, Department of Antiquities,
    Nigeria.
Morais, J., and Sinclair, P. 1980. Manyikeni, a Zimbabwe in Southern Mozambique.
    In Proceedings of the 8th Panafrican Congress of Prehistory and Quaternary


                                                                                381
References

    Studies, Nairobi, 5 to 10 September 1977, ed. R.E. Leakey and B.A. Ogot, 351–4.
    The International Louis Leakey Memorial Institute for African Prehistory,
    Nairobi.
Morkot, R.G. 2003. On the priestly origin of the Napatan kings: the adaptation,
    demise and resurrection of ideas in writing Nubian history. In Ancient Egypt in
    Africa, ed. D. O’Connor and A. Reid, 151–68. Left Coast Press, Walnut Creek,
    CA.
Mumford, L. 1961. The city in history: its origins, its transformations, and its
    prospects. Secker and Warburg, London.
Munro-Hay, S. 1982. The foreign trade of the Aksumite port of Adulis. Azania 17,
    107–25.
  1989. Excavations at Aksum: an account of research at the ancient Ethiopian capital
    directed in 1972–74 by the late Dr Neville Chittick. Memoir 10, British Institute
    in Eastern Africa, London.
  1991. Aksum: an African civilisation of late antiquity. Edinburgh University Press,
    Edinburgh.
Munson, P.J. 1976. Archaeological data on the origins of cultivation in the south-
    western Sahara and their implications for West Africa. In Origins of African plant
    domestication, ed. J.R. Harlan, J.M.J. de Wet, and A.B.L. Stemler, 187–209.
    Mouton, The Hague.
Mutoro, H.W. 1994–5. Tana ware and the kaya settlements of the coastal hinterland
    of Kenya. Azania 29–30, 257–60.
  1998. Precolonial trading systems of the East African interior. In Transformations in
    Africa: essays on Africa’s later past, ed. G. Connah, 186–203. Leicester University
    Press, London and Washington.
Negussie, C. 1994. Aksum and Matara: a stratigraphic comparison of two Aksumite
    towns. Department of Archaeology, Uppsala University, Sweden.
Nenquin, J. 1961. Salt: a study in economic prehistory. Dissertationes Archaeologicae
    Gandenses, vol. 6. De Tempel, Bruges, Belgium.
  1963. Excavations at Sanga, 1957: the protohistoric necropolis. Musée Royal de
    l’Afrique Centrale, Tervuren, Belgium.
Neumann, K. 1999. Early plant food production in the West African Sahel: new
    evidence. In The exploitation of plant resources in Ancient Africa, ed. M. van
    der Veen, 73–80. Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New York.
Neumann, K., and Hildebrand, E. 2009. Early bananas in Africa: the state of the art.
    Ethnobotany Research and Applications 7, 353–62.
Neumann, K., Ballouche, A., and Klee, M. 1996. The emergence of plant food
    production in the West African Sahel: new evidence from northeast Nigeria and
    northern Burkina Faso. In Aspects of African archaeology: papers from the 10th
    Congress of the PanAfrican Association for Prehistory and Related Studies, ed.
    G. Pwiti and R. Soper, 441–8. University of Zimbabwe, Harare.
Nevadomsky, J., Lawson, N., and Hazlett, K. 2014. An ethnographic and space syntax
    analysis of Benin Kingdom nobility architecture. African Archaeological Review
    31(1), 59–85.
Nikis, N., de Maret, P., Lanfranchi, R., Nsania, J., Goma, J.-P., Clist, B., and Bostoen, K.
    2013. Projet KongoKing. Prospections en République du Congo (Brazzaville):


382
                                                                           References

     le cuivre et l’origine des anciens royaumes Kongo et Teke. Nyame Akuma 80,
     32–42.
Nixon, S. 2009. Excavating Essouk-Tadmakka (Mali): new archaeological investiga-
     tions of early Islamic trans-Saharan trade. Azania: Archaeological Research in
     Africa 44(2), 217–55.
Nixon, S., Rehren, T., and Guerra, M.F. 2011. New light on the early Islamic West
     African gold trade: coin moulds from Tadmekka [sic], Mali. Antiquity 85(330),
     1353–68.
O’Connor, D. 1993. Ancient Nubia: Egypt’s rival in Africa. University of Pennsylva-
     nia, Philadelphia.
  2011. Abydos: Egypt’s ﬁrst pharaohs and the cult of Osiris. Thames and Hudson,
     London.
O’Connor, D., and Reid, A. 2003a. Introduction – Locating Ancient Egypt in Africa:
     modern theories, past realities. In Ancient Egypt in Africa, ed. D. O’Connor and
     A. Reid, 1–21. Left Coast Press, Walnut Creek, CA.
O’Connor, D., and Reid, A. (ed.) 2003b. Ancient Egypt in Africa. Left Coast Press,
     Walnut Creek, CA.
Ogundiran, A. 2007. Living in the shadow of the Atlantic World: history and material
     life in a Yoruba-Edo hinterland, ca. 1600–1750. In Archaeology of Atlantic Africa
     and the African diaspora, ed. A. Ogundiran and T. Falola, 77–99. Indiana
     University Press, Bloomington, IN.
  2014. The making of an internal frontier settlement: archaeology and historical
     process in Osun Grove (Nigeria), seventeenth to eighteenth centuries. African
     Archaeological Review 31(1), 1–24.
Ogundiran, A., and Falola, T. (eds.) 2007. Archaeology of Atlantic Africa and the
     African diaspora. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN.
Okafor, E.E. 1993. New evidence on early iron-smelting from southeastern Nigeria.
     In The archaeology of Africa: food, metals and towns, ed. T. Shaw, P. Sinclair,
     B. Andah, and A. Okpoko, 432–48. Routledge, London and New York.
Oliver, R. 1953. A question about the Bachwezi. Uganda Journal 17(2), 135–7.
  1959a. Ancient capital sites of Ankole. Uganda Journal 23(1), 51–63.
  1959b. The royal tombs of Buganda. Uganda Journal 23(2), 124–33.
  1993. The African experience (1st ed. 1991). Pimlico, London.
Orwell, G. 1966. Homage to Catalonia: and looking back on the Spanish War.
     Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, UK.
Oxford English Dictionary, 1933. Vol. 10. Clarendon Press, Oxford (1970 reprint).
Ozanne, P. 1969. A new archaeological survey of Ife. Odu (NS) 1, 28–45.
Pankhurst, R. 1961. An introduction to the economic history of Ethiopia from early
     times to 1800. Lalibela House, distributed by Sidgwick & Jackson, London.
  1979. Ethiopian medieval and post-medieval capitals: their development and princi-
     pal features. Azania 14, 1–19.
  2004. Arabian trade with Ethiopia and the Horn of Africa: from ancient times to
     the sixteenth century. In Trade and travel in the Red Sea Region, ed. P. Lunde and
     A. Porter, 19–24. BAR International Series 1269, Archaeopress, Oxford.
Paribeni, R. 1907. Ricerche nel luogo dell’antica Adulis (Colonia Eritrea). Monumenti
     Antichi, Reale Accademia dei Lincei 18, 437–572 and plates I–XI.


                                                                                  383
References

Parkington, J., and Cronin, M. 1979. The size and layout of Mgungundlovu
     1829–1838. In Iron Age studies in southern Africa, ed. N.J. van der Merwe and
     T.N. Huffman, 133–48. South African Archaeological Society Goodwin Series 3.
Patterson, K.D. 1993. Disease ecologies of Sub-Saharan Africa. In The Cambridge
     world history of human disease, ed. K.F. Kiple, 447–52. Cambridge University
     Press, Cambridge.
Pauketat, T.R. 2007. Chiefdoms and other archaeological delusions. AltaMira Press,
     Lanham, MD.
Pauly, M. 2013. Acoua-Agnala M’kiri (Mayotte-976) archéologie d’une localité méd-
     iévale (11e au 15e siècles EC), entre Afrique et Madagascar. Nyame Akuma 80,
     73–90.
Pawlowicz, M. 2012. Modelling the Swahili past: the archaeology of Mikindani
     in southern coastal Tanzania. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 47(4),
     488–508.
Peacock, D. 2000. The Roman Period (30 BC–AD 311). In The Oxford history of
     ancient Egypt, ed. I. Shaw, 422–45. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Peacock, D., and Blue, L. (eds.) 2007. The ancient Red Sea port of Adulis, Eritrea.
     Results of the Eritro-British Expedition, 2004–5. Oxbow Books, Oxford.
Peel, J.D.Y. 2000. Yoruba as a city-state culture. In A comparative study of thirty city-
     state cultures, ed. M.H. Hansen, 507–17. The Royal Danish Academy of Sciences
     and Letters, Copenhagen.
Perkins, J., Fleisher, J., and Wynne-Jones, S. 2014. A deposit of Kilwa-type coins from
     Songo Mnara, Tanzania. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 49(1),
     102–16.
Petit, L.P., von Czerniewicz, M., and Pelzer, C. (eds.) 2011. Oursi hu-beero: a medieval
     house complex in Burkina Faso, West Africa. Sidestone Press, Leiden.
Phillipson, D.W. 1994. The signiﬁcance and symbolism of the Aksumite stelae.
     Cambridge Archaeological Journal 4(2), 189–210.
  1997. The monuments of Aksum, (based on the work of the Deutsche Aksum-
     Expedition of 1906). Addis Ababa University Press and British Institute in Eastern
     Africa, Addis Ababa and London.
  1998. Ancient Ethiopia. Aksum: its antecedents and successors. British Museum
     Press, London.
  2000. Archaeology at Aksum, Ethiopia, 1993–7, 2 vols. Memoir 17, British Institute
     in Eastern Africa, and Report 65, Research Committee of the Society of Antiquar-
     ies of London, London.
  2003. Aksum: an archaeological introduction and guide. Azania 38, 1–68.
  2004. The Aksumite roots of Medieval Ethiopia. Azania 39, 77–89.
  2005. African archaeology, 3rd ed. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
  2009a. Aksumite civilization, its connections and descendants. Der Antike Sudan:
     Mitteilungen der Sudanarchäologischen Gesellschaft zu Berlin 20, 1–17.
  2009b. Ancient Churches of Ethiopia: Fourth–Fourteenth Centuries. Yale University
     Press, New Haven and London.
  2009c. The First Millennium BC in the Highlands of Northern Ethiopia and South–
     Central Eritrea: a reassessment of cultural and political development. African
     Archaeological Review 26(4), 257–74.


384
                                                                           References

   2012. Foundations of an African civilisation: Aksum and the northern Horn 1000
     BC – AD 1300. James Currey (Boydell & Brewer, Woodbridge, Suffolk, UK).
Phillipson, L. 2009a. Lithic artefacts as a source of cultural, social and economic
     information: the evidence from Aksum, Ethiopia. African Archaeological Review
     26(1), 45–58.
   2009b. Using stone tools: the evidence from Aksum, Ethiopia. BAR International
     Series 1926, Archaeopress, Oxford.
   2012. Grindstones and related artefacts from Pre-Aksumite Seglamen, northern
     Ethiopia, and their wider implications. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa
     47(4), 509–30.
   2013a. Lithic tools used in the manufacture of pre-Aksumite ceramics. Azania:
     Archaeological Research in Africa 48(3), 380–402.
   2013b. Parchment production in the ﬁrst millennium BC at Seglamen, northern
     Ethiopia. African Archaeological Review 30(3), 285–303.
Phillipson, L., and Sulas, F. 2005. Cultural continuity in Aksumite lithic tool produc-
     tion: the evidence from Mai Agam. Azania 40, 1–18.
Phimister, I.R. 1976. Pre-colonial gold mining in southern Zambezia: a reassessment.
     African Social Research 21, 1–30.
Pigafetta, F. 1591. A report of the Kingdom of Congo. Translated by M. Hutchinson 1881.
     Murray, London.
Pikirayi, I. 1992. Loopholed stone structures in a regional and local context: towards
     a deﬁnition of an archaeological tradition in northern Zimbabwe. In Urban
     origins in Eastern Africa: proceedings of the 1991 workshop in Zanzibar, ed.
     P.J.J. Sinclair and A. Juma, 120–39. Central Board of National Antiquities,
     Stockholm.
   1993. The archaeological identity of the Mutapa state: towards an historical archae-
     ology of northern Zimbabwe. Studies in African Archaeology 6, Societas Archae-
     ologica Upsaliensis, Uppsala.
   2001a. The physical environment and the landscape(s) of the Zimbabwe Culture
     states. In People, contact and the environment in the African past, ed. F. Chami,
     G. Pwiti and C. Radimilahy 129–50. University of Dar es Salaam, Dar es Salaam.
   2001b. The Zimbabwe Culture: origins and decline in southern Zambezian states.
     AltaMira, Walnut Creek, CA.
   2013a. Great Zimbabwe in historical archaeology: reconceptualizing decline, aban-
     donment, and reoccupation of an ancient polity, AD 1450–1900. Historical
     Archaeology 47(1), 26–37.
   2013b. Stone architecture and the development of power in the Zimbabwe tradition
     AD 1270–1830. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 48(2), 282–300.
Pikirayi, I., and Chirikure, S. 2011. Debating Great Zimbabwe. Azania: Archaeo-
     logical Research in Africa 46(2), 221–31.
Pistorius, J.C.C. 1992. Molokwane: an Iron Age Bakwena village: early Tswana
     settlement in the western Transvaal. Perskor, Johannesburg.
Pitt Rivers, Lieutenant-General. 1900. Antique works of art from Benin, Printed
     privately, London.
Plant, R. 1985. Architecture of the Tigre, Ethiopia. Ravens Educational and Develop-
     ment Services, Worcester.


                                                                                  385
References

Pole, L. 2010. Recent developments in iron-working research in West Africa. In West
     African archaeology: new developments, new perspectives, ed. P. Allsworth-Jones,
     53–65. BAR International Series 2164, Archaeopress, Oxford.
Pollard, E.J.D. 2008. The archaeology of Tanzanian coastal landscapes in the 6th to
     15th centuries AD. BAR International Series 1873, Archaeopress, Oxford.
Posnansky, M. 1968. The excavation of an Ankole capital site at Bweyorere. Uganda
     Journal 32(2), 165–82.
  1969. Bigo bya Mugenyi. Uganda Journal 33(2), 125–50.
  1980. Trade and the development of the state and town in Iron Age West Africa.
     In Proceedings of the 8th Panafrican Congress of Prehistory and Quaternary Studies,
     Nairobi, 5 to 10 September 1977. ed. R.E. Leakey and B.A. Ogot, 373–5. The
     International Louis Leakey Memorial Institute for African Prehistory, Nairobi.
  1987. Prelude to Akan civilization. In The Golden Stool: studies of the Asante center
     and periphery, ed. E. Schildkrout, 14–22. Anthropological Papers of the American
     Museum of Natural History, New York, vol. 65, part 1.
  2010. Reﬂecting on Begho and Hani: 1970–1998. Merrick Posnansky, University of
     California, Los Angeles.
Posnansky, M., and McIntosh, R. 1976. New radiocarbon dates for Northern and
     Western Africa. Journal of African History 17(2), 161–95.
Post Park, D. 2010. Prehistoric Timbuktu and its hinterland. Antiquity 84 (326),
     1076–88.
Powell, J.E. (trans.) 1949. Herodotus, 2 vols. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Pradines, S. 2004. Fortiﬁcations et urbanisation en Afrique orientale. BAR Inter-
     national Series 1216, Archaeopress, Oxford.
  2009. L’île de Sanjé ya Kati (Kilwa, Tanzanie): un mythe Shirâzi bien réel. Azania:
     Archaeological Research in Africa 44(1), 49–73.
  2010. Gedi: une cité portuaire swahilie: Islam médiéval en Afrique orientale. Insti-
     tute Français D’Archéologie Orientale, Le Caire.
  2013. The rock crystal of Dembeni, Mayotte Mission Report 2013. Nyame Akuma
     80, 59–72.
  2015. Islamic Cairo: urbanization and town walls. In Handbook on Islamic archae-
     ology, ed. B. Walker, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Price, B.J. 1978. Secondary state formation: an explanatory model. In Origins of the
     state: the anthropology of political evolution, ed. R. Cohen and E.L. Service,
     161–86. Institute for the Study of Human Issues, Philadelphia.
Prins, A.H.J. 1982. The mtepe of Lamu, Mombasa and the Zanzibar sea. In From Zinj
     to Zanzibar: studies in history, trade and society on the eastern coast of Africa,
     (Paideuma 28), ed. J. de V. Allen and T.H. Wilson, 85–100.
Pwiti, G. 1996. Continuity and change: an archaeological study of farming commu-
     nities in northern Zimbabwe AD 500–1700. Studies in African Archaeology 13,
     Department of Archaeology, Uppsala University, Uppsala.
  2005. Southern Africa and the East African coast. In African archaeology: a critical
     introduction, ed. A.B. Stahl, 378–91, Blackwell, Oxford.
Radimilahy, C. 1998. Mahilaka: an archaeological investigation of an early town in
     northwestern Madagascar. Studies in African Archaeology 15, Department of
     Archaeology and Ancient History, Uppsala University.


386
                                                                           References

Ramos, M. 1980. Une enceinte (Monomotapa?) peu connue du plateau du Songo,
    Mozambique. In Proceedings of the 8th Panafrican Congress of Prehistory
    and Quaternary Studies, Nairobi, 5 to 10 September 1977, ed. R.E. Leakey and
    B.A. Ogot, 373–5. The International Louis Leakey Memorial Institute for African
    Prehistory, Nairobi.
Randall-MacIver, D. 1971. Mediaeval Rhodesia, reprint, Cass, London, (1st ed. 1906).
Randles, W.G.L. 1968. L’ancien royaume du Congo. Mouton, Paris.
Randsborg, K. 2010. Destructive times, constructive measures: Danish funding and
    collaboration to develop archaeology in Bénin. In West African archaeology:
    new developments, new perspectives, ed. P. Allsworth-Jones, 79–82. BAR Inter-
    national Series 2164, Archaeopress, Oxford.
Rathje, W.L. 1971. The origin and development of lowland Maya classic civilization.
    American Antiquity 36, 275–85.
Ravenstein, E.G. 1898. (Translator and editor.) A journal of the ﬁrst voyage of Vasco
    da Gama, 1497–1499. Hakluyt Society, London.
Raymond, A. 2000. Cairo. Translated by W. Wood. Harvard University Press,
    Cambridge, MA.
Reader, J. 1997. Africa: a biography of the continent. Hamish Hamilton, London.
Redman, C.L. 1978. The rise of civilization: from early farmers to urban society in the
    ancient Near East. Freeman, San Francisco, CA.
  1983. Comparative urbanism in the Islamic Far West. World Archaeology 14(3),
    355–77.
  1986. Qsar es-Seghir: an archaeological view of medieval life. Academic Press,
    Orlando, FL.
Reefe, T.Q. 1981. The rainbow and the kings: a history of the Luba Empire to 1891,
    University of California Press, Berkeley.
  1983. The societies of the eastern savanna. In History of Central Africa, ed.
    D. Birmingham and P.M. Martin, vol. 1, 160–204. Longman, London and New
    York.
Reid, A. 1996. Ntusi and the development of social complexity in southern Uganda. In
    Aspects of African archaeology: papers from the 10th Congress of the PanAfrican
    Association for Prehistory and Related Studies, ed. G. Pwiti and R. Soper, 621–7.
    University of Zimbabwe, Harare.
  2001. Bananas and the archaeology of Buganda. Antiquity 75 (290), 811–12.
  2003. Recent research on the archaeology of Buganda. In Researching Africa’s Past:
    new contributions from British archaeologists, ed. P. Mitchell, A. Haour, and
    J. Hobart, 110–17. Oxford University School of Archaeology, Oxford.
Reid, A., and Robertshaw, P. 1987. A new look at Ankole capital sites. Azania 22, 83–8.
Reid, A., and Segobye, A. 2000. Politics, society and trade on the eastern margins
    of the Kalahari. In African naissance: the Limpopo Valley 1000 years ago, ed.
    M. Leslie and T. Maggs, 58–68. The South African Archaeological Society,
    Goodwin Series vol. 8.
Reid, A., and Young, R. 2003. Iron-smelting and bananas in Buganda. In Researching
    Africa’s Past: new contributions from British archaeologists, ed. P. Mitchell,
    A. Haour, and J. Hobart, 118–23. Oxford University School of Archaeology,
    Oxford.


                                                                                  387
References

Reisner, G.A. 1923. Excavations at Kerma, Parts 1–3, Parts 4–5, Harvard African
     Studies vols. 5 and 6. Peabody Museum of Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Renfrew, C. 1972. The emergence of civilization: the Cyclades and the Aegean in the
     third millennium BC. Methuen, London.
  1983. The emergence of civilization. In The encyclopedia of ancient civilizations, ed.
     A. Cotterell, 12–20. Macmillan, London.
Renfrew, C., and Bahn, P.G. 2008. Archaeology: theories, methods and practice, 5th
     ed. Thames and Hudson, London.
Richards, P.W. 1952. The tropical rain forest: an ecological study. Cambridge Univer-
     sity Press, Cambridge.
Ricks, T.M. 1970. Persian Gulf seafaring and East Africa: ninth–twelfth centuries.
     African Historical Studies 3(2), 339–57.
Robert, D. 1970. Les fouilles de Tegdaoust. Journal of African History 11, 471–93.
Robert, S., and Robert, D. 1972. Douze années de recherches archéologiques en
     République Islamique de Mauritanie. Annales de la Faculté des Lettres et Sciences
     Humaines, Université de Dakar 2, 195–233.
Robertshaw, P. 1994. Archaeological survey, ceramic analysis, and state formation in
     western Uganda. African Archaeological Review 12, 105–31.
  1997. Munsa earthworks: a preliminary report on recent excavations. Azania 32, 1–20.
Robins, P.A., and Whitty, A. 1966. Excavations at Harleigh Farm, near Rusape,
     Rhodesia. South African Archaeological Bulletin 21, 61–80.
Robinson, K.R. 1959. Khami ruins: report on excavations undertaken for the Com-
     mission for the Preservation of Natural and Historical Monuments and Relics,
     Southern Rhodesia, 1947–1955. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Robinson, K.R., Summers, R., and Whitty, A. 1961. Zimbabwe excavations 1958.
     Occasional Papers, the National Museums of Southern Rhodesia, 3(23A),
     157–332.
Roese, P.M. 1981. Erdwälle und Gräben im ehemaligen Königreich von Benin.
     Anthropos 76, 166–209.
Roth, H.L. 1903. Great Benin: its customs, art and horrors. King, Halifax.
Rousseau, J.J. 1966. The Social Contract and Discourses. Translated by G.D.H. Cole.
     Dent, London.
Rowley-Conwy, P. 1988. The camel in the Nile Valley: new radiocarbon accelerator
     (AMS) dates from Qasr Ibrim. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 74, 245–8 and
     plate 35.
  1991. Sorghum from Qasr Ibrim, Egyptian Nubia, c. 800 BC–AD 1811: a prelimin-
     ary study. In New light on early farming: recent developments in palaeoethnobo-
     tany, ed. J.M. Renfrew, 191–212. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.
Rudd, S. 1984. Excavations at Lekkerwater Ruins, Tsindi Hill, Theydon, Zimbabwe.
     South African Archaeological Bulletin 39, 83–105.
Ryder, A.F.C. 1969. Benin and the Europeans, 1485–1897. Longmans, London.
Sadr, K., and Rodier, X. 2012. Google Earth, GIS and stone-walled structures in
     southern Gauteng, South Africa. Journal of Archaeological Science 39, 1034–42.
Saitowitz, S.J., Reid, D.L., and van der Merwe, N.J. 1996. Glass bead trade from
     Islamic Egypt to South Africa c. AD 900–1250. South African Journal of Science
     92, 101–4.


388
                                                                            References

Saliège, J.F., Person, A., Barry, I., and Fontes, P. 1980. Premières datations de tumulus
     pré-islamiques au Mali: site mégalithique de Tondidarou. C.R. Acad. Sc. Paris
     Série D 291, 981–4.
Salzmann, U., and Hoelzmann, P. 2005. The Dahomey Gap: an abrupt climatically
     induced rain forest fragmentation in West Africa during the late Holocene. The
     Holocene 15(2), 190–99.
Sanmarti, J., Kallala, N., Belarte, M.C., Ramon, J., Telmini, B.M., Jornet, R., and
     Miniaoui, S. 2012. Filling the gaps in the protohistory of the Eastern Maghreb:
     the Althiburos Archaeological Project (El Kef, Tunisia). Journal of African
     Archaeology 10(1), 21–44.
Sassoon, H. 1980. Excavations at the site of early Mombasa. Azania 15, 1–42.
Säve-Söderbergh, T. 1960. The paintings in the tomb of Djehuty-hetep at Debeira.
     Kush 8, 25–44.
Sayce, A.H. 1911. Part II – the historical results. Second interim report on the
     excavations at Meroë in Ethiopia [sic]. Annals of Archaeology and Anthropology
     4, Liverpool Institute of Archaeology, Liverpool University Press, Liverpool.
Schmidt, P.R. 2009. Variability in Eritrea and the archaeology of the Northern Horn
     during the ﬁrst millennium BC: subsistence, ritual, and gold production. African
     Archaeological Review 26(4), 305–325.
Schmidt, P.R., and Avery, D.H. 1996. Complex iron smelting and prehistoric culture
     in Tanzania. In The culture and technology of African iron production, ed.
     P.R. Schmidt, 172–85. University Press of Florida, Gainesville.
Schmidt, P.R., and Curtis, M.C. 2001. Urban precursors in the Horn: early ﬁrst-
     millennium BC communities in Eritrea. Antiquity 75 (290), 849–59.
Schmidt, P.R., Curtis, M.C., and Teka, Z. 2008. The archaeology of Ancient Eritrea.
     The Red Sea Press, Trenton, NJ, and Asmara, Eritrea.
Schoenbrun, D.L. 1993. Cattle herds and banana gardens: the historical geography of
     the western Great Lakes region, ca AD 800–1500. African Archaeological Review
     11, 39–72.
Schuhmacher, T.X., Cardoso, J.L., and Banerjee, A. 2009. Sourcing African ivory in
     Chalcolithic Portugal. Antiquity 83 (322), 983–97.
Schwartz, J.H., Houghton, F.D., Bondioli, L., and Macchiarelli, R. 2012. Bones, teeth,
     and estimating age of perinates: Carthaginian infant sacriﬁce revisited. Antiquity
     86 (333), 738–45.
Scobie, A. 1986. Slums, sanitation and mortality in the Roman World. Klio 68(2),
     399–433.
Sears, G. 2007. Late Roman African urbanism: continuity and transformation in the
     city. BAR International Series 1693, Archaeopress, Oxford.
  2011. The cities of Roman Africa. The History Press, Stroud, UK.
Sernicola, L., and Phillipson, L. 2011. Aksum’s regional trade: new evidence
     from archaeological survey. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 46(2),
     190–204.
Serrano, B.M. 2011. Coins, cities and territories: the imaginary Far West and South
     Iberian and North African Punic coins. In Money, trade and trade routes in
     Pre-Islamic North Africa, ed. A. Dowler and E.R. Galvin, 21–32. Research
     Publication 176, British Museum, London.


                                                                                    389
References

Service, E.R. 1975. Origins of the state and civilization: the process of cultural evolu-
     tion. Norton, New York.
Shanahan, T.M., Overpeck, J.T., Anchukaitis, K.J., Beck, J.W., Cole, J.E., Dettman,
     D.L., Peck, J.A., Scholz, C.A., and King, J.W. 2009. Atlantic forcing of persistent
     drought in West Africa. Science 324, 377–80.
Shaw, I. 2012. Ancient Egyptian technology and innovation: transformations in
     Pharaonic material culture. Bloomsbury Academic, London.
  (ed.) 2000. The Oxford history of ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Shaw, T. 1960. Early smoking pipes: in Africa, Europe, and America. Journal of the
     Royal Anthropological Institute 90(2), 272–305 and plates 1–9.
  1970. Igbo-Ukwu, 2 vols. Faber and Faber, London.
  1977. Unearthing lgbo-Ukwu. Oxford University Press, Ibadan.
  1984. Archaeological evidence and effects of food-producing in Nigeria. In From
     hunters to farmers: the causes and consequences of food production in Africa, ed.
     J.D. Clark and S.A. Brandt, 152–7. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Shaw, T., and Daniels, S.G.H. 1984. Excavations at Iwo Eleru, Ondo State, Nigeria.
     West African Journal of Archaeology 14, 1–269.
Shaw, T., Sinclair, P., Andah, B., and Okpoko, A. (eds.) 1993. The archaeology of
     Africa: food, metals and towns. Routledge, London and New York.
Shepherd, G. 1982. The making of the Swahili: a view from the southern end of the East
     African coast. In From Zinj to Zanzibar: studies in history, trade and society on the
     eastern coast of Africa, (Paideuma 28), ed. J. de V. Allen and T.H. Wilson, 129–47.
Shinnie, P.L. 1960. Excavations at Bigo, 1957. Uganda Journal 24(1), 16–28.
  1967. Meroë: a civilization of the Sudan. Thames and Hudson, London.
  1989. The culture of Meroë and its inﬂuence in the central Sudan. Sahara 2, 21–30.
  1996. Ancient Nubia. Kegan Paul, London and New York.
  2005. Early Asante and European contacts. Journal des Africanistes 75(2), 2–14.
Shinnie, P.L., and Kense, F.J. 1982. Meroitic iron working. Meroitica 6, 17–28, 43–9.
  1989. Archaeology of Gonja, Ghana: excavations at Daboya. University of Calgary
     Press, Calgary.
Shinnie, P.L., and Shinnie, M. 1978. Debeira West: a mediaeval Nubian town. Aris &
     Phillips, Warminster, UK.
Shipton, P.M. 1984. Strips and patches: a demographic dimension in some African
     land-holding and political systems. Man (NS) 19, 613–34.
Siddle, D.J. 1968. War-towns in Sierra Leone: a study in social change. Africa 38(1),
     47–56.
Sidebotham, S.E., and Wendrich, W. (eds.) 2007. Berenike 1999/2000: report on the
     excavations at Berenike, including excavations in Wadi Kalalat and Siket, and the
     survey of the Mons Smaragdus region. Cotsen Institute of Archaeology, University
     of California, Los Angeles.
Sinclair, P.J.J. 1982. Chibuene – an early trading site in southern Mozambique. In
     From Zinj to Zanzibar: studies in history, trade and society on the eastern coast of
     Africa (Paideuma 28), ed. J. de V. Allen and T.H. Wilson, 149–64.
  1984. Some aspects of the economic level of the Zimbabwe state. In Papers pre-
     sented in honour of Miss G. Caton-Thompson (Zimbabwea 1). National
     Museums and Monuments of Zimbabwe, 48–53.


390
                                                                           References

  1987. Space, time and social formation: a territorial approach to the archaeology
     and anthropology of Zimbabwe and Mozambique c. 0–1700 AD. Aun 9, Societas
     Archaeologica Upsaliensis, Uppsala.
  1991. Archaeology in Eastern Africa: an overview of current chronological issues.
     Journal of African History 32, 179–219.
  1995. The origins of urbanism in East and southern Africa: a diachronic perspective.
     In Islamic art and culture in Sub-Saharan Africa, ed. K. Ådahl and B. Sahlström,
     99–109. Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis, Figura Nova Series 27, Uppsala.
Sinclair, P.J.J., and Håkansson, T. 2000. The Swahili city-state culture. In A compara-
     tive study of thirty city-state cultures, ed. M.H. Hansen, 463–82. The Royal
     Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters, Copenhagen.
Sinclair, P.J.J., and Lundmark, H. 1984. A spatial analysis of archaeological sites from
     Zimbabwe. In Frontiers: southern African archaeology today, ed. M. Hall,
     G. Avery, D.M. Avery, M.L. Wilson, and A.J.B. Humphreys, 277–88. Cambridge
     Monographs in African Archaeology 10, BAR International Series 207, Oxford.
Sinclair, P.J.J., Pikirayi, I., Pwiti, G., and Soper, R. 1993. Urban trajectories on the
     Zimbabwean plateau. In The archaeology of Africa: food, metals and towns, ed.
     T. Shaw, P. Sinclair, B. Andah, and A. Okpoko, 705–31. Routledge, London and
     New York.
Sinclair, P., Ekblom, A., and Wood, M. 2012. Trade and society on the south-east
     African coast in the later ﬁrst millennium AD: the case of Chibuene. Antiquity
     86(333), 723–37.
Sjoberg, G. 1960. The preindustrial city. Free Press of Glencoe, Illinois.
Smith, A.B. 1992. Pastoralism in Africa: origins and development ecology. Hurst,
     London.
Smith, M.C., and Wright, H.T. 1988. The ceramics from Ras Hafun in Somalia: notes
     on a classical maritime site. Azania 23, 115–41.
Smith, M.E. (ed.) 2012. The comparative archaeology of complex societies. Cambridge
     University Press, Cambridge.
Smith, P., Avishai, G., Greene, J.A., and Stager, L.E. 2011. Aging cremated infants: the
     problem of sacriﬁce at the Tophet at Carthage. Antiquity 85 (329), 859–74.
Smith, P., Stager, L.E., Greene, J.A., and Avishai, G. 2013. Age estimations attest to
     infant sacriﬁce at the Carthage Tophet. Antiquity 87 (338), 1191–99.
Smith, S.T. 2003. Wretched Kush: ethnic identities and boundaries in Egypt’s Nubian
     Empire. Routledge, London.
Soper, R. 1990. Great Zimbabwe tradition sites in local context: the Centenary Survey.
     In Urban origins in Eastern Africa: proceedings of the 1990 workshop, Harare
     and Great Zimbabwe, ed. P.J.J. Sinclair and G. Pwiti, 67–76. Central Board of
     National Antiquities, Stockholm.
  1992. Observations on the sociopolitical status of Great Zimbabwe tradition sites in
     northern Mashonaland. In Urban origins in Eastern Africa: proceedings of the
     1991 workshop in Zanzibar, ed. P.J.J. Sinclair and A. Juma, 140–5. Central Board
     of National Antiquities, Stockholm.
  1993. The palace at Oyo Ile, western Nigeria. In Imprints of West Africa’s past:
     forum on West African Archaeology at the Conference in Honour of Thurstan
     Shaw, Founding Editor of WAJA, ed. B.W. Andah, C.A. Folorunso, and


                                                                                   391
References

     I.A. Okpoko, 295–311. Special Book Issue, West African Journal of Archaeology
     22, Wisdom Publishers, Ibadan.
  1996. The Nyanga terrace complex of eastern Zimbabwe: new investigations.
     Azania 31, 1–35.
  2002. Nyanga: ancient ﬁelds, settlements and agricultural history in Zimbabwe.
     Memoir 16, British Institute in Eastern Africa, London.
Soper, R., and Darling, P. 1980. The walls of Oyo Ile. West African Journal of
     Archaeology 10, 61–81.
Soper, R., and Pwiti, G. 1992. Excavations at Zvongombe, Centenary District, North-
     ern Zimbabwe. In Urban origins in Eastern Africa: proceedings of the 1991 work-
     shop in Zanzibar, ed. P.J.J. Sinclair and A. Juma, 146–60. Central Board of
     National Antiquities, Stockholm.
Sowunmi, M.A. 1993. The Quaternary in West Africa: vegetational evidence. In
     Proceedings of the 9th Congress of the Pan-African Association of Pre-history
     and Related Studies: Jos, 11–17 December 1983, ed. B.W. Andah, P. de Maret,
     and R. Soper, 12–16. Rex Charles, Ibadan.
Spear, T.T. 1978. The Kaya Complex: a history of the Mijikenda peoples of the Kenya
     coast to 1900. Kenya Literature Bureau, Nairobi.
Speke, J.H. 1863. Journal of the discovery of the source of the Nile. Blackwood,
     London.
Spencer, A.J. 1982. Death in Ancient Egypt. Penguin, Harmondsworth, UK.
Stahl, A.B. 1999. Perceiving variability in time and space: the evolutionary mapping
     of African societies. In Beyond chiefdoms: pathways to complexity in Africa, ed.
     S.K. McIntosh, 39–55. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
  2001. Making history in Banda: anthropological visions of Africa’s past. Cambridge
     University Press, Cambridge.
  2005a. Glass houses under the rocks: a reply to Watson. Journal of African Archae-
     ology 3(1), 57–64.
Stahl, A.B. (ed.) 2005b. African archaeology: a critical introduction. Blackwell, Oxford.
Stanley, H.M. 1878. Through the Dark Continent, 2 vols. and maps. Sampson Low,
     Marston, Searle and Rivington, London.
Staudinger, P. 1889. Im Herzen der Haussaländer. Landsberger, Berlin. (Translated by
     J. Moody 1990 as In the heart of the Hausa states, 2 vols. Ohio University Center
     for International Studies, Athens, Ohio).
Stead, M. 1986. Egyptian life. British Museum Publications, London.
Steinhart, E.I. 1981. Herders and farmers: the tributary mode of production in
     Western Uganda. In Modes of production in Africa: the precolonial era, ed.
     D. Crummey and C.C. Stewart, 114–55. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, CA.
Sterner, J. 2012. Mandara Mountain basketry in continental context: signiﬁcance for
     archaeologists. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 47(3), 288–313.
Sulas, F., Madella, M., and French, C. 2009. State formation and water resources
     management in the Horn of Africa: the Aksumite Kingdom of the northern
     Ethiopian highlands. World Archaeology 41(1), 2–15.
Summers, R. 1967. Archaeological distributions and a tentative history of
     tsetse infestation in Rhodesia and the Northern Transvaal. Arnoldia (Rhodesia)
     3(13), 1–18.


392
                                                                          References

  1969. Ancient mining in Rhodesia and adjacent areas. Museum Memoir 3, Trustees
     of the National Museums of Rhodesia, Salisbury, Rhodesia.
Sutton, J.E.G. 1982. Archaeology in West Africa: a review of recent work and a further
     list of radiocarbon dates. Journal of African History 23(3), 291–313.
  1985. Ntusi and the ‘dams’. Azania 20, 172–5.
  1991. The international factor at Igbo-Ukwu. African Archaeological Review 9,
     145–60.
  1993. The antecedents of the interlacustrine kingdoms. Journal of African History
     34, 33–64.
  1997. The African lords of the intercontinental gold trade before the Black Death:
     al-Hasan bin Sulaiman of Kilwa and Mansa Musa of Mali. Antiquaries Journal
     77, 221–42.
  1998. Kilwa: a history of the ancient Swahili town, with a guide to the monuments
     of Kilwa Kisiwani and adjacent islands. Azania 33, 113–69.
Sutton, J.E.G., and Roberts, A.D. 1968. Uvinza and its salt industry. Azania 3, 45–86.
Swan, L. 1994. Early gold mining on the Zimbabwean Plateau: changing patterns of
     gold production in the ﬁrst and second millennia AD. Studies in African Archae-
     ology 9, Societas Archaeologica Upsaliensis, Uppsala.
Taddesse, T. 1972. Church and state in Ethiopia 1270–1527. Clarendon Press,
     Oxford.
Tainter, J.A. 1988. The collapse of complex societies. Cambridge University Press,
     Cambridge.
Talbot, M.R., and Delibrias, G. 1977. Holocene variations in the level of Lake
     Bosumtwi, Ghana. Nature 268, 722–4.
Theal, G.M. (ed.) 1964. Records of south-eastern Africa, 9 vols. Printed for the
     Government of the Cape Colony, 1898–1903, facsimile reprint, Struik, Cape
     Town.
Thomassey, P., 1956. Campagne de fouilles de 1950 à Koumbi Saleh (Ghana?).
     Bulletin de l’IFAN, Dakar, 18(B), 117–40.
Thomassey, P., and Mauny, R. 1951. Campagne de fouilles à Koumbi Saleh. Bulletin
     de l’IFAN, Dakar, 13(1), 438–62.
Thompson, A.H., Chaix, L., and Richards, M.P. 2008. Stable isotopes and diet at
     Ancient Kerma, Upper Nubia (Sudan). Journal of Archaeological Science 35(2),
     376–87.
Thompson, H.N. 1910–1911. The forests of Southern Nigeria. Journal of the African
     Society 10(38), 121–45.
Thorp, C.R. 1995. Kings, commoners and cattle at Zimbabwe Tradition sites.
     National Museums and Monuments of Zimbabwe, Harare.
Thruston, A.B. 1900. African incidents: personal experiences in Egypt and Unyoro.
     John Murray, London.
Thurman, C.C.M. 1979. The textiles. In Ancient textiles from Nubia: Meroitic,
     X-Group, and Christian fabrics from Ballana and Qustul, ed. C.C.M. Thurman
     and B. Williams, 36–46. The Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago.
Togola, T. 2008. Archaeological investigations of Iron Age sites in the Mema Region,
     Mali (West Africa). Cambridge Monographs in African Archaeology 73, BAR
     International Series 1736, Archaeopress, Oxford.


                                                                                 393
References

Tooley, A.M.J. 1995. Egyptian models and scenes. Princes Risborough, UK, Shire
     Publications.
Török, L. 1992. Ambulatory kingship and settlement history: a study on the contribu-
     tion of archaeology to Meroitic history. In Etudes Nubiennes: Conférence de
     Genève, Actes du VIIe Congrès international d’études nubiennes 3–8 septembre
     1990, ed. C. Bonnet, vol. 1, 111–26, Genève.
  1997. Meroe city: an ancient African capital: John Garstang’s excavations in the
     Sudan, Parts 1 and 2. Egypt Exploration Society, London.
Townshend, P. 1979. Mankala in Eastern and Southern Africa: a distributional analy-
     sis. Azania 14, 109–38.
Trigger, B.G. 1965. History and settlement in Lower Nubia. Yale University Publica-
     tions in Anthropology No. 69, New Haven, CT.
  1969. The myth of Meroë and the African Iron Age. African Historical Studies 2(1),
     23–50.
  1973. Meroitic language studies: strategies and goals. In Sudan im Altertum, ed.
     F. Hintze. Internationale Tagung für meroitische Forschungen in Berlin 1971.
     Meroitica 1, Akademie–Verlag, Berlin, 243–72.
  2003. Understanding early civilizations: a comparative study. Cambridge University
     Press, Cambridge.
Trimingham, J.S. 1975. The Arab geographers and the East African coast. In East
     Africa and the Orient: cultural syntheses in pre-colonial times, ed. H.N. Chittick
     and R.I. Rotberg, 115–46. Africana Publishing Company, New York.
Tsheboeng, A. 2001. Late Iron Age human responses and contribution to environ-
     mental change in the Shashe-Limpopo river basin: north eastern Botswana. In
     People, contact and the environment in the African past, ed. F. Chami, G. Pwiti,
     and C. Radimilahy 124–28. University of Dar es Salaam, Dar es Salaam.
Turner, G. 1984. Vertebrate remains from Lekkerwater. South African Archaeological
     Bulletin 39, 106–8.
UCL. 2013. Issues in the archaeology of Nubia. Course Handbook 2013. Under-
     graduate course coordinated by D.Q. Fuller, Institute of Archaeology, University
     College London. www.ucl.ac.uk/archaeology/studying/undergraduate/courses/
     coursehandbooks/ARCL3050_ArchNubia.pdf (Accessed 6 January 2015.)
Uganda. 1967. Atlas of Uganda, 2nd ed. Department of Lands and Surveys, Uganda.
Uganda National Parks, n.d. Queen Elizabeth National Park (North Sector). Guide
     leaﬂet, Kampala. (Acquired 1990.)
Ullendorff, E. 1960. The Ethiopians: an introduction to country and people. Oxford
     University Press, London.
Usman, A.A. 2004. On the frontier of empire: understanding the enclosed walls in
     Northern Yoruba, Nigeria. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 23, 119–32.
van Beek, G.W. 1967. Monuments of Axum in the light of South Arabian archeology.
     Journal of the American Oriental Society 87(2), 113–22.
van der Veen, M. 1991. The plant remains. In Soba: archaeological research at a
     medieval capital on the Blue Nile, ed. D.A. Welsby and C.M. Daniels, 264–73.
     Memoir 12, British Institute in Eastern Africa, London.
  1999. The exploitation of plant resources in Ancient Africa. Kluwer Academic/
     Plenum, New York.


394
                                                                           References

  2011. Consumption, trade and innovation: exploring the botanical remains from the
     Roman and Islamic ports at Quseir al-Qadim, Egypt. Journal of African Archae-
     ology Monograph Series 6, Africa Magna Verlag, Frankfurt am Main.
Van Noten, F.L. 1972. Les tombes du Roi Cyirima Rujugira et de la Reine-Mère
     Nyirayuhi Kanjogera: description archéologique. Musée Royal de l’Afrique
     Centrale, Tervuren, Belgium.
  1982. The Iron Age in the north and east. In The archaeology of Central Africa, ed.
     F.L. Van Noten, 69–76. Akademische Drück — und Verlagsanstalt, Graz,
     Austria.
Vansina, J. 1969. The bells of kings. Journal of African History 10(2), 187–97.
  1973. Oral tradition: a study in historical methodology (ﬁrst published in French in
     1961). Penguin, Harmondsworth.
  1990. Paths in the rainforests: toward a history of political tradition in Equatorial
     Africa. James Currey, London.
  2004. How societies are born: governance in West Central Africa before 1600.
     University of Virginia Press, Charlottesville and London.
Vantini, G. 1970. The excavations at Faras, a contribution to the history of Christian
     Nubia, Nigrizia, Bologna.
van Waarden, C. 1998. The Later Iron Age. In Ditswa Mmung: the archaeology
     of Botswana, ed. P. Lane, A. Reid, and A. Segobye, 115–60. The University of
     Botswana, Gaborone.
  2012. Butua and the end of an era: the effect of the collapse of the Kalanga state on
     ordinary citizens; an analysis of behaviour under stress. BAR International Series
     2420, Archaeopress, Oxford.
Vercoutter, J. 1959. The gold of Kush: two gold-washing stations at Faras East. Kush
    7, 120–53.
  1962. Un palais des ‘Candaces’, contemporain d’Auguste (Fouilles à Wad-ban-Naga
    1958–1960). Syria: Revue d’art oriental et d’archéologie 39, 263–99.
Vérin, P. 1986. The history of civilisation in north Madagascar. Translated by
    D. Smith. Balkema, Rotterdam.
Vernet, T. 2003. Le commerce des esclaves sur la côte Swahili, 1500–1750. Azania 38,
    69–97.
Verschuren, D., Laird, K.R., and Cumming, B.F. 2000. Rainfall and drought in
    equatorial east Africa during the past 1,100 years. Nature 403, 410–14.
Vivian, B.C. 1996. Recent excavations at Adansemanso. Nyame Akuma 46, 37–42.
Vogel, J.O. (ed.) 1997. Encyclopedia of precolonial Africa: archaeology, history,
    languages, cultures, and environments. AltaMira Press, Walnut Creek, CA.
von Endt, D.W. 1978. Was civet used as a perfume in Aksum? Azania 13, 186–8.
von Hellermann, P. 2010. Was Benin a forest kingdom? Attempting to reconstruct
    landscapes in Southern Nigeria. In West African archaeology: new developments,
    new perspectives, ed. P. Allsworth-Jones, 93–101. BAR International Series 2164,
    Archaeopress, Oxford.
von Heuglin, T. 1874. Reise nach Abessinien, den Gala-Laendern, Ost-Sudan und
    Chartum in den Jahren 1861 und 1862. Griesbach, Gera, Germany.
Waller, H. 1874. The last journals of David Livingstone, in Central Africa, from
    1865 to his death . . ., 2 vols. Murray, London.


                                                                                  395
References

Walton, J. 1956. African village. Van Schaik, Pretoria.
Ward, C. 2006. Boat-building and its social context in early Egypt: interpretations
    from the First Dynasty boat-grave cemetery at Abydos. Antiquity 80 (307),
    118–29.
Watson, D.J. 2005a. Straws within a glass house: a reply to Stahl. Journal of African
    Archaeology 3(1), 65–8.
 2005b. Under the rocks: reconsidering the origin of the Kintampo Tradition and the
    development of food production in the savanna–forest/forest of West Africa.
    Journal of African Archaeology 3(1), 3–55.
 2010. Within savanna and forest: a review of the Late Stone Age Kintampo Trad-
    ition, Ghana. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 45(2), 141–74.
Watson, E.J., and Watson, V. 1990. ‘Of commoners and kings’: faunal remains from
    Ondini. South African Archaeological Bulletin 45, 33–46.
Wayland, E.J. 1934. Notes on the Biggo bya Mugenyi: some ancient earthworks in
    northern Buddu. Uganda Journal 2(1), 21–32.
Weeks, K.R. 1967. The Classic Christian townsite at Arminna West. Publications of
    the Pennsylvania-Yale Expedition to Egypt, No. 3. New Haven and Philadelphia.
Welsby, D.A. 1996. The Kingdom of Kush: the Napatan and Meroitic Empires. British
    Museum Press, London.
 1998. Soba II: renewed excavations within the metropolis of the Kingdom of Alwa
    in Central Sudan. Memoir 15, British Institute in Eastern Africa, and British
    Museum Press, London.
 2002. The Medieval Kingdoms of Nubia: Pagans, Christians and Muslims along the
    middle Nile. British Museum Press, London.
Welsby, D.A., and Daniels, C.M. 1991. Soba: archaeological research at a medieval
    capital on the Blue Nile. Memoir 12, British Institute in Eastern Africa,
    London.
Wengrow, D. 2006. The archaeology of Early Egypt: social transformations in North-
    East Africa, 10,000 to 2650 BC. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Wenig, S. 2001. Musawwarat es-Sufra: interpreting the Great Enclosure. Sudan and
    Nubia 5, 71–88.
Wheatley, P. 1975. Analecta Sino-Africana Recensa. In East Africa and the Orient:
    cultural syntheses in pre-colonial times, ed. H.N. Chittick and R.I. Rotberg,
    76–114. Africana Publishing Company, New York.
Whitelaw, G. 1997. Southern African Iron Age. In Encyclopedia of precolonial Africa:
    archaeology, history, languages, cultures, and environments, ed. J.O. Vogel,
    444–55. AltaMira Press, Walnut Creek, CA.
Wildung, D. 1997. Meroitic ceramics. In Sudan: ancient kingdoms of the Nile, ed.
    D. Wildung, 341–68. Flammarion, Paris and New York.
Wilkinson, T.A.H. 1996. State formation in Egypt: chronology and society. BAR
    International Series 651, Tempus Reparatum, Oxford.
 2011. The rise and fall of Ancient Egypt: the history of a civilisation from 3000 BC
    to Cleopatra. Paperback edition, Bloomsbury Publishing, London.
Willett, F. 1966. On the funeral efﬁgies of Owo and Benin and the interpretation of the
    life-size bronze heads from Ife, Nigeria. Man (NS) 1(1), 34–45 and plates 1–4.
 1967. Ife in the history of West African sculpture. Thames and Hudson, London.


396
                                                                           References

Willett, F., and Fleming, S.J. 1976. A catalogue of important Nigerian copper-alloy
    castings dated by their thermoluminescence. Archaeometry 18(2), 135–46.
Willett, F., and Sayre, E.V. 2006. Lead isotopes in West African copper alloys. Journal
    of African Archaeology 4(1), 55–90.
Wilson, A. 2012. Saharan trade in the Roman period: short, medium and long-distance
    trade networks. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 47(4), 409–49.
Wilson, J.A. 1960. Egypt through the New Kingdom: civilization without cities. In City
    invincible: a symposium on urbanization and cultural development in the ancient
    Near East, ed. C.H. Kraeling and R.M. Adams, 124–64. Chicago University Press,
    Chicago.
Wilson, R.T. 1984. The camel. Longman, London and New York.
Wilson, T.H. 1978. The monumental architecture and archaeology north of the Tana
    River. National Museums of Kenya, Xerox.
 1980. The monumental architecture and archaeology of the central and southern
    Kenya coast. National Museums of Kenya, Xerox.
 1982. Spatial analysis and settlement patterns on the East African coast. In From
    Zinj to Zanzibar: studies in history, trade and society on the eastern coast of
    Africa, (Paideuma 28), ed. J. de V. Allen and T.H. Wilson, 201–19.
Wilson, T.H., and Lali Omar, A. 1997. Archaeological investigations at Pate. Azania
    32, 31–76.
Winterbotham, H.S.L., Smith, E.G., and Longland, F. 1944. The Belgian Congo,
    Geographical Handbook Series. Naval Intelligence Division, Oxford.
Wittfogel, K.A. 1957. Oriental despotism. Yale University Press, New Haven.
Wolf, P. 1997. Recent ﬁeldwork at Musawwarat es Sufra. Sudan and Nubia 1,
    20–29.
Wolf, P., Nowotnick, U., and Wöß, F. 2014. Meroitic Hamadab – a century after its
    discovery. Sudan and Nubia 18, 104–20.
Wood, M. 2000. Making connections: relationships between international trade and
    glass beads from the Shashe-Limpopo area. In African naissance: the Limpopo
    Valley 1000 years ago, ed. M. Leslie and T. Maggs, 78–90. The South African
    Archaeological Society, Goodwin Series vol. 8.
 2011. A glass bead sequence for southern Africa from the 8th to the 16th century
    AD. Journal of African Archaeology 9(1), 67–84.
Woodhouse, J. 1998. Iron in Africa: metal from nowhere. In Transformations in
    Africa: essays on Africa’s later past, ed. G. Connah, 160–85. Leicester University
    Press, London and Washington.
Woolley, C.L. 1911. Karanòg: the town. Eckley B. Coxe Junior Expedition to Nubia,
    vol. 5, University Museum, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Woolley, C.L., and Randall-MacIver, D. 1910. Karanòg: the Romano-Nubian cemet-
    ery. Eckley B. Coxe Junior Expedition to Nubia, vols. 3 and 4. University
    Museum, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Wright, D.K. 2005. New perspectives on early regional interaction networks of East
    African trade: a view from Tsavo National Park, Kenya. African Archaeological
    Review 22(3), 111–40.
Wright, H.T. 1984. Early seafarers of the Comoro Islands: the Dembeni Phase of the
    IXth–Xth centuries AD. Azania 19, 13–59.


                                                                                  397
References

  1992. Early Islam, oceanic trade and town development on Nzwani: the Comorian
     Archipelago in the XIth–XVth centuries AD. Azania 27, 81–128.
  1993. Trade and politics on the eastern littoral of Africa, AD 800–1300. In The
     archaeology of Africa: food, metals and towns, ed. T. Shaw, P. Sinclair, B. Andah,
     and A. Okpoko, 658–72. Routledge, London and New York.
Wright, H.T., and Johnson, G.A. 1975. Population, exchange, and early state forma-
     tion in southwestern Iran. American Anthropologist 77, 267–89.
Wright, H.T., and Rakotoarisoa, J.-A. 1990. The archaeology of complex societies in
     Madagascar: case-studies in cultural diversiﬁcation. In Urban origins in Eastern
     Africa: proceedings of the 1989 Madagascar workshop, ed. P.J.J. Sinclair and
     J.-A. Rakotoarisoa, 21–31. Central Board of National Antiquities, Stockholm.
Wright, H.T., Vérin, P., Ramilisonina, Burney, D., Burney, L.P., and Matsumoto, K.
     1996. The evolution of settlement systems in the Bay of Boeny and the Mahavavy
     River Valley, north-western Madagascar. Azania 31, 37–73.
Wrigley, C.C. 1958. Some thoughts on the Bacwezi. Uganda Journal 22(1), 11–17.
  1989. Bananas in Buganda. Azania 24, 64–70.
Wynne-Jones, S. 2012. Exploring the use of geophysical survey on the Swahili coast:
     Vumba Kuu, Kenya. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 47(2), 137–52.
Wynne-Jones, S., and Croucher, S. 2007. The central caravan route of Tanzania: a
     preliminary archaeological reconnaissance. Nyame Akuma 67, 91–5.
Xella, P., Quinn, J., Melchiorri, V., and van Dommelen, P. 2013. Phoenician bones of
     contention. Antiquity 87 (338), 1199–207.
Yegül, F. 2010. Bathing in the Roman World. Cambridge University Press,
     Cambridge.
Ylvisaker, M. 1982. The ivory trade in the Lamu area, 1600–870. In From Zinj to
     Zanzibar: studies in history, trade and society on the eastern coast of Africa,
     (Paideuma 28), ed. J. de V. Allen and T.H. Wilson, 221–31.
Yoffee, N. 2005. Myths of the archaic state: evolution of the earliest cities, states and
     civilizations. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Yoffee, N., and Cowgill, G.L. (eds.) 1988. The collapse of ancient states and civiliza-
     tions. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
York, R.N. 1973. Excavations at New Buipe. West African Journal of Archaeology 3,
     1–189.
Zabkar, L.V. 1975. Apedemak, lion god of Meroë: a study in Egyptian-Meroitic
     syncretism. Aris & Phillips, Warminster, UK.
Zazzaro, C., Cocca, E., and Manzo, A. 2014. Towards a chronology of the Eritrean
     Red Sea port of Adulis (1st–early 7th century AD). Journal of African Archae-
     ology 12(1), 43–73.




398
Index

Abomey, 213                                        Aksum site, 121–5
Abri-Delgo Reach, 73, 77, 107                        architectural styles in, 125–7
Abu Hamed, 88–9                                      Dongur Mansion at, 126, 140–1
Abu Simbel temple, 77                                German expeditions to, 125–7
Abydos, 23                                           Gudit Stelae Field, 124
Acoua-Agnala M’Kiri, 243                             stelae at, 121–5, 135–6, 143–4
Adams, William, 69                                   Tomb of King Bazen, 124
Adansemanso, 192                                     Tomb of the Brick Arches, 124, 137–8
Addi Galamo, 119–20                                  Tomb of the False Door, 123
Adi Tsehaﬁ, 137–8                                    trade and, historical evidence of, 145–7
Adulis, 116, 124–5, 129, 145                       Aksumite Ethiopia, 1–2, 111, 116–33
Africa. See also Far Western Africa                Alexandria, 23–4
  common archaeological factors throughout,        ’Allaqi, 95–6
     347–54                                        Allen, J. de V., 232
  elite power in, development of, 350–1            Alodia, 92–5
  environmental diversity throughout, 1            Althiburos, 50–1
  sociopolitical complexity in, 11                 Alvares, Francisco, 117
  state formation in, 8, 352–4                     ambas, 112
Africa (Reader), 9                                 Amenhotep IV (Pharaoh), 36
African Archaeology (Phillipson), 9                Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization
African Archaeology (Stahl), 9                          (Kemp), 18
African Cities and Towns Before the European       ancient Greece. See Greece, ancient
     Conquest (Hull), 9                            Anfray, Francis, 118
African Connections: An Archaeological             animals, domestication of
     Perspective on Africa and the Wider World       camels, 150–1
     (Mitchell), 12                                  cattle, 3–4, 30–1, 73, 96–7, 114–15, 133–4,
The African Experience (Oliver), 9                      172–3, 228–9, 284–6
African history, through archaeological sources,     dogs, 114–15, 173
     1–2                                             donkeys, 73, 96–7, 173
African Iron Age, 4–5                                goats, 3–4, 30–1, 73, 96–7, 114–15, 173, 228–9
African rice, 3–4, 151–3, 172, 188, 228–9            horses, 66, 114–15, 173
Africans (Iliffe), 9                                 in North Africa, 48
Africanus, Leo, 9–10, 149, 154                       in Nubia region, 73, 96–9
agriculture, 59, 209–10. See also pastoralism;       oxen, 114–15
     plants, domestication of; subsistence           pigs, 30–1
     economies                                       poultry, 30–1, 73, 96–7, 114–15, 133, 173,
’Aidhab, 95–6                                           228–9
Ain Farah, 95–6                                      sheep, 3–4, 30–1, 73, 96–7, 114–15, 173, 228–9
Akan states, 191–2, 218                              as trade, 115
akee, 188                                          Ankadivory, 245
Akhenaten, 23–4                                    Ankole, 311–12
Akonétye, 210                                      Anqqer Baahti, 137



                                                                                              399
Index

archaeology, 3–4                                 Bieta Giyorgis, 118, 121, 130–1, 133–4
  of metallurgy, 4–5                             Bigo, 313–18, 321–2, 325
  methodology for, 2–3                           Birimi, 208
  research potential for, 3                      Birnin Gazargamo, 164
  visibility of, 299                             black beniseed, 151–3
The Archaeology of Africa (Shaw), 9              Black Death, 295
Argo, 88–9                                       boat construction, 249
Arminna West, 93–5                               Bocarro, Antonio, 264
Asantemanso, 192                                 Bokoni settlements, 344
Asiatic Hyksos, 35                               Bonnet, Charles, 78–80
Aswan, 70–2                                      Bono Manso, 192–5, 209
Augustine of Hippo, 47                           Borno (old state), 1–2, 154–5, 164
Awdaghost, 161–2                                 Bosutswe, 271
Azelik, 164                                      brassica, 133
Azugi, 164                                       bronze metallurgy, 288
                                                 Bruce, James, 117
Baahti Nebait, 137                               Buganda, 299, 325
Bacwezi dynasty, 306, 315                        Buhen, 23–4, 76, 107–8
Badi’, 95–6                                      building and construction practices
al-Bakri, 154, 162, 167–9                          in Aksum site, 125–7
Ballana, 89–90, 98–100, 102, 106. See also         in Benin City, 213
      X-Group state                                daga, 264, 269–70, 272, 288
Bambandyanalo, 270, 292, 294                       along East African coast, 238–9, 248–9
Bambara groundnut, 173                             in Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands, 136–7
bananas, 228–9, 247, 303                           in Great Zimbabwe, 269–70, 284, 287–8
Bantu Cattle Pattern, 284, 290–1                   in North Africa, 53
Baranda, 282                                       in Nubia region, 99–100
Barbosa, Duarte, 231–2                             in Pharaonic Egypt, 32
barley, 3–4, 96–7, 133                             in Qsar es-Seghir, 56–8
Barros, João de, 231–2, 266–7                    Bunyoro, 318, 325
Barth, Heinrich, 177                             Bur Gao, 228
Al-Basra, 58–9                                   burial sites, 27–30, 49, 78, 90–1, 102, 167–70,
Batn el Hajar, 73, 88–9, 95–6, 106                    257. See also cemeteries; funerary artefacts
Battle of Ulundi, 343                            Burkina Faso, 173, 176–7
Bayuda Road, 82, 107–8                           Butua State, 291–2
Beach, David, 266                                Butzer, Karl, 142
beans, 210, 287, 303                             Bwogero, 317–18
Begho site, 191–2, 218                           Byzantine period, 47, 62
Benin City, 1–2, 187, 189–91, 199–206
   building and construction practices in, 213   camels, 150–1
   European trade in, 218–19                     Campbell, John, 333
   impluvia courtyards, 202                      Cape Bojador, 150
   metallurgy in, 205                            Cape Guardafui, 239
   Ogiamien’s House, 202–3                       Carthage, 46, 49–50
   population in, 214                            cassava, 210, 303
   technology in, 211                            Caton-Thompson, Gertrude, 260–1
Benin City Walls, 203                            cattle, 3–4, 30–1, 73, 96–7, 114–15, 133–4, 172–3,
Benin Massacre, 187                                   284–6
Bent, Theodore, 260–1                            cemeteries, 49, 84–6, 167–70
Beyond Chiefdoms (McIntosh), 11                  Centenary Survey, 281


400
                                                                                         Index

Central Africa. See Interlacustrine Region;     Dhar Tichitt-Walata, 157, 175, 177, 184
      Upemba Depression                         Dia, 161
chat, 114–15                                    disease, 19–21, 30, 34, 44, 74, 189, 304–5. See
Chibuene, 246–8                                      also Black Death
chickens, 114–15, 133, 173, 228–9               Djemila, 53
chiefdoms, 6                                    D’mt state, 121
Childe, Gordon, 5                               dogs, 114–15, 173
Chipadze’s Ruin, 278                            Domboshaba, 270
Chittick, Neville, 239–40                       Dombrowski, Joanne, 134
Chivowa Hill site, 281                          domesticated animals. See animals,
Christianity, 47, 64–5, 75, 92, 105, 111, 143        domestication of
Chumnungwa Ruins, 296                           Dondo, 238
Churchill, Winston, 304–5                       Dongola Reach, 70–2, 77, 81–2
Cinnamon Route, 224                             Dongur Mansion, 126, 140–1
cities, 9–12, 51–3. See also urbanization       donkeys, 73, 96–7, 173
civilization, 5–7                               Donley, Linda, 234
The Civilizations of Africa (Ehret), 9          Doupwil, 164
Clapperton, Hugh, 166–7                         dried ﬁsh, 216
coconuts, 228–9, 246–7                          Durbi Takusheyi, 174
cocoyams, 228–9                                 dyewoods, 216
coffee, 114–15, 188                             Dzata, 270
coins, 143, 145–6, 255
Comoro Islands, 225, 233, 242–3, 246–7          Early Iron Age, 242
Congo. See Interlacustrine Region; Upemba       Early Kitchen Ware, 242
      Depression                                Early Osogbo, 195
construction. See building and construction     East African coast
      practices                                   abandonment of early settlements, 230
copper metallurgy, 4–5, 173–5, 288, 308–11        archaeological evidence along, 232–45
Correa, Gaspar, 221, 231–2                        boat building along, 249
cotton, 114–15, 133                               building and construction practices along,
cowpeas, 151–3, 173, 208, 303                        238–9, 248–9
cowrie shells, 216–17                             burial sites along, 257
Cubalel, 161                                      environmental factors in, 222–30
Cyirima Rujugira (King), 300–1, 325               external trade along, 229–30, 254–8
Cyrene, 46                                        geographical location, 222–30
                                                  historical development along, 221–2
Da Asia (Barros), 231–2                           historical evidence in, 231–2
Daboya, 195, 208–9                                ideology and, 253–4
daga, 264, 269–70, 272, 288                       Islamic practices along, 253–4
Dahshur, 23                                       in literary works, 231–2, 239
Dakhlet el Atrous I, 157                          metallurgy and, 247–8
Danangombe, 267, 282–4, 296                       population for, 251–3
Darfur, 95–6                                      Shirazi immigration to, 231–2
Darius I (King), 39                               slave trade along, 229
Darling, Patrick, 191                             social systems along, 250–1
Debeira West, 93–5, 98–9                          subsistence economies along, 245–7
Debra Damo church, 126, 145                       Swahili Culture and, 222, 251
Deffufa temple, 78–80, 99–100                     technology along, 247–50
Deir el Bahari, 107–8                             textile production along, 249–50
Dembeni, 243, 246–8                               trans-Saharan trade in, 254–5


                                                                                           401
Index

economic development, 19, 37–8. See also      Fagan, Brian, 296
      subsistence economies; trade            Far Western Africa, 302–3
Edwards, David N., 70                            archaeological evidence in, 318–20
Egharevba, Jacob, 190                            historical evidence in, 305–6
Egypt, 18. See also Pharaonic Egypt              ideology in, 325
Ehret, Christopher, 9                            social systems in, 323–4
El Djem, 63                                      technology evidence in, 321–2
El Kurru, 81–2                                Faras site, 89, 92–3, 95–6, 107
El-Amarna, 23–4                               Fatimid period, 48
Ellis, William, 243–5                         Ferka, 95–6
El-Oualedji, 167–9                            Feti, 320
Emery, Walter, 90                             ﬁgs, 228–9
Encyclopedia of Precolonial Africa            ﬁshing, 44
      (Vogel), 9                              Flannery, Kent, 18
Enda Mika’el, 125                             Fletcher, Roland, 6
Enda Semon, 125                               ﬂoodwater farming, 153
ensete, 114–15                                fonio, 151–3
Essouk-Tadmakka, 162–4, 175, 180–1            food shortages, 149
Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands. See also    funerary artefacts, 27–30
      Aksum site; Aksumite Ethiopia           Fung kingdom, 95–6
  Adulis, 116, 124–5, 129, 145                al-Fustat, 23–4
  ambas in, 112
  building and construction practices in,     Gabra Maskal (King), 123
      136–7                                   Galana society, 228
  Christianity in, 143                        Galia, 164
  as cultural bridge with Asia, 111           Gao Ancien, 160–1
  domestication of plants in, 114–15          Gao Saney, 160–1
  environmental factors in, 112–16            Gariep River, 330–1
  external trade and, 144–7                   Garlake, Peter, 8, 198
  Gash Group in, 118                          Garrard, Timothy, 183
  geographical location of, 112–16            Gash Group, 118
  historical development periods for, 118     Gedi, 233–6, 250–1, 254
  historical evidence in, 116–17              Geographia (Ptolemy), 231
  ideology in, 143–4                          geographical location
  manuscript evidence in, 117                   East African coast, 222–30
  Matara, 111, 118, 121, 124–5, 127–8, 141,     Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands, 112–16
      145                                       North Africa, 43–4
  metallurgy in, 137                            Nubia region, 70–5
  physical topography of, 111                   Pharaonic Egypt, 18–21
  population pressures in, 141–3                South Africa, 330–1
  pottery production in, 137–8                  West African forest region, 186–90
  pre-Aksumite period, 118                      West African savanna, 149–54
  social systems in, 138–41                   Ghana, 10, 176–7, 191–2
  subsistence economy in, 133–4               glass beads, 180, 256, 295–6
  technology in, 135–9                        goats, 3–4, 30–1, 73, 96–7, 114–15, 133, 173,
  Yeha, 111, 118–20                                228–9
Europe, trade with, 43, 185–6, 190, 218–19,   Gobedra Hill, 129
      294–5                                   The Gold Coast, 185. See also West African forest
external trade. See trade                          region
Eyo, Ekpo, 198                                gold metallurgy, 173–5, 288


402
                                                                                            Index

gold mining, 285–6                                    in Great Zimbabwe, 266–7
Gondar, 144                                           for North Africa, 44–8
gourds, 133, 188                                      in Nubia region, 75–6
The Grain Coast, 185. See also West African           in Pharaonic Egypt, 21–2
     forest region                                    in West African savanna, 154–5
Grains of Paradise, 188                             History of Pate, 231–2
grapes, 133                                         History of the Yorubas (Johnson), 190
Grat-Be’al-Guebri, 120                              Holl, Augustin, 9
Great Crescent of population, 266, 292              Horn of Africa, 229
Great Zimbabwe                                      horses, 66, 114–15, 173
  archaeological evidence for, 260–1, 267–86        house power, 234
  as archaeological riddle, 260–2                   Huffman, Thomas, 274–8
  architectural evidence in, 272–3                  Hull, Richard, 9
  Bantu Cattle Pattern in, 284, 290–1               human development, archaeological evidence of,
  building and construction practices in, 269–70,        3–4
     284, 287–8                                     Hunwick, John, 154–5
  Centenary Survey of, 281                          Husuni Ndogo, 238
  daga in, 264, 269–70, 272, 288
  external trade throughout, 293–7                  ibn Battuta, 154, 221, 231–2, 294
  gold mining in, 285–6                             ibn Fartua, 154
  historical evidence in, 266–7                     Ibn Hawqal, 154, 162–4
  ideology in, 293                                  ibn Khaldun, 154
  Maund Ruin, 274                                   ibn Said, 154
  metallurgy in, 288                                ideology
  population pressures in, 291–2                       East African coast and, 253–4
  pottery production in, 289                           in Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands, 143–4
  social systems in, 289–91                            in Far Western Africa, 325
  technology in, 287–9                                 in Great Zimbabwe, 293
  urbanization in, 278, 290–1                          in Interlacustrine Region, 325
  Zimbabwe Plateau, 262–6                              in North Africa, 63–5
Greece, ancient, 44–6                                  in Nubia region, 104–5
groundnuts, 303                                        in Pharaonic Egypt, 36–7
Gudit Stelae Field, 124                                in South Africa, 344–5
                                                       in Upemba Depression, 325
Haas, Jonathan, 6                                      urbanization and, 105
Hall, Richard, 260–1                                   in West African forest region, 215
Hamadab site, 86–7                                     in West African savanna, 179
Hambarketolo, 157–60                                al-Idrisi, 154, 231–2
Hamdallahi, 164                                     Ife, 198, 209, 211, 215, 218–19
Haoulti-Melazo, 119–20                              Ifriqiyah, 48
Hausaland (old state), 154–5                        Igbo people, 206–8
Herodotus, 75                                       Igbo-Ukwu, 206–9, 217
heterarchy, 352–3                                   Ijebu-Ode, 195
Hierakonpolis, 17, 23                               Iliffe, John, 9
Hiernaux, Jean, 307–8                               impluvia courtyards, 202
hieroglyphic texts, 75                              Indicopleustes, Cosmas, 126, 146–7
Hill Ruin, 284–6                                    infant cemetery. See tophet
historical evidence                                 Ingombe Ilede, 296
  in East African coastal region, 231–2             Inland Niger delta
  in Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands, 116–17          archaeological evidence in, 157–60


                                                                                               403
Index

Inland Niger delta (cont.)                     Karanog, 89
   burial sites in, 167–70                     Kasunga, 315, 325
   Jenné-jeno, 149, 157–61, 165                Katonga River, 313, 317
   Mali, 157–60                                Katongo, 307
   Timbuktu region, 160–1, 180–1               Katsina, 164
Interaction-Communication Model, 192           Kawa, 88–9, 107–8
Interlacustrine Region, 302–5                  Kawinza, 169
   archaeological evidence in, 306–20          Kay, Stephen, 333
   disease in, 304–5                           Kemp, Barry, 18
   historical evidence in, 305–6               Kerkouane, 50–1
   ideology in, 325                            Kerma, 77–81, 102, 106–8
   population pressures in, 324                Khami, 282–4, 291–2
   social systems in, 323–4                    Kibengo, 315
   subsistence economy in, 320–1               Kibiro, 322
   trade throughout, 325–8                     Kidane Mehret, 126–7, 133, 137–8, 141
iron metallurgy, 4–5, 173–5, 210–11            Kikulu, 307
Ishan, 211                                     Kilwa, 10, 221, 231–2, 236, 239–40, 245–8,
Islam, 253–4                                        250–1, 254, 295
Islamic North Africa, 47–8, 67                 Kilwa Chronicle, 231–2
Island of Corisco, 318–20                      Kingdom of Kush. See Napata
Itsandra, 243                                  The Kingdoms of Africa (Garlake), 8
ivory, 256, 260–98                             Kintampo sites, 208
The Ivory Coast, 185. See also West African    Kirikongo, 175–7
      forest region                            Kisale Lake, 302
ivory trade, 106                               Kisalian tradition, 308–10
Iwo Eleru, 209                                 Kissi, 66
                                               Kitara, 306
Jebel Adda, 89–90, 92–3                        Kivu Lake, 302
Jebel Barkal, 77, 81–2, 88–9                   Koale, 240–1
Jebel Qeili, 98, 106                           Kohaito, 129
Jenné-jeno, 149, 157–61, 165, 172–5, 183       Koi Gourrey, 174
Johnson, Samuel, 190                           kola plant, 188, 216
Journal of the ﬁrst voyage of Vasco de Gama,   Kong, 164
     1497–9, 221, 231–2                        Kongo (old kingdom), 1–2, 9–10, 300, 305–6
Juba society, 228                              Kooki, 322
                                               Koptos, 23
Kabaka, 299                                    Korosko Road, 88–9, 107–8
Kadzi, 287                                     kosso tree, 115–16
Kagogo, 313                                    Koumbi Saleh, 162, 175, 177, 179–80
Kahun, 23–4                                    Kramokrom, 192
Kairouan, 53–5                                 Kulubnarti, 92–3
Kalabsha site, 95–6                            Kyoga Lake, 302
Kalahari Desert, 262
Kaleb (King), 123                              Lahun. See Kahun
Kalifa Gallou, 161                             Lake Albert, 302, 304
Kamilamba, 307–8                               Lake Edward, 302, 304
Kanem-Borno Empire, 10                         Lake George, 302
Kaniana, 157–60                                Lake Victoria, 302
Kano settlement, 164, 166–7, 177               lakes. See speciﬁc lakes
Karanga Kingdom, 266                           Lalibela Cave, 137, 144


404
                                                                               Index

Land of Punt, 107–8                     McIntosh, Roderick, 11, 155, 157–60, 167, 176
Lane, Paul, 9                           McIntosh, Susan Keech, 11, 155, 157–60, 167
Large Baths, at Djemila, 53             medical practices, in Pharaonic Egypt, 32
Lekkerwater site, 279                   Mediterranean Sea, 44, 65–7
Lendas de India (Correa), 231–2         Meheila Road, 77, 82, 107–8
Lepcis Magna, 50–1, 60                  Meinarti settlement, 89–90
Levtzion, Nehemiah, 154–5               Melegueta pepper, 188, 216
Limpopo River, 262, 266                 Memphis, 23–4
linseed, 133                            Meroë, 69–70, 82–9, 107–8
Lion Temple at Naqa, 84–6, 88, 106        archaeological evidence in, 82–4
Livingstone, David, 249                   cemeteries in, 84–6
Lonsdale, John, 8                         Napata settlement and, 81
Lozi Kingdom, 300                         Royal City settlement in, 84
Luba state, 301–3, 308–9                  southern settlements, 88–9
Lugard, Frederick, 166–7                  temple structures in, 84–6
                                          urban status of, 86–7
Mabogunje, Akin, 5–6                    metallurgy
Machemma, 270                             African Iron Age, 4–5
Mack, John, 245                           archaeological evidence of, 4–5
Madagascar, 225, 233, 242–3, 246–8        in Benin City, 205
Maﬁa, 225, 247–8                          bronze, 288
Mahdiyya, 53–5                            copper, 4–5, 173–5, 288, 308–11
Mahilaka, 245–50                          East African coast and, 247–8
maize, 114–15, 210, 303                   in Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands, 137
Majâbat Al-Koubrâ, 180                    gold, 173–5, 288
Makuria, 92–5                             in Great Zimbabwe, 288
Maleke Aksum, 126–7                       iron, 4–5, 173–5, 210–11
Malemba Nkulu, 307                        in Nubia region, 100–1
Mali, 10, 157–62                          in West African forest region, 210–11
Malindi, 251                              in West African savanna, 173–5
Malumba, 287                            Mfecane period, 333–4, 339, 344
Manda, 240, 246–8                       Mgombani, 246
Mandji, 318–20                          Mgungundlovu, 299–300, 333, 340
Manetho, 17–18                          Middle Kingdom settlements, 23–4
Manyikeni, 269                          Middle Senegal Valley, 161–2, 167–70
Mapungubwe, 267, 270–1, 273, 288, 292   Mijikenda peoples, 232, 242
Maqaber Ga’ewa, 119–20                  millet, 3–4, 151–3, 172–3, 228–9, 246, 287, 303
al-Maqrizi, 75, 154                     Mitchell, Peter, 9, 12
Marandet, 164                           Mkadini, 249–50
Masaka Hill, 325                        Mkukutu, 239
Mashita Bansa, 300–1                    Mobile Elites, 77–8, 155–7
al-Masudi, 154, 231–2                   Mogadishu, 247–8, 251
Matara, 111, 118, 121, 124–5, 127–8,    Mohenjo-Daro, 12
    141, 145                            Molokwane settlement, 337–9
matooke, 303                            Mombasa, 240–1, 251
Mauch, Carl, 260, 267, 286–7            Monroe, J. Cameron, 9
Maund Ruin, 274                         Montevideo Ranch site, 281
Mazoe River, 262                        Moody, H. L. B., 166–7
M’Bachile, 246                          Moor Park, 334
Mbanza Kongo, 300                       Mozambique Island, 225


                                                                                  405
Index

Mtambwe Mkuu, 247–8                                 during Roman Empire, 44–7, 51–3, 62
Mubende, 315, 325                                   social systems in, 61–2
mules, 114–15                                       subsistence economy in, 59
Munsa, 315, 321                                     technological development in,
Murrapania IV, 257                                     59–61
Musawwarat es-Sufra site, 86–7, 99–100              trade throughout, 46, 49–50, 65–7
Mutapa, Mwene, 266                                  urbanization in, 49–53
Mzâb, 53–5                                          Vandal period in, 47, 62
                                                    water availability in, 44
Naletale, 282–4                                   Nsukka sites, 210
Napata, 81–2, 102, 107–8                          Ntsuanatsatsi, 334
Naqa site, 84–6, 88, 106                          Ntsudjini, 243
Naqada, 23                                        Ntusi, 313, 315–18, 321
Narmer Palette, 23                                Nubia: Corridor to Africa (Adams), 69
Ndorwa Kingdom, 300–1                             Nubia region. See also Meroë; X-Group state
Nefas Mawcha, 124                                   archaeological evidence in, 76–96
Nekau II (ruler), 39                                building and construction in, 99–100
Nenquin, Jacques, 307–8                             Christianity in, 75, 92, 105
New Buipe, 192–3                                    cultural inﬂuences on, 69
New Kingdom settlements, 23–4, 35                   development of, 108–10
Nhunguza Ruin, 278–9                                disease in, 72
Nigeria. See Kano; Kano settlement                  domesticated plants in, 72, 92, 96–9
Nile Mosaic at Palestrina, 75                       domestication of animals in, 73, 96–9
Nile River, 18–19, 70–4, 302. See also Nubia        domestication of plants in, 92
     region                                         environmental factors in, 70–5
Nile Valley, 41–2, 74–5. See also Nubia region;     geographical location of, 70–5
     Pharaonic Egypt                                hieroglyphic texts in, 75
Nobadia, 92                                         historical antecedents for, 69
North Africa. See also Carthage;                    historical evidence in, 75–6
     Mediterranean sea                              ideology in, 104–5
  agricultural exports from, 59                     Kerma, 77–81
  ancient Greece and, 44–6                          metallurgy in, 100–1
  archaeological evidence in, 49–59                 military invasions in, 74–5
  burial sites in, 49                               mineral resources in, 73–4
  during Byzantine period, 47, 62                   Napata settlement in, 81–2, 102
  Christianity in, 47, 64–5                         pastoralism in, 98–9
  cities in, 51–3                                   Pharaonic Egyptian control of, 77–8
  construction practices in, 53                     population pressures in, 103–4
  domestication of animals in, 48                   pottery production in, 101
  environmental factors in, 43–4                    saqia use in, 74, 89, 101, 104
  ﬁshing in, 44                                     shaduf in, 74, 101, 104
  geographical location, 43–4                       slavery in, 106
  historical documentation for, 44–8                social systems in, 102–3
  ideology in, 63–5                                 subsistence economy in, 96–9
  Islamic, 47–8                                     technology in, 99–101
  as link to Europe, 43                             textile production in, 101
  Muslim Arab invasion of, 53–5                     as trade corridor, 69–70
  pastoralism in, 44                                trade throughout, 105–8
  Phoenician traders in, 46                       The Nubian Past (Edwards), 70
  population pressures in, 62–3                   nug, 114–15, 133


406
                                                                                        Index

oats, 133                                          as non-monetary economy, 37–8
Oba (religious ofﬁciant), 215                      Nubia region controlled by, 77–8
Obobogo, 210                                       Old Kingdom, 22
O’Connor, David, 80                                population pressures in, 35–6
Oea, 50–1                                          Quseir al-Qadim, 39
Ogiamien’s House, 202–3                            social complexity in, 17
oil-palm tree, 151–3, 188, 208                     social systems in, 33–5
okra, 188                                          sociopolitical importance of, 19
Old Cathedral of Maryam Tsion, 132                 subsistence economy in, 30–2
Old Dongola, 92                                    technological development in, 32–3
Old Kingdom, 22                                    trade for, 37–9
Old Lithako, 333                                   urbanization in, 22–9
Old Oyo, 195–8, 210, 213                         Phillipson, David W., 9, 117–18, 120–6,
Old Sima, 246–8                                       133–4
Oliver, Roland, 9                                  on population growth, 142–3
Ona Culture, 111                                   on stelae, 144
Ona Nagast, 133–4                                Phillipson, Laurel, 137
Ondini, 333, 340                                 Phoenicia, 46
Oni (spiritual leader), 215                      Phoenician alphabet, 46
Orwell, George, 348                              pigs, 30–1
Ouchatei Golo, 129                               Pikirayi, Innocent, 282
Oursi hu-beero, 173                              Plant, Ruth, 136
oxen, 114–15                                     plantains, 306
The Oxford Handbook of African Archaeology       plants, domestication of
     (Mitchell and Lane), 9                        African rice, 3–4, 151–3, 172, 188, 228–9
                                                   akee, 188
palm wine, 216                                     Bambara groundnut, 173
Pangani society, 228                               bananas, 228–9, 247, 303
pastoralism, 44, 98–9, 287                         barley, 3–4, 96–7, 133
Pate, 240–1, 251                                   beans, 210, 287, 303
peas, 287                                          black beniseed, 151–3
Pemba, 225                                         brassica, 133
Pereira, Duarte Pacheco, 185                       cassava, 210, 303
Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, 116, 129, 146,     coconuts, 228–9, 246–7
     224, 229–31, 239, 249, 270                    cocoyams, 228–9
Pharaonic Egypt, 1–2                               coffee, 114–15, 188
  archaeological evidence for, 22–30               cotton, 133
  burial sites in, 27–30                           cowpeas, 151–3, 173, 208, 303
  construction in, 32                              in Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands, 114–15
  documentation evidence for, 22                   ﬁgs, 228–9
  dynastic periods in, 17–18, 23                   fonio, 151–3
  economic development in, 19                      gourds, 133, 188
  environmental factors in, 18–21                  grapes, 133
  geographical location of, 18–21                  kola plant, 216
  historical evidence in, 21–2                     linseed, 133
  ideology in, 36–7                                maize, 114–15, 210, 303
  medical practices in, 32                         Melegueta pepper, 188, 216
  Middle Kingdom settlements during, 23–4          millet, 3–4, 151–3, 172–3, 228–9, 246, 287,
  New Kingdom settlements during, 23–4, 35            303
  Nile River and, 18–19                            in Nubia region, 72, 92, 96–9


                                                                                           407
Index

plants, domestication of (cont.)                 radiocarbon dating, 93, 162, 169, 192, 195–8,
   nug, 114–15, 133                                    203, 205, 212, 260–1, 281–2, 307, 334
   oats, 133                                     Randall-MacIver, David, 260–1
   oil-palm tree, 151–3, 188, 208                Ras Hafun, 239
   okra, 188                                     Ras Kipini, 228
   peas, 287                                     Reader, John, 9
   plantains, 306                                Red Sea, 112, 146–7
   pomegranates, 228–9                           Reid, Andrew, 311–12, 315
   roselle, 188                                  religion, 63–5, 143–4, 293. See also Christianity;
   saffron, 228–9, 247                                 ideology
   sesame, 246                                   Renders Ruin, 294
   sorghum, 3–4, 96, 151–3, 172–3, 228–9, 246,   River Lualaba, 302
      303                                        River Tana, 236
   sugar cane, 228–9                             rivers. See speciﬁc rivers
   taro, 228–9, 247                              Robert, Serge, 162
   teff, 3–4, 133                                Robertshaw, Peter, 311–12, 315
   tobacco, 210                                  Robinson, Keith, 282
   wheat, 96, 133                                Roman Empire, 44–7, 51–3, 62
   yams, 3–4, 151–3, 188, 208, 228–9             roselle plant, 188
Pliny the Younger, 116                           Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 34
political evolution, 6                           Royal City settlement, 84
pomegranates, 228–9                              Ruanga Ruin, 278–9, 286
population, historical evidence of               Rubaga, 10
   in Benin City, 214                            Ruﬁji society, 228
   along East African coast, 251–3               Ryamurari, 300–1
   in Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands, 141–3    Ryder, A. F. C., 190
   in Great Crescent, 266, 292
   in Great Zimbabwe, 291–2                      Sabaqura site, 95–6
   in Interlacustrine Region, 324                Sabratha, 50–1, 53
   in North Africa, 62–3                         al-Sa’di, 149, 154
   in Nubia region, 103–4                        saffron, 228–9, 247
   in Pharaonic Egypt, 35–6                      the Sahel region. See West African savanna
   for Phillipson, D. W., 142–3                  salt, as trade, 216
   in South Africa, 344                          salt production, 318
   in Upemba Depression, 324                     Sanam, 81–2, 88–9
   in West African forest region, 214            Sanga, 307–9
Posnansky, Merrick, 311–12                       Sanjé ya Kati, 240
pottery production, 101, 137–8, 175, 242, 289    saqia (waterwheel), 30, 74, 89, 101, 104
poultry, 30–1, 73, 114–15                        saqia land, 74
Ptolemais, 46                                    Sassoon, Caroline, 213
Ptolemy, Claudius, 231                           Save River, 262, 266
Punic language, 46                               schistosomiasis, 74
                                                 Schroda, 270
al-Qahira, 23–4                                  Seaward Baths at Sabratha, 53
Qasr Ibrim site, 74–5, 89–90, 92–3, 95–6, 98–9   secondary states, 7
Qayrawan, 48                                     Seddenga, 88–9, 107
Qsar es-Seghir, 56–9                             seluka land, 74
Queen of Sheba, 116                              Sembel, 111
Quseir al-Qadim, 39, 224                         sesame, 246
Qustul, 90, 98–100, 102, 106                     shaduf (weighted beam), 30, 74, 101, 104


408
                                                                                            Index

shaduf land, 74                                      for Far Western Africa, 305–6
Shanga, 236–7, 240, 246–50, 254                      for Great Zimbabwe, 266–7
shangwa, 265                                         for Interlacustrine Region, 305–6
Shaw, Thurstan, 9                                    for Nubia region, 75–6
shea-butter tree, 151–3                              for Pharaonic Egypt, 21–2
sheep, 3–4, 30–1, 73, 96–7, 114–15, 133, 173,        for South Africa, 333–4
      228–9                                          for West African forest region, 190–1
Sheikh Daud site, 95–6                               for West African savanna, 154–5
Shendi Reach, 73                                  South Africa
Shibeli society, 228                                 archaeological evidence in, 334–40
Shinnie, Peter, 70                                   Difaqane period, 339
Shipton, Parker, 324                                 environmental factors in, 330–1
Shirazi immigration, 231–2                           geographical location, 330–1
Shona people, 265, 267, 293                          historical evidence in, 333–4
Short history of Benin (Egharevba), 190              ideology in, 344–5
Shrine of Apis, 84–6                                 Mfecane period, 333–4, 339, 344
Shungwaya peoples, 232                               population pressures in, 344
silver metallurgy, 173–5                             settlement patterns in, 337–8
Sinai Peninsula, 19                                  social systems in, 343
Sincu Bara, 161                                      subsistence economy in, 340–1
Siouré, 161                                          technology in, 341–3
The Slave Coast, 185. See also West African          trade throughout, 345
      forest; West African forest region             Type N settlement units in, 334–7
slave trade, 217–18, 229                             Type V settlement units in, 336
slavery, in Nubia region, 106                        Type Z settlement units in, 336–7
Sneferu (King), 23                                Soy, 161
Soba, 92                                          Spear, Thomas, 232
social contract, 34                               Speke, John Hanning, 299
social systems                                    Stahl, Ann Brower, 9, 11
   along East African coast, 250–1                Stanley, Henry Morton, 10
   in Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands, 138–41    state formation
   in Far Western Africa, 323–4                      in Africa, 8, 352–4
   in Great Zimbabwe, 289–91                         archaeological evidence of, 9–10
   in Interlacustrine Region, 323–4                  civilization and, 6–7
   in North Africa, 61–2                             irrigation theories, 6–7
   in Nubia region, 102–3                            literary sources, 8–9
   in Pharaonic Egypt, 33–5                          secondary, 7
   in South Africa, 343                              trade theories, 6–7
   in Upemba Depression, 323–4                       urban centres and, 6
   in West African forest region, 212–13             warfare theories, 6–7
   in West African savanna, 176–8                 Staudinger, Paul, 166–7
Songhay Empire, 10, 154–5                         stelae, 121–5, 135–6, 143–4
Songo Mnara, 225, 236, 245, 247–8, 250–1          Suakin, 107–8
Soper, Robert, 195–8                              subsistence economies. See also animals,
sorghum, 3–4, 96, 151–3, 172–3, 228–9, 246,             domestication of; plants, domestication of
      303                                            along East African coast, 245–7
sources of information                               in Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands, 133–4
   for Aksum site, 145–7                             in Interlacustrine Region, 320–1
   for East African coast, 231–2                     in North Africa, 59
   for Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands, 116–17      in Nubia region, 96–9


                                                                                               409
Index

subsistence economies. (cont.)                  tobacco, 210
  in Pharaonic Egypt, 30–2                      Toladie, 161
  in South Africa, 340–1                        Tomb of Abalessa, 66
  in Upemba Depression, 320–1                   Tomb of King Bazen, 124
  in West African forest region, 208–10         Tomb of the Brick Arches, 124, 137–8
  in West African savanna, 172–3                Tomb of the False Door, 123
  in Zambezia region, 286–7                     Tongo Maaré Diabal, 164, 175
sugar cane, 228–9                               tophet (infant cemetery), 49
Sun Temple, 84–6                                Toutswemogala, 271
Sung, 271                                       Toyla, 169
Swahili Corridor, 257–8                         trade
Swahili Culture, 222, 251                          Aksum and, 145–7
Swan, Lorraine, 285–6                              in Benin City, 218–19
sweet potatoes, 303                                Cinnamon Route, 224
                                                   of domesticated animals, 115
Ta’akha Mariam, 125–6                              along East African coast, 229–30, 254–8
Taharqa, 81–2                                      within Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands,
Takedda, 164                                          144–7
Takrur Empire, 161, 170                            with glass beads, 180, 256, 295–6
Takwa, 237–8                                       in Great Zimbabwe, 293–7
Tana society, 228                                  in Ife, 218–19
Tanzania. See East African coast                   Igbo-Ukwu and, 206–8, 217
taro, 228–9, 247                                   within Interlacustrine Region,
Taukome, 271                                          325–8
technology                                         internal networks for, 350
   in Benin City, 211                              with Islamic North Africa, 67
   along East African Coast, 247–50                with ivory, 256, 260–98
   in Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands, 135–9      Jenné-jeno and, 183
   in Far Western Africa, 321–2                    in North Africa, 46, 49–50, 65–7
   in Great Zimbabwe, 287–9                        in Nubia region, 105–8
   in North Africa, 59–61                          Pharaonic Egypt and, 37–9
   in Nubia region, 99–101                         along Red Sea, 146–7
   in Pharaonic Egypt, 32–3                        of slaves, 217–18
   in South Africa, 341–3                          in South Africa, 345
   in Upemba Depression, 321–2                     along Swahili Corridor, 257–8
   in West African forest region, 210–12           within Upemba Depression, 325–8
   in West African savanna, 173–6                  in West African forest region,
teff, 3–4, 133                                        216–19
Tegdaoust, 161–2, 164, 175, 180–1                  in West African savanna, 179–84
Temple of Amon, 77                              trans-Saharan trade, 254–5
textile production, 101, 175–6, 249–50          Transvaal. See South Africa
Thamugadi, 53                                   Triangular Incised Ware (TIW), 242, 252
Thatswane, 271                                  Tsoede Bronzes, 219
Thebes, 23–4                                    Tswana settlements, 337–9
Thorp, Carolyn, 287                             tumuli, 167–70
Thugga, 50–1                                    Tumulus X, 78
Tigray, 120–1                                   Tunisia. See North Africa
Timbuktu region, 160–1, 180–1                   Type N settlement units, 334–7
Tissalaten, 169                                 Type V settlement units, 336
TIW. See Triangular Incised Ware                Type Z settlement units, 336–7


410
                                                                                            Index

Uganda. See Interlacustrine Region; Upemba          agriculture in, 209–10
      Depression                                    Akan states, 191–2
Ukunju Cave, 239                                    archaeological evidence in,
al-Umari, 154                                          191–208
Unguja Ukuu, 239                                    Begho site, 191–2
Ungwana, 236                                        Bono Manso, 192–5
Upemba Depression, 301–5                            Dahomey Gap, 186
   archaeological evidence in, 306–20               early European contact with, 185–6, 190
   copper metallurgy in, 308–11                     environmental factors in, 186–90
   disease in, 304–5                                external trade throughout, 216–19
   ideology in, 325                                 geographical location, 186–90
   Kisalian tradition in, 308–10                    historical evidence in, 190–1
   population pressures in, 324                     ideology in, 215
   social systems in, 323–4                         Ife, 198, 209, 211, 215
   subsistence economy in, 320–1                    Igbo-Ukwu, 206–9, 217
   technology evidence in, 321–2                    metallurgy in, 210–11
   trade throughout, 325–8                          population pressures in, 214
Upemba Lake, 302                                    social systems in, 212–13
urbanization                                        subsistence economy in, 208–10
   in Alexandria, 23–4                              technology in, 210–12
   in Great Zimbabwe, 278, 290–1                    urbanization in, evidence of, 192–8, 206–8
   historical development of, 5–6                   Yoruba people in, 195–8
   ideology and, 105                               West African savanna. See also Inland Niger
   Islam and, 253–4                                    delta; Jenné-jeno; Middle Senegal Valley
   main areas of, 10                                archaeological evidence in, 155–70
   in Meroë, 86–7                                   burial sites in, 167–70
   in North Africa, 49–53                           environmental factors in, 149–54
   in Pharaonic Egypt, 22–9                         external trade throughout, 179–84
   religion and, 144                                ﬂoodwater farming in, 153
   sanitation factors and, 11–12                    food shortages in, 149
   state formation and, 6                           geographical location, 149–54
   in West African forest region, 192–8, 206–8      historical evidence in, 154–5
Uri, 95–6                                           ideology in, 179
                                                    metallurgy in, 173–5
Vaal River, 330–1                                   Mobile Elites in, 77–8, 155–7
Vandals, in North Africa, 47, 62                    population pressures in, 178–9
Vansina, Jan, 2                                     pottery production in, 175
Vogel, Joseph, 9                                    social systems in, 176–8
The voyage of Pedro Alvares Cabral to Brazil and    subsistence economy in, 172–3
    India, 231–2                                    technology in, 173–6
Vumba Kuu, 238                                      textile production in, 175–6
                                                   wheat, 96, 133
Wad ben Naqa site, 88, 99–100                      Willett, Frank, 198
Wadi Halfa, 72                                     Wilson, Thomas, 238
Wadi Hariq, 96
water availability, 44                             X-Group state, 89–92
waterwheel. See saqia
weighted beam. See shaduf                          yams, 3–4, 151–3, 188, 208, 228–9, 247
West African Early Towns (Holl), 9                 Yeha, 111, 118–20
West African forest region. See also Benin City    Yoruba people, 195–8


                                                                                             411
Index

Zambezi River, 228, 262, 266                     Zaria, 164
Zambezia region, 260, 262–6, 286–7, 294–5. See   Zilum, 165
    also Great Zimbabwe                          Zimbabwe Plateau, 262–6. See also Great
Zambia. See Interlacustrine Region; Upemba           Zimbabwe
    Depression                                   Zulu kingdom, 333–4, 339–40
Zanzibar, 225, 239, 247–8                        Zvongombe site, 279




412
