       Highveld 332
11.2   Types of stone-walled settlement units on the South African
       Highveld 335
11.3   Settlement unit at Molokwane, North-West Province, South
       Africa 338
11.4   Centre of the settlement of Marothodi, North-West Province, South
       Africa 342




x
Preface and acknowledgements

I started to write this book in 1983, with previous editions appearing in
1987 and 2001 and a Japanese translation in 1993. Any book that originated
so long ago and has remained in print for so long will become seriously out of
date, but this is particularly the case for a publication about later African
archaeology, which has seen an enormous increase in research activity in
recent years. I am therefore very grateful to Cambridge University Press for
the opportunity to provide a third edition. In doing so, I feel it essential to
stress two points. First, people are sometimes unconvinced about the newness
of new editions, but this really is a new edition and I hope that it will assist
those who have ignored the second edition and continued to cite the outdated
ﬁrst edition. Second, preparing a new edition of a book will inevitably be
constrained to some extent by the thinking that inﬂuenced its original content
and form, in this instance many years ago; the only way to prevent this is to
write a completely new book.
  Failing this, what is new about this ‘new’ edition? First, it is larger and
covers the whole continent, not just tropical Africa, like the two previous
editions. This has meant the addition of three completely new chapters, on
Egypt, North Africa, and South Africa. Although the book is consequently
longer, the extra chapters could only be added by also shortening some of the
chapters that already existed. In addition, those chapters have required
considerable additions to include recent research, and as a result parts of
some of them have been substantially rewritten or subjected to numerous
smaller changes. Inevitably this has resulted in the deletion of older source
material, wherever it could be replaced by newer information. This has
included the replacement of some illustrations, as well as the addition of
new ones. The whole process has taken more than three years but I remain
concerned about recent publications that might have been missed; in spite of
the Internet, accessing sources remains one of the main difﬁculties for the
writers of syntheses. However, as far as possible, I have tried to include a
representative sample of recently published material. I hope that not too
many people will think that I have ignored their work.
  Second, although this does not pretend to be a theoretical study, there are
inevitably theoretical implications in the way that its subject matter has been
treated. As with previous editions, it has been my intention to examine the
archaeological evidence for emerging social complexity in Africa,

                                                                             xi
Preface and acknowledgements

particularly the evidence for urbanization and the formation of states. These
subjects have a very large literature, particularly concerning social theory,
and in the previous editions I tried to outline the most signiﬁcant of the
relevant ideas in the opening chapter. Given the main purpose of the book,
however, which is to ask of the physical evidence how we know what we
think we know, it is impossible to give adequate space to theoretical matters,
and in this new edition I have further compressed the relevant material as
well as updating some of its more important aspects. One review of the ﬁrst
edition was headed ‘Complex societies made simple’ and I have never been
able to decide whether this was intended as an insult or a compliment.
Whatever the case, is it a crime to attempt straightforward explanations of
complex data?
   In attempting those explanations, the book continues to emphasize geo-
graphical and environmental matters, but sociopolitical aspects are now given
greater attention than formerly. The changes in human societies that led to the
development of cities and states were clearly inﬂuenced by many external
factors, but in the end it was changes in the societies themselves and the way
that they organized themselves that were of greatest importance. Such changes
took place in many different ways and sometimes did not happen at all. There
is no magic formula to explain their occurrence or absence, and old explan-
ations involving social evolution and the emergence of so-called civilization
have ceased to be adequate. Unfortunately, archaeology is often insufﬁciently
informative on these matters, and our understanding is compounded by the
variety of ways used by different researchers to extract meaning from the
evidence that is available. It is to be hoped that as time passes, the picture will
become clearer.
   So many colleagues have assisted in my work on this and previous editions
that it is impossible to thank them all here. Instead, the text is heavily
referenced to the sources used, and the captions of the illustrations acknow-
ledge the origin of those that are not my own or that have been redrawn.
Great efforts have been made to obtain permission to reproduce copyright
material where necessary, and in cases where copyright holders could not be
contacted, usually because of the passage of time, the author would like to
hear from them and offers his apologies for the omission. Some line drawings
have been updated by Andrew Stawowczyk Long and/or myself, but I remain
grateful to Douglas Hobbs, who did the initial work on many of them long
ago. Finally, as for previous editions, I remain greatly in debt to Beryl
Connah, whose continuing support and encouragement has been vitally
important.




xii
                                             Preface and acknowledgements

  In the meantime, a whole generation of Africanist archaeologists has grad-
ually departed the scene, leaving a legacy of research on which a younger and
more numerous generation can build, and one that increasingly includes
African scholars as well as those from many other parts of the world. I wish
them all well in their future endeavours.

                                   Graham Connah
                                   School of Archaeology and Anthropology
                                   Australian National University
                                   Canberra




                                                                         xiii
