Chapter 11
Settlement growth and emerging polities:
South Africa
In this chapter, ‘South Africa’ describes the extremity of the continent south
of a line from the Limpopo River, in the east, to Walvis Bay, in the west.
It consists of the Republic of South Africa, together with southern parts of
Namibia, Botswana, and Mozambique, as well as Lesotho and Swaziland,
although attention will be limited to the ﬁrst of these modern states. Two
characteristics of the archaeology of this region are of relevance to the subject
of urban and state origins in Africa. First, environments in which trees were
rare or absent resulted in the use of drystone construction for parts of many
settlements, rendering them highly visible archaeologically, particularly
if subsequently abandoned during the turbulent history of recent centuries.
This allows detailed analysis of the layout of settlements and their relation-
ship to landscapes. Second, the sociopolitical developments that are the
subject of this book took place in South Africa within the last ﬁve hundred
years at most and in many cases more recently, so that both documentary
records and oral traditions are copious and valuable sources of information.
In addition, linguistic and genetic studies can provide information on the
relationships and movements of ethnic groups, to which investigations of
pottery and other aspects of material culture can contribute. Thus, in the
case of South Africa, we can examine processes of change for which there
is much less evidence in some other parts of the continent at earlier dates.
Not only can this throw light on the development of complexity in Africa as
a whole, but an investigation of the South African data also has global
relevance.


Geographical location and environmental factors
Mixed farming seems to have been well established in South Africa by the
middle of the second millennium AD. However, the western and south-
western parts of this huge area were too dry to grow African cereal crops
or had winter rainfall instead of the necessary summer rainfall. In those parts
of southern Africa, livestock-herding, hunter-gathering, or a combination of
the two remained the subsistence strategies until European colonization over
the last three hundred years or so. In contrast, to the east and north-east
both cultivation and livestock, particularly cattle, were important. This was
especially the case on the Highveld between the Vaal River and the Gariep

330
                                                                   South Africa

River (formerly the Orange River) and some way north of the Vaal. In this
area there are numerous deserted partly stone-built settlements belonging to
the last few centuries, and some of them were the scenes of substantial social
and political changes (Fig. 11.1). This is an area of temperate grassland,
in South Africa referred to as the Veld, a word meaning grassland and
open country. Indeed, the area is both of these, but it is also more than
1,000 metres above sea level, so that it has a relatively cool and healthy
climate. Much of it is good grazing country for livestock. It comprises two of
the ten biomes, or ecological zones, into which the South African environ-
ment can be divided (Mitchell 2002:15). These have been referred to as
‘Grassland’ and ‘Mixed Woodland Savanna’. Signiﬁcantly, the majority of
the archaeological sites discussed in this chapter are located within these
zones (Mitchell 2002: ﬁg. 12.2).
  In addition to livestock, both rainfall and soil in these zones are generally
suitable for cereal cultivation, with sorghum and pearl millet formerly grown
but after the seventeenth century increasingly maize, introduced from America.
The latter can yield up to three times as much as the indigenous cereals and
requires less labour for its cultivation. However, it needs 25 percent more rain,
and in an environment prone to rainfall ﬂuctuations and serious drought, this
was to have disastrous consequences (Mitchell 2002: 372). The existence of
such ﬂuctuations is why livestock became so important; cattle-keeping, in
particular, helped to protect against food shortages and provided a means of
accumulating wealth and gathering supporters by loaning animals. Under-
standably, cattle became the centre around which life revolved, even dictating
the layout of the settlements in which farmers lived, a layout known as the
Central Cattle Pattern that still characterizes patrilineal Eastern Bantu-
speaking people (Mitchell 2002: 179–280). Concerning this matter more is
known than usual, because many of the settlements were built partly in stone;
speciﬁcally they included extensive drystone enclosure walls whose ruins are
often still visible. As already mentioned, this was a response to the grassland
environment, for the general lack of trees meant that there was little wood
available for building, it being reserved for the framework of otherwise mud-
built houses; in some cases houses were even built of stone. Such was the
shortage of wood that dried dung had to be used for fuel in many places
(Chirikure et al. 2008: ﬁg. 5.2), and iron tools and weapons had to be obtained
by trade with other areas where there was sufﬁcient wood for smelting and
smithing. However, in spite of the rounded character of much of the land-
scape, there were also outcrops of rock that broke into pieces ideally suited for
building. Settlements were often located on the ridges formed by such out-
crops, giving ready access to building material as well as a commanding view
of the surrounding plains.

                                                                            331
African Civilizations




Fig. 11.1 Principal archaeological sites and places in South Africa mentioned in the
text, showing the distribution of the three types of stone-walled settlement units on the
South African Highveld. After Maggs 1976: ﬁg. 15 and Whitelaw 1997: ﬁg. 65. Drawn
by Joe LeMonnier.



332
                                                                  South Africa

Sources of information
Historical evidence
The earliest European settlements in South Africa were during the sixteenth
century, so that substantial historical documentation provides information on
African communities since that time (Theal 1964). Explorers, missionaries,
traders, and others recorded what they saw, and these ethnohistorical sources
indicate that urban development was already occurring in some places by the
nineteenth century. For example, in 1801 Truter and Somerville estimated the
number of huts at the Thlaping settlement of Old Lithako (which lacked stone
structures), in north-eastern Cape Province, to be between 2,000 and 3,000,
and the population between 10,000 and 15,000 (Walton 1956: 52). Further-
more, in 1835 Gardiner reckoned the number of inhabitants at the Zulu
capital of Mgungundlovu, in KwaZulu-Natal, at 5,500 (Parkington and
Cronin 1979: 136), and the later Zulu capital of Ondini is thought to have
housed up to 5,000 people at times during the 1870s (Watson and Watson
1990: 34). Neither of these places possessed stone structures. In the case of
Mgungundlovu, some of these visitors left plans and drawings of its layout, as
well as descriptions. Another important documentary source is the account by
John Campbell of his visit to Kaditshwene, the early nineteenth-century capital
of the Hurutshe group of the Tswana, in 1820. He estimated its population as
either 16,000 or 20,000; Stephen Kay, who visited in 1821, thought that it
contained 13,000 to 14,000 people. In comparison, an 1824 ofﬁcial census
recorded 18,668 occupants for Cape Town, the biggest colonial settlement at
that time (Boeyens 2000: 3).
  Historical documentation also provides evidence of state emergence, in
several of the more densely populated parts of South Africa, by the nineteenth
century. Best known is the Zulu kingdom, because of its violent conﬂict with
other ethnic groups and with European colonial interests. However, there were
also related Nguni polities and those of the Ndebele, Swazi, and others, which
appeared during and after the Mfecane, a period of wars and population
movements during the early nineteenth century (Fage and Verity 1978: 42).
Oral traditions are another important source of information concerning these
developments, and many of these traditions have been systematically recorded.
This has provided substantial information on the ethnic identities of many of
the people occupying the south-eastern part of South Africa, particularly the
Sotho-Tswana of the Highveld. Anthropological and ethnological investiga-
tions have further contributed to these contextual studies, so that much more is
understood about the development of sociopolitical complexity in South
Africa during the later second millennium AD than is the case for other parts


                                                                           333
African Civilizations

of Africa during earlier periods. A major factor contributing to this difference
was European settlement and trade, both of which expanded on an unpreced-
ented scale in South Africa during the nineteenth century.


Archaeological evidence
Some of the earliest archaeological evidence for the emergence of social com-
plexity in South Africa is in the Zoutpansberg Range, in what was formerly
the northern Transvaal (now Limpopo Province). This seems to be dated to the
ﬁfteenth century AD. Some sites with drystone structures in this region have
similarities to the zimbabwe-tradition sites of Zambezia, notable examples being
Dzata and Machemma. These are situated in a region later associated with the
Venda, whose culture has been used to interpret symbolism at Great Zimbabwe
(Huffman 1996). The Zoutpansberg had metal ores, good soils and pasture, and
formerly abundant game, particularly elephants, and it is thought to be where
the Sotho-Tswana people originated (Whitelaw 1997: 451). This was during
a period with a cooler, drier climate; in some parts of South Africa, severe
aridity probably occurred. As a consequence, farmers apparently had little
interest in the Highveld, and it was probably only the increasing importance
of cattle in their economy that led to substantial settlement in this zone. This
occurred from about 1300; the site of Moor Park, in KwaZulu-Natal, is
dated from the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries and consisted of a stone-walled
enclosed hilltop, with evidence of domesticated cattle and sorghum cultivation
(Mitchell 2002: 348; Huffman 2007: 33–4). Subsequently, a warmer, wetter
period with more regular summer rains, which provided favourable conditions
for cereal cultivation, might also have encouraged increased settlement of this
high country. Radiocarbon dates suggest that this could have happened as late
as the seventeenth century (Mitchell 2002: 348–9), although formerly a date
two centuries earlier was suggested (Maggs 1976: 320). It was at this time
that the earliest of many stone-walled settlements were built, in the north-
eastern corner of the southern Highveld. Each of these consisted of a cluster of
settlement units with layouts known to archaeologists as Type N (Fig. 11.2),
after a site at Ntsuanatsatsi, in Free State Province. These settlement units had a
central ring of circular livestock enclosures which were connected by walling to
form a large secondary enclosure, outside of which were houses of reeds and
mud, the whole complex being surrounded by a low outer wall. The layout
allowed livestock to be penned in the centre of the unit, away from the living
area around the huts. Each settlement unit seems to have housed an extended
family and its livestock; settlements consisted of as many as a hundred such
units, possibly containing up to 1,500 people. However, these early settlements
were widely spaced compared with later ones, suggesting that the overall

334
                                                                          South Africa




Fig. 11.2 Types of stone-walled settlement units on the South African Highveld. After
Maggs 1976: ﬁg. 16. Copyright Taylor & Francis Ltd: www.tandfonline.com.

population was still small. Excavation has produced broken pottery, clay ﬁgur-
ines of cattle, iron and bone tools, bones of both domesticated and wild animals,
stone platforms for grain bins, and indications that the houses were dome-like
structures, sometimes with paved ﬂoors (Maggs 1976).
                                                                                    335
African Civilizations

  After some time, the layout of the individual settlement units changed to one
that is referred to by archaeologists as Type V (Fig. 11.2). Settlements consist-
ing of units with this plan were much more common and more widespread
than the earlier form and were located in areas with the best arable and grazing
land, in part overlapping the distribution of Type N units. Each Type
V settlement unit was made up of circular enclosures arranged in a rough
circle and joined by connecting walls to form one large enclosure. The outer
wall of the Type N units was no longer present, and the circular houses, which
were sometimes of corbelled stone, were either in the open outside the large
enclosure or formed part of the enclosure. Settlements comprising clusters of
such units in some cases housed many hundreds of inhabitants. Occasional
differences in the sizes of individual settlement units suggest that differences in
wealth and power were developing within these communities. Furthermore,
settlements were now closer together, indicating an increase in the overall
population compared with the earlier period, and older settlements continued
to be occupied or were reoccupied, stone from Type N settlement units often
being robbed to build in the new style. Type V settlement units date from the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and excavations at the settlement site of
Makgwareng, in the Free State, have provided information on the history of
one of them. In this case the earliest occupants built enclosures of reeds, not
stone, and constructed houses of mud-plastered reeds. Eventually these were
replaced by ﬁve large stone enclosures that were linked to form a secondary
enclosure, around which were six stone houses. In this form, the Makgwareng
settlement unit was probably occupied by eighteen to forty-ﬁve people, com-
prising a family homestead, but subsequently additional houses were built,
suggesting that the number of occupants had increased. The end was appar-
ently sudden and violent, with iron tools and weapons abandoned at the site.
Like many other settlements with Type V units, it seems to have been des-
troyed during the widespread warfare that engulfed this part of southern
Africa in the early nineteenth century (Maggs 1976).
  In the north-west of the Free State was yet another design of settlement unit,
which archaeologists have called Type Z (Fig. 11.2). At the centre of each of
these units was a compact group of circular enclosures for livestock; surround-
ing these were eight to twenty circular houses, often with front and back semi-
circular courtyards. The houses were different from those of either Type N or
Type V settlement units. Apparently they had thatched conical roofs supported
mainly by a ring of poles set outside the mud wall of the building itself, thus
providing it with a veranda. Again, these settlement units were grouped
together into settlements, of which one particularly large example at Matloang
has been surveyed and partly excavated. At that place, tightly packed houses
and livestock enclosures extended for more than a kilometre along a ridge and

336
                                                                     South Africa

might have had a population of more than 1,000 people. Such settlements
were probably occupied during the eighteenth century, but the earliest of them
might be older. When oral traditions, historical accounts, and linguistic data
are compared with the archaeological evidence, it appears that all three types
of settlement unit were probably built by speakers of Sotho-Tswana languages
but that whereas both Type N and Type V were the work of Sotho people, the
ﬁrst style developing into the second, Type Z settlement units were built by
Tswana people. Thus it seems that the differences in layout amongst the stone
ruins of the Highveld reﬂect differences in its past populations (Maggs 1976).
  During the 1960s and 1970s, the classiﬁcation of the stone-walled structures
discussed above was based on aerial photographs. More recently, technologies
such as Google Earth satellite imagery and Geographic Information System
software have allowed more sophisticated analysis of such sites. Remotely
sensed settlement data from the Suikerbosrand Nature Reserve near Johannes-
burg have shown signiﬁcant changes in settlement patterns from dispersed
homesteads to nucleated towns during the last two or three centuries before
the colonial period. These changes are similar to those in other stone-walled
structures, where they have been interpreted as indicating an evolution in
social, political, and economic complexity. It is thought that climatic stress
and conﬂict might have helped bring about these changes in settlement pat-
terns. Structures have been classiﬁed into three groups: Group I dates from the
ﬁfteenth to the seventeenth century and Groups II and III from the seventeenth
to the nineteenth, although Group III might have been chronologically inter-
mediate between Groups I and II (Sadr and Rodier 2012).
  During the eighteenth century some Tswana settlements in the western
Transvaal (now North-West Province) grew to a remarkable size, culminating
in populations of 10,000 people or more. Kaditshwene appears to have been
one of the largest, with a population in the early nineteenth century approach-
ing 20,000, making it similar in size to contemporary Cape Town (Boeyens
2000: 3). Molokwane, also in North-West Province, dating from the beginning
of the eighteenth century, is thought to have been even larger. It was a
settlement 3 kilometres in length, averaging 1.5 kilometres in width and with
an area of approximately 4 to 5 square kilometres. It has to be regarded as
urban in character, although it was called a ‘village’ by its investigator, who
also described it as ‘the largest stone-walled archaeological site in South Africa’
(Pistorius 1992: 17). Excavation of one of its smaller settlement units, covering
an area of 1 hectare and loosely comparable in layout to the Type Z units, has
provided a valuable picture of the life of its occupants (Fig. 11.3). Over
79 percent of the meat consumed came from domestic animals, cattle outnum-
bering sheep and goats, and there was evidence for the preparation of plant
food, including grain. In addition, the internal arrangements of the settlement

                                                                              337
338




      Fig. 11.3 Plan of excavated stone-walled settlement unit SEL1 at Molokwane, North-West Province, South Africa.
      The layout consists of an outer wall enclosing dwellings, central kraal complexes, and an intervening unenclosed space.
      After Pistorius 1992: ﬁg. 7.
                                                                      South Africa

unit shed light on the social structure of its inhabitants as well as on their daily
activities. Considered as a whole, this huge settlement and others like it
indicate increasing centralization of economic and political power by local
rulers, at least partly in response to growing instability. Population expansion,
partly fuelled by the introduction of maize, had led to greater competition
between chiefdoms for arable land and grazing and to more frequent cattle
raiding as a means of augmenting wealth. In addition, the onset of drought
made the situation even worse, setting the stage for disaster (Antonites and
Antonites 2014).
  During the early nineteenth century there erupted a series of wars and
population movements that originated in KwaZulu-Natal but subsequently
affected much of south-eastern Africa. Known as the Mfecane by the Nguni,
meaning ‘the crushing’, this explosion of violence seems to have been princi-
pally sparked by intense competition for the control of resources, particularly
those sought by European traders at Delagoa Bay, the location of the Mozam-
bique port formerly known as Lourenço Marques (now Maputo). Slaves
appear to have been one of those resources, but ivory was the principal one,
as much as 50 tonnes (representing about 500 elephants) being exported each
year from 1750 to 1790. This was mainly in exchange for glass beads, cloth,
and brass. Such imports increased the wealth and power of those rulers who
gained access to them, and the competition for elephants grew ever more
intense as they became more difﬁcult to ﬁnd. In addition, there were the effects
of population growth, resulting from the cultivation of maize, as mentioned
earlier. Several severe drought episodes as well as crop rust and cattle disease
made the situation even worse. Out of the resulting chaos emerged the Zulu
state, centred in KwaZulu-Natal, but for the settlements of the Highveld the
period has been remembered as the Difaqane by the Sotho-Tswana, meaning
‘the scattering of tribes’. As European settlers moved north in the so-called
Great Trek of the late 1830s, they found only deserted stone ruins in many
places, not the thriving communities of people and animals that had formerly
existed (Mitchell 2002: 369–79).
  The increasing number and size of the stone-walled sites of the Highveld can
be regarded as indications of urban development. Furthermore, the emergence
of powerful centralized polities, such as that of the Zulus, out of the chaos of
the Mfecane is a remarkable example of state development. In the Zulu case
this was centred on a permanent army of young men of a given age, based in
purpose-built military homesteads. Warfare enabled control of land, cattle,
food, and agricultural labour, while the king controlled iron production and
imported prestige goods. The success of the Zulu state is indicated by the Battle
of Isandlwana in 1879, when the Zulus inﬂicted one of the most devastating
defeats suffered by a British Army during colonial wars in Africa. Later that

                                                                               339
African Civilizations

year the British retaliated at the Battle of Ulundi, breaking the military power
of the Zulu nation by defeating its army, destroying the capital of Zululand,
Ulundi, and capturing the Zulu king, Cetshwayo. The existence of the Zulu
state had been brief, but it was an impressive example of indigenous state
development in Africa.
   The ruins of other stone-walled settlements exist in the south-east of South
Africa, although individual settlement units are often relatively small. Never-
theless, as already seen, in some instances the dense distribution of such
structures and the size of some of them suggest the presence of substantial
populations, with the potential for urban growth and state development. Such
is the case in the Rustenburg region of North-West Province (Hall et al. 2008)
and on the Mpumalanga Escarpment in Mpumalanga Province (Delius and
Schoeman 2008). It was this potential that was most famously realized in the
case of the Zulu; fortunately there are two sites of Zulu state capitals that have
been investigated archaeologically. These are Mgungundlovu, in KwaZulu-
Natal, occupied from 1829 to 1838 (Parkington and Cronin 1979), and the
later capital of Ondini, dating from 1873 to 1879, in the same general area
(Watson and Watson 1990). Each of these are thought to have housed about
5,000 people at times, and although they both lacked stone structures, they
were clearly impressive settlements. Mgungundlovu had an area of about 22.5
hectares and a circumference of about 1.7 kilometres; Ondini covered about
35 hectares. Because they were constructed in timber, reed, and thatch and in
both cases had been destroyed by ﬁre, hut ﬂoors were ﬁred brick-hard, enab-
ling excavation at Mgungundlovu to uncover the plans and layout of many
huts as well as some of their internal details. At Ondini, excavation concen-
trated instead on midden deposits, permitting a detailed study of faunal
remains. On the basis of the meat weights estimated from the bones recovered,
cattle overwhelmingly dominated the animal input of the diet. This was as
expected from historical evidence for the major role of cattle in Zulu society at
that time, providing hides for shields and clothing, as well as food, and also
individual wealth for acquiring wives and for ritual and religious ceremonies.
Together, the sites of Mgungundlovu and Ondini have contributed an import-
ant insight into the character of nineteenth-century capitals in South Africa,
enabling both urban and state development to be better understood.


Subsistence economy
Historical documentation and oral traditions indicate that mixed farming,
consisting of cereal cultivation and livestock herding, was the basis of the
subsistence economy of the stone-walled and related settlements of south-east
South Africa. Perhaps as a result, relatively little attention appears to have been

340
                                                                     South Africa

given to archaeobotanical evidence from excavations. Nevertheless, carbonized
remains of sorghum, cowpeas, tsamma melons, and (from the eighteenth cen-
tury onwards) maize have been recorded, as well as granaries and grain bins for
storage. In addition, different forms of grindstones, used to prepare the grains as
food, indicate the change from sorghum and millet growing to maize growing
(Huffman 2007: 453–4; Antonites and Antonites 2014). More attention has
been given to the meat supply, which overwhelmingly depended on cattle,
although goats and sheep were kept and hunting and wild plant foods continued
to be signiﬁcant resources (Mitchell 2002: 349). In contrast, the importance of
cultivation to the economy is conﬁrmed by the distribution of stone-walled
structures relative to the best arable soils. This suggests ‘a strong correlation
between political courts and the best farmlands’ (Sadr and Rodier 2012: 1038).
Although it is apparent that population growth, drought, and both animal and
plant disease did cause periodic crises, the very existence of a growing popula-
tion suggests that the subsistence economy was sound.


Technology
Two aspects of the technology of the Highveld and related settlements were
particularly important. One was the building skill evident in the drystone
structures at many sites, as well as in the use of reeds, mud, and thatch to
produce serviceable and attractive houses. By the early nineteenth century, if
not before, numerous houses in Tswana settlements were even provided with
the sophistication of sliding doors. European visitors recorded these, and
excavators have found the grooves in which they ran, as well as the remains
of wood from the doors themselves. In addition, contemporary accounts
mention ﬁnely polished mud ﬂoors, verandas, courtyards, internally plastered
walls and ceilings, a void in the conical roof above the ceiling (presumably for
insulation), painted decorations, and the general cleanliness of the houses
(Maggs 1993). Clearly the occupants of these settlements were accomplished
builders with a pride in their work. The second aspect of technology that
deserves attention was metalworking, from the early second millennium AD,
including both iron and copper smelting and manufacturing (Fig. 11.4) and
mining to obtain the necessary ores (Hall et al. 2006). Tin was also mined and
alloyed with copper to produce bronze (Huffman 2007: 87–8). At Rooiberg,
in the Southern Waterberg of Limpopo Province, is the only source in southern
Africa of cassiterite (a tin oxide) that has provided evidence of its mining
before European colonization (Bandama et al. 2013). Because of the shortage
of wood in many areas, communities with access to fuel for smelting and
smithing, as well as the necessary ores, specialized in metalworking. They then
traded their products to populations whose lack of fuel prevented such work

                                                                              341
342




      Fig. 11.4 The central part of the settlement of Marothodi, North-West Province, South Africa, showing the location of copper- and
      iron-working areas in relation to the homesteads. After Hall et al. 2006: ﬁg. 2. Reproduced by permission of Africa Magna
      Verlag, Frankfurt am Main.
                                                                    South Africa

(Chirikure et al. 2008). A wide range of utilitarian iron goods was produced
for both agriculture and warfare; copper (and sometimes bronze) was used for
personal adornment. Other signiﬁcant aspects of technology included the
manufacture of salt and the mining of ochre (Huffman 2007: 90–1). There
was also the production of ﬁne pottery and the making of leather goods such
as clothing and shields. In addition, the Lydenburg Head and associated
artefacts from Mpumalanga Province (Huffman 2007: 67), although earlier
in date than the period discussed here, indicate a tradition of technical skill in
the forming and ﬁring of terracotta sculpture. Overall, archaeological and
other evidence suggests that the occupants of the stone-walled and related
settlements had a sophisticated technology and that a degree of functional
specialization had already developed within a context of sociopolitical change.


Social system
The archaeological evidence, like the documentary and oral evidence, indi-
cates the existence of a hierarchical society of chiefs and kings based on
populations of subsistence farmers. If the clusters of stone-walled settlement
units consisted of those occupied at the same time, then the larger clusters
represented larger settlements, and it is thought that the size of settlements
reﬂected wealth and political power. Large middens also indicate greater
political power, as they represent court, rather than household garbage.
Sadr and Rodier (2012) used the ranked sizes of individual settlements to
suggest the relative political and economic stratiﬁcation of their different
settlement groups. Clearly, varying degrees of urbanism were developing
amongst the Sotho-Tswana, as well as state formation at different levels.
For these changes to take place, social organization based on age sets and
circumcision-initiation schools tended to be replaced by militaristic govern-
ance, of which Shaka’s Zulu state was the best known example. Young men
of similar age were formed into regiments that lived together, were not
allowed to marry until they had served in action, and were under the control
of commanders answerable to the king. In addition, lineage heads lost power
to an elite centred on the royal lineage (Mitchell 2002: 372–3). This was a
state produced by interethnic conﬂict and dependant on warfare; it was
inevitable that it should eventually collapse when confronted by expanding
European interests in southern Africa, in spite of ﬁelding an army of 20,000
at the Battle of Ulundi. Assegais (short iron-tipped stabbing spears) and
obsolete or captured ﬁrearms were no match for late-nineteenth-century
European military technology. Although polities similar to that of the Zulu
emerged or began to emerge amongst other people, they also were swept
away in the sociopolitical maelstrom of nineteenth-century southern Africa.

                                                                             343
African Civilizations

Population pressures
The Mfecane appears to have been largely the consequence of population
increase during agriculturally productive periods, followed by drought and
food shortages leading to severe sociopolitical dislocation. The adoption of
maize, more productive than sorghum or millet but more vulnerable to ﬂuctu-
ations in rainfall (p. 331), is thought to have contributed to this crisis.
Although competition for access to overseas trade was another cause of the
violence that erupted, there seems little doubt that the Mfecane was itself an
indication of population pressures in southern Africa during the nineteenth
century. More people meant less food, a shortage that could be relieved only
by taking other people’s food, by force if necessary. Archaeological evidence
for population stress is present amongst Bokoni settlements of the Mpuma-
langa Escarpment, dated to within the last 400 years. These settlements are
remarkable because ‘not only are the homesteads preserved but there are also
networks of linking roads and vast areas of agricultural terraces’ (Maggs
2008: 173). It has been suggested that such developments represent ‘islands
of agricultural intensiﬁcation’, capable of supporting larger populations
(Maggs 2008: 178–9); part of the Lydenburg valley, for example, had a
maximum population of perhaps 19,000 to 57,000 (Maggs 2008: 172–3).
It seems that population pressures did contribute to the development of
sociopolitical complexity in this part of southern Africa.


Ideology
Little appears to have been known of Sotho-Tswana religious beliefs and
practices until the nineteenth century, when Christian missionary endeavour
was already transforming traditional ideas as well as misunderstanding them.
Shamanism, in which altered states of consciousness enabled interaction with
the spirit world, with ancestors acting as intermediaries, seems to have been
central to these ideas. Herbalist healers and diviners functioned as shamans,
spiritual counsellors, and protectors against evil spirits and black magic. Polit-
ical leaders were often expected to preside over rituals of fertility, rain making,
and warfare that strengthened the people and the land. In many African
societies, kingship was essentially divine kingship, in which ‘“ceremonies”
and the importance of the “following of people” were at the core of the notion
of power’ (de Maret 2012: 315). As de Maret stressed, it is necessary to
recognize sacred power in the archaeological record, focussing on palaces,
cities, burials, and regalia. In the case of the Sotho-Tswana occupants of the
stone-walled settlements in south-eastern South Africa, aspects of such evidence
do show religious ideology providing the basis of political control.

344
                                                                    South Africa

Archaeological evidence of the role of ideology in the functioning of these
societies is also present in the form of rain-making sites (Huffman 2007: 71–3).


External trade
By the nineteenth century, international maritime activity along South Africa’s
eastern coast had stimulated a major expansion of its external trade. The Sotho-
Tswana stone-walled settlements and adjacent areas, although inland, were
within relatively easy reach of that coast, where Delagoa Bay (now Maputo)
provided access to international markets and suppliers. The most important
African export commodity was probably ivory, to satisfy a growing European
demand for piano keys and a variety of other items, as well as for raw material to
feed a long-standing tradition of ivory carving. Slaves were another export, along
with rhinoceros horn, gold, tin, skins, and African exotica. In addition, visiting
ships needed provisions, particularly meat, with European and American whalers
calling at Delagoa Bay for that purpose. In exchange, glass beads, cloth, brass,
ceramics, and other manufactured goods were imported, providing wealth that
rulers and associated elite could use to accumulate more cattle and therefore
strengthen their power base. Signiﬁcantly, the Zulu state, the most successful
and aggressive polity in the coastal region, was adjacent to Delagoa Bay. As
already stated, competition for access to overseas trade is thought to have been a
contributory factor to the violence that erupted in the Mfecane, for which the
Zulus have often been blamed. Another view is that the Zulu part in this was a
defensive response by Shaka to slave raiding from Delagoa Bay and aggression
from Cape Colony (Cobbing 1988; Gordon 2009), but this interpretation has
been questioned (Mitchell 2002: 370). Whatever the case, it seems that external
trade played a part in the sociopolitical developments that occurred.
  As in other parts of Africa, however, the role of external trade must be seen
in the context of indigenous African trading networks. Differential distribution
of resources meant that there was a complex internal network of trade in iron,
copper, salt, specularite, pigments, animal skins, feathers, ostrich eggshell
beads, a variety of foodstuffs, and other things (Mitchell 2002). Any consider-
ation of the part that trade played in the development of sociopolitical com-
plexity in parts of southern Africa must consider internal trade as well as
external trade and the interaction between the two.


Conclusion
The Highveld and associated areas of South Africa have large numbers of
archaeological sites that constitute the remains of farming settlements dating
to only the last few centuries. Drystone construction ensures the archaeological

                                                                             345
African Civilizations

visibility of many of these sites, and both documentary records and oral
traditions are informative. Consequently, we are provided with an opportunity
to see the emergence of aspects of sociopolitical complexity actually in
progress. Study of evidence from this recent past reveals examples of the
beginnings of urbanization and of state formation. These nineteenth-century
developments were inevitably hesitant, constrained as they were by indigenous
political instability and growing colonial interference, but they do enable us to
see the circumstances in which the changes took place.
  To begin with, relatively good soil and pasture in some areas supported
mixed farming, to which cereals and cattle herding were the main contributors
and which in some instances involved intensive production. This resulted
in both population increase and greater local population density, so that the
number of settlements and their individual sizes became greater. Furthermore,
some of the occupants of these settlements had technological skills, particu-
larly in building with stone, mud, and organic materials, and in metal mining,
smelting, and manufacture, resulting in a degree of functional specialization.
However, population size and density contributed to the growth of a hierarch-
ical social system that was based on subsistence farming, varying in scale from
small chiefdoms to emergent states. Unfortunately, population pressures also
caused social instability, a situation made worse by the introduction of maize,
a cereal with a greater yield than sorghum or millet but vulnerable to the
periodic droughts of the region. Religious ideology provided the basis of
political control by rulers, but this was often weakened by severe competition
for resources. In addition, access to commodities from external trade and to
the means of paying for these brought on serious interethnic conﬂict. Added
to the violence and disruption that resulted was the increasing pressure of
colonial settlement. In the end, the South African evidence shows not only
how sociopolitical complexity can develop but also how it can fail.




346
Chapter 12
What are the common denominators?


The examples of African precolonial urbanization and state formation dis-
cussed in Chapters 2 to 11 come from a wide range of environments. These
include river valley, such as Egypt and Nubia; mountain plateau, for example,
Aksum and Zambezia; savanna plain, for instance, Kano; rainforest, such as
Ife and Central Africa; maritime fringe, as with the Swahili coast; grassland,
such as the South African Highveld; and desert margins, for example, North
Africa. The geographical locations of these developments within the continent
are equally diverse. Egypt and Nubia were so positioned that they had sub-
stantial and long-standing contacts with the eastern Mediterranean. Aksum
was situated beside a major trade route between the Mediterranean world and
the lands of the Indian Ocean. Zambezia also had contact with Indian Ocean
trade, although more remotely. The West African savanna, on the other hand,
was separated from the outside world by one of the greatest deserts on earth,
the traversal of which weakened external cultural inﬂuences. This was even
more the case in the West African forest, situated far to the south of the desert
margins and backed by the empty Atlantic Ocean that for many centuries was
a more effective barrier than the Sahara. Different again were the cities and
towns of the East African coast, which looked out on the Indian Ocean
that provided links with distant but technologically sophisticated cultures.
More remote from such contacts was Central Africa, which had relatively
little contact with the outside world until quite late, as was also the case for the
South African Highveld. North Africa looked north to the heart of the ancient
world but also south into the Sahara, with some remarkable adaptations to its
extreme environments. Such environmental and geographical diversity would
suggest that we must look elsewhere for any common factors that might
explain the appearance of social complexity in some parts of the African
continent and, equally, its failure to appear in other parts.
   Nevertheless, each area had its own characteristic environmental and
geographical opportunities. In every case there were also environmental con-
straints, but the ingenuity of human culture partly mitigated their impact.
Nowhere is this more starkly illustrated than on the middle Nile; on the one
hand, the river offered life, but on the other hand, parts of the surrounding
environment were so dry as to be scarcely habitable. Yet by means of a
combination of irrigation, rainfed cultivation, and pastoralism, human popu-
lations were able to exploit both the river and the adjacent savanna and

                                                                               347
African Civilizations

desert margins. So successfully were the environmental constraints overcome
that this area was the scene of some of Africa’s earliest states and cities and a
long succession of such developments. A similar interplay of environmental
opportunity, environmental constraint, and human culture can be discerned
(to varying extents) in each of the cases that have been considered. This
interplay was a dynamic one, and its outcome in each case was normally in
favour of the human inhabitants, except when episodic imbalance threatened
collapse of the often delicately balanced system. However, this does not go
very far in explaining the emergence of social complexity in Africa; obviously,
human beings thrive better in some places than in others, but this is no reason
why they should build cities or create states.
  However, it is the numbers of people who thrived that might be signiﬁcant.
Population sizes and densities in the relevant areas seem to have been higher
than was usual in this generally thinly populated continent. As a result,
localized population pressures probably developed, but all of the areas dis-
cussed had a strong subsistence base with potential for a storable, transport-
able surplus that could normally alleviate such pressures. Most people were
agriculturalists, growing a range of food plants suited to local environments
and keeping livestock, though the latter was limited by trypanosomiasis in the
West African forest and in some other parts of Africa. The importance of
pastoralism (Smith 1992) can hardly be overstated: herds of cattle and ﬂocks
of sheep and goats converted grass into wealth during good years and could
provide relief from starvation when crops failed in bad years. The farmers and
the pastoralists were often different groups of people, interacting with one
another, but from this symbiosis came strength, just as weakness resulted from
their periodic conﬂicts. In addition, in some areas there was an intensiﬁcation
of agricultural strategy, and this in a continent where agricultural systems have
tended to be extensive rather than intensive. Thus, on the middle Nile more
efﬁcient irrigation was achieved by introducing the ox-driven waterwheel; in
the Inland Niger Delta of Mali recessional cultivation of rice was developed;
and in the Ethiopian Highlands slopes were terraced and water-storage dams
constructed. Developments of this sort would suggest that populations in such
areas were indeed increasing, creating a demand for more food and for more
labour to produce it. It is surely signiﬁcant that people became such an
important trade commodity in some parts of Africa; slaves have a long history
in the continent for both export and internal use. In Africa, as elsewhere in the
world, one should remember George Orwell’s remark about ‘those hundreds
of millions of slaves on whose backs civilization rested generation after
generation’ (Orwell 1966: 238).
  In each of the areas considered, the exploitation of resources included
not only a mixed agricultural strategy but also a varied and sometimes

348
                                         What are the common denominators?

sophisticated metallurgically based technology. Most of the relevant societies
were proﬁcient in the working of iron; iron technology has been extremely
important in Africa as an enabling and intensifying agent during the last two
millennia or so. Without iron, the farmers of the West African forest could not
have exploited their heavily vegetated environment as successfully as they did,
nor could the occupants of Bigo in Uganda have dug such impressive rock-cut
ditches. Iron provided both the tools to exploit available resources and the
weapons to discourage others who coveted them. In addition to iron working
and other metallurgical skills, the technology of the groups of people discussed
in this book covered a range of abilities. Although engineering knowledge of
the sort indicated by the Aksumite stelae seems to have been unusual, there
was, nevertheless, a widespread understanding of building techniques, in
stone, ﬁred brick, mud-brick, coursed mud, wood, grass, and in other organic
materials. Building technology was both diverse and accomplished. Further-
more, there appear to have been other crafts, including pottery making, wood
working, textile production, and leather working. In some instances, there
must also have been people with skills speciﬁc to the region, such as boat
builders and sailors on the middle Nile or the East African coast, and scribes
in Meroë or Aksum where indigenous alphabets were developed. When it
is considered that a number of the cases studied also have evidence of religious
functionaries, government ofﬁcials, and specialist traders, it becomes apparent
that some degree of functional specialization was probably present in the areas
examined.
   Inevitably, some resources were more limited than others, and as Haas
(1982: 151) claimed, it is control of resources that gives rulers their power
(p. 7). All of the cases examined in this book show unmistakable signs of the
emergence of an elite who told other people what to do. The question is, what
were the vital resources that they controlled? Most commonly this has been
answered by pointing to the existence of raw materials such as gold, ivory, and
other things that commanded a high price on the world market. Control of
these meant control of long-distance trade, and control of such trade provided
prestige and wealth. Thus appeared the African elites; thus developed the cities
and the states. The problem with this explanation is not that it is incorrect but
that it is wrongly timed. Looking at the archaeological evidence in North
Africa, on the middle Nile, in the Ethiopian Highlands, or along the East
African coast, it is clear that external long-distance trade did sometimes play
a major role in African urbanization and state formation, but it seems that this
was as an intensiﬁer rather than as an originator. We now have evidence that
suggests an indigenous origin for the development of social complexity on
the East African coast; the earliest urbanization in the West African savanna
pre-dates the growth of large-scale trans-Saharan trade; and in Central Africa

                                                                            349
African Civilizations

there are signs of increasing social complexity at a time before there was
any substantial long-distance trade with the outside world. Furthermore,
neither Zambezia nor the West African forest has evidence for early long-
distance trade on a large scale, and even in the middle Nile and the Ethiopian
Highlands the origins of sociopolitical changes seem to have pre-dated such
a development.
   If external long-distance trade was merely an intensiﬁer of changes that had
already commenced, then the question remains of what started them. There
seem to be two possibilities. The ﬁrst is that extensive internal trading net-
works preexisted external trading contacts and that African elites ﬁrst gained
power by controlling resources within such internal exchange systems.
Copper, iron, and salt are likely to have been amongst these resources, but
there could have been many more, including the gold and ivory that subse-
quently became so vital to the overseas trade. Indeed, the earliest commodities
to be exchanged by internal trade were probably foodstuffs and other plant
and animal resources. The ecological diversity of much of Africa makes this
likely, and, in fact, the movement of such commodities has remained signiﬁ-
cant down to modern times. For example, shea butter has been exported from
northern Nigeria to the south of that country, whilst kola nuts travelled in the
opposite direction (Shaw 1984: 156); Africa has many other, similar instances
of resource exchange. Although archaeology tends to be silent on perishable
goods, there is some indication that early internal trading networks did exist,
particularly in Central Africa, West Africa, and Ethiopia. This being the case,
it seems likely that external long-distance trade merely plugged into the extant
circuitry of the internal networks.
   A second possible explanation is that elite power was ﬁrst acquired by the
control of land – not any land but land with an unusually high production
potential. The role of this factor is seen as possibly complementary to that of
internal trade, rather than as an alternative to it. Given the relatively poor
quality of many African soils, together with their often moisture-stressed
condition, and given expanding populations in some places, the greatest
competition was likely to be around land which was more highly productive.
In all of the case studies examined, it is possible to ﬁnd indications that such
land might have existed. Thus, in an environment surrounded by desert, the
lower Nile had seasonal ﬂoods carrying fertile silt, which beneﬁtted some
places more than others. In the middle Nile area, fertile silts that could be
reached by the available irrigation technology were limited, and the propor-
tion of each year for which they could be watered varied with location. As a
result, some areas of land must have been more productive than others. On the
north-eastern Ethiopian plateau, some soils were more fertile than others and
more suitable for plough cultivation of cereals, giving them a signiﬁcant role

350
                                         What are the common denominators?

during episodes of famine. The generally water-stressed environment of the
West African savanna gave the limited areas available for recessional cultiva-
tion, such as parts of the Inland Niger Delta, a particular importance. In the
West African forest, it seems to have been the upper interﬂuves and the forest–
savanna ecotonal areas that provided the best farmlands, and these were
limited. For the East African coast it was a matter of fertile soils and
water availability, some areas being better provided for than others. On the
Zimbabwe Plateau, it was again a matter of soils, where some soils were
particularly fertile in an otherwise rocky area with granite-derived soils of
poor fertility. For the Upemba Depression it was access to seasonally inun-
dated fertile alluvium and to the most productive ﬁshing grounds. In the
Interlacustrine Region, in areas of good rainfall it was control of the best
soils for cultivation, and in drier areas it was control of the best grazing lands
for cattle. In both North and South Africa there were also areas with more
rainfall or better pasture.
  So it is possible that the crucial common factor underlying the emergence of
African elites was access to, and control of, more highly productive land. If this
was the case, then we have an indigenous explanation for the origin of social
complexity in some parts of Africa. Doubtless, local trading networks also
played an important role, and, clearly, external long-distance trade eventually
came to act as an intensifying agent of signiﬁcance. Nevertheless, this ‘pro-
ductive land hypothesis’, as it might be called, does provide an originating
agent, within each locality, of the developments that we are seeking to under-
stand. It also provides an hypothesis that is testable, as ﬁeld research pro-
gresses. Nevertheless, those who argue that control of people was more
important than control of land have challenged this explanation (Edwards
1994: 9; Peel 2000: 515). After all, they claim, in the past there was no
shortage of land in an essentially underpopulated Africa, but their argument
fails to allow for the extensive areas of the continent where land is of limited
use due to low fertility, rocky surfaces, hard topsoils of laterite (clay high in
iron oxides), and other factors. In reality, a combination of land and people
as a controllable resource has greater explanatory value; land is needed to
support increasing numbers of people, but increasing numbers of people are
needed to make the land productive.
  With the emergence of an elite, a social hierarchy also developed. All of the
archaeological examples that have been examined show signs of such social
differentiation to a greater or lesser degree. There were clearly those few who
were in charge and those masses who did what they were told. Less easy to
recognize are the people in the middle, who acted on behalf of the elite but
were neither of their ranks nor of the labouring majority. Whatever the details
of the hierarchy, however, in each of the cases reviewed in this book it was

                                                                             351
African Civilizations

legitimized and reinforced by one form or another of religious ideology. In all
instances, the earliest manifestations of this were indigenous, presumably
animistic, religions, but in cases where there was prolonged contact with the
outside world Christianity or Islam eventually replaced these. Whatever its
form, however, it does seem that in each case the spiritual came to the aid of
the material. That is to understate the importance of African indigenous
religions, particularly during the earlier phases of the processes with which
this book is concerned. Such religions were often a means of manipulating
the forces believed to control fertility, in all senses of that word, and therefore
gave power to those who were thought to be able to do this. In that case, the
role of religion could have been much more than merely validating the author-
ity of those who had acquired power by other means; African power holders
were frequently priests themselves. As such, they could indeed have claimed
control of the best land and of the people to work it, or of the internal
exchange systems, or even, eventually, of their end of external long-distance
trade networks, and who would have been prepared to deny them? As for
the ordinary people, they needed to be assured that the sun would really rise
tomorrow and the rain fall when needed, and in exchange they had no choice
but to accept their condition.
   This book has been more concerned with archaeological evidence than with
theoretical matters, which often generate esoteric explanations incomprehen-
sible to people in general and difﬁcult even for some anthropologists and
sociologists to understand. Its objective has been to explain how we know
what we think we know. Nevertheless, any attempt to identify the main factors
that gave rise to the cities and states of precolonial Africa has theoretical
implications. For example, it appears that the power theory of state formation
advocated by Haas (p. 7) does help us to understand the African situation and
therefore does have some explanatory value. Furthermore, it seems that Lons-
dale (p. 7) was correct in concluding that state formation in Africa was a very
slow process, involving the coercive centralization of power and resulting from
local politics, not from external ideas. This being the case, one is inclined to
agree with Renfrew (p. 7) that the division into ‘pristine’ and ‘secondary’
states, which has so often been made, is a meaningless exercise. It was
Renfrew’s insistence that ‘to understand the origins and development of any
civilization’ it is necessary to look at its local conditions, which suggested an
analytical framework for each chapter of this book, hence the repeated sub-
sections examining those conditions.
   What of the idea of heterarchy, instead of hierarchy, as a basis for socio-
political organization? This has been advanced as an alternative model for the
development of complexity (p. 160), a model in which society is most simply
described as organized horizontally rather than vertically (McIntosh 2005: 187).

352
                                          What are the common denominators?

It is an important idea but one that appears to depend on a lack of evidence
for hierarchy rather than on the presence of positive evidence for heterarchy.
Probably such evidence will become available only after there has been much
more extensive excavation of relevant urban sites.
   Unfortunately, all the attempted explanations for the origins of social com-
plexity that have been discussed above are somewhat mechanistic; in terms
of argument it is a case of A plus B plus C must equal D, but surely the reality is
more complex than that. Inevitably there is a temptation to claim that the
problem is insoluble, simply because it is so complex and involves so many
interrelated factors whose associations are obscure. In the end it is perhaps
Jared Diamond who has come nearest to an explanation that is both coherent
and comprehensible. He argues that as the size of human groups increases,
‘Considerations of conﬂict resolution, decision making, economics, and space
thus converge in requiring large societies to be centralized’ (Diamond 1998:
288). In short, increasing levels of social complexity become essential if larger
and larger groups of people are to live together successfully. For sure, the
other factors discussed in this book are important contributors to change –
subsistence, technology, social system, population pressures, ideology, and
external trade – they provide what Diamond calls ‘autocatalysis’ (Diamond
1998: 285), a condition where the individual factors stimulate each other
and collectively trigger the developments that we seek to understand but do
not individually cause them (‘catalysis of a reaction by one of its products’,
Concise Oxford English Dictionary 2011: 88).
   Clearly the development of cities and the formation of states in Africa were
not aspects of a single process; not all cities were capitals of signiﬁcant states
and not all states had large, static centres of population. Nevertheless, they
were both important manifestations of precolonial complex societies, and it is
sometimes difﬁcult to discuss them in isolation. Centralization of power, social
stratiﬁcation, functional specialization, and other related developments,
together with population growth and population pressures, are phenomena
that can be associated with both the appearance of cities and the emergence of
states. Furthermore, their separate identiﬁcation in the archaeological record
can be particularly difﬁcult. In some cases we do have physical evidence for
the existence of settlements in which relatively large numbers of people were
congregated; whether they are called large villages, towns, or even cities, the
important point is that they were relatively dense aggregations of population,
recalling Mabogunje’s straightforward deﬁnition of urbanization (p. 6). More
ambiguous, however, are the instances of archaeological evidence that might
suggest the extension of political authority, or at least some commonality of
culture, over a substantial geographical area. Indeed, even in the minds of
some of the African people involved, it seems that the ideas of city and state

                                                                              353
African Civilizations

might at times have been inextricably associated. Thus, in 1893, Lugard found
it necessary to emphasize the close association of state, ruler, and city in the
case of Buganda: ‘The Waganda consider their country to be where the King is,
and if no Kabaka of the Royal blood is installed in Mengo [the capital], the
result would be a break-up of the people’ (Lugard 1893: 36). It is with
the opposite process of the coming together of people in tropical Africa that
this book has been concerned.
   In the African case this coming together occurred in a diversity of forms.
Varied in their indigenous origins, states were also variously inﬂuenced by
Pharaonic Egypt, by the ancient Mediterranean, by the Christian world,
by Islamic North Africa, by Indian Ocean traders, and by each other. Urban
centres also showed considerable variety: some were densely occupied for long
periods, some only brieﬂy occupied, some completely mobile, some with
transient residence from season to season and year to year, and some with
dispersed settlement covering enormous areas. Such diversity would suggest
that the physical evidence for African social complexity would merit far more
attention from archaeologists than it has yet had and that the African devel-
opments might have a far greater role in the formation of global social theory
than has yet been the case.




354
