Chapter 3
The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa


North Africa is situated between the Sahara Desert and the Mediterranean Sea,
between an inhospitable environment discouraging travel and one facilitating
extensive maritime contacts. Consequently, it has long tended to look to the
north rather than to the south, constituting a frontier zone for the rest of
the African continent. Excluding the lower Nile Valley, North Africa’s habit-
able coast to the east is so narrow that in places the desert reaches the sea, but
the coast broadens in the west into cultivable plains and still further west there
are mountains separating it from the desert. Climatically, North Africa belongs
with the Mediterranean, with hot dry summers and mild winters when most
of the modest rainfall occurs. Culturally, the region has been a meeting place
for people from the Levant, Greece, Rome, Europe, and Arabia and the
indigenous Libyans. As a result, North Africa has played a role in the history
of Europe as well as in that of Africa. The Mediterranean has been the link,
providing relatively easy movement for traders and migrants and a frequent
focus for armed conﬂict. Commencing early in the ﬁrst millennium BC, a series
of colonial and indigenous settlements developed that included urban commu-
nities and indications of state development. These were technologically sophis-
ticated societies, at least partly literate, that constituted early examples of
African social complexity, not as early as its development in the Nile Valley
but still preceding that of most of the rest of Africa. As such, North Africa was
eventually to stimulate changes in other parts of the continent, particularly in
the Sahel beyond the Sahara and in adjacent regions.


Geographical location and environmental factors
North Africa extends from the lower Nile Valley to the Atlantic coast of
Morocco. In terms of modern political geography, it includes western Egypt,
Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco. In Egypt and Libya the settled zone is
mainly restricted to the coast by the Sahara, but in Tunisia, Algeria, and
Morocco a variety of different environments, including those of the Atlas
Mountains that rise to more than 4,000 metres, have provided greater oppor-
tunities for human settlement. Extending almost 3,700 kilometres from east to
west, the geographical and environmental diversity of the region is striking.
Average monthly temperatures in coastal Tripoli range from 14C in January
to 28C in August but can be much higher in the desert and its margins.

                                                                               43
African Civilizations

Indeed, a temperature of 58C, recorded in 1922 at El Azizia in north-west
Libya, has been claimed to be the highest in the world. In contrast, winter frosts
can occur inland and the highest of the Atlas Mountains are snowcapped.
Rainfall also varies wildly, from as much as 1,200 millimetres a year in the
coastal mountains of the west to as little as 200 millimetres in the semi-desert
that forms the southern limit of most human occupation. In addition, rainfall is
unreliable in many areas and evapotranspiration high. Consequently, water
availability is a problem in much of the region; irrigation is often necessary;
and extensive areas are of limited use. Nevertheless, parts of North Africa
have long supported a highly productive agriculture; depending on local condi-
tions, different areas have grown a variety of crops. Pastoralism has also been
important, particularly in the mountains and the semi-desert. Furthermore,
much of the Mediterranean coast is well provided with harbours, and ﬁshing
has been another important source of food. Although North Africa has its share
of human diseases, its varied environments have long been generally conducive
to settlement, as repeated colonial immigration has demonstrated.
   Any consideration of the geography and environment of North Africa must
include the Mediterranean Sea, as well as the lands that form its southern
shore (Fig. 3.1). As the largest inland sea in the world, the Mediterranean has
long been a means of contact between people, particularly those of its coasts.
This has been made possible by its winds and currents and frequently calm or
relatively calm seas. Although violent storms can occur, refuge in a safe
harbour is often possible. Early seafarers with limited maritime technology
and navigational knowledge could sail much of the Mediterranean without
losing sight of land (Aubet 2001: 169). Currents and winds also inﬂuenced
the selection of sailing routes, for which the islands of Cyprus, Malta, Sicily,
Sardinia, Ibiza, and the south-eastern coast of Spain provided ports-of-call
(Aubet 2001: 182–5). In addition, the geographical conﬁguration of the
Mediterranean coasts meant that Greece and Italy, with Sicily, were within
relatively easy reach of North Africa. Furthermore, the Straits of Gibraltar
gave access to the Atlantic coasts of Morocco and south-western Spain; a
minimum of 14 kilometres of sea separated North Africa from the Iberian
Peninsula; and people could walk from the coast of the Levant to Egypt.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
A substantial amount of historical documentation exists for the last three
millennia in North Africa. The societies responsible for the emergence of
urbanization and the development of states in this region were all literate

44
     Fig. 3.1 Principal archaeological sites, places, and people in North and West Africa mentioned in the text. 1, Gadir; 2, Qsar es-Seghir and Tangier;
45   3, Lixus; 4, Al-Basra; 5, Fez; 6, Algiers; 7, Mzâb; 8, Djemila; 9, Thamugadi; 10, Timgad; 11, Hippo Regius; 12, Utica; 13, Carthage (Tunis);
     14, Bulla Regia; 15, Althiburos; 16, Thugga; 17, Kairouan; 18, Kerkouane; 19, El Djem; 20, Mahdiyya; 21, Sabratha; 22, Oea (Tripoli); 23, Lepcis
     Magna; 24, Ghirza; 25, Ptolemais; 26, Cyrene; 27, Garamantes (Old Jarma); 28, Kissi; 29, Durbi Takusheyi. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.
African Civilizations

to some extent, and also Greek, Roman, and other writers recorded the
activities of North African communities. External observers were sometimes
prejudiced or poorly informed, and some documentary materials was written
after the events they recorded, based on earlier sources that have not sur-
vived. However, inscriptions principally on stone and coins are also informa-
tive and often well dated, particularly for the Roman period.
   It appears to have been Phoenician seafarers and traders, from the coast of
what is now Lebanon, who inaugurated signiﬁcant social change in North
Africa. By the end of the second millennium BC their activities had extended
throughout the length of the Mediterranean and they had founded trading
colonies at Gadir, on the Atlantic coast of south-west Spain, and at Lixus, on
the Atlantic coast of Morocco. Their principal motivation seems to have been
the acquisition of metals, particularly silver, copper, gold, and tin, for all of
which there was a substantial demand in South-West Asia. In addition, polit-
ical and population pressures in their homeland could have initiated what
became a widespread diaspora. As time went on, they also founded colonies in
other places, including Malta, Sicily, Sardinia, Ibiza, southern Spain, and along
the North African coast, selecting locations suitable as staging points on their
long voyages and as potential trading centres. Utica, in Tunisia, was perhaps
the earliest African colony; nearby Carthage was founded in 814 or 813 BC
(Aubet 2001: 159–65). Subsequently, Carthage was to become a major urban-
ized state, whose rivalry with the rising power of Rome led to the three Punic
Wars of the third and second centuries BC, culminating in the destruction of
Carthage (Hoyos 2010). This was one of the major conﬂicts of the Ancient
World and received attention from a number of Greek and Roman writers, but
surviving Carthaginian written sources are limited. Nevertheless, the Phoen-
ician alphabet, in which the Carthaginian language, Punic, was written, has
been claimed as ancestral to the later alphabets of the Western World, and
Punic continued to be written during the Roman period in North Africa and
survived in a spoken form even longer (Lancel 1995).
   A little later than Carthage was the Greek colony of Cyrene, according to
tradition founded in 631 BC, which became one of the principal cities of the
Hellenistic world and gave its name to the Roman province of Cyrenaica,
established in 74 BC. This city developed further during the Roman period but
appears to have declined after an earthquake in AD 365. The Cyrenaican city
of Ptolemais, which also had Greek origins and was probably founded in the
seventh century BC, survived longer and was occupied during the Hellenistic,
Roman, and Byzantine periods, and after the Arab conquest of AD 643
(Kraeling 1962; Kenrick 2013).
   Following the destruction of Carthage, North Africa was gradually
absorbed into the growing Roman Empire, although it was not until the

46
                                    The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

early third century AD that the Roman occupation of North Africa was
completed. Documentary sources are numerous but patchy, mainly because
North Africa was on the edge of the Empire and attracted relatively little
attention from Roman historians. The spread of Christianity during the Late
Roman period led to an increase in written sources, although those by Bishop
Augustine of Hippo Regius and others tended to be dominated by religious
issues (Sears 2011). Overall, the documentary sources show a Roman North
Africa that consisted of numerous towns and cities, together with associated
areas of rural settlements, estates, and farms. A productive agriculture
developed from Carthaginian times, with a surplus of grain and some other
commodities being exported. Silphium, an indigenous strong-smelling plant
now extinct that was used in Greece and Rome for culinary and medicinal
purposes, was also exported, as was garum, a sauce that was made from the
entrails of salted ﬁsh and considered a great delicacy. Particularly productive
was the region that now forms the northern part of Tunisia. South-west of
Carthage, rebuilt during the Roman period, was an extensive wheat-growing
district, and the grain shipments to Rome from here and other parts of North
Africa became extremely important. The Roman army, in the form of the
Third Augustan Legion, provided security, particularly along the vulnerable
southern frontier. For four centuries or more North Africa became an
integral part of a huge area with similar political institutions, economic and
social organization, and culture. At least ofﬁcially there was even a common
language, in the form of Latin, although Punic and Libyan languages and
cultures survived.
  Gradual changes occurred in North Africa during the course of the late
third, fourth, and early ﬁfth centuries AD, particularly associated with
the growing importance of Christianity (Sears 2007). Then, from AD
429 to 533 the Vandals, a Germanic warrior group, gradually occupied
North Africa, leading to some socioeconomic decline but mainly replacing
the ruling elite, with little change for the indigenous people (Clover 1993).
Nevertheless, the Vandal invasion was ‘the beginning of the end of Roman
Africa’ (Mattingly 1994: 215). Byzantine rule from Constantinople replaced
that of the Vandals during the sixth century AD but appears to have been
tenuous, as is apparent from the relative ease with which the Arabs overran
North Africa during the seventh century (Christides 2000; Kenrick 2009:
6–8; Kaegi 2010).
  There are numerous written sources for Islamic North Africa, in Arabic,
Greek, and Latin, but many of them are of later date than the periods they
describe (Christides 2000: 71–7). In some ways Islamic North Africa was
the successor to Roman North Africa, although cities became less important
than rural areas, which were characterized by a fragmented society of

                                                                            47
African Civilizations

Libyan tribes. However, some cities survived and some new ones were
built, such as a capital for what was now called Ifriqiyah, a city that was
founded in AD 670 at Qayrawan (Kairouan) in central Tunisia. Islamic
society also adopted the Roman culture of public baths, which had ﬂour-
ished in Roman North Africa but was largely abandoned in Medieval
Western Europe (Yegül 2010). Furthermore, during the Fatimid period in
North Africa and Egypt in the tenth to twelfth centuries AD, art and
architecture attained some of the highest standards in the Islamic world
(Bloom 2007). It was as traders, however, that the inhabitants of Islamic
North Africa made their greatest contribution to African history. During
the Roman period there had been trade with people in the Sahara; the
Garamantes of the Fezzan, who occupied oases south of Tripoli, partici-
pated in this, and there is growing evidence of its importance (Wilson
2012). It was this trade that enabled Garamantian urban growth and
incipient state development in the hostile environment of the central
Sahara during the late ﬁrst millennium BC and early ﬁrst millennium AD
(Mattingly 2013; Mattingly and Sterry 2013). Furthermore, it was the
foggara irrigation of the Garamantian settlements that, in turn, made those
trading activities possible. Nevertheless, the extent to which such trade
penetrated the desert to the south of the Fezzan is uncertain (Mattingly
2011); it appears to have consisted mainly of relay exchange, rather than
exchange across the breadth of the desert. It was North African Arab
traders who eventually conquered trans-Saharan travel by the use of camels
as pack animals (Bulliet 1975). Capable of carrying loads of 150 to 200
kilograms each (Gauthier-Pilters and Dagg 1981: 110), they can cover
30 to 40 kilometres a day and can voluntarily go without water for up to
10 days and for longer if browsing on plants with a high water content or
in cooler weather (Wilson 1984: 151, 173). They can eat thorny plants that
other animals avoid and have large soft feet adapted to walking on soft
sand, although liable to injury on stony surfaces. The main problem with
camels is that they are susceptible to trypanosomiasis, not usually spread by
tsetse ﬂies as with other domestic animals but by other biting ﬂies (Wilson
1984: 122–7). The single-humped camel was probably domesticated in
southern Arabia, where desert Arabs learnt how to overcome problems of
management. Introduced to Roman North Africa, they were used to pull
ploughs and carts, but by the fourth to sixth century AD camel caravans
were in use, as indicated in a stone carving from a tomb at Ghirza, in
Tripolitania (Mattingly 1994: plates 59 and 61). Able to cover long dis-
tances in the desert, Islamic North Africans were to have a major impact on
the peoples south of the Sahara, spreading their religion and inﬂuencing the
development of trade and urbanization.

48
                                     The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

Archaeological evidence
There is plentiful archaeological evidence for the state and urban develop-
ments in North Africa that are recorded in historical sources. In spite of its
destruction and later rebuilding by the Romans, the outline of the city of
Carthage during the pre-Roman period is known. Excavation has uncovered
housing as early as the eighth to seventh centuries BC and evidence of metal-
working, dye production, and the making of ﬁne pottery (Aubet 2001:
218–26, ﬁgure 48). The latest phase of the Punic city, in the second century
BC, was carefully planned, with streets crossing at right angles and stone
houses of several storeys. Shops and workplaces seem to have been mixed
with domestic accommodation, and buildings were provided with washrooms
and had cisterns and pipes for the supply of water and soakaways and other
pipes for waste water and sanitation (Lancel 1995: 152–72).
   Early cemeteries have also been investigated; their grave goods included
gold jewellery and items of ivory thought to have been carved in Carthage as
early as the seventh century BC (Lancel 1995: 70–6). Particular attention
has been given to the tophet, a cemetery reserved for the burial of infant
cremations from about 700 to 146 BC. This yielded more than 20,000 urns,
the earlier ones containing the remains of foetuses and premature or newborn
(probably stillborn) babies and later ones those of infants up to three years
old. There has been debate over claims by some hostile ancient writers that
child sacriﬁce was practised in Carthage and at other Phoenician sites, and
some archaeologists have thought that the tophet burials at Carthage and
elsewhere are evidence of this. However, it is possible that the tophet was
merely a burial place reserved for very young children, who were not buried
in cemeteries with adults. Death from natural causes has seemed the most
likely explanation, in a society that probably had a high infant mortality,
particularly in an urban environment where the very young would have been
the most vulnerable to infection (Aubet 2001: 250–6). Nevertheless, argument
on this subject has continued (Smith et al. 2011; Schwartz et al. 2012; Smith
et al. 2013; Xella et al. 2013).
   Because of the role of Carthage in maritime trade and as a sea power, with its
location commanding the narrowest part of the Mediterranean between North
Africa and Sicily, its two interconnected harbours are particularly interesting.
Enclosed from the sea and entered by a narrow channel, they consisted of an
outer commercial harbour and an inner military one. Excavation has shown
that the inner harbour, which was circular, was ﬁrst constructed in the late
third or early second century BC, although subsequently rebuilt during the
Roman period. On an island in the centre of the Punic inner harbour was a
circular stone building that provided covered storage for at least 30 warships,


                                                                              49
African Civilizations

and up to 140 others could have been berthed around the perimeter of the
harbour (Hurst 1979; Lancel 1995: 176–8).
  Carthage was the most important of pre-Roman Punic and Numidian cities
in the western part of North Africa. Thugga and Kerkouane (Fig. 3.2), both in
northern Tunisia, are other examples of pre-Roman urbanism. Also important




Fig. 3.2 Plan of the Punic city of Kerkouane, Tunisia. After Sears 2011: ﬁg. 1.5.
Redrawn by Andrew Stawowczyk Long.


50
                                    The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

is Althiburos, in western Tunisia, where survey and excavation has thrown
valuable light on Numidian settlement during the ﬁrst millennium BC
(Sanmarti et al. 2012). Furthermore, the cities of Sabratha, Oea, and Lepcis
Magna, which became important during the Roman period, had Punic origins.
Sears (2011: 13–30) has stressed both the development of urbanization and the
emergence of states before the extension of Roman control over North Africa
began in the second century BC. Nevertheless, it was the incorporation of
North Africa into the Roman Empire that resulted in the most substantial
archaeological evidence of both urbanization and centralized state authority in
North Africa (Sears 2011: 32, map 2, 121, map 5). The physical remains are
amongst the most impressive to have survived above ground from the Roman
world. This is because Roman North Africa was one of the wealthiest and
most populated parts of the Empire; following political and economic decline
during the subsequent Vandal and Byzantine periods, population densities in
Islamic North Africa were lower and urban centres either shrank or were
abandoned. This situation contrasts with places that continued to be import-
ant urban centres, such as Carthage, which has remained occupied since
Roman times and is now part of Tunis, and Oea, which lies under the modern
city of Tripoli.
   The archaeological record for Roman North Africa provides a remarkable
picture of both urban and rural life during a period of more than 400 years.
In conjunction with the documentary record and with inscriptions and
coinage, it is possible to reconstruct much of the history of the region.
Numerous urban centres existed, particularly in parts of Tunisia and Algeria,
ranging from large to small, as well as country villas, farms, frontier defences
such as forts, and roads. Collectively, these sites provide abundant evidence
for a state infrastructure that was complex, sophisticated, and prosperous.
Its essentials also survived for a remarkably long time, even when in apparent
decline during the late Roman, Vandal, and Byzantine periods. Most
buildings were constructed in stone, often in ﬁne masonry; principal city
streets were paved and provided with drainage systems. Of central import-
ance in each Roman city was the forum, as a meeting place, often with a
basilica where courts took place and a curia where the town council met. In
addition, cities seem to have competed with one another in their construction
of monumental public buildings. These usually included temples, an amphi-
theatre for spectacles and public punishments (the one at El Djem, in Tunisia,
could seat 30,000 people), a theatre for dramatic performances, one or more
monumental arches, and, for a few cities, a circus for chariot races. As time
went on, they also included public baths (such as the Large South Baths at
Timgad, in Algeria, Fig. 3.3), the usage of which became a major part of
Roman culture in North Africa as elsewhere in the Empire (Yegül 2010).

                                                                             51
African Civilizations




Fig. 3.3 Plan of the Large South Baths at Timgad, Algeria. From Yegül 2010: ﬁg. 59,
after Krencker, D. et al. 1929.


To supply the baths with water and to meet other requirements in urban
centres, aquaducts were also constructed, sometimes bringing water from
considerable distances. In addition, there were statues of gods or civic
leaders, marketplaces and shops, and, in coastal cities, harbours. The imper-
ial government was the ultimate authority, controlling security, taxation, the
administration of law, and other matters of importance, but many of the
decisions about urban planning seem to have been made by the individual
cities. This was in spite of a tendency to adopt general Roman models, such

52
                                      The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

as orthogonal layouts in which streets met at right angles. Most often it was
members of a city’s administrative or commercial elite, or the city itself, that
ﬁnanced monumental building projects. This was a means of establishing
prestige within the urban community; in order to ensure that such generosity
was not forgotten, it was often recorded in inscriptions, in Latin and Punic,
which provide information about urban history. Another source of such
history is the cemeteries or necropoleis located on the edges of many cities,
with some of the burials marked by monumental tombs with inscriptions.
  Many public and private buildings display evidence of prosperity, such as
ﬁne carving, richly decorated mosaic pavements, or wall paintings, often
informative on a variety of subjects. Matters of more personal concern were
also attended to. In the Seaward Baths at Sabratha, there is a hexagonal
communal latrine with seats placed over a drain around three sides of the
marble-faced room and with a channel in front of the seats providing clean
water for washing oneself (Kenrick 2009: 58, ﬁgure 18). Latrines were often
associated with bath buildings because both needed water; the Large Baths at
Djemila, in Algeria, for instance, featured a facility that could accommodate
twenty-two to twenty-four people (Yegül 2010: 142). Similar comforts were
probably present in private houses also; in a villa at Bulla Regia, in Tunisia, for
example, is a two-hole latrine in a small closet with a decorative mosaic ﬂoor
(Manton 1988: 125–6: illustration 72). This subject needs to be seen in the
context of sanitation in the Roman world as a whole, for which Scobie (1986)
has provided a detailed study. In North Africa every effort seems to have been
made by the elite to make life pleasant for themselves, and even less fortunate
people beneﬁtted to some extent from the thriving economy.
  There was variety in the layout of North African Roman cities and also
changes that occurred over the centuries. In earlier times they often lacked city
walls, which were added at a later date, indicating changes in security. One of
the most impressive cities was Sabratha, a large, afﬂuent city on the coast of
Libya (Fig. 3.4), with a layout contrasting, for example, with Thamugadi, a
small inland city in Algeria (Fig. 3.5). There were also changes to North
African cities caused by the adoption of Christianity; Late Roman Carthage,
for instance, had sixteen known churches within and outside its walls. Subse-
quently, Vandal occupation of North Africa for a century seems to have
contributed little to the archaeological record, although the following Byzan-
tine period did see a small revival of cities and the construction of new city
walls, the restoration of old churches, and the building of new ones (Kenrick
2009: 7–8).
  The invasion of North Africa by Muslim Arabs in the seventh century
introduced a different culture to the region. Although it became less urbanized
than it had been during the Roman period, new capitals were built at Kairouan

                                                                                53
African Civilizations




Fig. 3.4 Plan of part of the central area of the Roman city of Sabratha, Libya. After
Kenrick 1986: ﬁg. 123.



in the late seventh century and at Mahdiyya in the early tenth century, both in
Tunisia. In addition, new state structures emerged from the confusion that
followed the invasion, the most signiﬁcant being controlled by the Aghlabid
dynasty during the ninth century and by the Fatimids during the tenth to

54
                                        The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa




Fig. 3.5 Plan of the centre of the Roman city of Thamugadi (Timgad), Algeria, in the
third century AD. From Sears 2007: ﬁg. 14.


twelfth centuries. The latter period was one of outstanding cultural achieve-
ment (Bloom 2007), but, as with subsequent periods in the region, it has not
received much archaeological attention. Principal cities included Fez, Tangier,
Algiers, Tunis, Kairouan, and Tripoli, but continuing occupation has made
their archaeological investigation difﬁcult. From the eleventh century there
were also the remarkable cities of Mzâb, in the harsh Algerian Sahara, each
constituting a separate city-state (Jaabiri and Yahia 2000).

                                                                                       55
African Civilizations

  For a detailed excavation of an Islamic city, it is necessary to look at the site
of the small city of Qsar es-Seghir, on the Moroccan coast. Located near the
narrowest part of the Straits of Gibraltar, it was only 22 kilometres from the
European shore. It was, in succession, a conduit for people and commodities, a
frontier fortress, and a colonial outpost. Occupied in turn by Muslim North
Africans and Christian Portuguese, it was the scene of interaction between
Africa and Europe. The settlement seems to have originated in about the eighth
century AD and continued until about the fourteenth century when Islamic
southern Spain approached its end (Redman 1986).
  Qsar es-Seghir was a planned city, its circular layout conforming to an
Islamic ideal supposedly represented by early Baghdad (Fig. 3.6). Less than
3 hectares in area, it was enclosed by a mortared stone and ﬁred-brick wall,
about 1.8 metres thick and 8 metres high. The wall had twenty-nine towers
and three fortiﬁed gates. Within the city wall was a roughly rectangular
layout of relatively wide streets, with a congregational mosque, a public bath
building, and a market. These were constructed in stone and ﬁred brick; the
building of which most survived when excavated was the bath building. This
was an impressive structure, with a changing area, a cold room, a warm
room, and a hot room. The ﬂoors were paved with bricks or tiles. There was
also a room containing a furnace, from which hot air circulated beneath the
ﬂoor of the hot room. Adjacent to the building was a well. The complex is a
reminder of how much Islamic society had inherited from the preceding
Roman world.
  Much of the remaining space within the city wall was ﬁlled with houses of
stone and ﬁred brick; a small number were outside the wall. The houses were
rectangular in plan, with windowless exteriors and a single entrance from the
street through a bent-axis corridor. Within each house, the rooms were ranged
around a central court and included living/sleeping rooms, a kitchen, a storage
space, and a latrine. The latter emptied into an underground drain, which fed
into a drainage system under the middle of the adjacent street; each house also
had a well. Although many houses were of only one storey, some had a second
storey reached by an internal stairway. Material culture at Qsar es-Seghir was
simple: most of the pottery was wheel-made but undecorated, sometimes with
a clear lead glaze on the interior. Much of it was probably locally produced,
but there were also decorated ceramics that were mostly imported from
elsewhere in North Africa and from Islamic Spain. Iron was used for weapons,
tools, and nails, and items of personal adornment were made of bronze or
brass, sometimes coated in silver or gold. Bone and ivory were made use of and
glass vessels were used but rare. A few Islamic coins of gold, silver, and copper
were also found. Some people seemed wealthier than others but not to any
great extent. Partly this might be because of Islamic restraint in display but

56
                                         The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa




Fig. 3.6 Plan of the Islamic city of Qsar es-Seghir, Morocco. After Redman, 1986: ﬁg. 3.2.


more likely it is because Qsar es-Seghir was a small city of workers and traders,
with a maximum population of only 1,200 to 1,300 inhabitants.
  Islamic Qasr es-Seghir came to a violent end in the ﬁfteenth century, when a
Portuguese army, equipped with cannon, attacked it. Renamed Alcacer Ceguer,

                                                                                       57
African Civilizations

the city became part of a Portuguese expansion into northwest Africa that
eventually included Tangier and several ports along the Atlantic coast. As
such it was a fortress city, with modernized fortiﬁcations, a garrison of soldiers,
and a population that was predominantly male. Eventually, the greater proﬁt-
ability of its more distant overseas interests led Portugal to abandon North
Africa. After ninety-two years the Portuguese left Qsar es-Seghir, ﬁrst destroying
many of its buildings and some of its fortiﬁcations to discourage reuse of the
site, which was never reoccupied.
   The Portuguese city was different from the preceding Islamic one. Although it
retained the circular plan, its defensive walls were reduced in height and
broadened at the base, as well as surrounded by a deep ditch. Five bastions
were also built, three of them around the former city gates; the one closest to the
sea became a fortiﬁed citadel. These modiﬁcations were designed to make the
city more easily defended against cannon ﬁre and to enable the efﬁcient use of
cannons and ﬁrearms against attackers. The street layout seems to have
remained much as it had been but with more open spaces at the ends or
intersections of streets, most of which were paved with cobbles. The mosque
was turned into a church and subsequently rebuilt. The old market disappeared
and the public bath building became a prison or arsenal. The houses in the
Portuguese city also differed from the Islamic ones, although in many cases the
earlier buildings were reused. Their plan was usually linear, with rooms that
were increasingly private as one moved away from the largest one, to which an
often decorative front door gave access. Many houses were also the location of
commercial activities and were not as well ﬁnished internally as the Muslim
houses had been. Although still built mainly of stone, they lacked the latrines
and drains of the earlier houses; fewer houses had their own wells, as public
wells in the city were also used. Many houses were subdivided as time went on,
probably because of a growing population, which might have reached about
1,000 people. The Portuguese occupants seem to have had more personal
possessions than their predecessors. Most of the pottery was imported from
across the Straits of Gibraltar, much of it glazed tableware, and later there was
even some Chinese porcelain. There were many metal objects, mainly of iron, as
well as numerous items of personal adornment of bronze, silver, and gold. Glass
vessels and bracelets were common and coins were more numerous than they
had been during the Islamic period. Collectively, the evidence suggested a three-
tier hierarchy, consisting of a large number of people of relatively modest means,
a small number who were rather wealthier, and just one who was richer than
anyone else, reﬂecting a typical military community.
   The pre-ﬁfteenth-century archaeological evidence from Qsar es-Seghir
provides an important example of North African Islamic urbanism. It should
be considered together with other Islamic urban sites in Morocco, such as

58
                                     The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

Al-Basra, to the south of Qsar es-Seghir. This was the site of another walled
city, mainly occupied in the ninth and tenth centuries AD but abandoned by
about the thirteenth century (Redman 1983; Benco 2004). Al-Basra has also
been set in its regional context in a study of the political economy and
settlement systems of northern Morocco (Ennahid 2002).


Subsistence economy
During the last three millennia the people of North Africa have mainly depended
on mixed agriculture to exploit the variety of environments in the region,
including desert, where the oasis cultivation in the Fezzan was particularly
impressive (Mattingly 2011; 2013; Mattingly and Sterry 2013). Different areas
have been important for cereal cultivation, particularly wheat and barley, or for
the production of olive oil, wine, dates, fruit, vegetables, and honey. Cattle,
sheep, and goat pastoralism have also contributed to subsistence, particularly in
the mountains and the semi-desert. Limiting factors of water stress and high
temperatures have often been ameliorated by irrigation, so that during some
periods North Africa became a major exporter of food. In addition, access to a
long coastline has enabled ﬁshing to contribute signiﬁcantly to human subsist-
ence. Inevitably, subsistence in the region varied throughout the long period
considered in this chapter, ﬂuctuating with economic conditions and the level of
security. However, Punic, Greek, Roman, Vandal, Byzantine, and Arab colon-
ists saw North Africa as a food source capable of generating considerable
wealth, as well as supporting its own people. The latter peaked at perhaps
3 million inhabitants late in the second or in the third century AD, although
the number is thought to have fallen by the seventh century (Kaegi: 2010: 64).
However, during the ﬁrst and second centuries AD, North African grain exports
fed Rome, the capital of the Empire, providing enough for eight months of each
year, some half a million tons (Manton 1988: 108). In addition, agricultural
exports included massive quantities of olive oil, but also wine and other com-
modities. Signiﬁcantly, a second-century AD coin of Hadrian depicts a personi-
ﬁcation of Africa holding a cornucopia in one hand, a symbol of plenty
consisting of a goat’s horn overﬂowing with ﬂowers, fruit, and corn. In the
other hand the ﬁgure holds a scorpion, suggesting perhaps an acceptance of the
counterbalancing constraints of the African environment (Fig. 3.7).


Technology
Throughout the relevant time there was a sophisticated level of technology in
North Africa, comparable to that of the contemporary Mediterranean world
in general. There is abundant evidence of skilled craftsmanship in stone, wood,

                                                                              59
African Civilizations




Fig. 3.7 Silver denarius of Hadrian commemorating his visit to Africa in AD 130–131.
On the reverse is a personiﬁcation of Africa wearing an elephant skin head-dress and
holding a cornucopia and a scorpion. ‘Africa’ at this time consisted of the Roman province
of Africa Proconsularis, approximately equivalent to modern northern Tunisia and
northeastern Algeria. From Manton 1988: ﬁg. 14.

ferrous and nonferrous metal, pottery, and other materials. Building of both
domestic and public structures frequently attained high standards, particularly
during the Roman and Islamic periods, and boat construction was already well
developed in the Punic period, with both warships and merchant vessels
playing an important role in Carthaginian history. Engineering was also
competent, as evidenced by the harbours at Carthage in the ﬁnal centuries
BC and by the aqueducts and other facilities for water supply during the
Roman period. Similarly, the harbour and lighthouse at Roman Lepcis Magna
(Sears 2011: 37, ﬁgure 2.1) are evidence of a capacity to plan and complete
large construction projects. Also in the Punic and Roman periods, urban
drainage and sanitation were attended to, and in Roman North Africa both
urban and rural road building were important. In addition, there are indica-
tions of urban planning in most periods. Dye and garum were manufactured
and olive-oil production was organized on a semi-industrial scale, as indicated
by the remains of stone olive-presses (Fig. 3.8) and by large numbers of
amphora used in the transport of oil or wine. However, perhaps the most
impressive of the surviving evidence for technological expertise in Roman
North Africa is the work of stonemasons and sculptors and the makers of
mosaic pavements, the latter depicting scenes from daily life as well as myth-
ology (Dunbabin 1978). Punic ﬂooring included what the Romans called
pavimentum Punicum, made up of terracotta fragments set in mortar (Hoyos
2010: 85, 221), perhaps the inspiration for the later but different potsherd

60
                                        The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa




Fig. 3.8 Reconstruction of a Roman olive-press, based on remains at Hinshir Sidi Hamdan,
southeast of Tripoli. From Kenrick 2009: Fig. 77.


pavements of West Africa (p. 198). Another Carthaginian innovation was the
threshing-cart, known to the Romans as the plostellum Punicum (Hoyos 2010:
221), and it appears that Punic agriculture, which included the use of the
plough, was generally sophisticated. Wheeled vehicles were in use until the
third century AD, when they were mainly replaced by camel transport; the
Carthaginians had horse-drawn chariots and in Roman North Africa carts
were pulled by horses, oxen, or camels, as also were ploughs (Bulliet 1975: 17,
137–40). Finally, North African states from the ﬁrst millennium BC to the
second millennium AD minted their own coinage.



Social system
North African society remained hierarchical during the many centuries dis-
cussed in this chapter, although the character of its social structures varied
through time. For the Carthaginians and the Hellenized people of Cyrene,
mercantile success and consequent wealth were often the basis of political
power and entry to a governing elite consisting of privileged families.
In Roman North Africa the situation was similar, but its leaders were subject

                                                                                     61
African Civilizations

to the superior authority and ﬁscal control of imperial Rome. Nevertheless,
social integration of Punic and other local people with colonial settlers and
their descendants makes it difﬁcult to decide the extent of ‘Romanization’ in
North Africa. During the Vandal period there was monarchy based mainly
on oppression of the population, and much the same was the case in indigen-
ous states and tribal areas during the overall period considered here. The
relationship of mobile pastoral tribes outside the settled areas with the urban
and rural communities was complex and variable. The Byzantine period
restored a diluted version of the earlier Roman situation, but the subsequent
Arab rulers were essentially successful military leaders, their descendants, or
their rivals. Common to all these periods, however, was an urban element
within society, ﬂuctuating in importance but consisting of cosmopolitan
citizens on whom the ruling elites depended. City-dwellers included a wide
range of socioeconomic groups, amongst them religious leaders, traders,
skilled craftsmen, artisans, servants, labourers, and slaves. There was also
an educated, literate component within many North African cities, and in
the Roman period some cities were essentially military in their character,
functioning as legionary bases or as settlements for army veterans. Urban
government, at least in the Roman period, depended on populism as well as
legal sanctions, as indicated by the number of public baths, amphitheatres,
theatres, circuses, temples, and other facilities that were constructed for the
beneﬁt of citizens. However, North African cities have to be considered in the
context of the rural economies that supported them. The greatest numbers of
cities were situated in the agriculturally most productive regions, and each
city had a close relationship with its surrounding countryside. Many of the
urban elite owned country estates, which are particularly well known from
the Roman period. Agricultural wealth was based on the labour of a large
population of rural workers, who included slaves and who were at the
bottom of the social pyramid.


Population pressures
North Africa has been called ‘the wealthiest region of the western half of the
[Roman] empire in the ﬁrst few centuries [AD]’ (Kaegi 2010: 65). This con-
trasts with the relatively impoverished and thinly populated condition of many
areas observed by visitors in the late second millennium, leading some to
suggest climatic deterioration as an explanation. This is now thought not to
have been the case; instead, it appears to have been skilled land management,
particularly of water in marginal areas, that underpinned past agricultural
success, most notably during the Roman period. In contrast, many subsequent
Arab settlers seem to have been more interested in pastoralism in the

62
                                     The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

semi-desert interior than in the cities and farmlands of the coastal regions
(Kenrick 2009: 10). Although North Africa was a land of urban centres in
Carthaginian, Roman, and later times, it is the number of Roman cities and
towns, their density in more fertile areas, and their presence even in drier areas
that is most impressive. Northern Tunisia and northeast Algeria had the
greatest density, but urban centres also occurred from the Atlantic coast to
Tripolitania, the latter supporting two of the best-known cities, Sabratha
(Kenrick 1986) and Lepcis Magna. Subsequently, cities appear to have become
less numerous but the rural settlements that supported them continued to be
important. Statistics are absent but it seems likely that the overall population
declined after the third century AD. At its peak, there must have been consider-
able pressure on land, especially the more productive land near cities. Such
land generated a great deal of wealth, particularly on large agricultural estates
that were often the property of absentee landowners and worked by slaves.
There is abundant archaeological evidence for this wealth in cities such as El
Djem, in present-day Tunisia. Crowded housing in the excavated portions of
some cities, particularly in the later Roman period, suggests population pres-
sure also existed in urban environments, especially among citizens of lower
socioeconomic status. Furthermore, beyond the settled areas, at the margins of
the desert, there must also have been population pressures, with attempts to
control the seasonal movements of pastoralists by frontier forts, fortlets, and
strategically located barriers. In addition, during the later Roman and subse-
quent periods, many farms were fortiﬁed, indicating insecurity probably
brought on by competition for resources. Considering the marginal constraints
of North Africa, located between the sea and the desert and limited further by
mountains to the west, it seems probable that population pressures did exist at
times.


Ideology
Religious beliefs were important throughout the communities of North Africa
during the periods considered. They varied with ethnic, cultural, linguistic, and
ideological identity. Carthaginian religion, with its origins in the Levant, had
its own distinctive deities, comprising a very large number of gods and god-
desses of whom the goddess Tanit and the god Baal seem to have been the most
signiﬁcant. Hostile Greek and Roman writers were critical of Carthaginian
beliefs, particularly regarding child sacriﬁce, concerning which the evidence
remains ambiguous. It is nevertheless clear that their religion was of major
importance to the Carthaginians for the well-being of their state in both peace
and war. In contrast, the Greek colony of Cyrene reverenced traditional Greek
deities and others of the Hellenized world. Similarly, the Roman colonists

                                                                               63
African Civilizations

honoured Roman gods, although there was also a broadminded acceptance of
cults from other places, such as Isis and Serapis from Egypt and Mithras from
Persia. However, it was the state cult of the Emperor (Fig. 3.9) that was most
important: ‘It kept the peoples of the Empire together and sacriﬁces and
libations had to be observed as homage before ofﬁcial functions and other
important occasions’ (Manton 1988: 128). This is testimony to the central
importance of religious ideology in the maintenance and extension of state
authority. It is signiﬁcant that North African Christian martyrs, in the third
and early fourth centuries AD, were persecuted because of their refusal to
sacriﬁce to the Emperor; it was their disloyalty to the state rather than their
religious belief that was judged criminal. Nevertheless, by the fourth century
Christianity had practically taken over North Africa, where it appears to have




Fig. 3.9 Marble portrait head of Septimius Severus, from Djemila, Algeria. Images of this
sort must have been important in the cult of the Emperor, particularly in the case of this
emperor, who was a North African, born in Lepcis Magna. From Manton 1988: plate 13.


64
                                    The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa

spread more quickly than it did in other parts of the Empire, and early in the
century it was accepted by the Emperor Constantine as the state religion. Its
divisive inﬂuence continued, however, with bitter and often violent disputes
amongst Christians between Catholics and Donatists and with the later
Vandal attempts to impose Arianism. The social and political tensions that
resulted inevitably contributed to the ultimate collapse of Roman North
Africa. Continuing dissension amongst Christians weakened even the sixth-
century Byzantine reassertion of state control. The success of the Arab inva-
sion of North Africa during the seventh century seems to have owed as much
to the cohesion of their Islamic faith as to their military superiority, and
Christianity appears to have collapsed rapidly. However, in its turn, Islam
also became divided by conﬂicts and schisms, especially those between the Shia
and Sunni sects. The story of religious ideology in North Africa shows how
such beliefs can contribute authority and cohesion to a state or, equally, cause
dissension that leads to state disintegration.


External trade
With its long Mediterranean coastline providing seaborne access to some of
the most remarkable urban and state developments of the last three millennia,
external trade was of great importance to North Africa for much of this time
(Fulford 1989). Indeed, external contact must have had great antiquity, as
indicated by ivory from African savanna elephants that reached southern
Portugal by the ﬁrst half of the third millennium BC (Schuhmacher et al.
2009). The very foundation of Carthage and other Phoenician settlements in
the late second to early ﬁrst millennium BC was the product of a wide trading
network. An important part of this comprised the Mediterranean and Atlantic
coasts of southern Spain and northwest Africa (Serrano 2011: 21). It is
apparent that both Carthage and the later Roman colonies owed much of
their economic success to their export capacity, particularly of agricultural
products. Grain and olive oil appear to have been the largest exports, but wine,
garum, and other commodities were also traded. In addition, wild animals
were sent from Africa to Roman amphitheatres, as attested archaeologically by
a late third-century AD Sicilian mosaic showing an elephant being loaded onto
a ship (Manton 1988: 40). Exported animals also included lions, leopards,
hippopotami, rhinoceros, giraffes, and even zebras; some of these must have
come from the African interior. Slaves were another important export; it has
been estimated that between 250,000 and 400,000 new slaves were required
each year to maintain the slave workforce of the Roman state. Amongst these
were Africans, many of them probably supplied by the Garamantes of the
Fezzan to Mediterranean traders (Fentress 2011: 66, 68). Ivory, from both

                                                                             65
African Civilizations

elephant tusks and hippopotamus teeth, was another important export, as
were various African exotica, such as animal skins and semi-precious stones.
Previously, Carthaginian trade had also included decorated ostrich-egg shells
(Lancel 1995: 218–20) and similar commodities. Furthermore, it is possible
that North African merchants were already handling West African gold in
the fourth century AD, considerably earlier than was previously thought
(Garrard 1982; MacDonald 2011).
   This raises the question of Saharan trade prior to its major development
beginning late in the ﬁrst millennium AD. This has often been dismissed as
unlikely because Roman material, for instance, appears not to have penetrated
south of the desert, in contrast to the way that it reached far beyond other
frontiers of the Roman Empire. However, there are indications that inter-
change over short distances could have taken some commodities across the
Sahara in both directions, perhaps in a relay of exchange along the trade
routes. With doubtful exceptions, Roman coins do not seem to have reached
south of the desert, but it is unlikely that they would have been acceptable in
societies unfamiliar with their use and possible that any remaining there would
have been melted down for their metal content. From a later date, Arabic
coins are similarly rare south of the Sahara in spite of the substantial trade
that is known to have developed by then. Nevertheless, Roman trade
goods did reach the Garamantes, in the Fezzan (Mattingly 2011: 54–5), and
the Tomb of Abalessa, in the Hoggar. In addition, carnelian and glass beads
and woollen textile fragments from burials at Kissi, in Burkina Faso, as
well as the ﬁrst appearance of donkeys, horses, camels, and chickens south
of the desert, are further indications of pre-Islamic trans-Saharan contact
(MacDonald 2011: 76).
   It seems likely, therefore, that North African exports to or across the Sahara
already included two commodities that were later to become of importance –
beads and textiles – but there were also ﬁne ceramics and other prestige goods.
As for the main imports of the Roman cities and rural estates of North Africa
itself, they must have comprised a wide range of consumer goods from the
Mediterranean world, many of them appropriate to the afﬂuent lifestyles of
the elite. Similarly, the later Arab settlements absorbed substantial imports,
although mainly from the Islamic world. Throughout the long period reviewed
in this chapter external trade was clearly well developed. The resulting
‘connectivity’, deﬁned as ‘the frequency and velocity of connections between
cities or regions’ (Dowler 2011: 2), has been of the greatest importance in the
inﬂuence of North Africa on its surrounding regions and that of the surround-
ing regions on North Africa. As a frontier, North Africa has contributed both
to the Mediterranean world and to the African world to its south, in the latter
case particularly during the Islamic period, as shown for example by the

66
                                         The Mediterranean frontier: North Africa




Fig. 3.10 Arabic inscription and frieze on copper-alloy bowl from a ﬁfteenth- to sixteenth-
century burial at Durbi Takusheyi, northern Nigeria. Haase 2011: ﬁg. 2, p.103. Drawing by
Michael Ober, Römisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum (RGZM). Reproduced by
permission of Detlef Gronenborn, RGZM).

Arabic inscription (Fig. 3.10) on a copper-alloy bowl from a ﬁfteenth- to
sixteenth-century AD burial at Durbi Takusheyi, in northern Nigeria (Haase
2011; Gronenborn et al. 2012). Indeed, North African Islamic trade also
penetrated far to the north, so that two Barbary lions reached the Royal
Menagerie of England during the thirteenth to ﬁfteenth centuries AD, as
shown by their skulls that were excavated from the moat of the Tower of
London (Barnett et al. 2008).


Conclusion
The inﬂuence of the states and cities of North Africa on other parts of the
continent has sometimes been overlooked. Scholars who were specialists in
North African history and archaeology have regarded Africa south of the
Sahara as not their concern; those who studied the regions south of the desert
have usually had little knowledge of lands to its north. Nevertheless, it has
long been acknowledged that the Islamic societies of North Africa had a
profound effect on many people in the West African savanna, particularly
during the second millennium AD. Traders and others from across the Sahara
stimulated commercial activity, the emergence and growth of cities and
states, the spread of the Islamic religion, and the adoption of limited literacy.
Gold, ivory, slaves, and spices travelled north with the camel caravans;
salt, copper alloys, beads, cowries, textiles, and other manufactured products
travelled south.
   What is less clear is whether such trade existed before the advent of the
Arabs in North Africa, even if only on a much smaller scale. The accepted
view has been that it did not or was virtually nonexistent. Gradually, however,
this is being challenged, and there are indications that there was increasing
trans-Saharan contact at least by North Africa’s late Roman period. Possibly

                                                                                       67
African Civilizations

this had existed even in Carthaginian times, but relevant evidence is very
limited. Nevertheless, the notion of the Sahara as an impassable barrier does
need to be reassessed; given the moister climate of the Early Holocene there
must have been a long-established mobility within this enormous region and in
its margins before the subsequent development of drier conditions.
   Nor was the Mediterranean a frontier in any exclusive sense; rather, it was
a vibrant interactive zone that brought North Africa into continual contact with
people to its north, including Greece, Rome, and southern Spain, and to its east,
including Egypt and the Levant. With a variety of highly productive agricultural
environments, sophisticated technology, organized social hierarchies, functional
specialization, a substantial population, a series of religious ideologies to legit-
imize the sociopolitical status quo, and a substantial export potential, North
Africa has often been a major attraction to outsiders. Clearly, the Phoenicians
thought so, and the Greeks, Romans, Vandals, Byzantines, and Arabs. Of the
people who exploited its beneﬁts, it was surely the Vandals, from central
Europt, whose presence was most remarkable. As a frontier, North Africa seems
to have been highly permeable.




68
Chapter 4
Sudanic genesis: Nubia


Other than Pharaonic Egypt, some of the earliest evidence for urbanization
and state formation in Africa was along the middle Nile, in the region called
Nubia. One of the best-known examples was Meroë, located about 200 kilo-
metres north-east of the modern city of Khartoum, in Sudan. Mentioned
as early as the ﬁfth century BC by Herodotus (Powell 1949: vol. 1, 121), its
antecedents lay in Napata and Kerma, the latter dating back to before 2000
BC, and it was succeeded by the kingdoms of Christian Nubia, which survived
until the early second millennium AD, and by Islamic states that existed until
recent times (Welsby 1996; 2002; Edwards 2004; 2007; UCL 2013).
  At the beginning of the twentieth century, scholars attributed such develop-
ments to the inﬂuence in turn of Pharaonic, Ptolemaic, Roman, Byzantine,
and Islamic Egypt, located to the north of the area. Later the emphasis was
changed to one that stressed the indigenous character of Nubian achievements
but acknowledged the contributions made to them by northern cultures.
William Adams, the author of a 1977 monograph on the archaeology of this
area, described Nubia as ‘the transition zone, between the civilized world
and Africa’ and entitled his book Nubia: Corridor to Africa. According
to Adams, the importance of this narrow corridor through the barren land
of Nubia arose from the fact that it was for long the only dependable route
across the great barrier of the Sahara Desert, a major road into the heart of
Africa. The African interior contained resources much coveted by the outside
world – gold, ivory, and slaves – but also other mineral, animal, and vegetable
products (Adams 1984: 40). These could be tapped via the Nubian corridor.
However, with the development of Red Sea shipping from the ﬁrst millennium
BC onwards, and of trans-Saharan camel caravans during the ﬁrst millennium
AD, the middle Nile Valley gradually lost its signiﬁcance as a major world
trade route. That role was ﬁnally destroyed by the expansion of maritime trade
around Africa’s coasts in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries AD.
  Both archaeological and documentary evidence support the idea of Adams’
trade corridor, and the growth of cities and states was centred on it. This
suggests that this part of Africa can provide us with an example of trade as
a major stimulus towards the development of social complexity. Perhaps so,
but these developments took place at the interface of considerable cultural
contact, of which trade was only one element, as Adams indeed stressed.
People are very likely to meet one another in corridors.

                                                                            69
African Civilizations

  Corridors, however, usually lead somewhere, and archaeologists have
debated the extent to which the culture of the inhabitants of the middle Nile
Valley might have inﬂuenced the rest of Africa. At one extreme, Sayce thought
that ‘Meroë . . . must have been the Birmingham of ancient Africa’ (Sayce 1911:
55). At the other extreme, Trigger (1969) complained about ‘the myth of Meroë’
and Shinnie (1967: 167) pointed out that ‘not a single object of certain Meroitic
origin has been found away from the Nile to the west’. Indeed, in the ﬁrst edition
of this book (Connah 1987) it was suggested that the Nubian corridor was
a cultural cul-de-sac, an interpretation also advanced by Alexander (1988).
However, such a view implies only a passive role for Nubia, suggesting that it
was a mere receiver of cultural inﬂuences rather than also an initiator of cultural
changes. It also reﬂects a former research emphasis on Lower Nubia, the
narrow, desert-enclosed part of the Nile Valley north of the Second Cataract,
and the relatively little attention given to the valley further south and its rainfed
wadis and savannas. As Edwards (1996: 5) put it: ‘Meroe, and indeed Kerma
before it, should be seen as the early examples of a long and enduring tradition
of Sudanic kingdoms.’ Edwards subsequently expanded this view in his
2004 book The Nubian Past, and similarly Fuller (2003: 183) stressed the
‘distinctive Sudanic system of power’ in Meroitic society. Whatever the external
inﬂuences, Nubia should be seen as a Sudanic genesis of social complexity.


Geographical location and environmental factors
The Nile is a very long river that runs from the Lake Region of East Africa to
the Mediterranean Sea, passing through a number of contrasting environ-
ments, some of which are amongst the driest in Africa. Because it ﬂows
through so much arid country for much of its length, the river and its narrow
valley have played an important role in human history. Ancient Egypt was,
as Herodotus called it, ‘the gift of the river’ (Powell 1949: vol. 1, 111) but if
this was true of the lower Nile, it was also partly true of the middle Nile, the
subject of this chapter. This is the land of the Nile cataracts impeding naviga-
tion, a series of rocky, swift rapids. Most of the cataracts are conventionally
numbered from one to six: the First Cataract just south of Aswan, in southern
Egypt; the Sixth Cataract a little north of Khartoum in the Sudan. It is this long
and narrow strip that for the last 2,000 years or so has been known as ‘Nubia’
(O’Connor 1993: xii), although the location of its southern limits has varied.
In this discussion, the ‘middle Nile’ will be that part of the Nile Valley between
Sennar on the Blue Nile south of Khartoum, and the First Cataract at Aswan,
in the north (Fig. 4.1). However, in addition to the river valley, it is essential to
consider the land to its east and west, particularly in southern Nubia, which
does receive a little seasonal rain.

70
                                                                Sudanic genesis: Nubia




Fig. 4.1 Principal archaeological sites and places on the middle Nile mentioned in the text.
(Some place-name spellings vary.) 1, Kalabsha; 2, Sabaqura; 3, Ikhmindi; 4, Maharraqa;
5, Sheikh Daoud; 6, Karanog; 7, Aniba; 8, Qasr Ibrim; 9, Arminna West; 10, Tamit; 11, Abu
Simbel; 12, Ballana; 13, Faras; 14, Debeira West; 15, Buhen; 16, Kasanarti; 17, Jebel Adda;
18, Qustul; 19, Debeira East; 20, Meinarti; 21, Duweishat; 22, Kulubnarti; 23, Amara;


                                                                                        71
African Civilizations

   The climate of the more northerly parts of the middle Nile is an extreme
one. At Wadi Halfa, in the northern Sudan, the mean daily temperature
between May and September is about 32C, but the temperature nearly
always exceeds 38C during the day and may reach above 49C. However,
from November to March it is comparatively mild, with temperatures that
can occasionally drop almost to freezing. Between Aswan and Dongola, that
is to say in the northern half of the middle Nile region, it almost never rains.
In contrast, the southern half of the region has a well-deﬁned wet season of
eight to ten weeks, in July and August, although the actual rainfall is very
limited, increasing from north to south from about 25 millimetres at Dongola
to about 180 millimetres at Khartoum. Another climatic factor of importance
is wind, which blows steadily from the north for the whole year, resulting
in considerable accumulation of desert sand, particularly on the west bank
of the Nile, where it has constantly encroached on both settlements and
ﬁelds. However, with the exception of the reverse bend between Abu Hamed
and Debba, it has also made upstream navigation possible on the river,
just as the direction of the current has facilitated downstream navigation
(Adams 1977: 33–5).
   The vegetation of the middle Nile region varies from total desert in the north
to acacia desert scrub in the south (Andrews 1948: 34). The most important
part of the environment, however, is the River Nile itself, rising more than
3,000 kilometres to the south and bringing to Nubia both the water and soil
that are necessary to sustain human settlement. Most vegetation maps are of
too small a scale to show details of the vegetation of the long river littoral, so
narrow that in places it is a mere few hundred metres wide or is absent.
However, date palms (Phoenix dactylifera) are common, really domesticated
trees but so numerous that they look like part of the natural vegetation. Other
trees also grow along the river littoral, the most important being the dom palm
(Hyphaena thebaica), various acacias, and the tamarisk. Most of the rest of the
vegetation consists of cultivated plants, but halfa grass grows wherever it can
ﬁnd moisture, and when the river is low a fringe of papyrus reed can be found
in some places at the water’s edge (Adams 1977: 37–8).
   Environments vary along the Nubian Nile because of its geology. From
Khartoum to Aswan, the river ﬂows alternately over Nubian sandstone and
basement complex (mostly granite). As a result, there are six geographic


Caption for Fig. 4.1 (cont.) 24, Ferka; 25, Sai; 26, Seddenga; 27, Soleb; 28, Sesebi; 29, Kerma
and Pnubs; 30, Argo; 31, Kawa; 32, Kurgus; 33, Old Dongola; 34, El Kurru; 35, Jebel Barkal;
36, Sanam; 37, Nuri (sites 34–7 constitute Napata); 38, Meroë; 39, Hamadab; 40, Shendi;
41, el Hobagi; 42, Wad ben Naqa; 43, Musawwaret es-Sufra; 44, Naqa; 45, Soba; 46, Jebel
Qeili; 47, Sennar. After Adams 1977 with additions. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.


72
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

subdivisions of the middle Nile (Adams 1977: 21–33), their boundaries mostly
consisting of the main cataracts of the river where it crosses from one geo-
logical formation to another (Fig. 4.1). In general, sandstone areas have
supported farming settlements but granite areas have not. To the south there
is semi-desert grassland beyond the river littoral and therefore pastoralism.
Within the Shendi Reach, the furthest south, lay the heartland of the Meroitic
state, including the city of Meroë itself. To the north of the Shendi Reach lies
the Abu Hamed Reach, a region of barren granite with low productivity,
which extends to the Fourth Cataract and seems never to have been an
important area for settlement. Between the Fourth Cataract and the Third
Cataract lies the Dongola Reach, with potentially cultivable land on both sides
of the river. This reach saw the earliest developments of complex society on the
middle Nile: both Kerma and Napata were situated there. From the Third
Cataract to the (unnumbered) Dal Cataract is the Abri-Delgo Reach, import-
ant during the Egyptian (New Kingdom) colonial expansion, in the second half
of the second millennium BC. Further north is the Batn el Hajar, a name
meaning ‘belly of rock’, appropriate for this bare granite landscape, extending
from the Dal Cataract to the Second Cataract. Last of the geographic subdiv-
isions is Lower Nubia, stretching from the Second Cataract to the First
Cataract. Now almost totally submerged beneath Lake Nasser (in Egypt; its
southern part, in Sudan, is called Lake Nubia), it was formerly moderately
prosperous. In spite of the virtual absence of rainfall, archaeological evidence
suggests that at times this was a signiﬁcant area of settlement and that its
proximity to Egypt gave it an important role as a cultural contact zone.
   In the middle Nile region, cultivation of seasonally inundated or irrigated
land, in recent times, produced sorghum, barley, beans, tobacco, lentils, peas,
watermelons, maize, some wheat, and other plants. Animal husbandry was
important, mainly involving cattle, sheep, goats, and donkeys. Chickens,
pigeons, ducks, and dogs were kept, but horses and pigs were rare (Trigger
1965: 19–22; Adams 1977: 54). Little of the native fauna seems to have
survived to later historical times, although ﬁsh remained an important
resource. At ﬁrst a primary source of ivory, ostrich eggs and feathers, skins,
and even live animals for the Egyptian trade, Lower Nubia in particular
gradually became merely a pipeline through which these passed on their way
north.
   A longer-lasting Nubian resource consisted of minerals, including copper,
ﬁne-grained igneous rocks, and, most important, gold. Gold was scarce but
occurred widely, particularly in the desert to the east of the Nile Valley.
Another resource of importance throughout most of the history of the region
was slaves. Even with this commodity, however, as time went on Nubia
became the pipeline rather than the source. It seems that the indigenous

                                                                             73
African Civilizations

resources of Nubia were less important than those that it obtained from
further south (Adams 1977: 41–3).
   A constraint on human settlement in the middle Nile was the level of the
river itself, whose height in the ﬂood season could be too low for irrigation or
so high that ﬂoodwater swept away both settlements and cultivable alluvium.
There were also long-term ﬂuctuations in the average level of the Nile, such as
Adams (1977: 242) hypothesized to explain the apparent virtual abandonment
of Lower Nubia during the ﬁrst millennium BC. This region, he claimed, was
reoccupied only at the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium AD, with the advent
of the saqia, the ox-driven water wheel, which could raise irrigation water
to greater heights than were possible with the man-powered shaduf – although
subsequently it appeared that the abandonment might have been overstated and
the saqia not introduced until about the fourth century AD (Edwards 1996:
80–1, 91; Welsby 1996: 156; Edwards 2004: 202–4). Another constraining
factor was the availability of arable land, of which three sorts existed: seluka
land, saqia and shaduf land, and basin land (Trigger 1965: 19–21). Seluka land
was situated on the ﬂoodplain and was inundated each year when the river was
high. When the level fell, the land could produce a crop without further
watering, and its exploitation was therefore an example of ‘recessional cultiva-
tion’, which is discussed elsewhere (p. 153). In contrast, saqia and shaduf
land consisted of relatively small areas that had to be watered mechanically
but could be cropped almost continuously. Basin land, although of importance
in Egypt, was more limited in Nubia, and consisted of land lying in natural
depressions adjacent to the river, into which ﬂoodwater overﬂowed or was
channelled by a canal.
   The life-giving waters of the Nile brought suffering to the inhabitants of
Nubia also. Schistosomiasis, a water-borne disease that is common in much
of tropical Africa and is caused by a blood ﬂuke that lives in freshwater snails,
is prevalent in the Nile Valley. The ﬂuke gains entry to the human bloodstream
usually through breaks in the skin and then attacks the liver and other organs.
Another afﬂiction associated with water is onchocerciasis, or river blindness,
caused by ﬁlarial worms transmitted by the minute ﬂy Simulium damnosum
(Manson-Bahr and Apted 1982: 166). Malaria, tuberculosis, and trachoma
are other diseases along the middle Nile (Adams 1977: 40–1).
   A further constraint on settlement has been the depredations of human
beings themselves. The middle Nile Valley has suffered numerous military
invasions from its north, and the nomadic pastoralists of the adjacent deserts
have repeatedly harassed the sedentary farmers along the river, particularly
after desert nomads adopted the camel; evidence from Qasr Ibrim indicates
that it was in the Nile Valley by the early ﬁrst millennium BC (Rowley-Conwy
1988). Nevertheless, it seems that desert pastoralism was so important to the

74
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

riverine economy (Edwards 1996; 2004) that it was essential for people within
the valley to control or coexist with those from outside it. This must have been
a strong incentive to more powerful political organization and to greater social
complexity.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
Understanding of early cities and states in the middle Nile region is based on
historical documentation and archaeological data. Except for the Islamic
period of the second millennium AD, the timespan is too great for oral
tradition to contribute. Adams (1977: 66–70) identiﬁed six groups of histor-
ical sources.
  The ﬁrst consists of Egyptian texts in hieroglyphic and hieratic. These cover
the period from the ﬁrst half of the third millennium BC to near the end of the
second millennium BC, but contain little about Nubia. The second group
comprises Nubian hieroglyphic texts of the Napatan period, from the eighth
to about the fourth century BC. Written by Egyptian scribes in the Egyptian
language and in hieroglyphics, these also contain little about Nubia and throw
no light on contemporary Nubian language. Consequently, when in later times
Nubians developed their own Meroitic alphabet, they left texts that are difﬁ-
cult to understand because their language bears no recognizable relationship to
any other language (Welsby 1996: 190; Edwards 2004: 176–9). Used from
about the second century BC to about the fourth century AD, Meroitic writing
can be read, but the language of the writing cannot be fully understood (e.g.,
Trigger 1973). The third group of historical sources are writings by classical
authors. One of the earliest was Herodotus, who visited Egypt in the ﬁfth
century BC. Other classical writers also contributed information on Nubia,
but these Greek and Latin texts are the view of the outsider, written from
hearsay evidence. Knowledge of the region appears to have been limited: the
Nile Mosaic at Palestrina near Rome, of the late second century BC, shows
‘the landscape of lower Nubia combined with the fauna of upper Nubia’
(Meyboom 1995: 50). The fourth group, that of ecclesiastical histories, is also
limited in value. Several church historians wrote about the conversion of
Nubia in the sixth century AD to Christianity, but their accounts conﬂict
depending on their doctrine. Also, the information that they give is mainly
concerned with the ﬁrst century of Christian Nubia, because subsequently the
Arab conquest of Egypt cut off contact with the rest of Christendom. The ﬁfth
group consists of Arab sources. The most important is the fourteenth-century
geographer al-Maqrizi, whose writing also preserves part of a tenth-century

                                                                             75
African Civilizations

ﬁrst-hand account of Nubia. Again, these sources represent the views of
outsiders and they are conﬁned to the ﬁrst half of the second millennium
AD. The sixth group is records by European travellers in the Early Modern
period. Their value is limited for the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, but
several eighteenth-century travellers wrote about Nubia; much of this material
belongs to the nineteenth century.
  Thus there are nearly 5,000 years of historical documentation for the middle
Nile. The documentation has three weaknesses: ﬁrst, the further up the Nile
one goes, the less informative it is; second, the texts provide only an intermit-
tent recorded history; third, most of the documentation was written by visitors
to Nubia, attempting to understand what they saw or were told.


Archaeological evidence
In such circumstances archaeological evidence has a vital role to play, although
studies of ancient Nubia have suffered from historical bias. Archaeological
research commenced at the beginning of the twentieth century with the work
of Reisner, Firth, Grifﬁth, Garstang, and Wellcome, to be followed until
1958 by others (Adams 1977: 78–80), but there was a tendency for excav-
ations to be tomb, temple, and palace–oriented and for much of the detailed
information never to reach publication. Only with the international archaeo-
logical campaign of the 1960s, made necessary by the construction of the
Aswan High Dam and the creation of Lake Nasser/Nubia (Hassan 2007),
did there develop both an interest in the excavation of settlement sites and a
substantial archaeological literature.
  Some of the earliest archaeological sites relevant to the origins of cities and
states in the middle Nile region are Egyptian rather than Nubian. They represent
two main periods of colonial expansion, ﬁrst during the Pharaonic Middle
Kingdom, and second during the New Kingdom. The ﬁrst of these expansions
belonged mainly to the Egyptian Twelfth Dynasty of the ﬁrst quarter of the
second millennium BC and resulted in the construction of a series of forts in
Lower Nubia, most of them clustered around the Second Cataract (Adams
1977: 175–83; Edwards 2004: 91–4). Buhen is the best known of those that
have been excavated. It consisted of a series of mud-brick fortiﬁcations built
on a massive scale, enclosing a small town (Emery 1965: 149). This was not
the ﬁrst Egyptian town at Buhen, for during the Fourth and Fifth Dynasties of
the Old Kingdom, around the middle of the third millennium BC, there was
already a sizeable town surrounded by a stone wall (Adams 1977: 170–4). It has
been assumed that the Middle Kingdom forts were constructed in order to
protect Egypt’s southern frontier, but Adams suggested that they were primarily
intended to protect and control the commerce of the Nile Valley (Adams 1984).

76
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

  During the Pharaonic Second Intermediate Period, which lasted from the end
of the ﬁrst quarter of the second millennium BC to the middle of that millen-
nium, Egyptian political control of Lower Nubia seems to have weakened
and the Second Cataract forts might have been abandoned. However, the New
Kingdom, of the second half of the second millennium BC, saw a new colonial
initiative by Egypt that extended Egypt’s dominion further up the Nile than
ever before, or indeed ever again until the conquests of Mohammed Ali early
in the nineteenth century AD.
  Egyptian authority was established to at least the Third Cataract, and
evidence of the most southerly Egyptian presence is provided by inscriptions
at Kurgus, between the Fourth and Fifth Cataracts (Edwards 2004: 105). The
Middle Kingdom forts were restored, and new fortiﬁed towns were built in the
Abri-Delgo Reach and in the Dongola Reach. In time, the military character of
Egyptian settlement diminished and the building of temples replaced that
of fortresses. During the period as a whole, however, colonial settlements of
importance grew up particularly in the Abri-Delgo Reach and included such
towns as Sai, Amara, Soleb, Seddenga, and Sesebi (Delgo). Further south, in
the Dongola Reach, there was less Egyptian colonization but towns developed
at both Kawa and Napata, possibly to control the Meheila Road, a desert
route that cut across the great bend of the Nile in this region. Most remarkable
of the New Kingdom temples in Nubia is that of Abu Simbel in Lower Nubia,
but another of importance was constructed far to the south at Jebel Barkal,
where the Temple of Amon, founded by the Egyptian Pharaoh Rameses II,
later became the ideological centre of the indigenous Napatan state. New
Kingdom colonization of the northern parts of the middle Nile terminated
towards the end of the second millennium BC, probably because of growing
political problems in Egypt. The colonial domination of parts of Nubia by
Egypt was over, but its consequences for the people of Nubia were to be long-
lasting (Adams 1977: 217–45).
  Egyptian involvement in Nubia had already elicited an indigenous Nubian
response by the Second Intermediate Period. It was at this time, about the
middle of the second millennium BC, that the Nubian kingdom of Kerma was
at the climax of its development in the period known as the Classic Kerma.
Prior to that, its emergence can be traced back for about 1,500 years through
the Middle Kerma and the Early Kerma to its indigenous origins in the
Pre-Kerma before 3000 BC (Bonnet 1990; 1992). That its roots included a
substantial pastoralist element is apparent from the sheep and cattle remains
with some of the Kerma burials, and MacDonald (1998) suggested that the
sociopolitical changes indicated by the Kerma evidence originated in what he
termed the ‘Mobile Elites’, of the African savanna and Saharan margins, from
4000 BC onwards. Nevertheless, Kerma reached its high point at a time of

                                                                             77
African Civilizations

Egyptian weakness during the Second Intermediate Period, when the Second
Cataract forts might have been abandoned, and it disappeared at the time of
Egypt’s colonial expansion during the New Kingdom.
   Although there was dense Kerma settlement as far south as the Kawa region
(Smith 2003: 88), the most important archaeological evidence comes from
Kerma itself, a complex of sites situated on the east bank of the Nile at the
northern end of the Dongola Reach, one of the more fertile regions of the
middle Nile. Excavations at Kerma by G.A. Reisner, in 1913–16, concentrated
on an extensive cemetery containing several thousand graves (Reisner 1923).
A number of these were covered by burial mounds, or ‘tumuli’, as the excav-
ator called them. Of these tumuli, eight were unusually large, the largest being
about 91 metres in diameter. Like the smaller examples they contained burial
chambers, but in the case of the three largest the body of the mound had an
internal structure of mud-brick walls. Part of this structure consisted of a
corridor running across the mound, with other walls at right angles to it. In
the main chamber, the principal burial lay upon a bed, accompanied by
weapons and personal possessions. Other human bodies, whose attitudes
suggested that they had been sacriﬁced, took up the rest of the space. A far
larger number of sacriﬁces lay in the transverse corridor, and later subsidiary
burials, some also accompanied by human sacriﬁces, had been inserted in
many places between the walls. In Tumulus X, where the main chamber had
been long ago robbed, Reisner found 322 sacriﬁces in the sacriﬁcial corridor,
and estimated that there had originally been as many as 400 before disturb-
ance by tomb robbers (Reisner 1923: Parts I–III, 312). Such evidence suggests
a highly centralized political authority, and it seems justiﬁable to claim Kerma
as the earliest state in tropical Africa.
   Excavations by Charles Bonnet more recently have shed additional light on
Kerma (Bonnet 1990; 1992; 1997; Bonnet and Valbelle 2014). A greater
chronological range of burials has now been examined, and because the dry
climate has preserved bone, leather, hair, and feathers, a remarkably detailed
picture of Kerma society can be reconstructed. For instance, a life expectancy of
thirty-one years has been calculated for those who died naturally, although
those who were sacriﬁced were generally younger than this, and some individ-
uals lived until they were eighty years old. In addition, the remains of an
extensive and long-lasting settlement have now been uncovered (Fig. 4.2).
Mainly of rectangular houses of mud-brick or wood, this has provided evidence
of an elaborate system of fortiﬁcation consisting of a mud wall with projecting
rectangular towers and a ditch. As time passed there were substantial changes
in the plans and layout of structures within the settlement, and both stone and
ﬁred brick were used in the defences. Overall, it seems that this early urban
development grew up around a sanctuary that evolved through time into a

78
79
     Fig. 4.2 Plan of Kerma during its ‘Classic’ period, about the middle of the second millennium BC. After Bonnet 1990: ﬁg. 30.
African Civilizations

massive mud-brick temple, known as the Western Deffufa. This is a solid
rectangular mass of mud-brick, measuring about 27 by 52 metres at the base
and originally probably far exceeding the height of 19 metres that has survived
to modern times (Reisner 1923: Parts I–III, 21–40). The structure has no internal
chambers, only the remains of a narrow, winding stair that must have led to its
top. Excavations by Bonnet, however, have shown that it was not originally a
solid structure but a temple with interior chambers that were later ﬁlled with
brickwork, while at least twelve phases have been distinguished in its masonry
(Bonnet 1992: 613–14). A similar but smaller structure, known as the Eastern
Deffufa, is situated in the cemetery about 4 kilometres to the east of the
settlement and appears to have been an outsized mortuary chapel (Reisner
1923: Parts I–III, 122–34). Attached to one side of the Western Deffufa was a
building from which Reisner excavated more than 500 mud sealings of Egyptian
type, which had been afﬁxed to various containers. There were in addition many
fragments of items of Egyptian manufacture and assorted raw materials. This
led Adams (1984: 51) to suggest that this was a trading depot, but the discovery
by Bonnet of a bronze workshop in the same place, and the argument of
Lacovara (1991) that some of the Egyptian material was in the process of
being recycled, makes it more likely that this was merely an activity area.
  Bonnet’s excavations have also shown that by the ﬁrst half of the second
millennium BC the Kerma settlement contained a very large circular building
of wood and mud-brick that was at least 10 metres high, probably with a
conical roof. Clearly an elite structure, its apparent similarity to much later
audience chambers recorded ethnohistorically in other parts of the continent
emphasizes the African character of the Kerma development. It contrasts with
a rectangular residential or administrative building and with an Egyptian-style
temple, both dating towards the end of the Kerma sequence and located
a kilometre away (Bonnet 1992). By this time the Egyptian New Kingdom
might have taken control of the area, but it seems that prior to this Kerma had
already attained urban status and become the capital of tropical Africa’s ﬁrst
identiﬁable state. David O’Connor had no doubt about this, referring to
Kerma as ‘the earliest city in Africa outside of Egypt’ and concluding that
‘the social complexity and the advanced degree of political centralization
evoked in the city and cemetery of Kerma would seem to be those of a state,
not a complex chiefdom’ (O’Connor 1993: 50, 55). An indication of the
demographic processes involved in the formation of this early city and state
has been provided by stable isotope analysis of human skeletal material from
Kerma burials, suggesting that a signiﬁcant portion of the population might
have originated elsewhere (Thompson et al. 2008).
  The extent of Egyptian inﬂuence in Kerma has become doubtful. For
instance, Bourriau (1991: 135–6) has shown that whereas Kerma pottery that

80
                                                         Sudanic genesis: Nubia

occurs in Egypt during the Eighteenth Dynasty is ‘tableware or cooking
pottery’, indicating the presence of Nubians, the Egyptian pottery found at
Kerma in the Classic Kerma period consists of ‘jars for the storage and
transport of commodities’ that are not ‘sufﬁcient evidence for the presence of
Egyptians’.
  New Kingdom colonization apparently brought Kerma to an end, but when
that in turn declined, the next indigenous Nubian development was that of
Napata, a kingdom that arose on the Dongola Reach during the ninth century
BC (Shinnie 1996: 95–105; Welsby 1996; Edwards 2004: 112–40). This
kingdom, usually known as the Kingdom of Kush, was focused until the fourth
century BC on an area extending downstream from the Fourth Cataract for a
distance of 24 kilometres. It is the whole of this district that is referred to as
Napata, and it includes major cemetery sites at El Kurru (Dunham 1950) and
Nuri (Dunham 1955), a cemetery and temple sites at Jebel Barkal, and a
cemetery, temple, and town site at Sanam (Grifﬁth 1922). After the fourth
century BC, the political focus of Kush seems to have moved south to Meroë
on the Shendi Reach of the Nile, although the relationship of Napata and
Meroë is still not fully understood. Napata seems to have had its origins in the
power vacuum left by the end of Egyptian colonial domination towards
the close of the second millennium BC (Morkot 2003). As already mentioned
(p. 77), Egyptian New Kingdom colonization had led to the growth of a town
at Napata and to the construction of a temple of Amon at Jebel Barkal. With
the end of Egyptian control, it seems that power fell into the hands of local
rulers who, with the sanction of the priests of Jebel Barkal, went on to control
much of Nubia and, in the eighth and seventh centuries BC, Egypt itself which
they ruled as the Twenty-ﬁfth Dynasty (Bonnet and Valbelle 2006). Subse-
quently, Napata became of less importance, but its culture seems to have
remained imitative of that of Pharaonic Egypt, although displaying Nubian
characteristics. Signiﬁcantly, Napata was still important to the later rulers
of Kush, located at Meroë, who continued to be crowned there and to build
temples there. Indeed, it is possible that some of the latest Napatan burials
were of rulers whose capital had already been transferred to Meroë.
  Archaeological evidence for the Napatan state is mainly limited to the sites
already mentioned. The cemeteries at El Kurru, Jebel Barkal, and Nuri have
been interpreted as ‘royal’ cemeteries, and it is from El Kurru and Nuri,
excavated early in the twentieth century by Reisner, that much of our infor-
mation comes. All three cemeteries are characterized by tombs covered by
small, steep-sided pyramids, almost certainly inspired by New Kingdom
examples such as those at Aniba in Lower Nubia (Shinnie 1996: 100), and
mummiﬁcation was practised. In addition, temples at Jebel Barkal and Sanam
have been excavated, and in a number of other places there are the remains of

                                                                               81
African Civilizations

temples constructed by Taharqa, one of the Nubian rulers of Egypt (Fig. 4.3).
Nevertheless, there is little known about Napatan settlement sites, in spite of
what appears to have been a large town at Sanam, which might have been
the principal population centre of Napata. Thus, although hieroglyphic
inscriptions from excavated tombs have enabled a substantial reconstruction
of the Napatan dynastic sequence (Welsby 1996: 207–9), we have relatively
little information about the social and economic organization of the people
that these rulers governed. Adams (1977: 293) was of the opinion that this
was not a ‘complex, urbanized society’, but Kendall (1991) has since identiﬁed
a Napatan palace building at Jebel Barkal; it is also possible that there was a
walled town at El Kurru (Welsby 1996: 148). Furthermore, Napata was at
the terminus both of the Bayuda Road, the land route to Meroë, and of the
Meheila Road, the land route to Kawa and Argo, which possibly, with
Seddenga further to the north, were also Napatan settlements of importance.
Napata, it would appear, must have been a major staging point in the trade of
the middle Nile (Edwards 2004: 139).
   As Napata declined, Meroë rose to prominence, and in its case there is
abundant archaeological evidence suggesting both urbanization and state
development. Meroë seems to have been of particular importance during the
ﬁrst century AD, but it probably extended from before the fourth century
BC to about the fourth century AD. Excavations at the site of Meroë itself
have indeed indicated that its earliest building level could have belonged to the
eighth century BC or perhaps even earlier (Török 1997: Part I, 15–20). Like
Napata, Meroë seems to have been a Nubian response to the world to its
north. For Napata, it was Pharaonic Egypt that was an important cultural
inﬂuence; for Meroë, it was Ptolemaic Egypt, which was part of the wider
Hellenistic world.
   Archaeological evidence for the Meroitic period includes the remains of large
settlements, of which Meroë itself is the most important. Situated on the east
bank of the Nile, some 200 kilometres downstream from modern Khartoum,
Meroë has suffered a chequered archaeological history. Forgotten until its
rediscovery at the end of the eighteenth century AD, parts of the site were
‘ransacked’ by Ferlini in the 1830s (Adams 1977: 295), and early in the
twentieth century parts were excavated at separate times by Budge, Garstang,
and Reisner. Only Reisner’s work was conducted in an adequate fashion, and
even his excavations had to be published posthumously by Dows Dunham.
The extensive excavations by Garstang were unscientiﬁc and remained largely
unpublished, until Török rescued them eighty-three years later (Török 1997).
At the time only the ﬁrst season’s work was described in detail (Garstang et al.
1911). Limited excavations by Peter Shinnie during the 1960s and 1970s
remain the only archaeological investigations at Meroë carried out and

82
Fig. 4.3 Upper part of a stone statue of Taharqa, excavated from a cache of statues at
the Egyptian town of Pnubs, near Kerma. Seventh century BC. According to Adams 1977:
248, Taharqa ‘is the only Nubian to be mentioned by name in the Bible’ (2 Kings XIX, 9).
After Bonnet and Valbelle 2006: 122.
                                                                                     83
African Civilizations

published in a scientiﬁc fashion. Shinnie also summarized what was then
known about Meroë and related sites (Shinnie 1967) and later followed this
with a more general study (Shinnie 1996). Welsby (1996) and Edwards (2004:
141–81) provided other syntheses.
   The site of Meroë (Fig. 4.4) covers an area roughly 0.75 kilometre by
1 kilometre (for plans, mostly variants of the same originals, see Shinnie 1967:
76; 1996: 107; Adams 1977: 299, 314; Bradley 1982: 164; Welsby 1996: 149;
Török 1997: Part II, ﬁgs. 1–3; Edwards 2004: 146). Within the settlement was
a large, stone-walled precinct, roughly rectangular in shape, in which lay a
labyrinth of buildings, mostly of monumental character. Many of these build-
ings, which were usually of mud-brick, often with an external facing of ﬁred
brick, were excavated by Garstang, who interpreted the area as the residence of
the rulers of Meroë, calling it the ‘Royal City’. Its buildings were believed
to include palaces, audience chambers, stores, and domestic quarters for the
palace staff; many of them seem to have been of two storeys (Török 1997:
Part I, 36). There was also a small temple, in front of which was found a bronze
head of Augustus, of Roman manufacture (Shinnie 1967: plate 28). Perhaps
the most remarkable feature of the Royal City, however, was its so-called Roman
Bath. This consisted of a large brick-lined tank with water channels leading into
it from the Nile. At ﬁrst interpreted as a swimming bath (Shinnie 1967: 79), it
was later suggested that it was a water sanctuary associated with Nile ﬂoodwater
festivals (Török 1992: 117; Welsby 1996: 122–3).
   Outside the Royal City, much of the rest of the site is covered by two
extensive occupation mounds, and it is possible that Meroë originated as a
settlement split between three alluvial islands in a braided channel of the Nile,
the course of the river having since changed (Bradley 1982). The south mound
remains unexcavated, and the only investigations of the north mound were test
excavations by Shinnie. These revealed remains of mud-brick structures serv-
ing industrial, domestic, and public functions, as well as furnace remains that
indicated both iron smelting and iron smithing (Bradley 1982; Shinnie and
Kense 1982). Other than this, little is known of ordinary buildings, although
Shinnie (1967: 77) described ‘many mounds covered with red [ﬁred] brick
fragments’ and mentioned ‘six large mounds of slag and other debris of iron
smelting’ on the edges of the site. The signiﬁcance of these mounds of slag has
long been discussed. Some idea of their size can be gained from a railway
cutting made through one of them for the line from Khartoum to Atbara.
Possibly this was the mound into which Arkell excavated an unpublished trial
trench in 1940, recording that it consisted of ‘solid slag and debris from iron
smelting from top to bottom’ (Shinnie and Kense 1982: 18).
   The site of Meroë also has the remains of a number of temples, and, in
contrast with the scant attention given to the residential and industrial areas,

84
                                                             Sudanic genesis: Nubia




Fig. 4.4 Plan of Meroë, in Sudan. After Shinnie 1967: ﬁg. 19; Welsby 1996: ﬁg. 66;
and Török 1997: Part II, ﬁg. 1.




                                                                                     85
African Civilizations

the more important of these have been entirely excavated. They include a
temple of Amon, adjacent to the Royal City; a temple of Isis, on the northern
edge of the site; the Lion Temple, which stands on top of one of the slag heaps
on the eastern edge of the site; and the Sun Temple, which is situated about
1 kilometre east of the site. There is also the Shrine of Apis, located about 2.5
kilometres south of the Royal City, and several lesser temples within the site
itself. In addition, just to the east of the settlement site lie three cemeteries
which have been entirely excavated and which were found to contain many
hundreds of graves, thought to have been occupied by common citizens of
Meroë. Some 3 to 4 kilometres east of the main site, however, lie three other
cemeteries. The most important of these is the North Cemetery, which was the
main burial place of the rulers of Meroë and their immediate relatives, char-
acterized by the best preserved of the small stone pyramids for which Meroë
has become famous. The South Cemetery comprises more than 200 graves,
most containing common citizens, but it also includes mastabas and pyramids
belonging both to rulers and (it is thought) to members of the ruling family. In
contrast, the West Cemetery, which contains about 500 graves, including a
number of pyramids, seems to have been for less important members of the
royal family and also for commoners (Shinnie 1967: 75–87; Hinkel 2000).
   It is regrettable that archaeologists have concentrated on the tomb, temple, and
palace aspect of Meroë, rather than on the settlement itself and its apparent urban
status. At its peak it might have had a population of 20,000 to 25,000 people
(Grzymski 1984: 289), although Edwards (2004: 147) thought it ‘quite impos-
sible even to estimate the size of its population’ and suggested that its ‘urban
character’ had still ‘to be clearly demonstrated’. Nevertheless, an emphasis on
monumental structures at Meroë has produced both inscriptions and artistic
representations that have made contributions to our knowledge of Meroitic
society and history. In particular, we know the names and approximate dates
of most of the rulers of Meroë, even though there is still some uncertainty about
the details of this dynastic sequence (Shinnie 1967: 58–61; Adams 1977: 251–2;
Welsby 1996: 207–9). The inscriptions are in Meroitic, however, rendered either
in hieroglyphs or in the distinctive Meroitic cursive alphabet, and because this
language cannot be fully understood (p. 75), they can be read only in part.
Luckily, the temple and pyramid-chapel reliefs and the small number of pieces
of sculpture in-the-round are more informative: depicting gods, rulers (male and
female), and vanquished enemies and throwing light on royal dress and regalia
and on iconography and religion (Shinnie 1967: 101–9).
   Although little is known of the housing of ordinary people at Meroë itself,
excavations at the site of Hamadab, some 3 kilometres to the south, have
revealed an apparently large nucleated Meroitic settlement of more than
15 hectares (Fig. 4.5). There seems little doubt of the urban character of this

86
                                                             Sudanic genesis: Nubia




Fig. 4.5 Meroitic ‘Upper Town’ of Hamadab, near Meroë. Representing the originally
walled core of the urban settlement, founded probably in the last century BC. Reproduced
by permission of Pawel Wolf, cf. ﬁg. 2 Wolf et al. 2014. Drawing by Nicole Salamanek
(Beuth Hochschule for Applied Sciences Berlin / Geomedia Lab) / Hamadab Archaeological
Project (Qatar-Sudan Archaeological Project).
site, and several potentially similar large sites are known to the south and
north of Meroë (Edwards 2004: 147–8; Wolf et al. 2014).
   There are many other sites along the middle Nile which both culturally and
chronologically can be described as ‘Meroitic’. Perhaps the most important of
                                                                                     87
African Civilizations

these are situated in the western part of the ‘Island of Meroë’, a name applied
to the area known as the Butana, in the triangle formed by the conﬂuence
of the rivers Atbara and Nile. Two of these sites are particularly signiﬁcant:
Naqa and Musawwarat es-Sufra (Shinnie 1967: 87–95; Adams 1977: 318–21;
Edwards 2004: 150–3). At Naqa there are remains of a town nearly as
extensive as those of Meroë itself, and there are at least seven stone temples,
several possible palaces, and two large cemeteries. One of the temples, the Lion
Temple of Natakamani and Amanitere, has remarkable exterior reliefs
depicting the ﬁrst-century AD king and queen and the lion god Apedemak.
The reliefs on the two pylons of this temple are an explicit statement of
autocratic authority, showing both king and queen brandishing weapons
whilst grasping their vanquished foes by the hair. In contrast, the site of
Musawwarat es-Sufra is something of a mystery, consisting principally of
a cluster of monumental stone buildings, of which the largest, the Great
Enclosure, has no Nubian or Egyptian parallel. It included a temple, with a
remarkable irrigated garden, perhaps a palace, and apparently a religious
pilgrimage centre (Welsby 1996: 143–6; Wolf 1997; Wenig 2001; Edwards
2004: 153).
  Another site in the Meroë area is Wad ben Naqa on the east bank of the
Nile, where there is evidence of a considerable town. Excavations there have
revealed the remains of a large, square building of at least two storeys, which
has been interpreted as a Meroitic palace, apparently similar to others at
Meroë, Jebel Barkal, and Naqa. It was built of mud-brick, its exterior walls
faced with ﬁred brick and plastered with white stucco. Only the lower ﬂoor
survived, consisting mainly of long, narrow rooms that were probably vaulted
storerooms, supporting more important rooms in the storey above. Neverthe-
less, the building is an indication of the development of centralized authority in
the Meroitic state (Vercoutter 1962; Adams 1977: 322–3).
  Other evidence of Meroitic settlement has been found as far south as Sennar,
far up the Blue Nile, and as far north as Maharraqa, in Lower Nubia, a distance
of more than 1,100 kilometres (Edwards 1989; 1996). Settlement on the middle
Nile was discontinuous, being concentrated along those stretches of the river
that were economically more viable. Adams (1977: 302) identiﬁed three main
areas of Meroitic culture: the Southern Province, containing Meroë itself; the
Napatan Province; and the Lower Nubian Province. The Southern Province,
which may be regarded as the Meroitic homeland, was connected to the
Napatan Province not by the barren Abu Hamed Reach of the Nile but by
the Bayuda Road, an important desert route that bypassed both the Fifth
and Fourth Cataracts and the contrary winds of this part of the Nile. In the
Napatan Province there was Meroitic activity at Jebel Barkal, Sanam, Kawa,
and Argo and (further north) at Seddenga, but the development of the Korosko

88
                                                         Sudanic genesis: Nubia

Road – a desert route leaving the Nile at Abu Hamed that rejoined it far
downstream in Lower Nubia – cut this area off from the mainstream of
commerce, so that the Napatan Province became something of a cultural and
economic backwater. It is possible that the introduction of the camel, probably
in the early ﬁrst millennium BC (Rowley-Conwy 1988), was one of the factors
that eventually brought about this change (Adams 1977: 304–5). North of the
Napatan Province lay the barren Batn el Hajar, but beyond that was the Lower
Nubian Province where substantial Meroitic settlement has been claimed
(Adams 1977: 345–81). As already explained (p. 74), it was an area thought
to have been virtually uninhabited for some centuries, until resettlement in the
second and third centuries AD as a result of the introduction of the saqia, the
ox-driven water wheel, but this view has been challenged (Edwards 2004:
202–3). The evidence of both cemeteries and occupation sites indicates that
Meroitic settlement in Lower Nubia was characterized not by large settlements
with monumental buildings, as in the southern provinces, but by a nearly
continuous line of farming villages along the Nile, together with a few relatively
small administrative centres. Qasr Ibrim, Jebel Adda, and Faras were amongst
the latter, all of them walled settlements. Karanog appears to have been another
important centre, but it consisted of a scattered collection of houses without
a surrounding wall. Amongst these, however, were two large mud-brick build-
ings, each apparently of three storeys, that are thought to have been successive
palaces of local governors, although their dating remains problematic (Woolley
1911; O’Connor 1993: 100–1). Apparent cultural differences between the
Meroitic north and south prompted Adams to conclude that in Lower Nubia
there had been a secularization of government and that control of trade had
passed into private hands, allowing a widespread development of material
prosperity (Adams 1974; 1976). Subsequently, however, this interpretation
was questioned and it was suggested that the settlement of Lower Nubia might
not have been as dense as was thought (Edwards 1996: 50–2).
   The Meroitic state seems to have faded away in the fourth century AD,
signiﬁcantly at a time when substantial changes were taking place in the
Mediterranean world to the north. Some Meroitic urban centres were aban-
doned and long-distance trade declined, but the elite burials in the mounds of
el Hobagi, 70 kilometres south-west of Meroë, suggest continuity of Meroitic
traditions along with a re-emergence of older ones (Lenoble and Sharif 1992;
Edwards 1996: 92–3; Welsby 1996: 202; Edwards 2004: 191–3). Other
indications of a successor state have been found in Lower Nubia, where the
‘X-Group’, called by Adams the ‘Ballana Culture’ (1977: 392) and treated by
Edwards (2004: 182–211) as one of several ‘post-Meroitic transitions’, sug-
gests the development of an absolute monarchy during the ﬁfth and sixth
centuries AD. The X-Group was ﬁrst recognized from scattered burial

                                                                               89
African Civilizations

evidence, but subsequently a number of village sites were identiﬁed, as well as
larger settlements at Jebel Adda and Qasr Ibrim; excavations at this latter site
suggested that it was a manufacturing centre at this time (Adams 1982: 27–8;
Alexander 1988: 81–2). In addition, the extensively excavated settlement of
Meinarti, just north of the Second Cataract, was also occupied in both the Late
Meroitic and X-Group periods (Adams 2000; 2001; 2002).
  Nevertheless, the X-Group is best known from the remarkable burials
of Ballana and Qustul, situated a little upstream of Jebel Adda. These were
excavated by Walter Emery in the early 1930s and produced evidence
of a concentration of wealth and autocratic power in the hands of a few individ-
uals, thought to be kings (Emery 1938; 1948). There were 122 tombs at Ballana
on the west bank of the Nile and 61 at Qustul on the east bank. All 183 of these
tombs were excavated, and the size of the structures and richness of contents of
perhaps 40 of them might suggest that they contained ‘royal’ burials. Typically,
these larger tombs consisted of a series of brick chambers, constructed at the
bottom of a large pit, which was entered by means of a ramp cut into the hard
alluvium. The chambers were roofed with barrel vaulting and in front of them
there was often a small open court into which the entrance ramp opened. After
the burials and offerings had been placed inside the chambers, in the court and
at the bottom of the ramp, both the pit and the ramp were ﬁlled with earth
and a large earthen mound was raised over them. At Ballana the largest of these
mounds measured 77 metres in diameter and 12 metres in height. It was the
contents of these tombs that were most impressive, however. The ‘king’ was
buried with his ‘queen’ and with his servants, horses, camels, donkeys, dogs,
sheep, and cows. Also included were furniture, food and drink, cooking utensils,
jewels, weapons, tools, and personal possessions.
  Many of these tombs had been ransacked by tomb-robbers in the past but
some survived intact. One of the more remarkable was Tomb 95 at Ballana
(Fig. 4.6). Animal burials lay at the bottom of the entrance ramp, beyond which
were three sealed burial chambers. Inside the ﬁrst chamber was the skeleton of
the ‘king’, who had been laid, wearing his silver crown and other ﬁnery, on a
wooden bier from which he had been displaced soon after burial by the collapse
of the chamber roof. Also in the chamber were the skeletons of his ‘queen’,
wearing a silver crown, and of a male servant and a cow. Weapons and other
personal possessions lay in other parts of the chamber. In an adjacent chamber
were the skeletons of six additional servants, two of them children, accompanied
by more weapons and by lamps, iron ingots, pottery wine jars, drinking cups,
and other things. Most of the third chamber was packed with more pottery wine
jars and drinking cups and with them were numerous bronze cups, a bronze
ﬂagon and pan, a stone bowl, a large vessel of green glass, several scarabs, and a
small gold ingot (Emery 1938: vol. 1, 135–41).

90
                                                              Sudanic genesis: Nubia




Fig. 4.6 Plan of Tomb 95 at Ballana, Egypt. After Emery 1938: vol. 1, ﬁg. 68.


  The animals buried in the tombs at Ballana and Qustul had been pole-axed,
and it was presumed that the human beings, other than the main burial in each
tomb, had met their deaths either by the cutting of their throats or by strangu-
lation. The combination of monumental tomb, wealth, and human sacriﬁce for
the burial of crowned individuals is surely indicative of absolute monarchy in
Lower Nubia during the time to which the X-Group belongs.
  Reisner, who ﬁrst identiﬁed the X-Group, thought that it represented an
invasion of a new people. There is, however, increasing evidence that this
culture evolved within the Nile Valley, where both settlement and burial
evidence suggest that it was a direct successor culture to the Meroitic state,
with similar subsistence strategies and with characteristics comparable to those
indicated by the el Hobagi burials far to the south (Welsby 1996: 204–5;

                                                                                 91
African Civilizations

Edwards 2004: 206–7). Then, with the conversion of the people of the middle
Nile to Christianity in the sixth century AD, a new period of state development
and urbanization was inaugurated.
   The Christian kingdoms of Nubia (Welsby 2002) existed from the sixth
century to about the fourteenth century AD. They developed out of Pre-
Christian states that followed the so-called collapse of the Meroitic state, but
Fuller (2014) has argued that, rather than resulting from collapse, they were
the consequence of increasing regional economic independence. This was
supported by an increasing cultivation of summer crops, such as Sorghum
bicolor and Pennisetum glaucum, and winter crops, such as wheat and barley,
in each case made possible by the third-century introduction of the saqia. Also
important was the growing of cash crops such as cotton and grapes in Lower
Nubia. The major Christian states were Nobadia and Makuria, to the north,
and Alodia (Alwa), to the south; Nobadia became uniﬁed with Makuria at an
early date. Collectively they have left substantial archaeological evidence
(Edwards 2004: 212–55). There are, for instance, the remains of many
churches built of mud-brick and stone. There is also evidence of urban centres
at Qasr Ibrim, Jebel Adda, Faras, Old Dongola, and Soba, as well as evidence
elsewhere of many smaller towns and villages, fortresses, monasteries, indus-
trial sites, and cemeteries. The churches of Medieval Nubia have attracted
archaeological interest for many years (Clarke 1912), but it was not until the
1960s that much work was done on other Christian sites. Study of church
architecture has revealed a steady reduction in size and pretentiousness as time
went on, reﬂecting the gradual decline of Christian Nubia and of its Mono-
physite, Coptic church. Nevertheless, many of the buildings were impressive
structures with stone columns, masonry piers, and brick vaults (Adams 2009).
Most important are the episcopal cathedrals at Qasr Ibrim, Faras, and Old
Dongola and a possible cathedral at Jebel Adda (Adams 1977: 473–8). The
insides of many churches were originally decorated with brightly coloured wall
paintings. Only fragmentary remains of these were known until the 1960s,
when excavations revealed well-preserved paintings in three churches, of
which those discovered in Faras cathedral were quite remarkable. This build-
ing (Vantini 1970) had been abandoned after it ﬁlled with blown sand during
the heyday of Nubian Christianity. Within it were numerous large paintings
depicting biblical scenes and individuals, as well as Nubian kings, bishops, and
eparchs (high-ranking government ofﬁcials), most identiﬁed by name.
   The archaeological remnants of the churches of Nubia indicate the existence
of organized religion and secular authority as separate but interacting entities,
each needing the protection of the other. Under their joint umbrella, the society
of the middle Nile developed its commercial activities to a high level and
became, at least in the northern part of the region, probably more densely

92
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

urbanized than in earlier periods. Unfortunately, archaeological excavation of
the major urban centres has not been extensive; both Faras and Jebel Adda,
for instance, were lost beneath Lake Nasser before much could be done.
Work continued at Qasr Ibrim, however, which was occupied throughout the
Christian period and which survived as an island at the edge of Lake Nasser,
although later ‘almost totally destroyed’ by the lake (Edwards 2004: 159–60).
Excavations there demonstrated that the Early Christian period (c. 500 to c. 800
AD) displayed a remarkable continuity from X-Group times, with many of the
same houses remaining in use and manufacturing activities continuing on a large
scale. Only the conversion of Meroitic temples to churches and the building of a
cathedral and of a monastery mark the introduction of Christianity. During the
Classic Christian period, however, from c. 800 to c. 1200 AD, the city seems to
have become primarily a pilgrimage centre, with most of its housing being
cleared to provide a large open plaza. Nevertheless, during the Late Christian
period (c. 1200 to c. 1500 AD) the site was again fortiﬁed and once more
became crowded with houses, regaining its commercial importance and
(according to excavated manuscript material) also becoming an administrative
centre (Adams 1982: 28–30; Alexander 1988). Excavations of settlements
dating from AD 1000 onwards have also been conducted at Kulubnarti, near
the Dal Cataract, providing further information on the Christian periods and
shedding light on subsequent Islamic occupation (Adams 2011).
  The standard of living for the more afﬂuent during the Christian period has
been indicated by excavations at the site of Old Dongola, far to the south, the
capital city of the kingdom of Makuria (e.g., Godlewski and Medeksza 1987).
A heated bathroom with piped hot water and painted decorations was found
in one supposed house (Jakobielski 1982), and fragments of pottery toilet seats
were also recovered (Godlewski 1991: 92–3, 97). Even further to the south,
the site of Soba, the capital of the kingdom of Alodia, has also been partly
excavated and has revealed rectangular palatial buildings and churches of
mud-brick, ﬁred brick, and stone, as well as both rectangular and circular
(wooden) domestic structures and many burials. Its radiocarbon chronology is
from the ﬁfth to the eleventh or twelfth century AD (Welsby and Daniels 1991;
Welsby 1998; 2002; Edwards 2004: 221–3). In addition, some of the smaller
settlements in Nubia have been excavated, such as Arminna West (Weeks
1967) and Debeira West (Shinnie and Shinnie 1978), both of which were
referred to as ‘towns’ by their excavators, although Adams (1977: 488)
thought that such settlements, although ‘densely urbanized’, numbered only
200 to 400 inhabitants. Indeed, the packed houses of Arminna West (Fig. 4.7)
suggest an urban environment. Many houses in these settlements attempted
to deal with one of the problems of such crowding by providing ‘inside’
latrines (Adams 1977: 491). Usually these would have required night-soil

                                                                             93
94




     Fig. 4.7 Plan of Arminna West, Egypt. After Weeks 1967: ﬁg. 1.
                                                                Sudanic genesis: Nubia

carriers, but at Debeira West there were some latrines that discharged into
individual, vaulted soakaways that were ﬁlled with ash and potsherds (Shinnie
and Shinnie 1978: 106).
  Although some Christian Nubian settlements lacked fortiﬁcations, suggest-
ing peace and stability at times, there were nevertheless many such structures
built over the centuries. In the Early Christian period there were fortiﬁed sites
at Faras, Sabaqura, Sheikh Daud, Ikhmindi, Kalabsha, and Qasr Ibrim, all in
Lower Nubia, presumably responding to military threats from Egypt. Subse-
quently, fortiﬁed settlements, forts, and even castles existed in many other
parts of the middle Nile, probably because of raiders from the adjoining
deserts and dynastic and civil conﬂicts, as well as the need to protect trade.
By the Late Christian period fortiﬁed settlements were common, concentrated
particularly in the Batn el Hajar, in which poor and isolated region many
people seem to have sought refuge (Welsby 2002: 129–36). In particular,
between Faras and Ferka, near the Dal Cataract, two-storey ‘castle-houses’
were constructed, with restricted external access, hidden storage crypts, and
latrine facilities (Fig. 4.8), obviously designed to provide refuge in times of
danger (Adams 1994). Christian Nubian polities were, in fact, disintegrating
into a society of peasant farmers gathered around the castles of local rulers.
The Christian Church was also in decline, and Arabs from the desert were
moving into the region of the middle Nile. With the gradual Arabization and




Fig. 4.8 Cross-section of castle-house at Kulubnarti (Site 21-S-2, House A1). C, cesspit;
H, secret crypt; T, toilet chamber. After Adams 1994: ﬁg. 11b.


                                                                                        95
African Civilizations

Islamization that overtook the area by about the fourteenth century AD,
numerous sheikhdoms based on the tribe replaced central government. How-
ever, eventually a series of loose confederations appeared, the largest and
longest-lasting of which was the Fung kingdom of Sennar, which survived
from the sixteenth century to the early nineteenth century AD (Elzein 2004).
Furthermore, the settlement of Qasr Ibrim, whose occupation dates back to
perhaps 1500 BC, was not abandoned until the early nineteenth century AD,
epitomizing the continuity of urban and state traditions in the middle Nile
region (Adams 1977: 508–636; Alexander 1995). Although those traditions
seem to have had little inﬂuence on the rest of tropical Africa (Shinnie 1989;
Alexander 1993a), this impression needs some qualiﬁcation. First, archaeo-
logically diagnostic artefacts, such as Meroitic and Christian decorated
pottery, are unlikely to have penetrated to economically peripheral areas of
the African savannas, and therefore inﬂuences from the Nile Valley might
be difﬁcult to recognize. Second, during the early Islamic periods large settle-
ments and associated polities did appear in Darfur (west of the Nile) at Uri and
Ain Farah, east of the Nile along the Red Sea coast at Badi’ and ‘Aidhab,
and inland at ‘Allaqi (Elzein 2004: 35–42).


Subsistence economy
The development of cities and states in the middle Nile region was supported
by mixed farming, depending on the cultivation of cereals and vegetables and
on animal husbandry (Edwards 2004). A major factor must have been the
availability of suitable soils that either received seasonal ﬂoodwater or could
be irrigated mechanically. All the developments that have been discussed
took place in areas that were relatively favoured agriculturally. Of the six
geographic subdivisions of the middle Nile, the barren Abu Hamed Reach and
Batn el Hajar were of less importance, while the remainder, particularly the
Shendi Reach and the Dongola Reach, were the locations of important
developments.
  Direct archaeological evidence for subsistence during the periods that have
been considered is not plentiful. However, there is evidence from Kerma for
the cultivation of barley and for the herding of cattle, sheep, and goats, as well
as for hunting, ﬁshing, and the keeping of dogs and donkeys. Sacriﬁces of
sheep and goats were a consistent feature of Kerma burial, and in many cases
a row of ox skulls was placed around one side of the burial mounds (Bonnet
1990; 1992). Transhumant pastoralists in the Wadi Hariq, 400 kilometres
west of the Nile, known archaeologically as the Handessi Horizon, were
contemporary with Kerma and possibly contributed to its subsistence base
(Jesse et al. 2004). All this suggests an early importance of animal husbandry

96
                                                           Sudanic genesis: Nubia

in Nubia; later evidence, from Meroitic times, reinforces this impression.
A bronze bowl (Fig. 4.9) from Tomb G187 at Karanog in Lower Nubia, for
instance, is decorated with an engraved scene showing a cow being milked
and another cow suckling a calf, whilst other calves have been tied to a tree.
Milk is being presented to a woman seated before a corn-stalk hut, the apex of
which is decorated with an ostrich egg; the hut is similar to some made in




Fig. 4.9 Pastoral scenes engraved on two bronze bowls from Tomb G187 at Karanog,
Egypt. The two at the top are on one bowl and the bottom two on another. From Woolley
and Randall-MacIver 1910: vol. 4, plates 27 and 28.


                                                                                  97
African Civilizations

parts of the African savanna until recent times. This bowl is actually one of
two, the other (Fig. 4.9) showing a bull, four cows, and a calf, as well as a
herdsman (Woolley and Randall-MacIver 1910: vol. 3, 39, 59–61, vol. 4,
plates 26–8). To these rural scenes can be added the fact that the quantities of
bones of cattle, sheep, and goats excavated from Meroë, and the ages of the
animals from which they came, indicate that meat as well as milk was
important (Carter and Foley 1980). Indeed, it has been suggested that the
archaeological sites of the Butana region near Meroë reﬂect its exploitation by
semi-nomadic pastoralists, demonstrating the signiﬁcant role of pastoralism
in the Meroitic subsistence economy. Adams (1981) was unconvinced of the
latter, stressing the role of cultivation, and in the drier northern Meroitic
provinces it does seem likely that the cultivation of either naturally or mech-
anically irrigated land provided the greater part of the subsistence base.
Evidence for the growing of sorghum has come from Meroë, Musawwarat
es-Sufra, and Naqa, and of barley from early levels at Meroë (Edwards 1996:
22). Evidence from Qasr Ibrim shows that barley, emmer wheat, and common
millet were at ﬁrst important, but that the ‘summer crops’ of sorghum, cotton,
durum wheat, bread wheat, bulrush millet, termis bean, and sesame were
introduced during the ﬁrst ﬁve centuries AD, about the time that the saqia was
being adopted in the area (Rowley-Conwy 1991). Sorghum seems to have
become especially important, and a relief on a granite boulder at Jebel Qeili,
in the southern Butana, depicts the sun god apparently presenting the Mer-
oitic King Sherkarer, of the ﬁrst century AD, with a number of heads of
sorghum (Shinnie 1967: 51, 96).
  The subsistence economy seems to have remained much the same through-
out Christian and Islamic times (Welsby 2002: 183–9). At Soba, far to the
south, for instance, the excavated cereal remains were dominated by sorghum
and bulrush millet during Early and Classic Christian times (van der Veen
1991: 266); at Qasr Ibrim, sorghum, barley, wheat, and pulses were the major
plant foods during the Late and Terminal Christian periods (Adams 1996:
100) and during the Islamic period. In addition, a variety of fruits and
vegetables had probably long been important. The New Kingdom paintings
in the tomb of Djehuty-hetep at Debeira, in Lower Nubia, depicted workers
harvesting dates and dom-palm fruit (Säve-Söderbergh 1960: 38–40). The
Christian deposits at Soba produced evidence of grapes, ﬁgs, dates, dom palm,
African fan palm, and Christ’s thorn; those at Debeira West, castor oil, dates,
cucumber, (African) groundnuts, and dom palm (Shinnie and Shinnie 1978:
107); and from late in the same period at Qasr Ibrim came castor bean,
watermelon, onion, garlic, and probably cucumber.
  Nevertheless, Edwards (1989; 1996; 2004) questioned the assumption that
cultivation in the Nile Valley was the main subsistence base and stressed the

98
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

probable importance of rainfed agriculture along wadi beds and on other
suitable alluvial soils, particularly (citing Ahmed 1984) in southern Nubia.
Edwards also emphasized the important and continuing input from pastoral-
ism, of which the number of domestic animals buried in X-Group tombs at
Ballana and Qustul remind us. So too might the bones of sheep, goats, cattle,
and pigs, as well as goat droppings, at the Christian site of Debeira West
(Shinnie and Shinnie 1978: 107), and the bones of sheep, goats, pigs, cattle,
horses, donkeys, and camels, and sheep, goat, horse, donkey, and camel dung,
in the Late and Terminal Christian deposits at Qasr Ibrim (Adams 1996: 101).
For Islamic times Qasr Ibrim continues to be informative, showing sheep,
goats, and cattle to be common. That domestic animals were so important
even in the rainless north of Nubia might seem difﬁcult to believe, but in
1963 a livestock census, along the Sudanese stretch of the Nile Valley subse-
quently ﬂooded by Lake Nubia, reported 2,831 cattle, 19,335 sheep, 34,146
goats, 86 horses, 3,415 donkeys, 608 camels, and large numbers of chickens,
pigeons, and ducks, in an area which had just over 50,000 people (Adams
1977: 54). To the south, with seasonal grazing available away from the river,
pastoralism must have been even more important.
  Nubia’s subsistence economy supported both a sedentary population along
the thin ribbon of the Nile, concentrating in places with water and fertile silt
and in rainfed wadis, and a more mobile population, dispersed through the
savanna lands of the south. In addition, mechanical means of irrigation further
increased the agricultural viability of parts of the region.


Technology
Abundant direct archaeological evidence throws light on the technology of the
middle Nile during the periods under review (Welsby 1996; 2002; Edwards
2004). At times this part of Africa reached a high level of technological
sophistication. There is, however, a problem in interpreting such evidence:
how much of this technological achievement is attributable to indigenous
endeavour and how much to exotic sources, be they imports or the presence
of expatriate craftsmen? Because of the repeated cultural contact along
the middle Nile, these are difﬁcult questions to answer. Nevertheless, when
evaluating the contribution of technology to social complexity, it is important
to attempt to separate the indigenous and the foreign import.
  Perhaps the most outstanding aspects of middle Nile technology were build-
ing and construction. Ashlar masonry, coarser types of stonework, ﬁred brick,
and mud-brick were all handled with skill to produce structures that were
often complex. Foreign inﬂuence is evident in much of this, from the Temple of
Amon at Jebel Barkal to the pyramids of Napata and Meroë or the churches

                                                                             99
African Civilizations

of Christian Nubia, all of which are examples of buildings of alien inspiration,
if not of foreign construction. Nevertheless, most of these structures have
distinctively Nubian characteristics. The deffufas and tombs of Kerma and
the tombs of Ballana and Qustul were, indeed, indigenous in design and
execution. So also was the unique Great Enclosure at Musawwarat es-Sufra.
Clearly, Nubians expended considerable energy on building, although many of
their less important structures were probably of grass and wood. Such
examples as the Meroitic palace at Wad ben Naqa, the cities and towns of
Meroitic and Christian Nubia, or the water-storage haﬁrs of the dry areas east
and south-east of Meroë are eloquent of effort as well as of building and
engineering skills. Furthermore, the heated bathroom of the supposed house at
Old Dongola (p. 93) and the latrines in Christian Nubian houses (Adams
2001: 53–4, plates 17e and 20e; Welsby 2002: 170–2) demonstrate a concern
for comfort and convenience, not just for monumental structures.
   Associated with building were a number of other skills, such as quarrying,
stone-dressing, mud-brick making, brick-ﬁring, carpentry, sculpture, wall
painting, and inscription cutting. A knowledge of surveying and architectural
design would also have been necessary; on the wall of one of the pyramid
chapels at Meroë is an architect’s elevation drawing at a scale of 1:10 that
appears to have been done during the construction of one of the other
pyramids in the cemetery (Welsby 1996: 134–5; Hinkel 2000: 19). The
question of foreign inﬂuence and sometimes even foreign execution inevitably
arises in such matters, but, again, the end products usually had a local input.
For much of the time under discussion the people of the middle Nile were at
least partly literate and during the Meroitic period even developed their own
unique alphabet. Moreover, the frequency of grafﬁti and other inscribed
material at Nubian sites indicates that in some periods literacy was fairly
widespread.
   Another important aspect of Nubian technology was the extraction and
manufacturing of metal, especially of iron. It is clear that many items of
bronze, silver, or gold were imported, but the furnace remains and substantial
quantities of iron slag at Meroë suggest that there at least an extensive iron-
working industry ﬂourished. Further evidence of this is provided by the range
of iron weapons and tools recovered from Meroitic sites, including spears,
arrowheads, hoe blades, adzes, axes, shears, and tweezers (Shinnie 1967:
162–5). Mounds of iron slag, probably of a similar date, have also been
reported from Kerma, Kawa, and Argo (Shinnie 1967: 182), and the iron
objects from the Ballana and Qustul tombs indicate that iron-working
skills remained at a high level even after the decline of the Meroitic state.
Another metal for which Nubia was an important source was gold, much of
which came from the desert east of the Nile, north of the Fifth Cataract

100
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

(Vercoutter 1959: 129). Particularly during the New Kingdom period, this
area seems to have been one of Egypt’s main suppliers, as paintings in the
Theban tomb of Huy appear to indicate (O’Connor 1993: 63).
  In addition, manufacturing along the middle Nile produced pottery, textiles,
leatherwork, woodwork, basketry, and wine. Fine pottery had been made
during the Kerma period, but exceptionally high-quality wares were produced
during Meroitic, X-Group and Christian times. These were wheel-made, well
ﬁred, and often had painted decoration. It is apparent that they were ﬁred in
special kilns of brick, of which a number have been excavated at Debeira East
that date from late X-Group and Early Christian times (Adams 1977: 402–3).
Other kilns have been uncovered at Faras, dating from the Early and Classic
Christian periods (Adams 1961; 1977: 496, 498), and kilns are also known
from Meroitic contexts at Meroë and Musawwarat es-Sufra and from the
Christian period at Old Dongola.
  Textile production seems to have been important, largely because cotton
was grown in the area at least by Meroitic times, but textiles found in Meroitic,
X-Group, and Christian tombs at Ballana and Qustul during the 1960s
included cotton, linen, and animal ﬁbre from either goats, sheep, or camels
(Thurman 1979: 36). Clearly, leather working depended on the widespread
animal husbandry, and basketry was based on palm ﬁbres and grasses that
were widely available. Only wood working remains difﬁcult to understand
in the environment of this region, but there is plentiful direct evidence for it
in both X-Group and Christian deposits at Qasr Ibrim (Adams 1982: 28–9).
As for the wine, a number of supposed wine presses have been found in Lower
Nubia; although the environment was not really suitable for vine cultivation, it
seems that wine was produced locally whenever the supply of the superior
Egyptian product was interrupted.
  Some items in Meroitic, X-Group, and Christian sites suggest imported
technologies. Such items as glassware, lamps, furniture, and jewellery of gold
or silver set with semi-precious stones mostly represent status symbols that
were not part of Nubian technology. There were also some aspects of Nubian
technology that resulted from technology transfer. Amongst these was mech-
anical irrigation. The shaduf and the saqia were most important for the
development of human societies on the middle Nile. Equally important was
transportation technology, enabling the commerce of the region to exist. The
oldest aspect of this was the sailing boat, in use on the Nile throughout
the period under discussion. It was, however, the development of desert
transportation systems, particularly that involving the camel, that seems to
have had the greatest impact on the commercial life of this region. These
aspects of irrigation and transportation emphasize the importance of technol-
ogy to social development on the middle Nile.

                                                                            101
African Civilizations

Social system
Monumental tombs at Kerma, Napata, Meroë, and Ballana and Qustul,
in their scale, construction, and contents, show the presence of absolute
monarchy at various times. The divinity and/or autocracy of such rulers is
demonstrated by the practice of human sacriﬁce at Kerma, and at Ballana and
Qustul, and by the sculptured reliefs of some Meroitic buildings. Some of the
latter are supplemented by inscriptions, which unfortunately we cannot fully
understand. Meroitic monarchy gave women an important role; indeed, some-
times they governed in their own right. Absolute monarchy is also suggested by
the existence of large and elaborate domestic buildings interpreted as palaces,
of which those at Meroë, Wad ben Naqa, and Jebel Barkal are perhaps the
most convincing. In addition, numerous temples represent ideologies in which
both spiritual and secular powers were intertwined. Indeed, not only is the
archaeological record eloquent of the emergence of absolute authority, but it
also chronicles its dissolution, as indicated by the numerous fortiﬁed buildings
of Late Christian and Islamic times.
  At the other end of the social scale, the archaeological evidence shows us a
numerous labouring class that presumably consisted, during most periods, of
both free peasants and slaves. Their presence is indicated not only by the
clusters of small houses in many settlements and the numerous ‘poorer’ graves
in cemeteries but also by the monumental constructions such as temples,
tombs, and burial mounds that were the achievement as much of their labour
as of the authority of their rulers. The relationship of this lowest level of
society, to both the rulers and their associated elite, is on occasion starkly
demonstrated by the sacriﬁce of such lesser human beings at the burial of those
to whom they were subservient, as was the case at Kerma and at Ballana and
Qustul.
  Archaeological evidence for the development of trade and manufacturing,
particularly in the Meroitic and Christian periods, would suggest that at times
there must have been a middle section in this stratiﬁed society, made up of
merchant-entrepreneurs and some skilled craftsmen, as well as various gov-
ernment ofﬁcials and holders of temple or church appointments. Some burials
at Kerma, Napata, and Meroë seem to belong neither to the elite nor to the
peasantry. Meroitic houses included both ‘de luxe’ and ‘humbler’ structures
(Adams 1977: 357–8).
  Archaeological evidence also indicates the development of functional spe-
cialization. Cross-cutting much of the social hierarchy but sometimes contrib-
uting to its differentiation, there emerged a variety of specialized occupations.
By Meroitic and Christian times, for instance, there were specialist potters
making high-quality wheel-formed wares, as distinct from traditional potters,


102
                                                         Sudanic genesis: Nubia

who continued to turn out rougher, hand-built pottery. In addition, there must
have been iron smelters, blacksmiths, and perhaps other metal workers; spin-
ners and weavers; builders, who would have included both masons and brick
makers; leather workers; carpenters and joiners; basket makers; and boatmen.
There would also have been scribes, artists (both sculptors and painters),
priests and temple and church ofﬁcials, some soldiers, and merchants.
  A level of social complexity conducive to both urbanization and state
formation would appear to have been reached during several periods along
the middle Nile. However, the social systems discussed were as much symp-
tomatic as causative of the development of cities and states. It is necessary to
look further if this development is to be explained.


Population pressures
The people of the middle Nile were agriculturalists who lived in dry savanna to
the south and in a desert to the north. They were able to do this because of
the existence of the river, which provided water and a base from which,
particularly in the south, they could exploit the seasonal grazing and rainfed
cultivation of the surrounding areas. However, cultivable land and accessible
pasture were limited; indeed, in some areas they were absent. Yet, where
present, they had the potential to yield a surplus and to support population
growth. The problem was that if the population grew, there was nowhere to
go: there was only a ﬁnite amount of land that could be exploited by the means
available. As a result, the settlement of the region was restricted to a long,
narrow, frequently broken strip of viable agricultural land, with some isolated
more fortunate areas, and to adjacent areas that could support transhumant
pastoralism or rainfed cultivation. Theoretically, therefore, the middle Nile
constituted a classic example of environmentally induced population pressure.
  Although limited, there are some archaeological indications of population
pressures during certain periods. For instance, the distribution of archaeo-
logical sites in Lower Nubia seems particularly dense for later Meroitic and
Christian times. Although Edwards (1996: 80) stated that the Meroitic popu-
lation was actually small, it seems that this rainless area did support a surpris-
ingly large number of people. Similarly, the existence of Meroitic sites in the
dry western Butana, away from the Nile but along wadis that could provide
seasonal cultivation, suggests that the population of that area found it neces-
sary to exploit available resources to the limit. It is even possible that the
crowding of houses within some Meroitic and Christian settlements was partly
caused by a desire to conserve adjacent cultivable land.
  The most obvious way that the carrying capacity of the region could be
improved was by increasing the available cultivable land, and the only way to

                                                                             103
African Civilizations

do this was to introduce better irrigation technology. Two such improvements
took place during the periods under review. The ﬁrst was the introduction of
the shaduf, an idea imported from Egypt probably during the New Kingdom.
Possibly it encouraged the growing population of that time that was calculated
by Trigger (1965: 156–66). The second was the saqia, again a foreign idea,
adopted in Nubia in about the fourth century AD during the X-Group period
(Edwards 1996: 80–1, 91). In conjunction with the new ‘summer crops’
introduced around this time (p. 92, 98), it is likely that the improved irrigation
that resulted did lead to an increase in population; indeed, the adoption of the
saqia and the new crops would suggest that population pressure caused their
adoption.
  Edwards (1994: 9) argued that in the Meroitic state, as generally in the
Sudanic savannas: ‘The availability of labour and the means of controlling it,
rather than land, tended to be a major determinant of production’. Neverthe-
less, it is possible that ﬁnite resources of productive land did result in popula-
tion pressures along the middle Nile, pressures that would have been
accentuated by ﬂuctuations in river level and rainfall that caused periodic
famines. It seems that cultivable land and accessible grazing could indeed have
been scarce resources at times. Control of them might have provided a power
base for an emerging elite and, therefore, might have been a contributory
factor in the growth of cities and states. Indeed, the control of both labour
and land could have been important.


Ideology
Tombs, temples, and churches have much to tell us about the beliefs of those
who built them. Their designs, sculptural and graphic decorations, and inscrip-
tions indicate that Nubia was often a borrower and adapter of foreign faiths.
Until about the middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD it was the gods of Pharaonic
Egypt that dominated Nubia; indeed, their veneration survived longer on the
middle Nile than in Egypt itself. The most important of these seem to have
been Isis and Amon; worship of the latter became a state cult for both Napata
and Meroë, with their rulers often taking the name of Amon as part of their
throne names, for example, Tenutamon and Natakamani. From about the
middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD to almost the middle of the second millen-
nium, Christianity became the dominant faith, to be replaced, in turn, by
Islam. Nevertheless, all these faiths developed their own Nubian characteris-
tics, and there were also at times separate indigenous beliefs. This is indicated
by the human sacriﬁces at Kerma and at Ballana and Qustul, and also by the
worship of Apedemak, the lion god of Meroë, who seems to have resulted
from Egyptian-Meroitic syncretism (Zabkar 1975).

104
                                                        Sudanic genesis: Nubia

   The archaeological evidence suggests that these ideologies contributed to the
development of states and cities. Prior to the arrival of Christianity on the
middle Nile, the religious beliefs of Nubia were characterized by an integration
of secular and spiritual authority, as frequently the case in Africa. The ruler
became the personiﬁcation of the god, a notion that sometimes manifests itself
archaeologically in monumental tombs and temples, which were an expression
of both human and divine authority. This provided legitimization for the rule
of an absolute monarch, who could literally claim a divine mandate. The
power base of a ruler was strengthened because it was both physical and
spiritual. The state developments of Kerma, Napata, Meroë, and the X-Group
all beneﬁtted from this ideological contribution. With the advent of Christian-
ity, the ruler was no longer a god, even though divinely sanctioned. Human
and divine authority were separate, and ‘royal’ tombs disappeared from the
archaeological record. However, this did not necessarily mean any loss of
authority by the temporal ruler who, as the Faras paintings show, could still
call on ideological support from a Church that was in turn protected. As a
result, the Christian states of Nubia were ruled by both Crown and Cross:
the one claiming authority over people’s bodies, the other over their souls
(Adams 1977).
   The role of ideology in the process of urbanization was different. The
construction of an important temple or church at a particular place sometimes
led to the development of a settlement at that place or to increased growth of a
settlement. In this way, some cities came into existence as religious ceremonial
centres or became more important because they assumed such a role. Nubian
cities also had a more general symbolic role, irrespective of whether religion,
administration, or commerce was the main activity; each city conferred polit-
ical and ideological legitimacy on the regime that controlled it.


External trade
As discussed at the beginning of this chapter (p. 69), Nubia was a major trade
corridor into the heart of Africa for South-West Asia and the Mediterranean.
Moving north were gold and other minerals, ivory, slaves, and a range of
African exotica; going south was a variety of manufactured goods, including
many luxuries. It was an example of characteristic exchange between the
developed and underdeveloped world: manufactures for raw materials.
  Archaeological evidence for this trade is abundant, although it tells us little
about some aspects. Least well represented in the archaeological record are the
commodities that were traded north to Egypt, but there is some evidence. For
example, diorite quarries in the Nubian desert west of Abu Simbel were being
exploited during the Egyptian Old Kingdom and Middle Kingdom. This rock

                                                                            105
African Civilizations

was favoured for statues and stelae in Egypt at this time and apparently was
transported as far as Giza, near modern Cairo, a distance along the Nile of
more than 1,200 kilometres (Adams 1977: 169–70). Similarly, copper-
smelting furnaces have been found in the Old Kingdom town investigated at
Buhen (Adams 1977: 170–4), and numerous gold mines, which were produ-
cing by Middle Kingdom times, are known in the desert east of the Second
Cataract area and in the Batn el Hajar (Vercoutter 1959). Archaeological
evidence suggests that all these activities were at ﬁrst in Egyptian hands, and,
initially at least, their output was probably only for Egyptian use. Evidence for
the trade in ivory is less easy to ﬁnd, but in the Napatan town of Sanam one
room of a possible storehouse had part of its ﬂoor covered with tusks (Grifﬁth
1922: 117, plate LIIIb). In addition, ivory tusks were found in one of the
storerooms in the palace at Wad ben Naqa (Vercoutter 1962: plate XXb).
Almost invisible in the archaeological record, however, is the trade in
slaves, which was probably of importance for much of the time considered
(Alexander 2001). The people sacriﬁced at Kerma or Ballana and Qustul, for
instance, were not necessarily slaves, although they might have been. It could
be signiﬁcant, nevertheless, that the relief at Jebel Qeili and those on the pylons
of the Lion Temple at Naqa show live rather than dead captives; they were
worth more alive. As for the tropical exotica that were traded north, Egyptian
documentary and archaeological sources provide details; amongst other
things, they seem to have included ostrich eggs and feathers, various skins
from wild animals, live wild animals, ebony, semi-precious stones, and incense.
A painting in the mid-second-millennium BC tomb of Rekhmire at Thebes
shows such a range of goods (Kendall 1997: 9). It seems likely that the
commodities sought by Egyptians were collected at trading stations during
the Egyptian Old and Middle Kingdoms, and the Second Cataract forts might
have had such a role during the latter period. Egyptian control of trade is also
probable following the New Kingdom expansion into Nubia, but in the
Kerma, Napatan, Meroitic, and later periods there must have been indigenous
control.
  There is better archaeological evidence for the commodities that were traded
south into Nubia, although it has problems. Outstanding amongst these
imports was a range of manufactured items that, although often common in
their places of origin, seem frequently to have been prized as status symbols in
Nubia and therefore buried in the more important graves. Indeed, the posses-
sion of such ‘prestige goods’ and the distribution of some of them to elite
supporters could have contributed signiﬁcantly to the power base of Nubian
rulers (Edwards 1994: 11–12). Sometimes these objects can be attributed on
the basis of style to their places of origin, although more commonly their
foreign manufacture has merely been assumed because of the technology by

106
                                                         Sudanic genesis: Nubia

which they have been produced. Perhaps the most impressive, by reason of its
fragility and the distances that it nevertheless travelled, is the glassware that
has been found in Meroitic, X-Group, and Christian Nubian contexts. Shinnie
(1967: plates 82–4) illustrated two glass vessels from Meroitic graves at Faras
in Lower Nubia and one from Meroë itself, but the most impressive Meroitic
collection of glass is perhaps that excavated from tombs at Seddenga on the
Abri-Delgo Reach of the middle Nile (Leclant 1973; Wildung 1997: 364–8). In
addition to glassware, ﬁne metalwork and jewellery seem also to have ﬁgured
amongst the imports to Nubia. For example, a silver gilt goblet, probably of
Roman origin, was found at Meroë (Shinnie 1967: plates 78–81), and a gold
ring, also from Meroë, was inscribed in Greek (Shinnie 1967: plate 61). From
various Meroitic contexts have also come an assortment of bronze lamps,
bowls, beakers, bottles, and vases, whilst the X-Group tombs of Ballana and
Qustul produced metal goods and other manufactures that seem to have
originated in Byzantine Egypt. Some objects might even have been loot from
Nubian raids into Egypt, such as the bronze head that was found buried in
front of one of the temples at Meroë and that probably came from a statue of
the Roman Emperor Augustus (Shinnie 1967: plate 28). However, the most
common imports in Meroitic Nubia, according to the archaeological record,
were beads of glass or stone, so common indeed that Adams (1977: 373)
suggested that they might have been used as a medium of exchange.
   In addition to the durable manufactures that were traded into Nubia, the
imported goods also included some consumables that have not usually sur-
vived in archaeological deposits. Some of the Meroitic glass vessels, for
instance, are of shapes used elsewhere for containing unguents and oils, and
it is likely that they were imported for their contents rather than for themselves
(Shinnie 1967: 130–1). Similarly, some of the imported Graeco-Roman
pottery that appears alongside indigenous wares in Meroitic contexts could
have arrived in Nubia as containers for consumables. An Egyptian Old King-
dom text, for example, mentions the Nubians’ fondness for Egyptian honey
(Adams 1984: 41), and the Egyptian amphorae that are found in Nubian sites
of Meroitic, X-Group, and Early Christian date seem to have been imported
full of either olive oil or wine. There must also have been other imported
commodities that have left little archaeological evidence, such as some of the
ﬁne textiles that have been recovered from Meroitic, X-Group, and Christian
tombs at Ballana and Qustul (Thurman 1979).
   Other archaeological evidence that throws light on the organization of
Nubian trade is the location of some of the major urban sites. All of the cities
that survived for any length of time seem to have been at places where the
export commodities of the African interior could be collected at the riverbank,
ready for shipment to Egypt. As time went on and trade networks expanded

                                                                             107
African Civilizations

ever further into the interior, so these places appeared successively further up
the Nile: ﬁrst there was Buhen, then Kerma, then Napata, then Meroë, and
ﬁnally there were Shendi, Soba, and Sennar. Some of these places, and indeed
others also, grew particularly important because they were situated at a point
where a major land route reached the Nile. Thus, Meroë and Napata stood at
the southern and northern end, respectively, of the Bayuda Road, which cut off
the great bend of the Nile containing the Fourth and Fifth Cataracts. In turn,
Napata and Kawa stood at each end of the Meheila Road, which cut off the
next great bend of the river further downstream. These routes were only part,
however, of those that seem to have existed by Meroitic times, including the
Korosko Road, which cut off the whole of the Nile bend that contained the
Second, Third, and Fourth Cataracts; the Wadi Hawad Road, which led
south-east from Meroë to Aksum; and another route that led north-east from
the Atbara–Nile conﬂuence to the Red Sea port of Suakin (Adams 1977). The
location of urban centres and the existence of these land routes suggest two
things: ﬁrst, that the external trade of the Nile might have played an important
role in urban growth; second, that such trade was only part of a vast network
of regional trading links. Archaeological evidence from the Gash Delta in
eastern Sudan (Fig. 5.1, p. 113) suggests contact with Kerma and the possibil-
ity that the area between the Gash and Baraka Valleys was the location of the
Land of Punt, whose trade with New Kingdom Egypt was recorded in a
carving at Deir el Bahari. These are indications of how extensive that network
might have been (Fattovich 1991; Mitchell 2005: 78–80).
   Until we have more archaeological evidence for regional trading systems in
this part of Africa, it is probably premature to assess the actual contribution
that external trade made to the development of cities and states on the middle
Nile. Nevertheless, it could be argued that trade in general provided a major
causative factor for these developments and that if there had been no trade
centred on the Nile, then there would have been little social development there.
However, external trade was only one aspect of long-continued cultural inter-
action between the middle Nile and the world to its north; signiﬁcantly, one
that is more susceptible to archaeological study than some others.


Conclusion
Considering its environment, Nubia would seem to have been an unlikely
place for the development of states and the appearance of cities. Yet not only
did these things happen, they happened here earlier than anywhere else in
tropical Africa. It is little wonder that a common explanation has been to
regard such developments as ‘secondary’ in character, resulting directly from
contact with Egypt. An examination of the archaeological evidence reveals a

108
                                                         Sudanic genesis: Nubia

more complex situation, in which exotic inﬂuences undoubtedly played a role
but where important contributions and initial development came from within,
so that the resultant social complexity had its own distinctive Nubian
characteristics.
  First, Nubia was partly a gift of the Nile, just as Egypt was completely so.
Water and silt from the Nile allowed the development of a sound subsistence
base that in some favoured areas was capable of producing a surplus, espe-
cially where seasonal grazing and rainfed cultivation were possible near the
river. It is noticeable that all of the major sociocultural developments discussed
in this chapter were located on more favoured parts of the river and not in the
less productive areas. The more southerly regions of Nubia, with greater
rainfall and access to seasonal grazing for savanna pastoralists, were especially
fortunate. Second, Nubian technology, although often inﬂuenced by foreign
ideas and products, was able to extend the cultivated land and to intensify its
exploitation by means of mechanical irrigation. It was also able to provide
both land and water transportation systems that could overcome the commu-
nication problems of a population strung out along many hundreds of kilo-
metres of river.
  It seems likely that cultivable land and accessible grazing became scarce
resources, providing a power base for those who controlled both those
resources and the people necessary for their exploitation. Limited resources,
particularly during periods of climatic stress and growing populations, encour-
aged people to gather in urban aggregations, with their potential for surplus
storage. Social stratiﬁcation followed, with society divided between the rulers
and the ruled, and with an increasingly sophisticated technology stimulating
the development of functional specialization and social differentiation. How-
ever, it was trading and exchange activities, and the general cultural inter-
action of which they were a part, that became the catalyst for major social and
political developments in Nubia. In particular, Nubian rulers acquired prestige
goods that conﬁrmed their superior status and gave them the means of ensur-
ing the support of other members of the elite. It is likely that the middle Nile
had long been part of an extensive regional trading system, but from Egyptian
Old Kingdom times onwards the demand of the developed world to the north
for raw materials and tropical exotica created a major interest in external
trade. Nubia became both a pipeline of supply and a successful entrepôt,
proﬁting not so much from its own products but from those that it handled
on their way north or on their way south. The origins of Kerma can already be
discerned at this time. Subsequently, Egypt controlled this trade itself,
extending its authority into Nubia both in Middle Kingdom and, more exten-
sively, in New Kingdom times. When Egypt’s grip weakened, indigenous
control quickly reasserted itself, ﬁrst with Kerma and eventually with the states

                                                                             109
African Civilizations

of Napata and Meroë, as well as those of later times. The earlier of these
polities might have been only tentative, but by Meroitic times we ﬁnd evidence
of a highly complex, stratiﬁed society. It is, however, apparent from archaeo-
logical evidence that all of these autocratic regimes sought to strengthen and
legitimize their control by sheltering behind powerful religious ideologies, of
which in turn contributed to the growth of urban centres. The foreign origin of
most of those religions indicates the considerable contribution made to Nubian
developments by cultural contacts with the north, but even with religion there
was a strong indigenous input.
  The emergence of social complexity on the middle Nile may thus be seen as
the result of a complex interaction between local and exotic factors but an
interaction in which indigenous people made their own decisions. As Shinnie
(1967: 169) wrote of the best known of these polities: ‘Meroë was an African
civilization, ﬁrmly based on African soil, and developed by an African popu-
lation.’ Indeed, the roots of Meroitic achievement can be traced back to Kerma
in the middle of the second millennium BC, and the cultural origins of Kerma
appear to have been contemporary with those of Pharaonic Egypt. Rather than
continuing to see the development of social complexity in Nubia as secondary
to that of Egypt, we should perhaps begin to regard them as parallel and
interacting African achievements.




110
