Chapter 9
Cattle, ivory, and gold: social complexity in
Zambezia
Zambezia is the region between the Zambezi and Limpopo Rivers and
between the Kalahari Desert and the Indian Ocean. The name was already in
use by 1890 (Maund 1890) and has remained relevant (Pikirayi 2001b). This
region comprises modern Zimbabwe, southern Mozambique, north-eastern
Botswana, and the extreme north of South Africa. From the archaeological
perspective, it is characterized by widespread evidence for the development of
social complexity, commencing in the ﬁrst millennium AD and continuing
until the nineteenth century. Most famous of this evidence is the site of Great
Zimbabwe, perhaps one of the most ill-used of Africa’s archaeological sites. Its
fame is such that it has given its name to the country in which it is situated, the
country formerly known as Rhodesia and before that as Southern Rhodesia.
Its ill usage has been both intellectual and physical, starting when it ﬁrst
became known to Europeans. The ﬁrst such visitor was a German geologist,
Carl Mauch, in 1871. After giving an account of the impressive stone ruins,
Mauch felt it necessary to explain their presence deep in the African interior
and did so by associating them with King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba.
Perhaps it is understandable that a nineteenth-century European should grasp
at such an unlikely biblical explanation, but unfortunately the myth of alien
origin for the Great Zimbabwe structures was to survive for a long time, even
surfacing as a political issue in the 1960s and 1970s (Garlake 1973: 209–10).
This was probably because such a belief became psychologically essential for
some European colonial settlers in this part of Africa. Perhaps the most
damaging aspect of the African colonial experience was the attempted denial
to African peoples of their own cultural heritage, of which the attribution of
Great Zimbabwe to outside inﬂuence must be the classic example.
   For those who understood the archaeological evidence, there was never any
doubt about the African origins of Great Zimbabwe (e.g., Garlake 1973;
1978a). Nevertheless, the resulting controversy has inﬂuenced much of the
research that has been conducted at this famous site. Intellectually, it has
dictated the questions that have been asked by researchers; physically, it
has sometimes occasioned excavations and restoration work that damaged
or destroyed archaeological evidence. Excavations by Theodore Bent in 1891,
Richard Hall in 1902–4, David Randall-MacIver in 1905, and Gertrude
Caton-Thompson in 1929 were all directed principally at the problem of
who built the ruins and when (Bent 1896; Hall 1905; Caton-Thompson 1971;

260
                                                 Social complexity in Zambezia

Randall-MacIver 1971). The ﬁrst two excavators were determined to prove
that alien builders were responsible and ignored indications to the contrary;
the second two treated the evidence objectively and were able to demonstrate its
indigenous identity. Dating, however, remained a problem, and later excavation
and survey in 1958 was still principally concerned with the chronological
sequence of occupation within the stone ruins (Robinson et al. 1961). It was
only as radiocarbon dates became increasingly available that archaeologists
were able to turn their attention to other questions.
   In the latter part of the twentieth century, for instance, archaeologists began
to ask themselves what the stone ruins of Great Zimbabwe and similar sites
represented in social, economic, and political terms. In particular, it
was realized that the stone-walled enclosures of at least some of these sites
were merely the central and most important features of quite large former
settlements. At Great Zimbabwe, the recognition of extensive areas of densely
packed huts caused the revision of Peter Garlake’s 1973 population estimate, of
1,000 to 2,500 adults (Garlake 1973: 195), to one of about 18,000 (Huffman
1986: 323; 1996: 125). It is unfortunate, therefore, that archaeologists have
been so obsessed by the stone structures at Great Zimbabwe and related sites
that for a long time they virtually ignored other parts of these sites. Sinclair
calculated that of the estimated 600 square metres excavated and published
from all zimbabwe sites (here called ‘zimbabwe-tradition sites’) after the time of
Randall-MacIver, all except about 20 square metres had been excavated inside
and immediately outside stone-walled enclosures (Sinclair 1984). This meant
that ‘at least at Great Zimbabwe over 90 percent of archaeological effort has
been focused upon 2 percent of the population’ (Morais and Sinclair 1980:
351). Attention concentrated on the elite; commoners were ignored. However,
changes in research orientation have occurred, and Huffman’s excavations of
the early 1970s (p. 290) provided information about an extensive area of
commoner housing (Huffman 2007: 398).
   Great Zimbabwe has indeed been ill used. The only ‘mystery’ or ‘riddle’
connected with this site is why it took archaeologists so long to recognize its
urban character. By the 1970s Huffman was calling it southern Africa’s ﬁrst
town, and others saw it as the capital of the earliest state in its area. We have
little documentary or oral traditional evidence to support these claims, but it
seems likely that these sites, on and around the Zimbabwe Plateau, do indicate
the presence of both urbanization and state formation during the ﬁrst half of
the second millennium AD. The real ‘problem’ of zimbabwe-tradition sites has
been to explain why and how these developments took place. In particular,
what economic factors led to a growth in the size of some settlements and to
increased centralization of authority? Furthermore, how did those factors
change so that by the late nineteenth century there were merely ruins scattered

                                                                             261
African Civilizations

through a rural landscape? Indeed, answering such economic questions is only
part of the task of explaining the Great Zimbabwe phenomenon. Both this and
the related sites can be understood only by seeing them in their full context:
chronological, geographical, economic, and sociocultural; only then might it
be possible to explain their rise and fall.


Geographical location and environmental factors
Most of the well-known sites of zimbabwe tradition are located on the
Zimbabwe Plateau, an area of high land much of which is more than 1,000
metres above sea level. However, there are also comparable sites on the
lowveld to the south of the plateau (Manyanga 2007), in areas to its west
(van Waarden 1998; 2012), and in one known case to its east (Garlake
1976a). The plateau is situated between about 16 south and about 22 south,
bounded on the north by the valley of the Zambezi River, on the south by the
valley of the Limpopo River, and on the east by an escarpment that runs down
to the wide coastal plain of the Indian Ocean. To the west the plateau merges
gradually with the Kalahari Desert (Fig. 9.1). It might seem that Zambezia
would have been isolated in the past, but this was not the case. There was
apparently contact with areas now in Zambia, southern Democratic Congo,
the Transvaal (now Limpopo Province of South Africa), and north-eastern
Botswana, as well as with the Indian Ocean coast. Via the latter there were
even connections with more distant parts of the world: in earlier times with the
Persian Gulf and China, in later times with Western Europe. Travel outside
the plateau itself was made easier by the river valleys which dissect its sides,
particularly those of the tributaries of the Save and Mazoe Rivers.
  The Zimbabwe Plateau has a wet season from November to March and
a dry season from April to October. Temperatures are highest late in the dry
season, are slightly lower during the wet season, and can fall below freezing
point. Rainfall tends to be heavier in the north and east of the plateau than in
the south and west. Geologically, the plateau consists mainly of igneous and
metamorphic rocks, particularly of granites and schists, amongst some of
which there has been extensive mineralization (Collins 1965: 40–1). Much
of the landscape comprises gently rolling plains broken by granite inselbergs
and by bare, rounded hills of granite. Parts of the plateau are deeply dissected
by river valleys, however, leaving rugged ranges of hills between them. In
addition, there are the mountains of the Eastern Highlands, which contrast
with much of the rest of the plateau. Variations in the geology of the plateau
have resulted in a variety of soil conditions: some soils are remarkably fertile,
while others are very poor. Natural vegetation varies with both altitude and
soil but generally consists of savanna–woodland, with trees scattered among

262
                                                    Social complexity in Zambezia




Fig. 9.1 Distribution of zimbabwe-tradition sites of Great Zimbabwe and Khami style.
After Garlake 1973: ﬁgs. 25 and 26.

wide grassy spaces. The trees tend to be more numerous in lower areas, but
some of the highest parts of the plateau consist of almost treeless grassy plains.
The Eastern Highlands, on the other hand, have a variety of trees as well as
grassland, while the lowlands off the edge of the plateau are usually thickly
wooded, mostly by mopane trees (Phimister 1976; Beach 1980).
  Much of the Zimbabwe Plateau would have been attractive to early human
settlement. Its relatively cool, well-watered plains provided a generally healthy
environment. The plateau and surrounding areas also possessed a variety of
resources, of which agricultural and pastoral potential was probably the most
important. Extensive pasturage made parts of the plateau, and of areas to its
west, good country for sheep, goats, and particularly cattle. The considerable
range in altitude between the plateau and the coastal plain offered the possibility
of transhumant pastoralism for overcoming seasonal variations in pasture and
other conditions. Suitable climate and soils also made cultivation important in
some areas, however, and provided the staple foods of sorghum, millet, beans,

                                                                                  263
African Civilizations

and squashes (Garlake 1978a: 73). The signiﬁcance of food production amongst
the region’s resources was clearly indicated by a Portuguese, Antonio Bocarro,
writing in the seventeenth century about the Mwene Mutapa state, one of
the successors of Great Zimbabwe. According to Bocarro the land ‘abounds
with . . . millet, some rice, many vegetables, large and small cattle, and many
hens . . . and the greater number of . . . [people] . . . are inclined to agricultural
and pastoral pursuits, in which their riches consist’ (Theal 1964: vol. 3, 355).
  There were, however, other resources on the plateau and in surrounding
areas, of which ivory and gold were the most important (Summers 1969; Swan
1994: van Waarden 1998: 144, see table 6.3 for later statistics). Much of the
ivory came from the Shashe-Limpopo Basin, and gold could be obtained both
from alluvial deposits and from quartz reefs, particularly on the plateau itself
(Miller et al. 2000: ﬁg. 2). Together, they became the basis of long-distance
trade from the ﬁrst millennium AD into the ﬁrst half of the second millennium.
Other metals included iron, copper, and tin. Silver might also have been
present (Pikirayi 2001b: 226, 263). In addition, there appears to have
been salt available (Pikirayi 2001b: 146). A further resource was granite, of
which much of the plateau consisted. This continually exfoliated in thin layers
from the many rock surfaces exposed to the marked daily changes of tempera-
ture. The thin, parallel-sided slabs produced in this way collected as a scree
around granite domes and inselbergs and could be readily broken up into
rectangular blocks of uniform size. These provided abundant building material,
needing little or no preparation. Indeed, supplies were virtually inexhaustible,
because lighting ﬁres on the rock surfaces and quenching them with water
produced exfoliation artiﬁcially (Garlake 1973). It was the ready availability of
building stone in such a uniform size and shape that gave many of the walls of
Great Zimbabwe, and of some other sites, their unusually regular appearance.
For although drystone building was widely practised in precolonial Africa, the
neat, horizontal coursework of some of the zimbabwe-tradition ruins is
unusual. The resources of the plateau also included other building material:
wood and grass for house construction and clays derived from decomposed
granite, which formed the main ingredient of the ‘mud’ used in building.
Known in this part of Africa as daga, this was sometimes of such high quality
that it was used for free-standing structures that could survive considerable
exposure. Some of the earlier excavators at Great Zimbabwe erroneously called
this material ‘cement’ (Garlake 1973: 19). Also amongst the plateau’s resources
were clays suitable for potting and soapstone for carving. Finally, there was
abundant wild fauna, which not only provided important sources of ivory but
could also supplement human food supplies.
  Counterbalancing these resources were a number of environmental con-
straints that would have inﬂuenced the character of precolonial settlement

264
                                                Social complexity in Zambezia

on and around the Zimbabwe Plateau. Probably most important was the
tsetse ﬂy, particularly Glossina morsitans, whose presence discouraged human
settlement both because of the danger to human health and because it killed
the livestock on which so many human groups were dependent. Much of the
plateau is free of tsetse, as Garlake showed (1978b: ﬁg. 1); however, Summers
(1967) suggested that tsetse distribution could have expanded at times during
the last two millennia, given slightly warmer and wetter conditions. Although
Garlake doubted the evidence for such climatic changes, he showed how the
location of zimbabwe-tradition sites might have been inﬂuenced by transhu-
mant pastoralism on the seasonally ﬂuctuating boundaries of tsetse ﬂy infest-
ation (Garlake 1978b). At lower elevations than the plateau, particularly in the
Shashe-Limpopo Basin, tsetse could have been more of a problem, although
it has been suggested that the danger of disease for livestock and humans in
that area has been exaggerated (Manyanga 2007: 59). In such places, malarial
mosquitoes could also have been an inhibiting factor for settlement.
   Another constraint of importance was climatic variability, which often led to
what the Shona (the principal inhabitants of the Zimbabwe Plateau) called
shangwa (Beach 1980: 28–9). This was drought or some other natural disas-
ter. Thus the rains might arrive too late or fail completely or even be so
abundant as to destroy the crops. Records exist of droughts and extreme
weather from 1790 to 2003, with comparable conditions back to the ﬁfteenth
century (Manyanga 2007: 56). There is also evidence for longer climatic
ﬂuctuations, from cool and dry to warm and wet, from AD 100–200 to
1810 (van Waarden 1998: 116). Alternatively, locusts or other pests, whose
appearance was climatically linked, might be destructive. The result, according
to Beach, was that although four years out of ﬁve might have normal rainfall,
it was probable that the ﬁfth would see some such disaster. The keeping of
livestock (goats were the most numerous) was a strategy for surviving years of
that sort, for not only could the animals be eaten during a famine but they
could be exchanged for grain with neighbours who had not suffered so badly.
   Variable soil fertility was also a constraining factor for settlement on the
plateau and in surrounding areas. There were undoubtedly some areas of
fertile red clay soil and some areas of fertile alluvial soil, but large expanses
of the plateau were covered by poor sandy soils developed on the granite
(Sinclair 1987: 38–40). Off the plateau the best soils were along river margins
or on the edges of seasonally ﬂooded areas, both important in an otherwise dry
environment. Thus it is probable that good land was limited, and control of
such land might have been one of the means by which rulers exerted economic
control over their people (Sinclair 1984). Soil conditions affected not only
cultivated crops but also the nutritional value of the pastures available for
livestock. In addition, some parts of the land were agriculturally useless

                                                                            265
African Civilizations

because they consisted of bare rock surfaces or because they were too steep to
exploit. In the latter case, terracing was a solution; this was extensively
employed in the Nyanga (formerly Inyanga) area of the Eastern Highlands
from the sixteenth to the early nineteenth century AD. In that area, not only
were cultivation terraces constructed on hillsides but also stone-lined pits
to house livestock within the stone-built homesteads (Soper 2002).
  The interplay of environmental assets and constraints that characterized
the Zimbabwe Plateau and surrounding areas seems to have concentrated
precolonial population around the watershed between the middle Zambezi to
the west and the lower Zambezi and Save-Limpopo rivers to the east. Ethno-
historical and archaeological evidence shows that there was a huge curved
area of denser settlement, particularly to the east of this watershed, which David
Beach called ‘The Great Crescent of population’ (Beach 1994: 19–23). It was in
this area that the sociopolitical developments associated with the best-known of
the zimbabwe-tradition sites took place, although the plateau must also be seen
in the context of developments in adjacent environments.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
Our knowledge of Great Zimbabwe and comparable sites is heavily depend-
ent on archaeological evidence. However, there are also historical documen-
tation and oral tradition that are relevant. Stone buildings on the Zimbabwe
Plateau were known to the Portuguese, who in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries AD had trading posts along the Zambezi River and on adjacent
parts of the plateau (Pikirayi 1993: 71–4). They wanted to control the gold
trade, by exerting inﬂuence on the Mwene Mutapa, a ruler of part of an
area of similar culture from the Zambezi to the Limpopo and from the
Kalahari to the Indian Ocean. Unfortunately, the Portuguese had little
direct knowledge beyond the area of the Mwene Mutapa’s own Karanga
kingdom, on the northern end of the Zimbabwe Plateau. Nevertheless, it is
thought that this kingdom was one of the successor states to that of Great
Zimbabwe, on the southern part of the plateau. If this was so, then the
Portuguese descriptions of what they observed in the territories of the Mwene
Mutapa must have some relevance for Great Zimbabwe itself. They seem
to have been told about Great Zimbabwe, although they never visited it.
One of them, João de Barros, published a secondhand account in 1552
(Theal 1964: vol. 6, 267–8), and Garlake thought that the place described
was Great Zimbabwe, which had been virtually abandoned by that time.
Although subsequent archaeological research has shown that it was still

266
                                                 Social complexity in Zambezia

inhabited, it was no longer as important as it had been (Garlake 1973: 53;
Huffman and Vogel 1991: 69).
   The de Barros description is the nearest that historical documentation comes to
providing details about Great Zimbabwe, but it was based on information
obtained after its heyday. To understand the economic, social, and political
organization of this place, it is necessary to draw on later Portuguese accounts.
Also it is necessary to consider oral traditions, but again there are problems.
Great Zimbabwe was most prosperous about 600 years ago, which is a long time
for oral traditions to have real value. In addition, it is probable that the Ngoni
invasions of the 1830s, and other ethnic movements during the nineteenth
century, caused a break in those traditions. When Carl Mauch reached the site
in 1871 he found people living there who seemed to know little about its history
and signiﬁcance. Nevertheless, sufﬁcient oral traditions exist to show that Great
Zimbabwe was built by the ancestors of the present Shona people, for whom
it apparently formed an important political and religious centre. From these
traditions it has been possible to reconstruct something of its religious signiﬁ-
cance (Garlake 1973), social organization (Huffman 1981), and position in
Shona history (Beach 1980). Indeed, it has been claimed that oral and ethnohis-
torical evidence concerning the Venda, a people to the south of the Shona but said
to be related to them, can be used to reconstruct life in Great Zimbabwe (Huff-
man 1996). This has been done by applying the Venda evidence to the layout of
the seventeenth- to nineteenth-century site of Danangombe (formerly called Dhlo
Dhlo), and then back to the ﬁfteenth- to seventeenth-century site of Khami, and
even further back to the thirteenth- to ﬁfteenth-century site of Great Zimbabwe
and its thirteenth-century predecessor at Mapungubwe. The result is a stimulat-
ing picture of life at Great Zimbabwe and in similar sites but one that is imposed
on the physical evidence rather than generated from it, occasioning much discus-
sion, some of it critical (Beach et al. 1997; Beach 1998). Subsequently, Chirikure
and Pikirayi challenged Huffman’s interpretation and used the archaeological
evidence to argue that the various parts of Great Zimbabwe represent not
contemporary activities by different occupants but ‘the work of successive rulers,
each founding a new residence and power centre in accord with Shona practice’
(Chirikure and Pikirayi 2008: 976). Inevitably, Huffman (2010a) objected
to their approach, which they then defended (Pikirayi and Chirikure 2011).
Publication concerning Great Zimbabwe has become almost an industry in itself.


Archaeological evidence
It is archaeological evidence that has the greatest potential for informing us
about Great Zimbabwe and similar sites (Fig. 9.2). Great Zimbabwe is the
largest of an extensive group of stone ruins situated on the high granite

                                                                             267
268




      Fig. 9.2 Principal archaeological sites in Zambezia mentioned in the text. 1, Ingombe Ilede; 2, Kadzi; 3, Songo Plateau; 4, Zvongombe; 5, Swart
      Village; 6, Baranda; 7, Ruanga; 8, Nhunguza; 9, Lekkerwater (Tsindi); 10, Mtelegwa; 11, Chipadze’s Ruin (Harleigh Farm); 12, Tebekwe Mine;
      13, Naletale; 14, Danangombe (Dhlo Dhlo); 15, Chivowa Hill; 16, Montevideo Ranch; 17, Great Zimbabwe; 18, Domboshaba; 19, Leopard’s
      Kopje; 20, Khami; 21, Sofala; 22, Chumnungwa; 23, Malumba; 24, Bosutswe; 25, Taukome; 26, Toutswe; 27, Mapungubwe; 28,
      Bambandyanalo; 29, Schroda; 30, Manyikeni (Manekweni); 31, Machemma; 32, Dzata. Note that the site of Bambandyanalo is also known as
      ‘K2’. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.
                                                Social complexity in Zambezia

country of the Zimbabwe Plateau. It has been estimated that about 150 ruins
built in the Great Zimbabwe style, or in the later Khami style, survive in this
area (Fig. 9.1) and that perhaps another ﬁfty have been destroyed since the
1890s (Garlake 1973: 162). Outside the area, similar sites have been located
in north-eastern Botswana, northern Transvaal (now Limpopo Province of
South Africa), and Mozambique, and both these and the sites in Zimbabwe
are part of a widespread practice of drystone construction in southern Africa
(e.g., Walton 1956). The characteristic feature of the Great Zimbabwe-style
sites is the presence of single or multiple enclosures of drystone walls, which
are usually free standing and broad based relative to their height. These
walls are constructed of either regularly coursed, dressed masonry or poorly
coursed masonry; both types of walling are often found on the same site.
Occasionally the walls are decorated with courses of stonework set in a
chevron, herringbone, or other pattern or with courses of darker stone. Other
typical architectural features include rounded ‘bastions’, stepped platforms,
and upright monoliths. The walls are usually built of granite blocks, but
on sites where granite was not available they are constructed of whatever
stone was to hand. These stone-walled enclosures were evidently intended
as ‘containers’, for apparently they usually sheltered small groups of circular
huts with solid daga walls and thatched roofs. Alternatively, on occasion
they might have sheltered granaries (Huffman 1981: 6) or even groups of
religious emblems (e.g., the Eastern Enclosure of the Hill Ruin at Great
Zimbabwe).
   Sites of this tradition are called ‘zimbabwe’ (madzimbabwe is the more
correct plural form) because this is what the Shona called them. This has been
said to be a contraction of dzimba dza mabwe, meaning ‘houses of stone’, and
has also been claimed to be derived from dzimba woye, meaning ‘venerated
houses’, a phrase used to describe chiefs’ houses or graves (Garlake 1973: 11;
1978b: 479). Shona linguists, however, point out that dzimbahwe itself means
court, home, or grave of a chief. Most of these sites are situated on the
Zimbabwe Plateau and within the modern state of Zimbabwe. To avoid
confusion, it has become customary amongst archaeologists to refer to the
largest and most researched site as ‘Great Zimbabwe’. However, sites of
the same tradition do occur in more distant locations, and there might be
more than are yet known. One example is Manyikeni (formerly known as
Manekweni) on the coastal plain of Mozambique, only 50 kilometres from the
Indian Ocean and some 270 kilometres from the nearest other known
zimbabwe-tradition site. This small site is dated principally to the thirteenth
to ﬁfteenth centuries and consists of a single stone enclosure of poorly coursed
limestone blocks. The enclosure is subdivided by internal walls and contains
traces of occupation in the form of an eroding hut ﬂoor of daga and two

                                                                           269
African Civilizations

middens. Outside the stone ruin there is extensive evidence of habitation
consisting of low mounds, most of which are middens, and house-ﬂoor
remains. In addition, an overall scatter of broken pottery deﬁnes the site limits
at approximately 368 by 264 metres; the population has been estimated at
150 to 200 (Garlake 1976a; Sinclair 1987: 91–9). Another outlying site of
zimbabwe tradition, although probably of a later date, is on the Songo Plateau,
near the Cabora-Bassa Dam in central Mozambique (Ramos 1980; Macamo
and Duarte 1996). Also a number of stone ruins of either the Zimbabwe
or Khami style exist in north-eastern Botswana, of which Domboshaba has
been dated to the ﬁfteenth to sixteenth centuries (Denbow 1986: 25–6).
Furthermore, some of the numerous precolonial stone structures in the former
Transvaal show similarities with zimbabwe-tradition sites, notable examples
being Dzata and Machemma in the Zoutpansberg (Walton 1956: 123, 125;
Huffman and Hanisch 1987; Huffman 1996: 40, 75).
   For many years Great Zimbabwe was studied in isolation, but it has become
increasingly apparent that it needs to be seen in its chronological and geo-
graphical context. It represents the apogee of socioeconomic developments
that ﬁrst become evident in the archaeological record of Zambezia during
the ﬁrst millennium AD. Agropastoral people on and around the Zimbabwe
Plateau were keeping herds of cattle that are thought to have been indicators
of wealth and power, as well as a source of food. To the south, in the Shashe-
Limpopo Basin, the settlement sites of Schroda, Bambandyanalo (K2), and
Mapungubwe provide a dated sequence from AD 900 to 1300; increasing
settlement size indicates growing social complexity at the same time that there
is increasing evidence of trade with the East African coast (Leslie and Maggs
2000; Calabrese 2007). Occupants of these sites were receiving glass beads
(p. 294) manufactured in places from the Persian Gulf to China (Wood 2000:
ﬁg. 1). Cloth and other manufactures were probably also being obtained.
In exchange were a variety of African commodities, of which ivory was
important, as mentioned in the ﬁrst-century Periplus of the Erythraean
Sea (Horton 1996: 414). Furthermore, ‘the Mapungubwe area is capable of
supporting large herds of elephants’ (Huffman 2009: 37). It has been shown
that these could have met the trade demand for ivory but that the area was
also attractive for cultivation and domestic livestock, as well as large wild
mammalian herbivores (Forssman et al. 2014: 75). By the thirteenth century
ivory and other resources had made Mapungubwe the urban capital of south-
ern Africa’s ﬁrst state (Fouché 1937; Gardner 1963), with structures of dry-
stone walling and elite burials accompanied by gold grave goods (Duffey
2012). It was succeeded in this role by Great Zimbabwe, Mapungubwe’s
abandonment probably being caused by climatic deterioration in the Limpopo
Valley, exotic diseases introduced by the Indian Ocean trade, and a shift north

270
                                               Social complexity in Zambezia

in the trade routes to the coast. These routes were particularly important for
the trade in gold, because the gold mines were more accessible from Great
Zimbabwe, and by the thirteenth century the trade in gold had become more
important than that in ivory (van Waarden 1998: 123). Similar to the devel-
opments in the Shashe-Limpopo Basin, a three-tiered social structure emerged
in the Toutswe Complex of north-east Botswana, also based on cattle herding.
Most common were small settlements of 2,000 to 5,000 square metres. Above
these were fewer sites, always on hilltops, of about 10,000 square metres,
such as Taukome and Thatswane. At the top of the socioeconomic pyramid
were three much larger hilltop sites, each of more than 40,000 square metres:
Toutswemogala, Bosutswe, and Sung (Denbow 1999; Reid and Segobye
2000). Glass beads reached some of these sites but far fewer than were received
in the Limpopo Valley. In exchange, Toutswe sites were probably supplying
ivory for trade with the East Coast.
   Such is the background for the emergence of Great Zimbabwe. It consists
of two main areas of stone ruins: a group of enclosures clustered around
boulders at the top of a precipitous granite hill and another group of enclos-
ures on the far slope of an adjacent valley. Much of the ‘Hill Ruin’, as it
has been called, consists of small enclosures separated by narrow twisting
passages, but at one end is the large ‘Western Enclosure’, which is bounded
by walls more than 9 metres high, capped by turrets and monoliths. This
enclosure contained deposits over 4 metres in depth, the remains of a succes-
sion of daga structures, and had room for about fourteen dwelling huts.
At the other end of the Hill Ruin is the ‘Eastern Enclosure’, much smaller
than the Western Enclosure and bounded on one side by a high wall origin-
ally capped by two courses of decorative stonework. The ground inside this
enclosure slopes steeply upwards; it was originally terraced and supported
groups of stone platforms in which were set some of the large number
of monoliths found in this enclosure. Some were of soapstone and were
surmounted by carved birds (Matenga 1998). The most remarkable of the
ruins in the valley is a large stone enclosure with a maximum diameter of
89 metres, which has been variously called the ‘Temple’, the ‘Circular Ruin’,
the ‘Great Enclosure’, and the ‘Elliptical Building’. Garlake, who preferred
the last of these names, described its outer wall as ‘by far the largest single
prehistoric structure in sub-Saharan Africa’ (Garlake 1973: 27). This wall
is 244 metres long and, at its greatest, 5 metres thick and 10 metres high.
It has been estimated to contain 5,151 cubic metres of stonework. Parts of
the wall consist of exceptionally sophisticated drystone masonry, comprising
the most regular coursing at Great Zimbabwe and with the top of the wall
capped by monoliths and a decorative frieze. Other walls, many of which
appear to belong to an earlier period than the outer wall, subdivide the space

                                                                           271
African Civilizations

within this enclosure. There is also a conical tower, about 5.5 metres in
diameter and more than 9 metres high, built of solid drystone masonry, in
itself one of Africa’s most remarkable precolonial structures. Spreads of daga
within the enclosure suggest that parts of its interior were originally occupied
by daga structures, most of them probably huts. The remainder of the ruins
in the valley at Great Zimbabwe consist of small enclosures, a number of
which were formerly named after early European visitors. Thus there was the
‘Mauch Ruin’, the ‘Renders Ruin’, the ‘Posselt Ruin’, the ‘Philips Ruin’,
and the ‘Maund Ruin’. Others had names such as the ‘East Ruin’, the
‘No. 1 Ruin’, the ‘Ridge Ruins’, the ‘Camp Ruin’, and the ‘Outspan Ruin’
(Garlake 1973: 25–30). Although these appear to have been renamed, the
Posselt, Philips, and Maund Ruins, for instance, becoming, respectively,
the Western, Central, and Eastern Valley Enclosures (Collett et al. 1992),
their former names are common in the older literature.
   Investigations at Great Zimbabwe and other zimbabwe sites have been
architectural and archaeological. Architecturally, it was shown that there
was an indigenous evolution of masonry techniques at Great Zimbabwe, from
poorly coursed (P) to regularly coursed (Q) stonework, which ﬁnally devolved
into uncoursed, loosely piled (R) walling (Robinson et al. 1961). Radiocarbon
dating subsequently conﬁrmed the sequence from P to Q masonry but showed
that R stonework was contemporary with them rather than belonging to a
separate late phase (Huffman and Vogel 1991: 69). Architectural studies at
Great Zimbabwe have also identiﬁed a number of distinctive features in the
Great Zimbabwe style of building. Thus the poorly coursed, early walls were
frequently built among and over boulders, which were incorporated into their
fabric (Fig. 9.3). Regularly coursed, later walls, on the other hand, were
usually built on level ground free from boulders. Doorways in these later walls
are distinctive, having rounded sides and high thresholds that frequently have
curved steps, each successive step curving more sharply into the doorway and
merging into the walls at the sides. Pairs of semi-circular projections, often
called ‘bastions’, are inside most doorways and passages in later walls and
have the effect of making entrances narrower and longer. Slots in the sides of
many of these bastions and in other locations might originally have held
upright stone slabs (but see Huffman 1996). Similar slabs were also set upright
as monoliths, in the ground, grouped on low daga platforms, or along the tops
of some of the walls. Other features associated with the regularly coursed later
walling are stepped, curved platforms, perhaps intended as seats or as display
stands for ceremonial objects, and small stone turrets, either on the ground
within enclosures or on the tops of walls (Garlake 1973: 21–5).
   Archaeological investigations of Great Zimbabwe and at related sites have
concentrated on the date of the stone structures and the identity of their

272
                                                    Social complexity in Zambezia




Fig. 9.3 Stonework in the Hill Ruin at Great Zimbabwe. Note the skill with which the
masonry has been built around the natural outcrops of granite. Photograph by the
author, 1994.

builders. Considerable attention has also been given to the question of why
these structures were built. It appears that building in stone at Great Zim-
babwe dates mainly from AD 1275 to 1450, with a late period from 1450 to
1550 (Huffman and Vogel 1991: 68). The builders might have been descend-
ants of earlier occupants of the site during the ﬁrst millennium AD, a people
whose culture was related to that of cattle-oriented groups in south-eastern
Zimbabwe (Huffman 1982). As already discussed, Great Zimbabwe seems to
have inherited the role of Mapungubwe, a hilltop settlement on the south side
of the Limpopo Valley, which has been described as ‘the ﬁrst Zimbabwe
Culture capital’ (Huffman 1982: 146) and seems to have been at its most
important in the thirteenth century AD. Thus the site of Great Zimbabwe was
already occupied before the earliest stone walls were constructed. According to
Huffman and Vogel (1991: 69), continuity in the pottery at Great Zimbabwe
from the twelfth century onwards ‘deﬁnitely establishes a Shona identity’ for
the builders, but why were the walls constructed? Archaeologists seem agreed
that all zimbabwe-tradition stone structures were intended to be indicators of
status for the dwelling places of the elite. In short, their ﬁrst appearance may be
regarded as a sign of social and political change. That being the case, it is
unfortunate that so much archaeological attention has been given to the stone

                                                                                  273
African Civilizations

ruins at zimbabwe-tradition sites and so little to the rest of the settlement of
which each ruin must have formed a part. As a result, not only has most
attention been concentrated on a very small part of the population of these
settlements, as Morais and Sinclair claimed (p. 261), but the impressive char-
acter of the stone ruins at Great Zimbabwe has led to a concentration of work
on that site, while inadequate attention has been given to other zimbabwe-
tradition sites. Indeed, so single-minded were the earliest excavators that they
virtually destroyed the archaeological deposits within the main stone-walled
enclosures at Great Zimbabwe. Fortunately, both Randall-MacIver (1971)
and Caton-Thompson (1971) recognized the necessity to excavate at other
sites also, if they were to understand Great Zimbabwe itself. In addition, both
of them realized that the stone structures at Great Zimbabwe and similar sites
were only part of the story. Thus Randall-MacIver wrote in 1906: ‘It is,
properly speaking, the huts which constitute the really essential part of the
ruin in every case; the stone wall which the visitor so much admires is only the
skin, the huts are the ﬂesh and bone’ (Randall-MacIver 1971: 84). Caton-
Thompson went further by demonstrating, with her Great Zimbabwe excav-
ations in 1929 at the Maund Ruin, now the Eastern Valley Enclosure
(Fig. 9.4), how a jumble of stone walls made sense when one included in the
plan the daga huts, of which they were the courtyard walls (Caton-Thompson
1971: plate 57; Garlake 1973: ﬁg. 3). Collett et al. (1992: ﬁgs. 2 and 3) show
the same for the Western and Central Valley Enclosures but from surface
evidence. However, it was not till the 1970s that attention again turned to
area excavation and that interest at last focused on the whole settlement, of
which the enclosures and their inhabitants formed only a part.
   Work by Thomas Huffman, in the 1970s, showed that the stone enclosures
at Great Zimbabwe were the principal structures within an extensive settle-
ment of daga huts (Fig. 9.5), and a plan (Fig. 9.6) was provided of the
entire site (Huffman 1981: ﬁg. 1). Huffman’s work led to a revision of
the population estimate for Great Zimbabwe made by Garlake in 1973.
Instead of a population of 1,000 to 2,500 adults (Garlake 1973: 195),
it was suggested that the population might have numbered 5,000 adults
(Sinclair 1984) and also that the total population was 10,000 (Morais and
Sinclair 1980: 351) and might have been as high as 11,000 or even 18,000
(Huffman 1986: 323; 1996: 125). The conclusion was inescapable: Great
Zimbabwe had a density of population sufﬁcient for it to be called a town
or city. Beach provided a description of what it might have been like,
commenting: ‘The effect of having so many people on a single site may easily
be imagined: this was urban living’ (Beach 1980: 46). His analogy with
London or Paris at a similar date was a salutary reminder of the environment
that could have existed at Great Zimbabwe. Manyanga et al. (2010: 584)

274
Fig. 9.4 Great Zimbabwe: the Maund Ruin. Above, plan of stone walls only. Below,
plan of stone walls and daga huts as revealed by excavation. After Garlake 1973: ﬁg. 3.


                                                                                          275
276




      Fig. 9.5 Commoner housing at Great Zimbabwe. After Huffman 2007: ﬁg. 21.4.
277
      Fig. 9.6 Plan of Great Zimbabwe showing stone structures and areas of daga huts. Note: The ‘Acropolis’ is
      more usually referred to as the ‘Hill Ruin’. After Huffman 1981: ﬁg. 1.
African Civilizations

were more speciﬁc and wondered ‘how waste disposal [including sewage]
was handled at such crowded places’ in southern Africa.
   The problem for archaeologists has always been that the sheer size of an
urban site makes it difﬁcult to get an overall picture. This is what makes the
investigations of Sinclair so important. Soil samples were collected at random
from more than 600 hectares, allowing geophysical analysis, measurement of
soil colour, and geochemical analysis of phosphate concentrations to be
carried out over the whole of the Great Zimbabwe site. In addition, more than
200 cores each of 50 millimetres in diameter were drilled across the centre of
the site, covering an area of about 20 hectares. To all of this data were added
observations from ﬁeld walking, local informants, and the records of previous
archaeological investigations, resulting in a series of maps that showed the
developmental history of Great Zimbabwe, covering both its growth and
its subsequent decline, from the fourth century AD to the nineteenth century.
This work provided a picture that would have taken many years of excavation
to obtain, and provided it with minimal impact on the archaeological deposits
(Sinclair et al. 1993: 710, 712–13).
   Yet if Great Zimbabwe was the scene of an urban development on the scale
now suggested, then the question arises of how it related to the other, smaller
zimbabwe-tradition sites. Insufﬁcient attention was formerly given to these
sites by archaeologists, but ﬁeldwork and excavation have thrown some light
on them. Chipadze’s Ruin at Harleigh Farm near Rusape, for instance, seems
to have been the earlier of two ruins at this place and excavation showed that
it comprised a small settlement with cultural afﬁnities to Great Zimbabwe.
Occupied from about AD 1300 to after 1500, and with an apparent emphasis
on cattle keeping, this settlement consisted of stone screening walls enclosing
areas within which were massive daga huts (Robins and Whitty 1966). It
seems that what the excavators investigated were the dwellings of a small
political or religious elite and that somewhere nearby must have been the rest
of the settlement in which lived the ordinary people.
   A similar impression is gained from other zimbabwe-tradition sites that have
been excavated. Thus both Nhunguza Ruin and Ruanga Ruin are small sites,
dated to about the ﬁfteenth century AD, where stone screening walls enclosed
only a small number of daga huts. Garlake was of the opinion that the adult
population of such enclosures could never have been more than thirty and
was probably more often nearer ten (Garlake 1973: 164). Several pieces of
evidence at the Nhunguza and Ruanga sites reinforce the impression that the
occupants of the stone-walled enclosures were merely an elite section of a
larger settlement. First, at Nhunguza the largest hut seems to have been for
a person of authority to sit in audience, backed by symbols of that authority
that were housed in an adjacent, secluded room. Second, at both Nhunguza

278
                                                 Social complexity in Zambezia

and Ruanga the pottery consisted of a limited range of vessels and excluded
cooking vessels and bowls for eating and serving. This has also been observed
at other zimbabwe-tradition sites, indicating that food was prepared outside
the stone enclosures, then brought into them and the vessels later removed.
Third, at both these sites there is a suggestion that there were other habitations
outside the stone enclosures. At Ruanga it is possible that people of a lesser
status were living on the Lower Platform, while at Nhunguza the remains of at
least six small huts were found outside the enclosure but were not investigated
(Garlake 1972). It is from the zimbabwe-tradition site of Manyikeni (Manek-
weni), however, that has come some of the best evidence for social differenti-
ation. There is extensive surface evidence for occupation outside the stone
enclosure (Garlake 1976a: 29), and excavation has conﬁrmed the presence of
huts in this peripheral area (Morais and Sinclair 1980: 352; Sinclair 1987:
91–9). In addition, analysis of the faunal remains indicated that whereas cattle
dominated the meat diet of the people living in the central enclosure and
immediately around it, sheep or goat and game dominated that of the people
living on the periphery of the site (Barker 1978).
   The elite status of those who lived within zimbabwe-tradition structures, or
the special function of those structures, is also suggested by excavations at the
sites of Lekkerwater (Tsindi) and Zvongombe. At Lekkerwater a small number
of daga huts nestled within stone enclosures on the top of a bare granite hill,
one of them with an internal dividing wall like that in the largest hut at
Nhunguza and two of them with ﬁnely moulded daga features, some with
complex relief decoration. Material culture, economy, and occupation from
the tenth to the nineteenth century associate the site with the overall
zimbabwe-tradition complex (Garlake 1973: plates 17 and 99; Rudd 1984;
Turner 1984). Like Nhunguza and Ruanga, the two zimbabwe-tradition sites
at Zvongombe show that this complex extended also to the northern
Zimbabwe Plateau, where it seems to have been imposed on the unrelated
Musengezi and Harare traditions, suggesting an expansion from a core area in
the south (Pwiti 1996: ﬁg. 42, table 20b). It is uncertain whether these two
sites, known as Zvongombe North and Zvongombe South (Fig. 9.7), were
contemporary, although both appear to have belonged to the ﬁfteenth century
AD. Several daga huts were located within the stone enclosures, and internal
dividing walls and moulded daga features were present (Soper and Pwiti
1992). As with other similar sites, the number of occupants of the Zvongombe
enclosures seems to have been small.
   Just as the stone structures at Great Zimbabwe can be understood only in
the context of the substantial number of people who lived outside them, so also
the associated smaller zimbabwe-tradition sites scattered over the landscape
need to be examined in the context of the overall settlement pattern of which

                                                                             279
African Civilizations




Fig. 9.7 Zvongombe South, Zimbabwe, reconstructed layout. Stone walls are shown
solid, daga huts in outline. dp, daga platform; small circles in A represent pots, small black
dots are postholes, and arrows indicate entrances. After Soper and Pwiti 1992: ﬁgs. 3 and 4.
                                                  Social complexity in Zambezia

they formed a part. On the Zimbabwe Plateau there are some sites that
are culturally and chronologically related to zimbabwe-tradition sites but have
few or no stone structures. Two relevant sites that have been excavated are
Chivowa Hill (which has very little stone walling) and Montevideo Ranch
(which has no walling), both quite near to Great Zimbabwe itself. These sites
yielded evidence of communities engaged in both pastoralism and (probably)
sorghum and millet cultivation, for whom cattle seem to have been particularly
important. They would appear to have been rural peasant communities that
were contemporary with the various zimbabwe-tradition sites (Sinclair 1984;
1987: 99–109). A similar situation was also revealed on part of the northern
Zimbabwe Plateau, when a random stratiﬁed sampling strategy was applied
to an area of approximately 12 by 10 kilometres around Zvongombe.
The ‘Centenary Survey’, as this ﬁeldwork project was called, showed that
whereas the zimbabwe-tradition stone structures of the area tended to cluster,
there were ‘unwalled sites ceramically related to the zimbabwes’ that were more
widely scattered (Soper 1990: 73). It was concluded that the evidence suggested
‘a group of more important GZ [Great Zimbabwe] communities, perhaps a
“political elite” . . . supported by a network of small subordinate settlements’
(Soper 1990: 74). Subsequently, Soper (1992) discussed the sociopolitical status
of the zimbabwe-tradition sites on the northern Zimbabwe Plateau, where they
appear to represent a cultural intrusion from the south, but found that the
evidence was inadequate for any conﬁdent inferences to be made. However, the
overall evidence from the various sites that are thought to be culturally related
to Great Zimbabwe suggests that there existed a graded series of settlements,
from capital city to regional centre to rural village. If this was the case, then it
seems likely that a formally organized state did exist on the Zimbabwe Plateau
during the second quarter of the second millennium. However, the manner of
its emergence remains one of the most signiﬁcant issues in the archaeology
of southern Africa (Kim and Kusimba 2008; Huffman 2010b).
   Radiocarbon dating and imports from the East African coast, of which
ceramics are the most signiﬁcant, have enabled archaeologists to piece together
a reasonably consistent chronology for the zimbabwe-tradition sites of Great
Zimbabwe style. This indicates that they had ceased to be important by the
end of the ﬁfteenth century and indeed that Great Zimbabwe had declined
sharply, at least as an urban centre, by the middle of that century. It used to be
thought that the site was virtually abandoned at that time, but it seems more
likely that it continued to be inhabited until the nineteenth century, although it
had lost both its economic and political importance and most of its population
(Huffman and Vogel 1991: 69; Collett et al. 1992: 157–8; Sinclair et al. 1993:
ﬁg. 43.2). However, more attention needs to be given to the archaeology
of Great Zimbabwe concerning the period after about 1450 (Pikirayi 2013a).

                                                                               281
African Civilizations

   Documentary and oral sources indicate that the kingdom of the Mwene
Mutapa, on the northern end of the Zimbabwe Plateau, was the immediate
successor of the state that had been centred on Great Zimbabwe, and archaeo-
logical research has provided some support for this. In the Mount Fura area,
Innocent Pikirayi investigated sites which he identiﬁed with the Mutapa state.
During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the Portuguese had trading posts
in this area, attracted, it would appear, by its gold resources. Excavations at the
large settlement site of Baranda produced imports of those and later dates,
including glazed ceramics from the Near East, the Far East, and Europe, as well
as large quantities of Indian glass beads and other imported glass. However,
indigenous burnished graphite pottery was far more abundant than imported
wares and is similar to pottery from zimbabwe-tradition sites at the time of their
maximum development. Smaller sites in the same locality told a similar story,
although less imported material was present. Although there was no indication
of building in stone at any of these sites, others of possibly later date and
different cultural tradition, located on hills in the vicinity, do have stone-built
enclosures that contain evidence of occupation and in some cases have loop-
holes, perhaps for ﬁrearms, but these are quite different from the stone struc-
tures of zimbabwe-tradition sites. Thus, some sites in this area seem to have
inherited parts of the zimbabwe cultural tradition, but sophisticated building in
stone was not one of them (Pikirayi 1992; 1993; Sinclair et al. 1993: 725–31).
   It was in the south-western part of the plateau, not its north, that the
zimbabwe tradition of building in stone was to survive and develop. The sites
of Khami, Danangombe (Dhlo Dhlo), and Naletale are remarkable examples
of this phenomenon. These and a number of similar sites belong to the period
from the ﬁfteenth to the nineteenth century AD. The stone structures typical
of this later period consist mainly of revetment walls for building platforms, on
which daga huts were erected. Belonging to the Khami style of the zimbabwe
tradition, these walls made considerable use of decorative features (Garlake
1973: 166–8, plates 16 and 103). The most extensively investigated site
is the ﬁfteenth- to seventeenth-century Khami, where Keith Robinson excav-
ated parts of a group of elite buildings, some of which were approached
by underground passages and many of which were provided with drains
(Robinson 1959: 105). Khami is thought to have been the capital of the Butua
State, associated with the Torwa dynasty (Huffman 1996: 51), where many
people might have moved after the decline of Great Zimbabwe. For this
reason, Huffman (1981: 15–16) used the settlement pattern at Khami to throw
light on the earlier one at Great Zimbabwe and so provided a plan of the Khami
site (Fig. 9.8). This demonstrates that Khami, like Great Zimbabwe, consisted
mainly of peasant housing, with the buildings of the elite occupying only a
small part of the total area of the settlement. Subsequently, Huffman (1996)

282
                                                    Social complexity in Zambezia




Fig. 9.8 Plan of Khami, showing stone structures and areas of daga huts. After Huffman
1981: ﬁg. 13.



                                                                                  283
African Civilizations

also used both Khami and the seventeenth- to nineteenth-century site of
Danangombe, which became the capital of the Changamire dynasty (Beach
1994: 120), to help explain the symbolic use of space within Great Zimbabwe
itself and even in the earlier Mapungubwe. However, whatever the actual
level of cultural continuity over this long period, it appears that state formation
and urban living had a long history in this area. Indeed, van Waarden has
studied what she identiﬁes as the Butua State, which occupied much of western
Zimbabwe and eastern Botswana from 1425 to 1830 and which ‘for four
centuries . . . was the largest and most powerful state in southern Africa’.
It collapsed only in the nineteenth century due to repeated Ndebele invasions
(van Waarden 2012).
   Building in stone also continued in the Nyanga area of the Eastern
Highlands, where numerous structures have been thought to date from the
sixteenth to the early nineteenth century AD, although the so-called ruin
complexes have been dated to the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries (Soper
1996). Nyanga stone building (p. 266) differs from that of the zimbabwe-
tradition sites, however, and it has been claimed that it has little relevance for
understanding the latter (Garlake 1973: 172). Nevertheless, it does form part
of the wider context within which Great Zimbabwe, Khami, and their related
sites should be considered.
   The economic basis of the relatively large populations, indicated by the
settlements with stone walling, was a combination of cereal agriculture and
cattle and small stock husbandry. These were societies in which cattle became
wealth and their possession gave power; cattle even determined the layout of
settlements and the symbolic use of space within them (Kuper 1980; 1982;
Evers 1984). The ‘Bantu Cattle Pattern’, as it has been called, can be discerned
in many sites, including the Toutswe settlements of north-east Botswana, which
date from about AD 600 to about 1300 and show evidence of a graded
settlement hierarchy based on the possession of large herds of cattle (Denbow
1984; 1986). Similar developments also took place in the Limpopo Valley from
the ninth century onwards, eventually giving rise to the important centre of
Mapungubwe, which by the thirteenth century had grown powerful and
wealthy from its participation in long-distance trade with the Indian Ocean
coast. At the peak of its power, 3,000 to 5,000 people are thought to have lived
at Mapungubwe, making it ‘the largest urban settlement in Southern Africa in
its time’ (Huffman 1996: 184). In conjunction with a number of associated
sites, it also seems that Mapungubwe became one of the earliest identiﬁable
states in the area (Hall 1987: 74–90). However, although it has been thought
that the zimbabwe-tradition sites were its successors, a reexamination of the
chronology of Great Zimbabwe has suggested that the latter actually over-
lapped with that of Mapungubwe (Chirikure et al. 2013a; 2013b).

284
                                              Social complexity in Zambezia

   There is archaeological evidence for precolonial mining, particularly for
gold, on the Zimbabwe Plateau. These ‘ancient workings’, as they have been
called, have been associated with the zimbabwe-tradition sites and it was
formerly suggested that the distribution of workings and ruins was similar
(Summers 1969: 137–41). Summers (1969: 105) listed 1,267 ancient work-
ings, most of which resulted from gold mining. Both alluvial and quartz
reef gold was mined, with stopes, shafts, and sometimes adits used to exploit
the latter. The miners rarely penetrated deeper than about 25 metres, because
of the harder rocks met at depth, as well as ventilation or drainage problems
(Phimister 1976). Nevertheless, it has been claimed that of the 3,041 kilo-
metres of gold reef pegged by European miners by 1894, some 611 kilometres
were covered by ‘ancient workings’. The mining of placer deposits, both
alluvial and eluvial, seems to have been important, and they were compara-
tively easy to exploit. Indeed, it has been suggested that placer deposits in
the vicinity inﬂuenced the location of Great Zimbabwe. However, the problem
with archaeological evidence for precolonial mining on the Zimbabwe Plateau,
which included mining for copper and iron as well as gold, is that so many of
the old workings were destroyed by mining early in the twentieth century.
   Because of this, the work of Lorraine Swan, looking at changes in the
proximity of settlements to gold mines (excluding alluvial workings), has
been particularly useful (Swan 1994). Although gold production seems to
have peaked from the twelfth to the early ﬁfteenth centuries (Phimister 1976:
16), she found ‘a close relationship’ between mines and ﬁrst-millennium
settlements in the north-east of the Zimbabwe Plateau and indications of a
movement of the latter towards the mines in the south-west between the
seventh and ninth centuries (Swan 1994: 125). She also showed that mining
was the work of a lower-status population living near the mines, while
smelting was carried out at the elite zimbabwe-tradition sites, from which
have come most of the gold artefacts that have been found. Furthermore,
Swan was able to excavate a rare surviving portion of backﬁll in a stope
at the Tebekwe Mine, in central Zimbabwe (Swan 1994: 103–16). This
provided information on hard-rock mining techniques and was dated by
radiocarbon to the mid-ﬁfteenth to mid-seventeenth centuries. Huffman
argued that gold mining did not develop on the plateau until the eleventh
century AD at the earliest and that the rise of the Great Zimbabwe state was
a direct consequence of that mining and of the gold trade with the East
African coast. Swan’s work, and the presence of marine shells and beads in
early to mid ﬁrst-millennium contexts on the Zimbabwe Plateau (Swan 1994:
72–3), suggests that gold mining actually began during the ﬁrst millennium
AD. Nevertheless, the greater part of the production of 7 to 9 million ounces
that Phimister (1976: 16–17) estimated for the period from the late tenth

                                                                         285
African Civilizations

century to the nineteenth seems to have been produced during the time of
greatest building activity at Great Zimbabwe, and the signiﬁcance of gold
mining for the zimbabwe phenomenon seems incontrovertible.


Subsistence economy
In the economy that supported urbanization and state developments in
Zambezia, livestock husbandry was particularly important, dominated by
cattle. Consider, for example, the analysis of a large quantity of animal bones
excavated from a midden on the lower slopes of the hill at Great Zimbabwe,
on the top of which is the so-called Hill Ruin. It was estimated that this
collection consisted of about 140,000 pieces of bone. Of these, 15,298 were
selected as easily recognizable; on examination it was found that all except
218 pieces came from cattle. The more recognizable material was also ana-
lysed for skeletal part, bone treatment and fragmentation, and minimum
number of individuals. It was concluded that cattle dominated the food
remains from the Hill Ruin and that more than 75 percent of the 1,330
animals represented were immature when killed. It also appeared that the
cattle had been butchered on the hilltop rather than elsewhere (Brain 1974).
  A similar emphasis on cattle has been found at other sites. At Ruanga Ruin the
animal bones excavated by Garlake indicated that mature domestic cattle were
the main source of meat, although smaller animals – domestic sheep, goats, or
small buck – were also eaten (Garlake 1972: 134). Cattle were the most
common animal at Harleigh Farm (Robins and Whitty 1966); Sinclair found
the same thing at Chivowa Hill and Montevideo Ranch (Sinclair 1984; 1987:
102, 108); and Turner the same thing at Lekkerwater (Tsindi) (Turner 1984). At
these sites sheep or goat and wild animals were also present but of considerably
less importance. The cattle seem to have been of the Sanga type, which are still
kept by the Shona people of the area today. Garlake suggested that transhumant
pastoralism for the intensive production of beef was a major factor in the
location of zimbabwe-tradition settlements, many of which were situated on
the edge of the tsetse-free highlands so as to exploit lowland grazing when it was
relatively tsetse-free during the dry seasons. Indeed, Garlake argued that such
specialist pastoralism is as likely to have formed part of the basis for the rise of
Great Zimbabwe and its associated sites as gold mining and long-distance trade,
to which the development has so often been attributed (Garlake 1978b).
Although his transhumance model has since been questioned (Thorp 1995:
73), there seems little doubt about the important role of cattle in the economy.
  Perhaps those immature cattle bones at the base of the hill at Great Zimbabwe
should make us pause. If the Hill Ruin was occupied by an elite group or if the
ethnohistorical evidence for cattle sacriﬁce collected by Carl Mauch in 1871 is

286
                                                  Social complexity in Zambezia

relevant for 400 to 600 years earlier (Brain 1974: 308–9), then the bones from
the hill midden might not constitute reliable evidence for the role of cattle in the
overall subsistence economy. Indeed, there is a general danger that faunal
evidence from within or near stone structures at zimbabwe-tradition sites will
throw light only on the diet or rituals of the elite. A comparison by Carolyn
Thorp of the age of cattle from the hill midden at Great Zimbabwe with the age
of cattle from an area of commoners’ houses in the valley showed that the
former indicated the killing of a signiﬁcantly larger number of young animals
(Thorp 1995: 73). Furthermore, it was found at Manyikeni (p. 279) that whilst
those people within and near the stone enclosure mainly ate beef, those living
on the edge of the site ate mainly sheep or goat and game (Barker 1978).
In addition, a sample of faunal material from Khami contained not only a
preponderance of cattle but also a wide variety of other species.
   The location and apparently continuous occupation of the zimbabwe-
tradition sites suggest that pastoralism was only a part of the subsistence
economy. Ethnohistorical evidence indicates that it was grain cultivation, par-
ticularly of sorghum and millet, which provided the basic staple foods. In
addition, there was probably a wide range of vegetables cultivated. Carbonized
seeds from Great Zimbabwe and from related sites of the Leopard’s Kopje
tradition (Robinson et al. 1961: 170) conﬁrm that sorghum was grown, as well
as ﬁnger millet (Eleusine coracana), pearl millet (Pennisetum americanum), and
a variety of beans (Voandzeia subterranea) and peas (Vigna spp.). Furthermore,
two grains of ﬁnger millet were recovered from deposits dated to the second
half of the ﬁrst millennium at the site of Kadzi, in the middle Zambezi Valley
(Pwiti 1996: 132). Also the eleventh- to fourteenth-century site of Malumba, in
southern Zimbabwe, yielded large quantities of sorghum. The role of livestock
in such mixed farming economies was largely to cushion the effect of crop
failure in bad years and, particularly in the case of cattle, to provide a means of
amassing wealth in a negotiable form, wealth that could form the basis of
power. Apparently, Bocarro (p. 264) was not exaggerating in the seventeenth
century when he claimed that most of the people in this area were ‘inclined to
agricultural and pastoral pursuits, in which their riches consist’.


Technology
Archaeological evidence from zimbabwe-tradition sites indicates considerable
technological expertise. Most obvious is building in stone; the construction of
free-standing, drystone walls, especially on the scale and of the quality of some of
those at Great Zimbabwe, requires skill. Admittedly the tabular nature of the
exfoliated granite provided a supply of superb building material, but the builders
knew how best to use it within their own technological limitations. Although they

                                                                               287
African Civilizations

never seem to have grasped fully the importance of bonding, either between
courses or between separate walls, their building technique, at its best, exhibited
remarkable sophistication. Walls were broad based to spread their load and
tapered to their tops. They were rubble ﬁlled, to economise on labour and
resources, but the faces of the walls, so vital to the success of such a technique,
were constructed with great care. Sharp corners and rectangular layouts were
avoided, and plans consisted of random curved forms. This emphasis on curves is
also evident in the distinctive architectural features that were constructed. Over-
all, the stone structures of the zimbabwe-tradition sites, and of Great Zimbabwe
particularly, imply remarkable technological skill. These structures indicate the
development, from an indigenous tradition, of what Garlake called ‘an architec-
ture that is unparalleled elsewhere in Africa or beyond’ (Garlake 1973: 50).
   However, the stone walls of the zimbabwe-tradition sites were merely one
component of the building technology. Fragmentary evidence from a number of
sites suggests that building in daga (or ‘mud’) was just as important as building in
stone. Indeed, it seems that originally much of the impressive stonework at Great
Zimbabwe would have been plastered with daga up to a height of some 2 metres
above the ground (Garlake 1973: 20). This material was used for a variety of
constructional purposes, including ﬂoors and other internal ﬁttings, and was
skilfully moulded into decorative patterns, as well as being beautifully ﬁnished
to a hard, smooth, almost polished surface. Other building skills of which we
have no direct evidence must have included wood working and thatching.
   An important aspect of the technology of Zambezia during the ﬁrst half of
the second millennium AD comprised mining and metallurgy. Archaeological
evidence (p. 285) indicates that mining was a widespread activity conducted on a
considerable scale, although in the case of gold mining it was limited in depth,
and recovery methods were inefﬁcient (Phimister 1976: 15). The metals that were
produced probably consisted of iron, copper, gold, and tin, and Great Zimbabwe
has yielded evidence of metal working in all of these. Iron working seems
to have been particularly well developed, producing a range of hoes, axes,
spearheads, arrowheads, knives, and other things. Excavations at two sites in
northern Zimbabwe, Swart Village, dated from 800 to 1200 AD, and Baranda,
dated from 1500 to 1700, have thrown light on smelting and smithing practices,
indicating both continuities and differences through time (Chirikure and Rehren
2006). Copper, bronze, and gold were used mainly for decorative purposes, often
in the form of wire made with the assistance of iron tongs and drawplates but also
as sheet or cast metal (Garlake 1973: 113–16). The gold-covered rhinoceros
ﬁgurine and other objects found in twelfth-century burials at Mapungubwe are
a sad reminder of the objects that must have been lost to looters, particularly
during the period 1895 to 1900 when more than 2,000 ounces (62,200 grams)
of gold were estimated to have been taken from ruin sites (Swan 1994: 70).

288
                                                Social complexity in Zambezia

   Other crafts indicated by the archaeological evidence from zimbabwe-tradition
sites include the manufacture of pottery, much of which had polished and
graphited exteriors. In addition, spinning, presumably of cotton, is suggested
by the large numbers of perforated discs of potsherd that have been found,
although they might have had other uses (Garlake 1973: 116–17). If they were
spindle whorls, then the presence of spinning would suggest that weaving was
taking place and that textile manufacture was of some signiﬁcance (Davison and
Harries 1980). The carving of soapstone is also worth noting, with most of the
evidence coming from Great Zimbabwe itself. Ritual bird ﬁgures, monoliths, ﬂat-
bottomed dishes, ﬁgurines, and open moulds for casting cross-shaped ingots of
copper were all carved from this easily worked and locally available stone. The
manner in which the soapstone was carved suggests a familiarity with wood
carving and is another reminder of the many crafts in perishable materials that
must also have existed at the zimbabwe-tradition settlements (Garlake 1973:
119–23, 130–1). There are, however, examples of ivory carving and bone
working from the site of Bambandyanalo (K2) and from nearby Mapungubwe,
dating from the end of the ﬁrst millennium and the beginning of the second
millennium AD (Hall 1987: 80–1). More durable are the many pottery ﬁgurines
of humans and animals, recovered from more than 200 sites and dating from
about the third century AD to the end of the nineteenth century (Matenga 1993).
   The technology associated with zimbabwe-tradition settlements indicates
that by the second quarter of the second millennium AD, there had developed
a degree of functional specialization within the society to which these settle-
ments belonged.


Social system
Zimbabwe-tradition sites provide many indications of social and economic
stratiﬁcation. The stone structures that characterize most of these sites are
symbols of privilege and power, in the opinion of Pikirayi (2013b) creating
elite power as well as reﬂecting it. They have no other obvious role, such as
defence. Rather, they seem to have been intended as containers, behind whose
high walls could be hidden both the living and the ceremonial areas of a ruling
elite. Indeed, the walls themselves demonstrate the power of the ruling group,
able to spend its surplus wealth on such conspicuous consumption and able to
exert the necessary control over substantial bodies of skilled and unskilled
labour. Although the work actually extended over some three centuries, a
British drystone building contractor has estimated that the structures at Great
Zimbabwe would take eighty-four men, working six days a week, two years to
complete (Reader 1997: 338). Furthermore, some of the items recovered from
within these stone-walled compounds conﬁrm the elevated status of their

                                                                           289
African Civilizations

occupants. Thus there are objects of gold, copper, bronze, or soapstone; there
are also exotic objects such as glass beads and, at Great Zimbabwe itself, glass
vessels and Islamic and Chinese ceramics, products of long-distance trade via
the East African coast. Moreover, there are signiﬁcant absences from the
artefacts found in the stone enclosures. Garlake remarked on the ‘extraordin-
arily limited range’ of pottery, comprising drinking and brewing/storage
vessels but lacking open bowls for cooking, serving, and eating and lacking
pots for fetching water. Garlake thought that this suggested a limited range of
domestic activities within the enclosures and pointed out that there is also
an almost complete absence of grindstones (Garlake 1973: 112–13). Add to
this the fact that many of the enclosures contained huts with ﬁnely ﬁnished
daga walls, at least one of which (at Nhunguza) seems to have been an
‘audience hut’, and the elite character of the occupants is almost certainly
established. The small populations of the enclosures provide further evidence
of this; Garlake estimated the total population of those at Great Zimbabwe
as between 100 and 200 adults and the population of enclosures at all the
other known zimbabwe-tradition sites at any one time as about 750 adults
(Garlake 1973: 195–6).
   By the 1970s archaeologists began to ask questions about the rest of the
population of these settlements. Evidence became available that the stone
enclosures were merely central structures within more extensive settlements,
which in the case of Great Zimbabwe might have had a total population of
18,000 people. With some justiﬁcation, Huffman referred to Great Zimbabwe
as southern Africa’s ﬁrst town. The ordinary townspeople lived in cramped
conditions (Fig. 9.5), at a density of about three times that of the elite. Further,
judging from the evidence at Manyikeni (p. 279), they did not eat so well.
However, there was probably already social differentiation amongst the
townspeople themselves, with functional specialization giving a different status
to craftsmen such as blacksmiths and builders.
   At Great Zimbabwe, at least, urbanization was already in progress. Further-
more, if this site is examined in the context of all the other zimbabwe-tradition
sites that are culturally and chronologically related, then it is possible to
discern a graded series of settlements that suggests the existence of a formally
organized state (p. 281). At one end of the scale was the capital at Great
Zimbabwe, with its large population controlled by a powerful elite; at the
other end were rural villages with their peasant communities. In between were
regional centres: smaller towns, each of which was controlled by its own elite
group that probably owed allegiance to that of the capital. It also seems
probable that the occupants of these settlements shared a similar worldview,
originating from Kuper’s ‘Bantu Cattle Pattern’ (p. 284) but developing into
something quite distinctive. The attempt by Huffman (1996) to reconstruct the

290
                                                     Social complexity in Zambezia




Fig. 9.9 Spatial analysis maps of Zimbabwe sites. Large map shows 50 km clustering level;
inset map shows 155 km clustering level and Garlake’s (1978b) Thiessen polygon study.
After Sinclair and Lundmark 1984: ﬁg. 5.


symbolism that shaped the material record at Great Zimbabwe and related
sites provides a stimulating picture of how society might have been organized,
although it remains difﬁcult to verify.


Population pressures
Spatial analysis (Fig. 9.9) of the distribution of zimbabwe-tradition sites on the
Zimbabwe Plateau (possibly the distribution of research rather than of sites) has
demonstrated a settlement pattern in which the population showed a marked
tendency to cluster. A similar analysis of Khami sites again shows obvious

                                                                                    291
African Civilizations

clustering but in a different place (Sinclair and Lundmark 1984; Sinclair 1987:
123–4). The locations of these clusters, which are thought to indicate the areas,
respectively, of the Great Zimbabwe and the Butua State, were presumably
inﬂuenced by environmental factors. Tsetse ﬂy, climatic variability, and differ-
ences in soil fertility must all have played a part in making some areas more
attractive to human settlement than others. For example, zimbabwe-tradition
sites tended to be on the southern edge of the plateau, which was high enough to
be tsetse-free, was within reach of lowland grazing only exploitable during its
relatively tsetse-free dry season, had local areas with a higher rainfall, and
possessed some areas of high soil fertility. As Pikirayi (2001a: 148) concluded:
‘Land was always an important issue in the past. It was necessary to control it
for its resources’. In addition, Tsheboeng (2001: 128) thought that ‘two vari-
ables appear to have been important in settlement location decision, namely
soils and water needs’. Although this picture was complicated by settlement
clusters of lesser importance in the mining areas of the central plateau, it appears
that the places most attractive to human settlement were relatively limited.
Many seem to have lain within what Beach (1994: 19–23) called ‘The Great
Crescent of population’. This could well have caused local population pressures
sufﬁcient to give rise to the social changes inherent in the processes of urbaniza-
tion and state formation. As Sinclair concluded, ‘pressure on land and the
accompanying possibility to control access to productive areas should be
included in the analysis of relations between élite and others and even of
differentiation within the élite itself’ (Sinclair 1987: 144).
   Some conﬁrmation of the existence of local population pressures
might, indeed, be provided by the eventual abandonment of Great Zimbabwe
itself. Both Garlake and Huffman were of the opinion that abandonment
resulted from environmental deterioration brought on by the large population,
and Sinclair (1987: 114, 116) thought that there was a 200-year periodicity
in the sociopolitical history of the area resulting from this factor, so that
Bambandyanalo–Mapungubwe, Great Zimbabwe, and Khami each lasted
for about that time. Certainly the large number of people that are now thought
to have lived in Great Zimbabwe must have placed a tremendous demand on
the natural resources of the surrounding area. Firewood would soon have
become locally unavailable, necessitating its laborious transport by head from
ever-increasing distances; wildlife to serve as a supplement to human diet
would have become scarce (Brain 1974: 309); and the relatively limited areas
of better soils must have been gradually exhausted by overcultivation and
overgrazing. As might have been the case with Aksum, it is possible that it
was overexploitation of the strong resource base of Great Zimbabwe that
brought about its destruction. Without fundamental changes in technology
and agricultural system, it was fated to destroy itself.

292
                                                Social complexity in Zambezia

Ideology
Religion seems to have permeated many aspects of Shona life, as suggested by
the numerous pottery ﬁgurines from Zimbabwe, widespread in space and time,
which have been discussed by Matenga (1993). Therefore, it is probable that
it was a contributory factor in the rise of Great Zimbabwe and of the state
that it seems to have controlled. Indeed, one of the two main schools of
thought concerning the origins of these developments sees religion as the major
factor in their initiation. However, our knowledge of Shona religion is drawn
from oral tradition and ethnography, and from such sources it is difﬁcult to
estimate its role in changes that took place some seven centuries ago, although
Huffman (1996) made a bold attempt to do so. According to Garlake (1973:
184), ‘Great Zimbabwe was very probably always a major religious centre’,
where Mwari, the Shona supreme god, was particularly revered and where
cults of the mhondoro, spirits associated with the ruling dynasties, also ﬂour-
ished (Garlake 1973: 174). Certainly there are archaeological features and
artefacts at Great Zimbabwe that suggest religious and ancestral associations –
particularly the monoliths, some surmounted by carved birds, most of which
originally stood in the Eastern Enclosure of the Hill Ruin. Furthermore,
Herbert (1996: 645) emphasized ‘the ideological dimensions of technology
and the negotiations over power’ represented by ‘the insignia of ofﬁce such as
spears, axes and double gongs’. However, there is no archaeological evidence
to support Garlake’s assumption that religion was ‘probably the most import-
ant single factor in bringing about the ﬁrst steps towards the cohesion, organ-
ization and stratiﬁcation of the society’, and Garlake himself recognized
this (1973: 184). Indeed, although Shona religious ideology might have been
important as a means of reinforcing the authority of a ruling elite, the hypoth-
esis that the rise of Great Zimbabwe and its associated sites was due to
a religious minority, of either migrant or local origin, is unconvincing. The
alternative is the trade hypothesis, which maintains that Zimbabwe was a
result of surplus wealth from the East African gold trade. This, at least, is an
hypothesis that is susceptible to archaeological evaluation.


External trade
Both Arabic and early Portuguese documentary sources mention the existence
of trade between the Sofala area (p. 251), on the southern coast of Mozam-
bique, and the interior. That area seems to have been a clearing house, where
trade goods from the Islamic world and from India and China were imported
for onward transmission to the interior, which exported primary products via
the same area. Most sought-after of those products was gold, although at the

                                                                           293
African Civilizations

time of the ﬁrst Portuguese contact ivory was another important export, and it
is probable that other commodities, including copper, were also handled. The
imports, according to the Portuguese, were principally cloth, beads, and glazed
ceramics. The source of the gold that passed through the Sofala area was said
by ibn Battuta, early in the fourteenth century, to be Yuﬁ in the land of the
Limiin, one month’s march from the coast (Freeman-Grenville 1975: 31), and it
has been suggested that the land of the Limiin was the Zimbabwe Plateau and
that Yuﬁ was Great Zimbabwe itself. A number of questions arise from this.
First: does the archaeological evidence at zimbabwe-tradition sites throw any
light on this trade? Second: to what extent was this trade unusual and to what
extent was it merely part of a complex network of trade that involved both
long-distance and interregional exchange? Third and most important: what
role, if any, did this trade play in the rise of Great Zimbabwe and its associated
sites? Is it really possible that the Zimbabwe Culture was simply an indigenous
reaction to external stimulus in the form of the East Coast gold trade?
   Archaeological evidence for trade between Zambezia and the East African
coast is abundant for the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries AD, when the
Portuguese had trading posts in the Zambezi Valley and on the northern part
of the plateau (Pikirayi 1993). For the earlier periods there is less evidence,
but some of the earliest comes from the site of Schroda, near the conﬂuence
of the Shashe and Limpopo Rivers, occupied between the eighth and tenth
centuries and containing imported glass beads as well as indications that
ivory was being worked and traded. In the same area the eleventh-century
site of Bambandyanalo (K2) has produced similar evidence, and by the
thirteenth century, glass beads and gold-covered objects from Mapungubwe
suggest trade in gold and ivory with the East Coast (Hall 1987: 75–85;
Huffman 1996: 175–80). Perhaps the most important evidence for trade,
however, comes from the ‘Renders Ruin’ at Great Zimbabwe itself, where a
hoard included a glazed Persian bowl of thirteenth- or fourteenth-century
date. With it were a number of Chinese celadon dishes, some sherds of a
Chinese stoneware vessel, another glazed Persian bowl, and fragments of
engraved and painted Near Eastern glass, all of about the same date. In
addition there were a piece of coral, an iron spoon, an iron lamp holder with
a copper suspension chain, a copper box, two copper ﬁnger rings, and two
small bronze bells. There were also several tens of thousands of glass beads,
some brass wire, and a quantity of cowrie shells. Hall excavated this hoard in
1903, but in 1941 Goodall found some 30,000 beads in another part of the
same ruin (Garlake 1973: 131–3). These exotic objects demonstrate that in
about the fourteenth century Great Zimbabwe was in contact with the
trading cities of the East African coast. The hoard has been interpreted as
part of the stock of a visiting Arab trader, but the diverse nature of the goods

294
                                                Social complexity in Zambezia

and their location within what might have been the royal wives’ living
area make it more likely that they were part of a royal repository (Huffman
1981: 6). The unique character of this collection suggests that it must have
had considerable prestige value for its owner. Indeed, as late as the beginning
of the sixteenth century imported Chinese porcelain was still reaching Great
Zimbabwe (Collett et al. 1992: 139, 157–8).
   Another piece of archaeological evidence for trading contacts between the
Zimbabwe Plateau and the coast consists of a coin minted in Kilwa probably
in the early fourteenth century. This coin was excavated at Great Zimbabwe
and appears to be the only one ever recovered from a scientiﬁc context at that
site. Of more use as evidence for trade with the coast, because they are more
common, are the large numbers of glass beads recovered both from Great
Zimbabwe and from many other zimbabwe-tradition sites. The ultimate origin
of these beads is unknown, but they are similar to beads found in the East
Coast cities and, like them, they came from the Indian Ocean trade (p. 256).
Indeed, beads from the earlier sites of Bambandyanalo and Mapungubwe have
been shown by rare earth element analysis to have been made at al-Fustat
in Egypt (Saitowitz et al. 1996). However, changes in the glass chemistry of
beads from southern African sites between the eighth and ﬁfteenth centuries
suggest different sources around the Indian Ocean at different times (Wood
2011). Cowries are also very occasionally found at other zimbabwe-tradition
sites, as well as at Great Zimbabwe. Otherwise, evidence of imports from the
coast is limited, although the appearance at zimbabwe-tradition sites of spindle
whorls, which are absent from earlier sites, has been interpreted as indicating
that the craft of spinning spread from the coast as a result of trading contacts
(Garlake 1973: 117). It should be no surprise that a trade in which textiles and
gold were the most important commodities has left relatively little archaeo-
logical evidence. Nevertheless, there is strong circumstantial evidence for the
importance of trading between the Zimbabwe Plateau and the coast. There
was a sudden and considerable increase in building activity at Great Zim-
babwe during the fourteenth century, at the same time that equally sudden and
considerable expansion was taking place in the cities of the East African coast,
particularly at Kilwa. Equally, the fortunes of both Great Zimbabwe and the
coastal cities declined at about the same time during the ﬁfteenth century.
The most likely explanation for such a coincidence of prosperity must be that
there was a ‘close economic connection’ (Garlake 1976b: 224). Sutton (1997)
has suggested that depression in the coastal economy actually began in the
second half of the fourteenth century, following a fall in the international
price of gold, possibly resulting from the Black Death of 1346 to 1349.
Thus one of the factors in the decline of Great Zimbabwe might have been
a reduced demand for gold on the ‘world’ market.

                                                                           295
African Civilizations

   The second question that was asked concerned the extent to which this
overseas trade was part of a more general network of long-distance and
interregional exchange. In addition to items that must have derived from the
East Coast trade, the Renders Ruin hoard contained a large quantity of
material that suggests the existence of a substantial internal African trade.
Thus there were about 30 kilograms of iron wire and about 100 kilograms of
iron hoes, axes, and chisels. With them were ‘cakes of copper’, ivory, two
unusual spearheads, three iron gongs, and three iron rods that were probably
strikers for the gongs. There were also a soapstone dish, twenty small pieces of
perforated gold sheathing, some gold wire, and a handful of gold beads
(Garlake 1973: 133). The gongs are bell shaped and were made of two sheets
of iron welded together round the ﬂanges, although welding seems not to have
been practised in Zambezia. Seven similar gongs have been found at Great
Zimbabwe and single examples have been found at Chumnungwa Ruins and
Danangombe (Dhlo Dhlo) Ruins. Such gongs are characteristic of parts of
Zambia, the Congo Basin, and West Africa, and it has been suggested that
their distribution indicates contact between different African states (Vansina
1969). Indeed, gongs of this type accompanied two of the burials at the
Zambezi Valley site of Ingombe Ilede, in Zambia (Fagan et al. 1969: 92–4),
and their presence at Great Zimbabwe presumably indicates trading connec-
tions with the Ingombe Ilede area. This probability is reinforced by the
discovery of single examples of cross-shaped copper ingots, of a characteristic
Ingombe Ilede form, at the zimbabwe-tradition site of Chumnungwa and at
another ruin site in the Great Zimbabwe area. Three similar ingots have also
been found in the Mtelegwa Ruin. It seems that during the fourteenth and
ﬁfteenth centuries the Ingombe Ilede people were mining copper on some scale,
and as there are salt deposits in their area, it is likely that they traded salt as
well as copper to the Zimbabwe Plateau. In exchange they probably took gold
beads and ornaments, and iron tools and weapons. The comparatively few
glass beads at Ingombe Ilede sites suggest that the trade was with other internal
African communities, rather than with the East Coast (Garlake 1976b: 224).
Furthermore, this Ingombe Ilede–Zimbabwe Plateau trade was probably just a
small part of a complex internal trading network, of which the rest has left
little archaeological evidence. Documentary and oral traditional sources indi-
cate a network of trade routes stretching deep into the interior (van Waarden
2012: ﬁg. 7.2). Brian Fagan demonstrated for the region north of the Zim-
babwe Plateau that the demand for raw materials, particularly iron, copper,
and salt, ensured the growth of such networks (Fagan 1969). As in other parts
of Africa, it is likely that internal trading of this sort substantially pre-dated
long-distance external trade. If this was the case, then the East Coast gold trade
probably took advantage of an existing trading network.

296
                                                 Social complexity in Zambezia

  The third and ﬁnal question concerned the role of the East Coast trade in
the rise of Great Zimbabwe and other zimbabwe-tradition sites. The quick
answer is that it was probably very important but that its role in the social
and economic changes that led to urbanization and state formation was to
facilitate rather than to originate. The cause of these developments was
deeper and more complex than a mere trade in luxuries, but without doubt
that trade provided the elite with prestige goods and with a form of wealth
that could be used to enhance their authority.


Conclusion
Great Zimbabwe and its related sites comprise the archaeological evidence for
social and political developments that took place in Zambezia during the ﬁrst
half of the second millennium AD. The stone structures that have dominated
archaeological research housed a small ruling elite, who governed settlements
varying in size from the capital city of Great Zimbabwe itself, with a popula-
tion of perhaps 18,000, to smaller regional towns. The authority of this elite
probably extended also to rural villages that were too small to justify elite
residences. The size of Great Zimbabwe would suggest that urbanization was
already in process, at least at this place. The presence of comparable elite
structures in so many of the other settlements would suggest that some
progress had also been made towards the formation of a state. Why and
how had this happened?
   The basic reason was almost certainly the successful subsistence agriculture of
this area. As a generally healthy environment that was tsetse-free and with
access to other areas that were seasonally tsetse-free, it supported a mixed
farming economy in which grain, vegetables, and livestock – particularly cattle –
all played a part. This combination of cultivation and livestock would have
helped to even out the effects of bad years and must inevitably have led to
an increase in the population. However, good soils were limited and it is
probable that the tsetse boundaries ﬂuctuated. Thus some areas must have been
more productive than others, and those who controlled such areas must in time
have come to control the less fortunate members of an expanding population.
   However, there were alternatives to agriculture: mining, trade, and crafts of
various sorts. The development of these activities provided some escape from
the problem of limited productive land. They also provided the emerging elite
with further sources of wealth that could be controlled and that were more
negotiable than land or cattle. In particular, it is likely that a far-reaching and
complex network of interregional trade in raw materials had developed within
south central Africa, before Indian Ocean merchants were able to beneﬁt from
it. How could the latter have known that there was gold to be had from the

                                                                              297
African Civilizations

relatively remote Zimbabwe Plateau, unless that gold was already reaching the
coast? Nevertheless, the gold trade with the East Coast must in time have
become extremely important in creating surplus wealth that further enhanced
the power of the Zimbabwe Plateau elite. Even the most conservative estimate
suggests that between 7 and 9 million ounces of gold were made available for
trade and internal consumption before the end of the nineteenth century
(Phimister 1976: 16–17). It is not difﬁcult to imagine the impact on Plateau
society of the volume of goods (particularly cloth and beads) that must have
been received in exchange prior to the middle of the second millennium AD.
It seems unlikely that the gold trade ‘caused’ the rise of Great Zimbabwe, but
nevertheless it must have had a great effect on it.
   The apparent reasons for the decline and abandonment of Great Zimbabwe
and its associated sites consist of a reversal of the factors that gave rise to their
growth. The gold trade declined, probably because of falling world prices and
the depletion of the more easily worked deposits on the Zimbabwe Plateau.
More important, however, the environment around Great Zimbabwe col-
lapsed: overcropped, overgrazed, overhunted, overexploited in every essential
aspect of subsistence agriculture, it ceased to be able to carry the concentration
of people to whom it had given rise. To begin to understand this episode of
growth and decay, it is essential to see it in the broadest possible context, in
spatial, temporal, and social, economic, and political circumstances. Great
Zimbabwe was only ever a mystery when viewed in isolation.




298
Chapter 10
Central Africa: the Upemba Depression,
Interlacustrine Region, and Far West
This book presents case studies of archaeological evidence for urbanization
and state formation in precolonial Africa. The choice of areas has been
dictated by the character of the archaeological evidence and by the extent of
archaeological research, resulting in an incomplete picture. Not only might
the individual case studies be unrepresentative of developments in the selected
areas, but also there were precolonial cities and states in Africa, known from
the evidence of ethnohistory or oral tradition, that are excluded. This omission
is because the relevant archaeological evidence is either absent or severely
limited.
   The basic problem is archaeological visibility (Connah 2008). Some mani-
festations of early urbanization and state formation in Africa are of such a
character that their archaeological investigation is peculiarly difﬁcult. For
instance, the capital city of Buganda (Gutkind 1963), a state near Lake
Victoria, was described in 1889 as ‘one of the great capitals of Africa’ (Ashe
1889: 52), but it was constructed totally of grass, wood, and other organic
materials and it moved frequently, particularly on the death of the Kabaka, the
ruler of Buganda (Gutkind 1960: 29). The sites of these large settlements are,
therefore, unlikely to have much depth of deposit or structural remains, and
no archaeological investigation of them has been attempted (the last two
are covered by modern Kampala). Thus there is no archaeological information
about a settlement that John Hanning Speke, its ﬁrst European visitor,
described as ‘a magniﬁcent sight. A whole hill was covered with gigantic huts
such as I had never seen in Africa before’ (Speke 1863: 283).
   There is, however, no reason why archaeologists should not be able to
investigate such short-lived settlements of ephemeral materials, as was done,
for example, at the South African site of Mgungundlovu (Parkington
and Cronin 1979). Provided that subsequent activity or erosion has not
destroyed the inevitably shallow evidence, survey and excavation techniques
do exist that enable information to be obtained from sites of this type.
Nevertheless, they have been seldom applied in Africa, and a lack of sophis-
tication in research design has led to the excavation of many larger African
settlement sites with structures of stone, ﬁred brick, or mud, while sites
with less substantial structural remains have been ignored. Although this
situation is now changing, there are large areas of Africa where political and
economic problems make it difﬁcult, and sometimes impossible, to conduct

                                                                           299
African Civilizations

archaeological ﬁeld research, so that the excavation of sites of supposed
low archaeological visibility still lacks the necessary attention.
   This could apply to many parts of Africa but is particularly relevant to a
huge area of the continent extending across the modern states of the Congo
Republic, Democratic Congo, Angola, Zambia, Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda,
and western Tanzania. This area straddles the equator, although situated
mostly to its south. Ethnohistorical and oral traditional evidence indicate that
it was the location of a succession of cities and states from at least the sixteenth
century AD onwards. Some of these, such as the Kingdom of Kongo in the
sixteenth century or the state of Buganda in the nineteenth century, clearly
impressed European visitors. The latter were often particularly interested in
the cities that they came across, such as Loango in what is now the Congo
Republic (Dapper 1686: 320–1). Nevertheless, archaeology has contributed
relatively little to our knowledge of precolonial cities and states in this part of
Africa. At its southern margin, for instance, the Lozi Kingdom is known from
oral history, not archaeology. For all periods in the enormous area covered by
equatorial rainforest there has been only ‘a meager scattering of excavated
archaeological sites’ (Vansina 1990: 8), although the situation is improving.
   For the Kingdom of Kongo, there is the site of its capital city, Mbanza
Kongo (São Salvador), in northern Angola (Fig. 10.1), but it has never been
excavated (de Maret 1982: 80). Indeed, excavated evidence relevant to the
Kongo state was for long limited to a cemetery at Mbanza Mbata, where elite
graves produced indications of European trading contacts during the seven-
teenth and eighteenth centuries (de Maret 1982: 82). However, there has now
been other ﬁeldwork that indicates the potential of archaeology to throw light
on this region during the last 400 to 500 years (Clist et al. 2013a; 2013b).
Nevertheless, archaeological evidence for Kongo, a state described in detail
in both contemporary accounts (e.g., Pigafetta 1591) and historical studies
(e.g., Randles 1968), remains limited. Further to the north, for example, the
city of Concobela (Ngombela) has been identiﬁed with the site of Kingabwa,
near Kinshasa, but it has since been destroyed by clay digging and covered by a
garbage dump (de Maret 1982: 83). Similarly, the mounds of Mashita Bansa,
the site of a city in south-central Democratic Congo, can tell us little, although
test excavations were carried out there in 1984. Even the excavation of some
of the royal tombs of Rwanda was of limited value, as the three graves
investigated contained burials of the late nineteenth and early twentieth cen-
turies. One of these was of Cyirima Rujugira, a king who had been dead since
the seventeenth or eighteenth century but was buried only in 1930 or 1931.
This burial was accompanied by numerous grave goods that had also
remained unburied until the twentieth century; these are of interest because
they included items symbolic of royalty (Van Noten 1972). A similar problem

300
                                                                          Central Africa




Fig. 10.1 Principal archaeological sites in Central Africa mentioned in the text. Note the
locations of the Upemba Depression and the Interlacustrine Region, for which see Figs. 10.2
and 10.4. Hatched areas are subject to inundation. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.

of limited time depth exists for the site of Ryamurari, the old capital of the
Ndorwa Kingdom in Rwanda. Remains of circular mud walls indicate the
king’s enclosure, and there are also cattle kraals built of cattle dung and
garbage, but excavation has produced radiocarbon dates of the eighteenth
and twentieth centuries (Van Noten 1982: 75).
  Fortunately there are two areas in Central Africa where archaeological
research has contributed signiﬁcantly to our knowledge of socioeconomic
and political developments over the last millennium or so. One of these is
the Upemba Depression, in south-east Democratic Congo, and the other is the
Interlacustrine Region, particularly the part in Uganda (Fig. 10.1). The ﬁrst

                                                                                      301
African Civilizations

has shed light on the origins of the Luba state, which is known to have existed
by the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (Reefe 1981: 60–1); the second has
provided information on the antecedents and early phases of several states
which oral tradition suggests might have developed by about the middle of the
second millennium AD (Sutton 1993). A third area, where archaeological
research has been more limited, consists of a vast area of Central Africa to
the west of the ﬁrst two areas (Vansina 2004). For convenience, it is called here
the ‘Far West’, and more is now known of its archaeology than previously.
Situated in the heart of Africa, the relative isolation of these three areas from
inﬂuences outside the continent makes it particularly likely that increasing
social complexity was the result of indigenous rather than external factors.
For this reason, it is especially important to examine the developments that
took place, recollecting in doing so that the three selected areas are merely
representative of a huge region for much of which there is little relevant
archaeological evidence.


Geographical location and environmental factors
Situated roughly 1,000 kilometres apart, the main two areas discussed here
have similarities but some differences (Winterbotham et al. 1944; Connah
1996). Both lie within the savanna that fringes the equatorial rainforest, the
Interlacustrine Region actually straddling the equator, the Upemba Depression
more than 8 south of it. This gives both areas an annual rainfall in many
places of about 1,000 millimetres, which tends to fall in two wet seasons.
However, climatic conditions are modiﬁed by altitude, with much of the
Interlacustrine Region being more than 1,000 metres above sea level and even
the Upemba Depression lying above 500 metres. In addition, there is a consid-
erable altitudinal range within each area: the northern one is bordered by both
the Western Rift Valley and the Ruwenzori Mountains, and the southern by
the Hakansson Mountains to its north-west and the Mitumba Mountains to its
south-east. The resulting environmental diversity of both areas is made even
more complex by the presence of major bodies of water: the Victoria Nile and
Lakes Victoria, Kyoga, Albert, George, Edward, and Kivu in the one case, and
the River Lualaba (the Upper Congo) and Lakes Upemba and Kisale in the
other. The Interlacustrine Region, however, is much larger than the Upemba
Depression, with a greater variety of environments, although only small parts
of the area have been investigated archaeologically. In addition, the Upemba
Depression is dominated by a vast ﬂoodplain through which runs the Lualaba
and to which archaeological research has so far been conﬁned. Contrasting
with the relatively dispersed natural resources of the Interlacustrine Region,
those of the Upemba Depression are markedly concentrated.

302
                                                                  Central Africa

   Less detail is known about the environment in the Far West, the third area
on which attention is focussed here and the archaeology of which is limited. Its
environment consists of a mix of rainforest, savanna, and grassland, through
which in this case ﬂow the Congo River and its tributaries (Vansina 2004:
map 6). There is marked variation in relief, soil fertility, and rainfall (Vansina
2004: maps 2, 3, and 5). Food production in about AD 1000 probably
consisted of agriculture, agropastoralism, cattle pastoralism, and foraging,
in appropriate environments (Vansina 2004: map 10). Population densities
between AD 1000 and 1500 were probably varied (Vansina 2004: map 16).
Like the Upemba Depression and the Interlacustrine Region, the Far West
offered both opportunities and constraints for human settlement, facilitating
an increase in sociopolitical complexity in some places but not in others.
   Compared with much of the African savanna, the ﬁrst two areas provided
environments rich in resources and attractive to human settlement. In the
Upemba Depression ﬁsh were particularly important, being the main export
of the area when Europeans ﬁrst visited it (de Maret 1982: 90). However,
fertile, well-watered, alluvial soils and access to mountain grasslands permitted
a mixed agricultural economy, to which hunting of the proliﬁc local game also
made a contribution. Maize, cassava, groundnuts, and sweet potatoes seem to
have been the main crops in recent times, but these were introductions from
the Americas since the sixteenth century; African millets and sorghum were
also important. In addition, bananas, originally from South-East Asia, were
grown, as were indigenous beans and cowpeas. Domesticated animals con-
sisted mainly of chickens and goats. In the Upemba Depression, farmers
controlled water levels with dams, and canoe channels were maintained to
give ﬁshermen access to open water (Reefe 1983: 163). So successful was the
human exploitation of the area that for centuries a ‘high population density
supported by the richness of the ecosystem, appears to have strongly con-
trasted with neighboring less-populated areas’ (de Maret 1997: 499). The
Upemba Depression seems to have become the heartland of the Luba people.
Occupants of the Interlacustrine Region, however, might have been even more
fortunate. Generally good rainfall, equatorial temperatures moderated by
altitude, and relatively fertile soils enabled the growing of a range of crops
that now include, amongst other things, ﬁnger millet, cassava, sweet potatoes,
beans, and above all bananas. Many varieties of the latter have been grown in
the area for a long time, particularly the vegetable banana known as matooke,
which in its cooked form has become a staple food for large numbers of
people. Given adequate rainfall, moderate heat all year round, and suitable
soil, bananas need only modest inputs of land and labour, will yield within ten
to eighteen months of planting, and can produce for thirty years or more
(Wrigley 1989). Furthermore, in the drier parts of the Interlacustrine Region

                                                                             303
African Civilizations

were some of Africa’s best grasslands, often free of tsetse, which supported
extensive pastoralism, particularly of cattle. In addition, the lakes and rivers of
the area yielded important supplies of ﬁsh, and until recent times there were
also substantial resources of wild game. Overall, this range of subsistence
choices, especially those based on bananas or cattle (Schoenbrun 1993), not
only supported local concentrations of population but also provided the
wealth and power that brought about sociopolitical changes leading to
the emergence of the Interlacustrine kingdoms.
   As well as an exceptional subsistence base, however, both of these areas
possessed other resources of importance. In the case of the Upemba Depres-
sion, to its south-east lies one of the richest and largest copper deposits in the
world, which extends some 400 kilometres from the extreme south-east of
Democratic Congo into northern Zambia (Winterbotham et al. 1944: 401–2).
There are also sources of iron ore and salt in the area (Reefe 1983: 162), and,
like the Interlacustrine Region, there would formerly have been substantial
supplies of ivory. For this latter region, however, it was iron and salt that were
the most important commodities, iron having been smelted in Rwanda,
Burundi, and north-west Tanzania for more than 2,000 years (Woodhouse
1998: 181) and salt having been produced at Katwe on Lake Edward and Kibiro
on Lake Albert probably for much of the second millennium AD (Connah 1996).
Given such resources and the transport potential of the rivers and lakes as well
as the relatively easy conditions of overland routes, both areas are likely to
have played an important part in the development of trading networks within
Central Africa, which must have further stimulated sociopolitical changes.
   Nevertheless, there were constraints, as even Winston Churchill realized in
1908 when eulogizing Uganda as ‘from end to end one beautiful garden’
(Churchill 1962: 60). Over the relatively short period for which written
records have been kept, both human and animal diseases have had major
demographic impacts, and it seems possible that the same was the case in the
remoter past. As in much of Africa where there are substantial bodies of water,
malaria, schistosomiasis, ﬁlariasis, and other scourges must have long been a
problem. In addition, as population densities increased in some parts of the
areas, so did the likelihood of disease transmission, particularly of gastrointest-
inal infections and intestinal parasites (Patterson 1993: 448). It was sleeping
sickness, however, that most impressed Churchill in the early years of the
twentieth century, which by the end of 1905 killed ‘considerably more than
two hundred thousand persons’ in parts of Uganda, out of a population
estimated at not more than 300,000 (Churchill 1962: 67). In the area between
Lakes George and Edward, an especially nightmarish situation developed. In
1891 rinderpest swept through this country, and most of the cattle and much
of the game died. The amount of thicket increased with the reduction of

304
                                                                 Central Africa

grazing, creating suitable environments for tsetse ﬂies, which in turn spread
trypanosomiasis that killed more cattle, and sleeping sickness that killed large
numbers of people. By 1912 the area was so badly affected that the British
colonial authorities removed much of the remaining population, as was
also done at about the same time in other areas along the eastern side of
Lake Albert and along the lower Victoria Nile. Large parts of these areas
became game reserves and national parks with very few inhabitants (Good
1972: 571–7; Uganda National Parks n.d.). Admittedly, colonial movements
of livestock and people triggered these epidemics; previously an ecological
balance could have existed between disease vectors, animals, and humans.
However, even the threat of these diseases must have constituted a constraint
on the distribution and density of population in these areas.
  A ﬁnal constraint in these areas might have resulted from the very popula-
tion densities to which the exceptional subsistence base, and other resources,
gave rise. At times the two areas might have supported some of the densest
populations in tropical Africa, particularly in Rwanda, Burundi, and parts
of Uganda. Increasing pressure on resources, especially competition for pro-
ductive land, could have produced intergroup violence in the absence of major
epidemics, substantial emigration, or fundamental technological change.
Although compounded by the sociopolitical dislocation of the colonial and
postcolonial experience, the explosion of violence in Rwanda in 1994 is a
reminder of the potential for self-destruction within dense human populations.
An estimated 500,000 to 850,000 people were killed over a period of about
three months – more than 10 percent of the population – and another 30 per-
cent were forced into exile (Reader 1997: 717–19). Political scientists, anthro-
pologists, and others might agonize about the reasons for this appalling series
of events, but one thing is clear: human beings can become a major constraint
to other human beings.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
The Kingdom of Kongo, in the Far West, was ﬁrst described by Portuguese
visitors in the late ﬁfteenth century AD (de Maret 1998), but for both the
Upemba Depression and the Interlacustrine Region historical documentation
is of limited time depth. The former became known to the outside world only
towards the end of the nineteenth century, and accounts of the latter area
began in the 1860s with the visits of Speke, Grant, and Baker (Winterbotham
et al. 1944: ﬁg. 36; Connah 1996: 1). It was indeed these writers who ﬁrst
brought some of the Interlacustrine states to international attention, providing

                                                                           305
African Civilizations

accounts of Karagwe, Buganda, and Bunyoro before the impact of European
colonial ambitions. Late-nineteenth-century and early-twentieth-century Euro-
pean visitors, ofﬁcials, soldiers, traders, missionaries, and scientists, not only
left writings that have become a source of ethnohistorical data for the Upemba
and Interlacustrine areas but also made some of the earliest records of their
oral traditions, a source of information for precontact periods. However, for
the Luba area, ‘individual tales yield only an occasional, tantalising glimpse of
what happened before about AD 1700’ (Reefe 1983: 165), and for the Inter-
lacustrine states, attempts to interpret the traditions about the supposed
former state of Kitara and the Bacwezi dynasty have generated an extensive
but inconclusive literature (Sutton 1993). It seems probable that these latter
sources refer to about the middle of the second millennium AD and concern
the antecedents of the states ﬁrst visited by Europeans in the 1860s, but
interpretations have ranged from seeing the Bacwezi as the rulers of an early
pastoral state (Oliver 1953) to arguing that they were merely mythical ﬁgures
(Wrigley 1958), and from suggesting that their origins lay in the ﬁrst millen-
nium AD (Berger 1980) to concluding that they belonged to the fourteenth and
ﬁfteenth centuries (Steinhart 1981: 118). Collectively, the documentary and
oral records seem unlikely to throw much light on sociopolitical developments
in these areas of Central Africa before, at best, the last four or ﬁve centuries.
A source of information with greater potential is the study of historical
linguistics, particularly concerning cultivated plants and domesticated animals.
Schoenbrun (1993), by setting his linguistic evidence in a broad interdisciplin-
ary context, has been able to suggest that banana farming and pastoralism
were already established in the Interlacustrine Region by the beginning of the
second millennium. He has also examined the possible social dimensions of
those agricultural developments. This has provided a useful set of hypotheses,
but the chronological validity of the evidence remains uncertain. Much the
same might be said for another potentially important source of information,
the genetic history of the plants and animals themselves. For example, it is
largely on the basis of such evidence, as well as linguistics, that De Langhe
et al. (1995) proposed that plantains reached the Interlacustrine Region, from
the other side of the Indian Ocean, by 2,500 years ago. In such matters we
need physical evidence, particularly evidence that can be subjected to absolute
dating.


Archaeological evidence
For the Upemba Depression (Fig. 10.2), archaeological evidence provides a
cultural sequence from the ﬁfth century AD to the beginning of the nineteenth
century and indicates the emergence of an hierarchical society by the end of the

306
                                                                      Central Africa




Fig. 10.2 Archaeological sites in the Upemba Depression, Democratic Congo. After de
Maret 1992: ﬁg. 48. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.


ﬁrst millennium (de Maret 1979). The sequence is supported by more than ﬁfty
radiocarbon dates (de Maret 1997: 499) and constitutes a most successful
piece of archaeological research. Unfortunately, however, the evidence consists
entirely of burials, clustered in cemeteries in the Upemba Depression, particu-
larly on the banks of Lake Kisale on the upper Lualaba River. Settlement sites
are known but appear to have only shallow deposits that have been extensively
disturbed by continuous occupation or cultivation. As a result, they have not
been excavated, but a total of more than 265 graves have been. These were
situated at the sites of Sanga, Katongo, Kamilamba, Kikulu, and Malemba
Nkulu (de Maret 1982: 89).
   The Upemba Depression sequence can, therefore, tell us little about early
urbanization in this area, but it is informative about social evolution and early
state emergence. This ﬁrst became apparent after the excavations of Jacques
Nenquin at Sanga in 1957 and of Jean Hiernaux in 1958, which produced
evidence of a remarkably sophisticated material culture from the seventh
to ninth century AD. Called by Nenquin the ‘Kisalian’, this culture was

                                                                                  307
African Civilizations

characterized by ﬁnely made and distinctive pottery, skilful metalworking in
both iron and copper, and graves containing evidence of accumulated wealth
(Nenquin 1963; Hiernaux et al. 1971). Later excavations at Sanga and at
other sites (de Maret 1979; 1982; 1992) revised Nenquin’s dating and placed
the Kisalian in its chronological context. The sequence thus established com-
menced in the ﬁfth century AD with the Kamilambian tradition, which was
replaced by the Early Kisalian tradition at the end of the eighth century. This,
in turn, was succeeded by the Classic Kisalian tradition in the eleventh century,
which was followed by the Kabambian tradition that appeared at the end of
the fourteenth century. The Kabambian has been divided into Kabambian
A and B, the latter ending at the beginning of the nineteenth century. The
latest of the archaeological evidence is, indeed, comparable with the material
culture of the Luba in recent times. Thus, as de Maret claimed, ‘It becomes
apparent that in establishing an Iron Age sequence in the Upemba rift one is
actually studying the emergence of the Luba Kingdom’ (de Maret 1979: 234).
   Anthropometric studies of the Sanga skeletons and of the present-day Luba,
which are said to show strong afﬁnities between the two, seem to support
this idea. In addition, the archaeological evidence suggests the gradual devel-
opment of social stratiﬁcation, political organization, and functional special-
ization. For example, as far back as the Early Kisalian, ceremonial iron axes
were placed in graves. These had handles decorated with nails and were much
like those later used by the Luba as symbols of authority. In one such Early
Kisalian grave, the deceased had also been buried with an iron anvil, another
symbol of power among Bantu-speaking peoples (Fig. 10.3). At Katoto, a
cemetery in the southern part of the Upemba Rift belonging to a tradition
approximately contemporaneous with the Kisalian, the richest graves included
not only ceremonial axes and anvils but also evidence of child sacriﬁces. Social
stratiﬁcation was further indicated in the Classic Kisalian by the unequal
distribution of grave goods between the various burials. It was observed that
the few graves that contained an unusually large number of pots also con-
tained uncommon things like cowries and ivory pendants. Furthermore, such
wealth appeared to be partly hereditary, because some children’s graves were
among the wealthiest (de Maret 1979; 1982).
   Following Bisson (1975), the development of political organization in the
Luba area might be inferred from the archaeological evidence for the use of
copper. This metal was particularly valued in much of Africa during precolo-
nial times, being variously used as a medium of exchange, for personal
adornment, for status symbols, and for cult objects (Herbert 1984). In the
Upemba Depression sequence (de Maret 1979) there is no evidence of copper
in the Kamilambian, and its ﬁrst appearance is in the Early Kisalian when there
were a few copper objects, mainly in the form of hammered bangles. It is very

308
                                                                          Central Africa




Fig. 10.3 Early Kisalian burial at Kamilamba, Democratic Congo. Note ceremonial
iron axe at left centre and iron anvil to left of skull. Reproduced by permission of Pierre
de Maret.




                                                                                      309
African Civilizations

common, however, in the Classic Kisalian, when it was used both for personal
ornaments and for some functional objects. Thus far it would appear that the
role of copper was principally as an indicator of wealth, prestige, and status.
With the Kabambian came a marked change; distinctive copper croisettes
(little crosses) appeared, probably originally as ingots but later used as cur-
rency. As time went by, these crosses grew smaller and more uniform in shape
(de Maret 1981), and it is thought that they might have ﬁrst been used as a
special-purpose currency (e.g., for buying wives) but gradually evolved into
a general-purpose unit of exchange. Thus the smaller, later crosses could have
been used for a variety of small purchases. The use of these crosses as a form
of money is suggested by evidence at Sanga, where they were often found in or
near the hands of the deceased; one grave containing 140 of the smallest
crosses had them tied in groups of ﬁve (Bisson 1975: 287). The presence of
such a currency would imply the existence of political sophistication.
   The craftsmanship indicated by the archaeological evidence for the Kisalian
suggests a degree of functional specialization by the early part of the second
millennium AD. The skilful handling of iron, copper, ivory, bone, and pottery
hints at the presence of professional artisans. The range of metalwork alone
is one of the most impressive in tropical Africa, including (for the Kisalian)
iron hoes, knives, axes, spears, arrows, harpoon heads, ﬁsh hooks, necklaces,
pendants with chains, together with copper artefacts such as belts, necklaces,
bangles, bracelets, small knives, spearheads, and ﬁsh hooks. There might have
been specialist traders bringing copper from the Copperbelt, some 200 kilo-
metres to the south-east (de Maret 1979).
   The relative proximity of one of the richest sources of copper in Africa must,
indeed, have played a part in the developments in south-east Democratic
Congo. From Kansanshi and Kipushi, in northern Zambia, Bisson (1976)
obtained precolonial evidence for both mining and smelting copper. Exploit-
ation of the Kansanshi deposits commenced possibly as early as the fourth
century AD, and there is evidence that copper was being smelted at a similar
date in the Lubumbashi region of south-east Democratic Congo (Anciaux de
Faveaux and de Maret 1984; de Maret 1985: 138). The Kansanshi evidence
led Bisson to reject the hypothesis sometimes advanced that Arab or Swahili
traders were responsible for both the origin of states and the start of large-scale
copper mining in this part of Africa. Similarly, de Maret argued that the
Kisalian evidence for an hierarchical society as early as the end of the ﬁrst
millennium AD ruled out long-distance trade as a possible cause of this
development. Rather, he saw a combination of ﬁshing, hunting, and agricul-
ture as permitting a high population density that ‘led to a need for political
integration’ (de Maret 1979: 234). Certainly, the evidence for the Classic
Kisalian is suggestive of some form of early state, and this in an area where

310
                                                                     Central Africa

throughout the earlier archaeological sequence the only indication of contact
with the outside world consists of a few glass beads and a small number of
marine shells from the Indian Ocean coast (Hiernaux et al. 1971: 55; 1972:
154–5; de Maret 1992: 170). Nevertheless, the possible role of internal trading
networks should not be forgotten; local exchanges of copper, iron, and salt
were probably particularly important (Fagan 1969). The people of the Classic
Kisalian might well have participated in such networks by trading dried ﬁsh
from the lakes and rivers of the Upemba Depression, as was still occurring
when Europeans ﬁrst entered the area (de Maret 1982: 90).
   Although important, the archaeological evidence from the Upemba Depres-
sion provides information on only a relatively small area. In the case of the
Interlacustrine Region the situation is rather better: the available information
is scattered but covers a larger geographical area and provides more varied
data (Fig. 10.4). Uganda, in particular, has had a long record of archaeological
research, unfortunately interrupted by periods of political instability during
the 1970s and 1980s. One of the most important of the nineteenth-century
states in this area was Buganda (from which modern Uganda takes its name),
although there is no archaeological evidence to throw light on the development
of Bugandan urbanization. However, the origins of urbanization elsewhere in
the Interlacustrine Region can be identiﬁed (p. 324). Also, Oliver (1959b) was
able to make a study of the Bugandan royal tombs and of their associated
human jaw-bone shrines. Other archaeological work has been carried out
on Ankole, also one of the Interlacustrine states. As with that of Buganda,
the capital of Ankole moved many times, but careful use of oral tradition
enabled Oliver (1959a) to identify a number of capital sites in the ﬁeld, which
were reexamined years later by Andrew Reid and Peter Robertshaw (1987).
Bweyorere, seemingly the largest, was excavated by Merrick Posnansky
(1968), demonstrating the difﬁculties of extracting useful information from
this type of site. It consists of a series of low banks on the top of a hill, forming
irregular, incomplete enclosures. The banks seem to be mainly of cattle dung,
and there are also several hollows that might have been cisterns. Posnansky
excavated thirty-one trenches into the site and was able to identify the remains
of the palace, a circular building of organic material over 15 metres in
diameter, which had been destroyed by ﬁre. The deposit was shallow, how-
ever, and no other habitation structures were found, although pottery and
bones were generally distributed. Oral tradition indicated occupation of this
site at three different periods: in the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth
centuries. Radiocarbon dating was in general agreement with this timespan.
Animal bones from the site indicated the importance of cattle to its occupants
but also suggested that hunting was common. Glass beads and fragments of
pottery pipes for smoking probably belonged to the latter part of the sequence.

                                                                                311
African Civilizations




Fig. 10.4 Principal archaeological sites and places in the Ugandan part of the
Interlacustrine Region. After Connah 1996: ﬁg. 2.2. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.


Posnansky concluded that Bweyorere represented ‘a large pastoral settlement
with evidence of a palace site’ but with a population of ‘probably no more than
a few hundred people’ and that it was ‘not a town’ (Posnansky 1968: 165,
173). Indeed, Reid and Robertshaw pointed out that, as the traditions say that
the site was occupied on several occasions, not all of it is likely to have been
occupied at the same time, so that this relatively large site ‘may be simply a
palimpsest of several small sites’. They concluded that further excavation of
such sites was unlikely to throw new light on ‘the establishment and organiza-
tion of the Ankole state’ (Reid and Robertshaw 1987: 87–8).

312
                                                                  Central Africa

   Of more value for the archaeological investigation of sociopolitical change in
western Uganda is a series of large earthwork enclosures to the north of
Ankole, extending from the Katonga River towards the south-eastern part of
Lake Albert, of which the best known are Kibengo, Munsa, and Bigo (Lanning
1953). Most investigated of these is Bigo, one of the most famous sites in east
Central Africa. It consists of some 10 kilometres of ditches and banks, enclos-
ing an area of about 5 square kilometres (Fig. 10.5). The earthworks form two
main enclosures, within the larger of which is a central group of smaller
enclosures. The height and width of bank and ditch vary greatly; the greatest
height from the bottom of the ditch to the top of the bank is more than 7
metres. Situated within and around the central enclosures are three large
mounds. Bigo was ﬁrst described in 1909, was ﬁrst mapped properly in
1921, and has been the subject of considerable published discussion. Tenuous
oral tradition ascribes the site to the so-called Bacwezi dynasty, whose uncer-
tain historical status has already been mentioned (p. 306). The site is associ-
ated with two smaller earthwork enclosures – Kagogo to its north-west and
Kasonko to its north-east – and with the large open settlement site at Ntusi
some 15 kilometres to its south-west (p. 315). All four of these sites are
situated within an area less than 20 kilometres across (Wayland 1934; Shinnie
1960; Posnansky 1969).
   Bigo has been excavated on two occasions: by Shinnie in 1957 (Shinnie
1960) and by Posnansky in 1960 (Posnansky 1969). These excavations indi-
cated that there was settlement at Bigo prior to the construction of the bank
and ditch system, and radiocarbon dates suggested an overall occupation date
in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries AD. Although few traces of timber
structures were found, Posnansky claimed to identify the location of a royal
enclosure (Posnansky 1969: 135), and Shinnie thought that ‘there was consid-
erable human occupation at the centre of the complex’ (Shinnie 1960: 27). The
excavated animal bones, however, revealed an emphasis on cattle; it seems
possible that the outer enclosures were intended for penning cattle rather than
for defence. There is some support for this: more attention seems to have been
given to digging the ditch than to constructing the bank, but the protection of
agricultural ﬁelds is also likely. Furthermore, as Posnansky suggested (1969:
145), it is also possible that the immensity of the earthworks was intended to
bestow prestige on those who lived there. Certainly they may be regarded as a
form of monumental construction: in one place Shinnie found the rock-cut
ditch to be nearly 4 metres deep (Shinnie 1960: 17), and Posnansky (1969:
144) estimated that more than 200,000 cubic metres of earth and rock had
been removed in making the ditches. The size and direction of the labour force
necessary to accomplish such work, together with the presence at this site of a
royal enclosure, would imply the existence of some degree of political

                                                                            313
314




      Fig. 10.5 Plan of earthworks at Bigo, Uganda. After Wayland 1934.
                                                                  Central Africa

centralization. It would appear that Bigo was a settlement of importance, the
centre perhaps of an emerging state.
  Such an assumption fails to recognize ‘the ability of non-stratiﬁed societies to
produce feats of construction over long periods of time’ (Reid 1996: 621), but
inevitably Bigo and the other earthwork sites have been interpreted as arch-
aeological evidence of a Bacwezi-ruled Kitara state. Of the other sites, only
Munsa and Kibengo have been subjected to archaeological investigation, ﬁrst
by E.C. Lanning (1955; 1960) and later by Peter Robertshaw (Robertshaw
1997). The earthworks at these sites were probably constructed in about the
ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries AD, at roughly the same time as those at Bigo,
although there is evidence of occupation at Munsa as early as around the tenth
century and at Kibengo from the late thirteenth to the mid-seventeenth cen-
tury. Like Bigo, cattle dominated the faunal remains at Munsa, but Kibengo
showed more variation and, like Bigo, lacked the evidence for smelting and
iron working present at Munsa. These and other differences between the sites
led Robertshaw and others to suggest that they might have acted as the centres
of three polities, rather than of a single one. Excavations have also been
conducted at shrine sites associated with the Bacwezi at both Mubende and
Kasunga, but the former produced only the remains of a small village dating to
the late thirteenth or fourteenth century, and the latter, which yielded both
occupation and burial evidence, might date to as late as the seventeenth
century.
  It is the site of Ntusi, with neither earthworks nor a demonstrated associ-
ation with the Bacwezi traditions, that has proved most informative so far as
sociopolitical changes in the ﬁrst half of the second millennium are concerned
(Sutton 1993; Reid 1996). Lanning (1970: 39) described it as ‘an ancient
capital site’, and, indeed, survey and excavations conducted by Andrew Reid
in the late 1980s and early 1990s showed that this open settlement site has
archaeological material scattered over approximately 100 hectares and was
occupied between the eleventh and ﬁfteenth centuries AD (Fig. 10.6).
Excavation of two large midden mounds and of an area associated with some
of the low banks that characterize the site produced large quantities of broken
pottery, a faunal assemblage dominated by young cattle, numerous grind-
stones, curved iron knives thought to have been for cereal harvesting, burnt
grain which appeared to be sorghum, storage pits probably for grain, evidence
of iron working, fragments of ivory of which some were worked, ostrich
eggshell beads, traces of circular houses dated to the fourteenth to ﬁfteenth
century (Fig. 10.7), and glass and cowrie shell beads indicating contact with
the Indian Ocean coast by about the thirteenth century. Thus Ntusi was ﬁrst
occupied earlier than Bigo, whose dates have been revised to the period from
the thirteenth to sixteenth century, but they apparently overlapped. Reid

                                                                             315
African Civilizations




Fig. 10.6 Plan of Ntusi, Uganda. After Sutton 1993: ﬁg. 4 based on a survey by
Andrew Reid in 1987–9.




316
                                                                          Central Africa




Fig. 10.7 Traces of fourteenth- to ﬁfteenth-century circular houses at Ntusi. Reproduced by
permission of Andrew Reid.


conducted a survey of 5 percent of 560 square kilometres around Ntusi and
Bigo and found more than ﬁfty other sites of second-millennium date, of which
several when excavated revealed faunal remains overwhelmingly dominated
by cattle. However, these sites were in general less than half a hectare in area,
and the lack of sites of intermediate size suggests that, by the fourteenth and
ﬁfteenth centuries, Ntusi was a chiefdom based on cattle pastoralism and
sorghum cultivation rather than a centralized state. A social hierarchy based
on cattle had perhaps not yet emerged, but the ﬁfteenth-century abandonment
of Ntusi and the construction of the Bigo earthworks might indicate that this
occurred subsequently. Perhaps Bigo, bordered by the Katonga River, offered
a more viable centre for cattle than the dry grassland area of Ntusi. The
existence near the latter site of the huge artiﬁcial depression and associated
mounds and banks known as the Bwogero, sometimes called the Ntusi ‘dams’,
suggests that this might indeed have been so (Fig. 10.6). Reid described this
rather suspect feature as ‘functionally ambiguous’ (1996: 623), but Sutton
(1985: 174) suggested that it resulted from exposing the water table for use
by cattle. If he was correct, then the scale of the feature (Reid thought that
almost 30,000 cubic metres of material had been removed) would suggest that
this activity continued for some centuries and that demand was extreme. In
such circumstances Ntusi could have been abandoned in favour of Bigo,

                                                                                      317
African Civilizations

particularly if cattle rather than a balance of pastoralism and cultivation were
becoming economically dominant. However, the Bwogero remains undated
and its association with the site of Ntusi has never been demonstrated.
   Comparable to Reid’s survey around Ntusi and Bigo were Robertshaw’s
investigations of the country south and west of Munsa. Some 130 archaeo-
logical sites were recorded, which all appeared to belong to the second millen-
nium AD. By comparing the sizes and locations of these sites and grouping
them on the basis of a statistical analysis of the pottery found on them,
Robertshaw was able to suggest how the state of Bunyoro had developed
in this area prior to the nineteenth century. Early settlements tended to
be small, but it appears that a hierarchy of sizes existed from about the
fourteenth century, some of the larger being protected with earthworks
by the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries. A period of ‘competing polities’
(Robertshaw 1994: 127) between about the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries
might eventually have led to collapse, which the Babito dynasty, the rulers of
Bunyoro when the ﬁrst Europeans arrived, were able to exploit. Thus Bunyoro
might have emerged only during the seventeenth or eighteenth century but the
sociopolitical changes that gave rise to it could have originated in the earlier
part of the second millennium (Robertshaw 1994). Support for this model
came from my excavations of the settlement site at Kibiro on the eastern shore
of Lake Albert, the salt production of which was so important to the economy
of nineteenth-century Bunyoro. The exploitation of this resource could also be
traced back to the early second millennium (Connah 1996). Furthermore,
evidence from the surface of other sites adjacent to the north-eastern part of
Lake Albert and along the lower part of the Victoria Nile suggests widespread
cultural homogeneity in this area over the last thousand years and gives some
idea of the background of Bunyoro’s development.
   Control of salt production and trading was probably of importance in the
rise of Bunyoro, but in the case of both this and other Interlacustrine states,
such as Buganda (Reid 2001; 2003; Reid and Young 2003), the smelting and
exchange of iron must also have been of signiﬁcance. In the Mwenge Kingdom
of western Uganda, this has been investigated archaeologically for the second
millennium AD (Iles 2013b). However, in the Buhaya area, in north-west
Tanzania, work by Peter Schmidt has shown that iron smelting was already
practised more than 2000 years before Europeans visited that area (Schmidt
and Avery 1996). Given its probable socioeconomic role, it is hardly surprising
that iron also took on political and religious symbolic meaning, so that iron
anvils were amongst the royal insignia of the states of Karagwe (now part of
Tanzania), Ankole, Buganda, and Rwanda.
   The third part of Central Africa discussed in this chapter is the Far West. Until
recently there was little archaeological evidence for the emergence of social

318
                                                                        Central Africa




Fig. 10.8 Axes and other iron artefacts in a burial on Corisco Island, Equatorial Guinea,
ﬁrst to second century AD. González-Ruibal et al. 2011, cover photograph. Reproduced by
permission of Alfredo González-Ruibal and Africa Magna Verlag, Frankfurt am Main.


complexity in this area, but this is changing. Most remarkable are sites on the
Island of Corisco, also known as Mandji, off the coast of Equatorial Guinea,
where burials dating from the ﬁrst to second century AD were accompanied by
iron axes, spearheads, anklets, bracelets, spoons, knives, sickle knives, and other
items, as well as complete pots (Fig. 10.8). Copper and bronze were notably
absent; it seems to have been the production of iron that provided a major
resource in this area (González-Ruibal et al. 2011; 2013). Little bone seems
to have survived from the burials, but the iron grave goods were well preserved
and possibly the graves had held both secondary and primary burials. The

                                                                                    319
African Civilizations

evidence from these sites has been associated with an ‘ancient and common
tradition’ identiﬁed by Vansina for Equatorial Africa, from which later develop-
ments grew (Vansina 1990: 71–100; González-Ruibal et al. 2013: 141).
It has been claimed that ‘the new archaeological data reveal the existence
of another core area for the emergence of inequalities in sub-Saharan Africa’
(González-Ruibal et al. 2011: 65). In this respect it is signiﬁcant that ‘special-
purpose currency’ is present amongst the iron artefacts from Corisco (González-
Ruibal et al. 2013: 129–30), suggesting that as in the Upemba Depression
a sophisticated economic and sociopolitical situation was developing.
  In their discussion of the Corisco evidence, González-Ruibal et al. (2011: 64)
refer to the Angolan site of Feti, ‘a royal tumulus’ dated to between the ninth
and thirteenth centuries AD, which also yielded iron hoes, knives, arrowheads,
spearheads, anvils, and hammers. Vansina (2004: 170) described this site as
‘one of the largest known ancient sites anywhere in West Central Africa’.
Consisting of several mounds, surrounding ditches, and stone walls, it was
7.5 hectares in extent; Vansina claimed that in its later stages it was ‘the capital
of a very large kingdom’. In spite of incompetent excavation during the 1940s
and subsequent destruction by a hydroelectric dam, the evidence from Feti
suggests the development of social complexity on the planalto (Benguela
Plateau) of Angola and in the wider Cuanza basin. Indeed, it was only one
of four sites that Vansina (2004: map 17) showed on a map of ‘Stone Ruins in
Angola’. According to some of his other maps, these ruins were in an area with
an ‘ancient population cluster’ and with both greater altitude and soil fertility
than adjacent areas (Vansina 2004: maps 2, 3, and 16). Clearly, this part of
Angola has considerable archaeological potential and needs further investi-
gation by excavators. However, this is the case for the most of the Far West as
identiﬁed here. In spite of detailed study of ceramic traditions associated with
the Kingdom of Kongo, for instance, archaeology has been unable as yet to
provide much information on its origins (Clist 2012). Nevertheless, ongoing
archaeological research promises to shed new light on the latter subject,
particularly regarding the role of copper exploitation in state development
(Clist et al. 2013a; 2013b; Nikis et al. 2013).


Subsistence economy
It is uncertain to what extent the two main areas discussed are representative
of Central Africa, but both have archaeological evidence for growing social
complexity. It is signiﬁcant that in both instances there seems to have been
a subsistence economy that was stronger than in surrounding regions. Mixed
farming, relying on the cultivation of cereal and other crops as well as on
the herding of domestic animals, was supplemented by ﬁshing and hunting.

320
                                                                  Central Africa

In the Upemba Depression ﬁshing was particularly important, but fertile
alluvial soils that were inundated seasonally provided a productive agricul-
tural base. Archaeological evidence limited to burials and a lack of infor-
mation from settlement sites makes it difﬁcult to assess the subsistence
economy, but clearly it was a successful one that supported a substantial
population. Direct evidence is sparse, but oil-palm nuts (Elaeis guineensis),
grain that was very probably ﬁnger millet (Eleusine [coracana?]), and the
bones of goats and chicken were found in various contexts, as well as ﬁsh
bones, mollusc shells, and bones from wild animals (de Maret 1992: 157,
170, 239–43).
  In the Interlacustrine Region there is more evidence, with probable sorghum
at Ntusi in the fourteenth to ﬁfteenth century; ﬁnger millet from an approxi-
mately fourteenth-century context at Kibiro; cattle dominating faunal evidence
at Ntusi, Bigo, Munsa, and other sites; and sheep or goats as important as
cattle at Kibiro (Posnansky 1969; Connah 1996; Reid 1996). In the more
fertile areas with higher rainfall, cereal cultivation was apparently supple-
mented by banana growing, although bananas are difﬁcult to identify in
the archaeological record. Impressions of banana pseudostems in slag from
iron-smelting sites in Buganda are ‘possibly only a hundred or so years old’
(Reid and Young 2003: 122), and claims of banana phytoliths from Munsa
dated to the fourth millennium BC (Lejju et al. 2006) have been questioned
(Neumann and Hildebrand 2009). Nevertheless, bananas seem to have had an
important role in the emergence of the Bugandan state, because of their low-
input and high-yield production (Reid 2001). Cattle herding so successfully
exploited the drier grasslands that it came to be sociopolitically if not econom-
ically dominant. It would appear that both these areas had a successful
subsistence base that was capable of producing a surplus that could be accu-
mulated: in the form of grain, dried ﬁsh, cattle, or small stock. Some parts
of these areas were probably able to support locally dense populations. Con-
cerning the subsistence economy of the Far West, archaeological evidence
remains sparse, although the ﬁrst-millennium BC site of Boso-Njafo, further
to the East, in the Inner Congo Basin, has produced grains of domesticated
pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum), suggesting a drier period than at present
(Kahlheber et al. 2014).


Technology
Archaeological evidence from the three areas of Central Africa discussed
indicates a sound technological base. Because the Upemba Depression and
Far West evidence consists of grave goods, with a high incidence of intact
artefacts, and the Interlacustrine Region evidence consists of material from

                                                                            321
African Civilizations

settlement sites, where items are often fragmented, our knowledge of technol-
ogy in the ﬁrst two areas is substantial. Metalworking, of both iron and (not in
the Far West) copper, was sophisticated. In the Upemba Depression the
carving of ivory and bone and the making of high-quality pottery also indicate
considerable craftsmanship, while evidence for basket making is a reminder of
skills using organic materials that have not survived.
   For the Interlacustrine Region we have more information on processes
than products. Thus numerous sites indicate skill in iron smelting and
smithing, and sites in north-west Tanzania have been claimed to show
evidence of a preheated air blast and a direct steel process, although these
claims might need qualiﬁcation (Killick 1996; Woodhouse 1998). Further-
more, the smelters of western Uganda between the fourteenth and twentieth
centuries must have been highly skilled; archaeological excavations and
ﬁeldwork in the Mwenge Kingdom suggest that metal yield was increased
by the addition of manganese oxide to the ore (Iles 2013b). A fourteenth-
century furnace excavated at Munsa is amongst the earliest evidence for iron
smelting in this region (Iles et al. 2014). Analysis of iron furnaces and other
remains from Kooki and Masindi, in western Uganda, has also shed light
on iron-working technology over the last three centuries (Iles 2013a). In
addition, the evidence from Kibiro demonstrates the existence, from early
in the second millennium, of a salt-making technique using the sun’s capillary
action on waterlogged deposits, producing salt of 97.6 percent purity
(Connah 1996). Salt was also made at Katwe, on Lake Edward, and at Lake
Bunyampaka, near Lake George, by the more usual solar evaporation tech-
nique, although it is unknown for how long this had been done prior to
its recording in the nineteenth century (Connah 1998a). In contrast, the
making of pottery was well established by the ﬁrst millennium AD, and
during the second millennium produced an impressive range of vessel forms.
Relatively late in the Kibiro sequence graphite slip was used on some high-
status items, requiring the mining of graphite for which evidence was found
at Kigorobya nearby (Connah 1996: 129, 180). The pottery is also techno-
logically informative in other ways: acquiring clay and tempers needed an
understanding of geology, making ﬂexible roulettes used in decoration
required a knowledge of plant ﬁbres, and the ﬁne carving of wooden roul-
ettes also used in decoration suggests the existence of wood-carving skills.
Finally, perhaps the most impressive aspect of the technology of the Inter-
lacustrine Region is indicated by the existence of the earthwork sites, of
which Bigo is the best known. Requiring the excavation of earth, the quarry-
ing of rock, and the construction of substantial banks of these materials,
something more than massed hoes and copious sweat was needed: civil
engineering skills must have been present.

322
                                                                  Central Africa

Social system
In all three of the areas reviewed there is archaeological evidence for
the emergence of a social hierarchy. Some of the Upemban burials were
accompanied by more grave goods than others, some even by child sacriﬁces,
and the existence of wealthy children’s graves suggested that wealth was
partly hereditary. Large numbers of high-quality pots, iron and copper arte-
facts, items of ivory, and even glass beads and cowrie shells from the Indian
Ocean coast were probably indicative of one or more elite groups. Further-
more, some graves contained probable symbols of power, such as an iron axe,
anvil, or bell, suggesting that the individuals with whom they were buried
were invested with political or sacred authority. Indeed, the eventual use of
copper croisettes as a form of currency suggests that a sophisticated political
structure had developed. It seems likely that several privileged groups that had
attained chieftain status, one of which by the eighteenth century founded
the Luba state, ruled a society of cultivators, herdsmen, and ﬁshermen. The
diverse technological skills indicated by the artefactual assemblage would
suggest that some degree of functional specialization also developed. In the
Far West, iron grave goods on the Island of Corisco, and at Feti where there
are earthworks and stone structures, with the latter also in other places,
suggest the emergence of social hierarchies during the ﬁrst and second
millennia AD.
  In the Interlacustrine Region it is the construction of large earthworks, with
all that this implies for control of resources, planning, and direction of labour,
that suggests the existence of powerful elites whose wealth was accumulated
in the form of cattle. In addition, at both Bigo and Bweyorere the sites of
supposed elite structures were found, and it is possible that the two large
midden mounds at Ntusi were associated with the dwellings of sociopolitical
leaders. That some members of society were wealthier and perhaps more
powerful than others is also suggested by several approximately eleventh-
century burials excavated at Munsa that were accompanied by the earliest
glass beads found in the area as well as by bracelets of iron and one of copper
(Robertshaw 1997: 13–14). Furthermore, the roughly fourteenth-century
female burial at Kibiro that had iron and copper jewellery with it, as well as
beads of glass and of freshwater shell, suggests that women as well as men
were among the elite (Connah 1996: 90–2). From the evidence of Robert-
shaw’s survey south and west of Munsa (Robertshaw 1994) and from Reid’s
research in and around Ntusi (Reid 1996), it seems likely that the process of
sociopolitical change followed much the same course as in the Upemba
Depression, with separate chiefdoms gradually giving way to a number
of Interlacustrine states by the eighteenth century. At the same time the


                                                                             323
African Civilizations

archaeological evidence for iron working, salt making, and perhaps other
activities suggests that some functional specialization was also occurring.
Finally, although the Upemba Depression and Far West lack evidence from
settlement sites that could throw light on the subject, at least in the Inter-
lacustrine Region the beginnings of urbanization were apparent. For example,
by the ﬁfteenth century Ntusi was an extensive settlement, probably covering
much of its approximately 100 hectares; round about the sixteenth century
the massive enclosures at Bigo might at times have sheltered large numbers of
people and their cattle; and in 1894 Kibiro was described as ‘the only
manufacturing town in [B]Unyoro’ (Thruston 1900: 143). Apparently all
three of the areas of Central Africa discussed had already attained a substan-
tial level of social complexity before the advent of sustained contact with
the outside world. Clearly, this was also the case for the Kingdom of Kongo,
in the Far West, which so impressed Portuguese visitors in the late ﬁfteenth
century.


Population pressures
A causative factor in these changes might have been localized population
pressures, which resulted in competition for an important but limited resource
that had stimulated population growth. Greater resources than were available
in adjacent areas characterized each of the areas discussed in this chapter. In
the Upemba Depression this could have been access to prime ﬁshing areas or to
fertile alluvial soils in an environment where ‘[d]ense populations had to
compete for the few stretches of land not inundated during the annual ﬂood’
(Reefe 1983: 163). In the Interlacustrine Region it is more likely to have been
access to dryland grazing rights and to the more fertile cultivable soils in higher
rainfall areas, but water for livestock and sources of salt, iron ore, and even
charcoal are also possibilities. For the Far West, specialized iron production
seems to have provided a major resource, and marked population clustering
has been claimed for the ﬁrst half of the second millennium AD (Vansina 2004:
map 16). It seems that exceptional natural resources might have promoted
population growth in areas that were so endowed but that such growth
inevitably led to competition for control of the best of those resources. Those
who succeeded in gaining that control could then accumulate a surplus in one
form or another and use this as a means of establishing authority over large
numbers of less fortunate people. However, these propositions have yet to be
tested with relevant archaeological evidence, and Parker Shipton argued that
in agrarian East Africa it was areas of low population pressure, not high
population pressure, that were characterized by the development of political
hierarchy (Shipton 1984).

324
                                                                Central Africa

Ideology
The archaeological evidence for the role of religious ideology in the socio-
political changes that took place in the Upemba Depression, the Interlacus-
trine Region, and the Far West is limited, although both oral tradition and the
ethnohistorical record suggest that it must have been an important contribu-
tory factor. In these areas, the placing of valuable and sometimes numerous
items as grave goods in burials indicates a concern with the spirit world, and
the collection of both secular and sacred objects placed with the 1930/1 burial
of the seventeenth- or eighteenth-century Rwandan king Cyirima Rujugira
suggests that this was particularly the case with state rulers (Van Noten 1972:
ﬁg. 8; 1982: ﬁg. 36). Evidence of the association of kingship and the sacred is
also provided by the large number of royal tombs in both Bunyoro and
Buganda, which were still maintained and venerated during the twentieth
century (Uganda 1967: 71). Indeed, in these states it was customary to remove
the mandible from the deceased and house it in a separate ‘jaw-bone shrine’,
speciﬁcally because it represented part of the credentials of his successor
(Oliver 1959b). It is possible that these various tombs and shrines extend
back to the ﬁfteenth century, but other shrines associated with the supposed
earlier Bacwezi rulers could be developments subsequent to these possibly
mythical ﬁgures. This might be the case at Mubende, Kasunga, and Masaka
Hill, and certainly is the case at Bigo where such a shrine seems to have
appeared only in the 1990s. Nevertheless, it is likely that those who ruled
emergent states in Central Africa based their power on the spiritual world as
well as on material resources. Indeed, de Maret (2012) focussed on the Far
West of Central Africa and on the Upemba Depression in his examination of
the role of ritual power in African kingship and in the emergence of political
complexity. For the Interlacustrine Region, the importance of belief systems is
indicated by the late-ﬁrst- to early-second-millennium AD Luzira Head
(Fig. 10.9), and associated terracottas, found near Kampala in Uganda
(Ashley and Reid 2008).


External trade
It has often been assumed that until late in the second millennium, Central
Africa remained so remote from the world outside the continent that external
long-distance trade could not have played a part in sociopolitical changes
(e.g., Connah 1996: 1, 213). Indeed, archaeological evidence indicates that
such changes were already in progress at an earlier date. However, the idea
of an isolated Central Africa needs modiﬁcation, particularly because of
its origin in the nineteenth century amongst Europeans who believed they

                                                                           325
African Civilizations




Fig. 10.9 Ceramic head from Luzira, near Kampala, Uganda. Late ﬁrst to early second
millennium AD. Ashley and Reid 2008: ﬁg. 2a. Copyright British Institute in Eastern Africa,
reproduced with permission.

were ending the timeless isolation of the continent’s heart. Can Central
Africa have been previously so isolated, when nineteenth-century European
visitors found American crops such as maize, cassava, sweet potatoes, and

326
                                                                   Central Africa

groundnuts already growing there? Furthermore, tobacco was also being
grown and was being smoked in pottery pipes that were similar in form to
pipes found in other parts of Africa and beyond (Shaw 1960). It might be
countered that none of these introductions is likely to pre-date the sixteenth
century, by which time the Portuguese were already present in the Kingdom of
Kongo. However, there is also the problem of bananas to explain, for it has
been proposed that they were introduced to Central Africa, from the other side
of the Indian Ocean, 2,500 years ago (De Langhe et al. 1995). Indeed,
a small amount of archaeological evidence does suggest that contacts with
the outside world go back to early in the second millennium AD. Such is the
approximate date of a few glass beads and a small number of marine shells
(from the Indian Ocean coast) that were found at the site of Katoto in the
Upemba Depression (Hiernaux et al. 1972: 154–5), while glass and cowrie shell
beads were excavated from a roughly thirteenth-century context at Ntusi and
glass beads from a grave of about the fourteenth century at Kibiro (Connah
1996: 90–2). In addition, glass beads were also recovered from several approxi-
mately eleventh-century burials at Munsa (Robertshaw 1997: 13–14). In short,
Central Africa was not totally isolated from the rest of the world, but the
evidence for long-distance trade from outside the continent before the middle
of the second millennium AD is tenuous. Surface collections from no less than
thirty-six sites in the Ugandan part of the Western Rift Valley, for instance,
produced only seven glass beads (Connah 1996: 213).
   In such circumstances, although isolation was not total, external trade
is unlikely to have been an important factor in the development of social
complexity. On the other hand, internal African trading networks, particu-
larly in salt, iron, and copper, could have played a signiﬁcant role in this
development. Salt was produced at Uvinza, in western Tanzania, from the
middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD (Sutton and Roberts 1968); at Ivuna, also in
western Tanzania, from early in the second millennium (Fagan and Yellen
1968); at Kibiro, in Uganda, from a similar date (Connah 1996); and at
Katwe, also in Uganda, from an unknown date prior to the nineteenth century
(Connah 1998a). Iron production was clearly important in the Interlacustrine
Region, and one of the world’s great copper deposits was already being
exploited in south-east Democratic Congo and northern Zambia. In addition,
it is probable that numerous other commodities were traded widely in Central
Africa, such as dried ﬁsh, millet, sorghum, charcoal, bark cloth, wild animal
skins, and ivory. With landscapes over which movement was relatively easy,
many trade goods could have travelled long distances as head loads, but this is a
land of lakes and rivers in which there is ethnohistorical evidence for substantial
development of water transport. In the course of a thousand years or more a
complex series of overlapping trading networks could have developed, of which

                                                                              327
African Civilizations

we still know very little, although Vansina (2004: map 12) thought that
trade routes could have already extended across the continent, from the Indian
Ocean to the Atlantic, by early in the second millennium AD. It was possibly
these that spread the bananas and the other new crops, as well as the
occasional glass beads and marine shells, all of them picked up at the periphery
of the networks from international sources. It might also have been these
internal trading networks that generated concentrations of wealth in particular
areas, brought disparate groups of people into contact, and stimulated compe-
tition and conﬂict, by these and other means contributing to the social,
political, and economic transformations that took place in some parts of
Central Africa.


Conclusion
The relative isolation of much of Central Africa from inﬂuences external
to the continent, until the middle of the second millennium AD, makes it
particularly important to understand the processes that led in some places to
state emergence and/or the growth of larger, denser settlements. Explanation
of such developments in this context might help us to comprehend similar
sociopolitical changes in other parts of Africa, and perhaps even elsewhere
in the world. Unfortunately, however, a relatively low level of archaeological
visibility and a very uneven distribution of archaeological research given
the huge area involved make it difﬁcult to draw any general conclusions.
Nevertheless, for the relatively small Upemba Depression, the larger but still
limited Interlacustrine Region, and parts of the Far West, there is sufﬁcient
archaeological evidence to throw a little light on the matter, assuming that
they can be taken as representative of Central Africa. Potentially highly
productive environments, with access to other major resources, distinguished
all these areas. In spite of the constraints of periodic disease and human
conﬂict, each of them could have supported locally dense populations sus-
tained by cereal, banana, and other cultivation; pastoralism; ﬁshing; and
hunting and with a varied metallurgy-based technology. The archaeological
evidence also suggests that increasingly hierarchical social systems were
developing during the ﬁrst half of the second millennium, stimulated by
competition for prime resources as population pressures increased in some
areas. Elite individuals were able to manipulate large groups of people,
legitimizing their position by assumption of ritual status but basing their
power on economic control. Extensive trading networks within Central
Africa are also likely to have played an important contributory part in these
developments, with only attenuated input from outside the continent. Many


328
                                                                Central Africa

commodities were probably involved, but the importance of salt (so keenly
sought for both human and livestock use), iron (the very basis of the technol-
ogy on which society depended), and copper (such a valued symbol
of status and means of exchange) can hardly be exaggerated. It is apparent
that all of these factors helped to shape the complex sociopolitical landscape,
which impressed nineteenth-century European explorers deep in the heart
of Africa.




                                                                           329
