Chapter 1
The context


Africa is huge; it is so big that you can put the United States and Australia into
it and still have a bit left over. It extends from about 37 north to about 35
south and has an altitudinal range from depressions that are below sea level
to mountain peaks that exceed 5,000 metres. As a result it has an incredible
diversity of environments. It contains some of the driest deserts in the world,
and yet has three of the world’s major rivers: the Nile, the Niger, and the
Congo. Some of the hottest places on earth are in Africa, and yet there
are glaciers on its highest mountains. There are steaming rainforests and
dry savanna grasslands, low-lying river valleys and high plateaux, extensive
deserts and gigantic lakes, mangrove coasts and surf-pounded beaches. This
is only an impressionistic picture of the very large number of differing environ-
ments in the African continent. In reality the major zones merge into one
another, resulting in an even greater variety of conditions that have been
further complicated by climatic variation through time.
   For at least 2 million years, human beings have been learning how to get the
best out of the kaleidoscope of African environments. Those environments
have not determined what men and women could do, nor could the latter
ignore the environments in which they have lived. Instead there has been a
dynamic relationship between the two, in which people have sought to turn
to their advantage the opportunities offered by each environment and to come
to terms with its constraints. First as hunters, gatherers, and ﬁshers who
gradually intensiﬁed their exploitation of available resources, then as pastor-
alists and cultivators, and eventually as city-dwellers, artisans, and traders,
men and women have continued to interact with their environment, retaining a
remarkable variety of strategies for doing so.
   Archaeology is a major source of information about Africa’s past.
Documentary sources for African history are limited: their coverage often
chronologically patchy and geographically fragmented. For large areas of
Africa, particularly tropical Africa, their time depth is restricted to the last
century or two. A uniform divide between prehistory and history does not
exist on the African continent: some peoples and places, such as Pharaonic
Egypt and Aksumite Ethiopia, developed writing several millennia ago; others,
such as Benin City and Zimbabwe, lacked a written record until recent times;
still others, such as Borno and Kongo, had contemporary accounts for a short
period in the past, after which there is virtual silence. In addition, many of the

                                                                                1
African Civilizations

documentary sources that do exist are based on the observations of outsiders
who did not always understand what they observed or were prejudiced in
their assessments. Such documentary evidence that does exist is often invalu-
able, but Africanist historians have also given considerable attention to oral
sources of history. However, it seems unlikely that oral sources can throw
much light on periods more than, say, 500 years ago. Indeed, Jan Vansina
(1973: xiv) thought that 250 years was often the maximum. In these circum-
stances, scholars interested in Africa’s past have turned to a variety of other
information sources. Thus, art and architectural history (Garlake 2002)
and linguistics (Blench 2006) have contributed useful information, as have
ethnographic and anthropological investigations. In addition, other disciplines
have been of assistance, such as investigations of animals and plants in the
past, including genetics (van der Veen 1999; Blench and MacDonald 2000).
Relevant research has also included ethnoarchaeological studies, in which
archaeology is employed to examine contemporary societies in order to test
interpretations applied to societies in the past.
  Archaeologists have spent a lot of time over the last few decades arguing
about the nature of archaeology (Renfrew and Bahn 2008). Basically the
subject is concerned with the study of the physical evidence of past human
activities, in order to reconstruct those activities or at least construct what we
think they might have been. This, it is hoped, will enable us to understand
the undocumented past or to increase our understanding of inadequately
documented periods of the past. Archaeological evidence, however, has its
own strengths and weaknesses, and we are still learning ways of gaining the
maximum reliable information from it. Its greatest advantage is that it enables
us to examine things that were actually made and used by people in the past
and allows us to investigate the impact that those people had on their environ-
ment. We can discover what human beings actually did, not merely what they
or others said that they did. The main disadvantage of archaeological evidence
is that it almost always reﬂects only part of the activities of past men and
women. The differential effects of human behaviour, of climate and soil
chemistry, and of subsequent disturbance by either natural or human agencies
cause most archaeological evidence to be rather like a jigsaw puzzle from
which two-thirds of the pieces are lost, whilst many of the rest have the picture
worn off or corners missing. These strengths and weaknesses of archaeological
evidence can be seen in this book. On the lower and middle Nile, in North
Africa, and in the Ethiopian Highlands we have the remains of cities often
built of stone or earth, which have clear indications of centralized authority,
so that archaeological investigations have added greatly to what is known
from documentary sources. In contrast, archaeology has contributed much less
information for Central Africa, where urban settlements were constructed

2
                                                                      The context

mainly of grass, wood, and other organic materials and occupied by people
who did not express their identity in more permanent building materials and
did not create written records. Unfortunately, however, archaeological
evidence has another drawback: it results from human endeavour, and archae-
ologists (just like other people) tend to vary in the effort that they expend
on different problems. Thus it is easy to search for settlement sites in the
open grasslands of the African savanna but difﬁcult to do so in the tangled
undergrowth of the rainforest. Similarly, it is easier to locate the sites of stone
ruins than those of timber buildings and it is easier to excavate mud-brick
structures than those of pisé. As a result, African archaeological distribution
maps tend to show the distribution of archaeological research, rather than that
of archaeological evidence.
   Despite these problems, archaeology has powerful research potential. No
longer merely concerned with studying artefacts, archaeologists have turned
their attention to the study of human behaviour and its change through time.
This is as it should be, for over a long time scale it is probably they, increas-
ingly along with geneticists, linguists, and others, who can throw much light
on when and how and why human societies changed in the way that they did.
This book, for instance, attempts to assess how much archaeology can tell us
about two aspects of the development of social complexity in the African
continent: the growth of cities and the appearance of states. The purpose
is not to dispute with historians or social anthropologists or sociologists
or geographers, who have their own ideas and have developed a number of
explanatory theories, but to evaluate the archaeological data and to determine
what it has to contribute to the debates on these issues. In doing this, it will
also become apparent that future archaeological ﬁeldwork will need more
sophisticated research designs than has sometimes been the case in the past.
   For most of the time that human beings have been in Africa, they scavenged,
collected, hunted, and ﬁshed for their food, and there were few of them,
widely scattered across the landscape. Nevertheless, archaeological evidence
(Phillipson 2005) suggests that from about 200,000 years ago people were
adapting to virtually all the varied African environments. Subsequently, it is
likely that the size of some groups increased and that overall population levels
rose. This probably led to pressure on food resources, which during the period
between about 18,000 and about 7,000 years ago caused intensiﬁed exploit-
ation strategies, such as the harvesting of grass seeds, the use of specialized
ﬁshing equipment, and possibly the management of wild animals. These
changes occurred at various dates during this overall period, in parts of what
is now the Sahara, in parts of the Nile Valley, and in some areas of the East
African savanna. It seems likely that they then led to the development of food
production, which occurred in the northern half of Africa by about the sixth

                                                                                 3
African Civilizations

millennium BC. Thus Africans have been farmers for less than half of 1 percent
of their history, but the development of farming has had a major accelerating
effect on the evolution of human culture and on social organization. The
domestication of sorghum, millet, teff, African rice, wheat, barley, yam, and
a host of other plants, plus the domestication of cattle, sheep, and goats,
resulted in larger human populations, greater densities of population, and a
growth in human sedentism. The development of food production in Africa
arose from both indigenous experimentation and inﬂuences from South-West
Asia. The evidence indicates that much of the plant domestication was
an African achievement and that some cattle were probably domesticated in
Africa, unlike sheep and goats whose domestication apparently resulted
from Asiatic initiatives. It is in the context of African farming that most
subsequent cultural changes in the continent must be seen.
  One of the most important of these changes was the adoption of iron
metallurgy, which in most of Africa took place from about the middle of the
ﬁrst millennium BC or somewhat earlier and greatly improved the efﬁciency
of tools and weapons. Copper and copper-alloy metallurgy pre-dated iron
metallurgy but was mainly practised in the lower and middle Nile Valley and
North Africa. So great was the impact of the adoption of iron on both the
means of production and the means of destruction during the last two millen-
nia in Africa that archaeologists have tended to emphasize it and to overlook
other matters. The period has been called ‘the African Iron Age’, terminology
that is difﬁcult to apply chronologically and that distracts attention from other
important changes that were occurring in some African societies. It seems that
over the last 5,000 years or more there was a rapid growth of interaction
between human groups. This was probably brought about by a combination
of population growth, increasing sedentism, ecological diversity, and an
uneven distribution of resources. Certain animal and plant products, salt,
copper, iron, and other commodities were increasingly exchanged between
different population centres, and it was into such exchange networks that
long-distance trade, both within and outside Africa, was eventually able to
tap. At the local level, such intergroup dependence encouraged a complex
interaction between individual settlements, so that some became larger and
more important than others and in time came to control other settlements in
their immediate region. At the same time there was increasing specialization
and social stratiﬁcation amongst the people living in the larger settlements. In
certain instances, elite groups within hierarchical societies gained control of
crucial resources, which became the basis of their political domination of the
rest of the population in their region. It could have been in some such manner
that there emerged in parts of Africa the cities and states that were the
principal manifestations of social complexity and that form the subject of this

4
                                                                       The context

book. These developments ﬁrst took place in the lower and middle Nile Valley
and in Africa north of the Sahara, but they also occurred in tropical Africa,
particularly during the last two millennia. This book is an archaeologist’s
attempt to explain how and why this came to be the case.
   In retrospect, many of the earlier attempts at such explanation now seem
simplistic and even naïve, a range of theories from each of which its propon-
ents claimed understanding could be gained. There was almost a competition
to produce a theory that would explain everything. More recently this some-
what mechanistic, formulaic approach has been replaced by treating the
subject as one aspect of cultural evolution, seen not as a step-like series of
changes, as was once thought, but as a process varying in tempo and pattern
from region to region and characterized by socioeconomic multicausality
(Feinman and Manzanilla 2000). Nevertheless, some scholars considering
the origins of cities and states as global phenomena still saw them as compon-
ents of what they called ‘the emergence of civilization’, generally concentrating
on West Asia, Pakistan–India, China, and Central and South America, with
Egypt the only part of Africa given attention (Daniel 1968). The reason for this
was the essentially nineteenth-century concept of ‘civilization’, which to
Gordon Childe and many of his generation, principally trained in Greek and
Roman classical history, implied the existence of writing (Childe 1957: 37).
This was a Eurocentric view, in which civilization was deﬁned by the extent to
which other societies conformed to nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century
European ideals. The use of the word ‘civilization’ in the title of this book is
therefore intended to be provocative, to remind readers that Africa had its own
‘civilizations’. However, after Childe the concept of civilization continued to
attract prescriptive deﬁnition, although this became broader as time went on
(e.g., Kluckhohn 1960: 400; Renfrew 1972: 11; Redman 1978: 218–20). In
general it was thought that civilization implied cities, and vice versa, and this
led to a debate about the deﬁnition of the word ‘city’, in which a list of ten
criteria by Childe became inﬂuential (Childe 1950: 3, 9–16). The latter
reﬂected the circumstances of city development and state formation in South-
West Asia and, like Childe’s deﬁnition of civilization, were of limited value in
other parts of the world. As with the word ‘civilization’, subsequent attempts
to deﬁne the term ‘city’ became increasingly generalized (e.g., Sjoberg 1960;
Mumford 1961: 85; Redman 1978: 215–16). Nigerian geographer Akin
Mabogunje reviewed ‘the functional specialization theory of urbanization’,
pointing out that it was essential that functional specialization take place under
three ‘limiting conditions’: the existence of a food surplus to feed the specialists,
the existence of a small group of people able to exercise power over the food
producers and ensure peaceful conditions, and the existence of traders and
merchants to provide raw materials for the specialists (Mabogunje 1968: 35).

                                                                                   5
African Civilizations

He deﬁned urbanization as simply ‘the process whereby human beings congre-
gate in relatively large number at one particular spot of the earth’s surface’
(Mabogunje 1968: 33). The process of state formation, in his opinion, origin-
ated in the necessity to defend urban centres against external aggression,
resulting in the extension of control over neighbouring cities (Mabogunje
1968: 37). However, by 1981 Adams would comment: ‘Urbanism, to be sure,
denotes no set of precise, well understood additional characteristics for societies
so described’ (R.McC. Adams 1981: 81).
   Implicit in these attempts at deﬁnition was a concern with process, that is to
say: how did cities develop, how did states emerge? It has been these questions
that have increasingly attracted attention, resulting in a large literature. Inves-
tigations have concentrated on what has been called ‘the rise of complex
society’, and there has been a tendency to separate the study of urbanization
from that of state formation. Indeed, the rise of the state has been seen as
central to the emergence of ‘complex societies’, which some anthropologists
would prefer to call ‘stratiﬁed societies’ or ‘pluralistic societies’. There has been
much discussion of ‘the anthropology of political evolution’ (e.g., Claessen and
Skalník 1978; Cohen and Service 1978; Claessen and van de Velde 1987;
Eisenstadt et al. 1988; Claessen and Oosten 1996), but the emphasis has
tended to be on theoretical considerations, and much of the evidence used
has been drawn either from historical sources or from ethnographic and
anthropological observations. For example, much attention had been given
to the role of ‘chiefdoms’ and the ways in which they could have developed
into states; Flannery (1999) drawing on ethnohistorical sources from Africa,
Madagascar, Inner Asia, and Hawaii to examine the interaction of ‘process’
and ‘agency’ in such changes. Nevertheless, it has been difﬁcult to relate such
theories to archaeological evidence, although Jonathan Haas (1982) attempted
to do this, and Roland Fletcher (1995) constructed a theory of urbanization on
a similar basis. In addition, Trigger (2003), Maisels (2010), Lull and Micó
(2011), and Smith (2012) have adopted a comparative approach in which
more attention has been given to the archaeological aspects of complex
societies.
   Haas presented a state-formation theory that could be used in the interpret-
ation of archaeological data. He deﬁned a ‘state’ as being ‘a society in which
there is a centralized and specialized institution of government’ (Haas 1982: 3)
and examined the ways in which scholars have attempted to explain the
emergence of such societies. He grouped these explanations into two schools
of thought (Haas 1982: 15): the ‘conﬂict’ school (e.g., Fried 1967) and the
‘integration’ school (e.g., Service 1975). Instead, Haas suggested a theory
‘introducing major integration elements into a broadened conﬂict model’
(Haas 1982: 129). Examining the main theories for the emergence of state

6
                                                                      The context

societies, he identiﬁed three groups (Haas 1982: 132–52): (1) warfare theories
(e.g., Carneiro 1970); (2) trade theories, either interregional (e.g., Rathje 1971)
or intraregional (e.g., Wright and Johnson 1975); and (3) an irrigation theory
(Wittfogel 1957). Haas argued that in spite of differences between them,
‘All the theories begin with stratiﬁcation and outline alternate ways by which
certain members of a society may gain differential access to basic resources’.
He observed, ‘This differential access is based on control over the production
or procurement of the resources in question’ (Haas 1982: 150–1; emphasis in
original). It is that control, according to Haas, that gives rulers power. Subse-
quently, Flannery and Marcus (2012) have also emphasized the creation of
inequality as an important factor in state formation. In addition, others have
recognized the importance of power in the development of social complexity
(e.g., Earle 1997; Maisels 2010). Haas understood power to be the capacity to
oblige somebody else to do something that she or he would not otherwise do,
through the application, threat, or promise of sanctions (Haas 1982: 157).
He identiﬁed nine variables that could be used to measure power in social
relationships and demonstrated how each of these could be recognized in the
archaeological record (Haas 1982: 159–71). Redeﬁning the word ‘state’ in
terms of power, Haas called it ‘a stratiﬁed society in which a governing body
exercises control over the production or procurement of basic resources, and
thus necessarily exercises coercive power over the remainder of the population’
(Haas 1982: 172).
   Although Haas attempted to relate some of the anthropological ideas about
state formation to archaeological data, he made little mention of African
states, drawing his archaeological evidence from Mesopotamia, China,
Mesoamerica, and Peru. Like many anthropologists who have written about
state formation theory, he restricted his discussion to what have been called
‘pristine’ states. These are states that arose so early or in such isolation that
there can be no question of their being inﬂuenced by other states, as might
have been the case with what have been called ‘secondary’ states. Thus, Haas
ignored the archaeological evidence from African states, presumably because
he considered them to be ‘secondary’ in origin, even excluding the early
Egyptian state on this basis. It seems strange that so much theoretical work
has gone into attempting to understand ‘pristine’ state formation when most
states were inevitably ‘secondary’ in their origins. Barbara Price (1978: 161)
commented on the limited theoretical treatment of the secondary state, and
Renfrew referred to the idea of a division into ‘pristine’ and ‘secondary’
‘civilizations’ as ‘unacceptably diffusionist’ (Renfrew 1983: 17). Renfrew
thought that ‘to understand the origins and development of any civilization’,
it is necessary to look at its local conditions: at subsistence, technology, social
system, population pressures, ideology, and external trade. Yoffee (2005) also

                                                                                 7
African Civilizations

argued for a broader treatment of social change in the past. This is the
approach adopted in this book, because although state formation theory and
urbanization theory are important, it is also important to examine the arch-
aeological evidence for the conditions that gave rise to states and cities, as
Pauketat (2007) has insisted.
   Anthropologists and historians have advanced various hypotheses to
explain the development of states in Africa. Historian John Lonsdale reviewed
the historiography of the subject (Lonsdale 1981) and identiﬁed the following
hypotheses: (1) imposition by an autonomous will, (2) conquest, (3) demo-
graphic pressure, (4) a managerial basis of power, (5) long-distance trade,
and (6) drought. These hypotheses were not seen as mutually exclusive;
Lonsdale accepted that combinations of them might be used in an explanatory
role in particular instances. Nevertheless, he stressed that most of these
hypotheses originated at a time when there was relatively little known about
African state formation. Lonsdale thought that three things had subsequently
become apparent. First, state formation was a very slow process: ‘frequently
botched and started again’, so that ‘the decay and fall of kingdoms is as
important a process as their rise’. Second, a great deal more had become
known about the politics of state formation and state collapse (for the latter,
Tainter 1988; Yoffee and Cowgill 1988). Power seems to have been decentral-
ized in early kingdoms with their kings acting as mediators rather than
autocrats. State emergence involved centralization of that power, and this
was achieved by coercion, not by consensus. Third, it was more useful to
explain the rise of particular states in terms of local politics, rather than
to hypothesize about ‘the idea of the state’ and the diffusion of political ideas
(Lonsdale 1981: 172–3).
   Physical evidence is needed to test the theories concerning urbanization and
state formation, but so limited is our knowledge of the later archaeology of
Africa that ethnohistorical and historical evidence also need to be considered.
The danger here is that we might ‘allow the ethnographic present and the
historically constructed past to exercise tyranny over our perception of past
human behaviour’ (Fletcher 1995: 212). Because of an uneven geographical
distribution of excavations and other ﬁeld researches, there have been rela-
tively few general archaeological studies concerned with the origins and devel-
opment of cities and states in Africa, and older contributions are of limited
value. However, an early contribution to the general archaeological literature
was Peter Garlake’s The Kingdoms of Africa (Garlake 1978a), which was
noteworthy for the author’s insistence on the indigenous evolution of African
states, although he also stressed the importance of external trade, whereby a
small group could monopolize not the resources but the outlets by which they
could be converted into a useful surplus.

8
                                                                   The context

  Although it gave little attention to archaeological evidence, there was also
Richard Hull’s book African Cities and Towns before the European Conquest
(1976). Relevant to the present discussion were parts of the book concerning
the origins of cities and towns and their decline and disappearance. Hull
identiﬁed ﬁve main urban types, assuming that major function explained
origin but emphasizing that most cities and towns served a combination of
such functions. The types were: spiritual and ceremonial centres, commercial
centres, centres of governance, centres of refuge, and ‘cities of vision’ (Hull
1976: 120–1). Hull also outlined what he saw as the prerequisites for the
growth of cities and towns in Africa: government had to be sufﬁciently
developed to exert control over the agricultural surplus; leaders had to have
enough power to demand labour from their people for the construction of
public works; specialist craftsmen had to be present; and government had to
have an ideological power base (Hull 1976: 2). For decline and disappearance,
Hull suggested four main causes: environmental deterioration, collapse of
political superstructure, revolt of peripheral cities against the mother city,
and external military invasion (Hull 1976: 114–16).
  Other publications relevant to the archaeology of cities and states in Africa
include: Augustin Holl, West African Early Towns (2006); David Phillipson,
African Archaeology (2005); Thurstan Shaw et al., The Archaeology of Africa
(1993); and Joseph Vogel, Encyclopedia of Precolonial Africa (1997). Another
source is The Oxford Handbook of African Archaeology (2013), edited by
Peter Mitchell and Paul Lane. Chapter 48 in that book, by J. Cameron Monroe
(2013: 703–22), entitled ‘The archaeology of the precolonial state in Africa’,
provides a useful summary. Parts of The Civilizations of Africa by Christopher
Ehret (2002) are also relevant, as are some of the papers in African Archae-
ology edited by Ann Brower Stahl (2005b). Furthermore, three essays of my
own consider speciﬁc aspects of the subject (Connah 2000a; 2000b; 2008). In
addition, there are historical studies: Roland Oliver, The African Experience
(1993); John Iliffe, Africans (1995); John Reader, Africa (1997); and Anderson
and Rathbone, Africa’s Urban Past (2000).
  When examining the archaeological evidence, a discrepancy becomes appar-
ent. According to historical sources, there was a greater number of cities and
states in Africa than the archaeological literature indicates. Fage and Verity’s
An Atlas of African History (1978) shows numerous cities and states in its
maps of which little or nothing is known archaeologically. What about the
early second-millennium AD state of Kanem east of Lake Chad, for instance,
of which the capital Njimi has never been found? Or what about the sixteenth-
century state of Kongo with its capital Mbanza Kongo, thought by Leo
Africanus to have had a population of about 100,000 people (Africanus
1896: vol. 1, 73)? Virtually nothing is known about its archaeology, either.

                                                                              9
African Civilizations

These examples illustrate the two main reasons for the patchy state of arch-
aeological knowledge on this subject. First, there is the problem of the
archaeological visibility of the sites (Connah 2008). At the one extreme, a
long-established, partly stone-built, commercial centre like Kilwa (Chittick
1974), and at the other extreme, a short-lived, grass-built, centre of governance
like the Bugandan capital at Rubaga, visited by Henry Morton Stanley in 1875
(Stanley 1878: vol. 1, 199–202). The second of the main reasons for the patchy
state of archaeological knowledge is the uneven distribution in space and time of
archaeological ﬁeld research in Africa. Comparatively large amounts of excav-
ation and ﬁeldwork have been carried out, for instance, on settlement sites
of the last three millennia along the Sudanese Nile, but, in contrast, relatively
little such work has been done, for example, on the Mozambique coast. These
two problems of archaeological visibility and uneven ﬁeld research frequently
compound one another. Clearly, only the most intensive ﬁeld investigations will
reveal sites of low archaeological visibility.
   A consequence of the patchy state of archaeological knowledge concerning
cities and states in Africa is that any discussion of the relevant archaeological
evidence might give a distorted picture. However, Chandler and Fox (1974)
produced a series of maps of African cities at intervals between AD 1000 and
1850 mainly based on historical sources. Although the distribution of cities
does not necessarily indicate the distribution of states, these maps do reﬂect the
geographical distribution of cities and states indicated by the archaeological
evidence. Thus they show that the main areas of urban development were: in
the Maghreb of North Africa, along the lower Nile in Egypt, on the middle
Nile in the Sudan, in West Africa along the southern edge of the Sahara, in the
West African rainforest west of the lower Niger River, and on the Ethiopian
Plateau. They also record urban centres on the East African coast, on the
Zimbabwe Plateau, around the lower Congo, and in the Lake Victoria area. So
the archaeological evidence does produce a geographical pattern comparable
to that derived from historical and ethnohistorical evidence. It is this that has
prompted the choice of subject matter for most of the substantive chapters of
this book.
   Some of the implicit assumptions in this book require examination. For
instance, how are the terms ‘city’ and ‘state’ to be understood in this speciﬁc
context? Some authors have written of ‘cities’ in Africa (Hull 1976) and
‘kingdoms’ (Garlake 1978a) or ‘states’ (Fage and Verity 1978). Others have
accepted the existence of the West African ‘empires’ of Ghana, Mali, Songhay,
and Kanem-Borno. The question is whether such terms accurately describe
African realities or merely reﬂect the inﬂuence of European historiography.
Studies of more recent African societies by anthropologists and ethnographers
suggest that larger settlements in Africa occurred in a variety of forms,

10
                                                                     The context

differing in character and scale, and that African polities tended to lack the
autocratic, centralized, and bounded forms that the words ‘kingdom’ and
‘empire’ suggest. Perhaps the use of such terms resulted partly from a post-
colonial reaction by scholars seeking to legitimize the African past in a global
context, attempting to show that in certain respects Africa was like Europe.
Indeed, they might have had some justiﬁcation, for the cities and states
of Medieval and Early Modern Europe were not always the autocratic,
centralized, and bounded entities of popular Eurocentric imagination.
   In an introductory essay to her edited book Beyond Chiefdoms (1999),
Susan Keech McIntosh provided an important perspective on the subject of
sociopolitical complexity in Africa. She pointed out: ‘The initial establishment
of supralocal organization in sub-Saharan Africa more likely took the form of
a central ritual authority, lacking any signiﬁcant political power or particular
economic advantage’ (S.K. McIntosh 1999: 23). She also remarked: ‘It is quite
common to ﬁnd in African segmentary states a pattern of power counterpoised
between a king and either associations (such as secret societies or cults with
titled elders) and/or a council of lineage heads’ (S.K. McIntosh 1999: 15).
Other factors, such as religious afﬁliation, ethnic/linguistic identity, clan mem-
bership, age-grades, craft guilds, and trade obligations, can also play a part in
limiting an African ruler’s hierarchical authority implied by the term ‘state’.
Indeed, on the subject of urban origins, Roderick McIntosh argued that in
some cases a heterarchical, horizontal sociopolitical structure existed, rather
than a hierarchical, vertical one with control of surplus, visible stratiﬁcation,
and public monuments (R.J. McIntosh 1999; 2005). Also Ann Stahl ques-
tioned the progressivist and evolutionist assumptions in much that has been
written about the appearance of aspects of social complexity, such as urbanism
and states, in Africa. She recommended ‘research strategies that can help us
rethink how we perceive variability in time and space’ (Stahl 1999: 46). Terms
less loaded with meaning than ‘city’ and ‘state’ are needed for examples of
uncertain character; ‘large settlement’ and ‘polity’ might be preferable.
Roderick McIntosh observed: ‘As archaeology matures we will look more
inclusively at the full range of processes by which complex society emerged’
(R.J. McIntosh 1999: 63).
   One aspect of urban living, to which archaeologists need to give more
attention, is sanitation. The informal disposal of human bodily waste becomes
a serious problem as the density of settlements increases. Archaeological
evidence of attempted solutions, in the form of latrines, drains, soakaways,
and sometimes water supply, has been identiﬁed in some African regions and
periods but is apparently absent from others. Inevitably, this raises the ques-
tion of whether some excavators have failed to identify such evidence. Possibly
the subject has been regarded by some scholars as not worth their attention,

                                                                               11
African Civilizations

and yet the provision of such facilities, or the lack of them, is relevant to
evaluating the technology of an urban society, as well as having signiﬁcant
social and health implications. Nevertheless, archaeological evidence for
African sanitation has not yet received the attention afforded to that of
Mohenjo-Daro, for example, in Pakistan (Jansen 1989).
  The chapters that follow are a series of case studies, whose choice has been
dictated by the availability of archaeological evidence as well as historical
and ethnohistorical evidence. Chapters 2–11 examine the main areas of arch-
aeological evidence by grouping that evidence both geographically and
chronologically (Fig. 1.1). Thus, Chapter 2 discusses the earliest instance of
African social complexity: the Pharaonic state and its settlements along the
lower Nile. The later states and settlements of North Africa are then examined
in Chapter 3. In previous editions of this book, these regions were excluded,
although it was acknowledged that they inﬂuenced to varying extents the
developments that took place in the Sudanese Nile Valley, the Ethiopian
Plateau, and the West African savanna. The intention was to look at the cities
and states of tropical Africa, because they were regarded as comprising a
logically coherent group. In contrast, North Africa and Egypt have long had
such diverse connections with the Mediterranean and South-West Asia that it
seemed legitimate to exclude them from a study of the African evidence. This
reﬂected a long-standing tendency for Africanist scholars to focus on what
they called ‘sub-Saharan Africa’, conveniently beheading the continent in the
process. More recently it has been realized that discussions should be set in
a continent-wide, and even global, context. Peter Mitchell’s book African
Connections: An Archaeological Perspective on Africa and the Wider World
(Mitchell 2005) has inﬂuenced this new orientation. Mitchell’s book is a timely
reminder that although connections between different societies are sometimes
not represented in their material cultures, they might still be indicated by
‘shared ideas and beliefs’ (O’Connor and Reid 2003a: 3). The widespread
dispersal of religious ideologies is a major example, but physical evidence for
other aspects of culture such as the board game of mancala, played in both the
Roman world and over much of Africa, is another example that is relevant
here (Townshend 1979; de Voogt 2010).
  However, most Africanist archaeologists have only limited knowledge of
the archaeology of North Africa and Egypt, particularly of the latter with its
enormous number of publications. Therefore, Chapters 2 and 3 in the present
book are superﬁcial compared with other chapters, but they have an essential
role as contextual material. Moving on, Chapter 4 discusses the evidence from
the middle Nile for the cities and states of Kerma, Napata, and Meroë, perhaps
the ﬁrst of such developments in tropical Africa, and also considers the
evidence for the successor states of Christian Nubia. This is followed in

12
                                                                               The context




Fig. 1.1 Location of the areas discussed in this book. 1: North Africa (Chapter 3);
2: Lower Nile (Chapter 2); 3: West African savanna (Chapter 6); 4: Nubia (Chapter 4);
5: Ethiopian Highlands (Chapter 5); 6: West African rainforest (Chapter 7); 7: Interlacustrine
Region (Chapter 10); 8: Upemba Depression (Chapter 10); 9: The Far West of Central Africa
(Chapter 10); 10: East African coast and islands (Chapter 8); 11: Great Zimbabwe and
related sites (Chapter 9); 12: South African sites (Chapter 11). Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.




                                                                                          13
African Civilizations

Chapter 5 by an examination of the evidence for Aksum and Christian
Ethiopia. The scene is then changed to West Africa, and Chapters 6 and 7,
respectively, look at what archaeology has to tell us of the cities and states of
the West African savanna and of the West African rainforest and its fringes.
Chapter 8 takes us across the continent again to examine the archaeological
evidence for the cities of the East African coast and islands, including
Madagascar. In contrast, Chapter 9 considers the evidence from the Zim-
babwe Plateau and related areas in the interior, and Chapter 10 focuses on
the Upemba Depression and the Interlacustrine Zone, in Central Africa, also
discussing evidence from further west. Chapter 11, like Chapters 2 and 3,
is new to this third edition. Both previous editions excluded the southern
extremity of the continent, because the book was limited to tropical Africa.
Chapter 11 considers the appearance of large settlements and centralized
polities on the South African Highveld and in adjacent areas during the second
millennium AD, particularly during its later part. Finally, Chapter 12 discusses
possible common circumstances in the examples of social complexity that have
been examined in the previous chapters.
  The subject matter of this book is limited to the last ﬁve and a half millennia
of Africa’s past (Fig. 1.2) but prior to colonialism and decolonization. For
some parts of Africa the last two millennia or so have often been called ‘the
African Iron Age’, but such technoepochal terminology has little explanatory
value and obstructs rather than aids understanding (Connah 1998b: 5–6).
Certainly the period concerned was one of substantial technological change,
but there were also profound economic and social changes, which it is the
purpose of this book to investigate. This investigation consists of the examin-
ation of the relevant archaeological evidence for social complexity in Africa.
That evidence consists of the material remains of larger settlements and of the
culture of their occupants, together with inferences about the relationship of
such settlements to the populations of their hinterlands and to the resources
available in those hinterlands. In assessing this evidence, it is important to ask
how we know that a particular archaeological site represents the remains of
a city and how we are able to assume that the area around it constituted a state
controlled either from that or from another city. We can also compare the
picture that emerges from the archaeological evidence with the picture that
can be reconstructed from ethnohistorical or historical evidence. At the very
roots of our enquiry, however, are basic questions around which the whole
discussion revolves: how and why did cities and states emerge in Africa?
In particular, what factors led to their development in some parts of the
continent but not in others? These questions allow us to assess, principally
using archaeological evidence, both the theoretical explanations of anthro-
pologists like Haas (1982) and the explanatory hypotheses advanced by

14
                                                                           The context




Fig. 1.2 Approximate chronology of the areas of social complexity discussed in this book,
arranged in the order of its chapters, numbers 2–11 at left margin. D., Danangombe
(Dhlo Dhlo); F.W., Far West; G.Z., Great Zimbabwe; H.V.S., Highveld settlements;
M., Mapungubwe. Note how the earliest examples are to the north, becoming progressively
later to the south. Drawn by Andrew Stawowczyk Long.



Africanist historians (Lonsdale 1981). In attempting such an assessment,
the approach is based on that advocated by Renfrew (1983: 17), discussed
above (p. 7). The archaeological evidence for each group of African cities
and states is investigated from the point of view of geographical location,
environmental conditions, subsistence, technology, social system, population
pressures, ideology, and external trade. Whatever the weaknesses of the
archaeological evidence for the emergence of cities and states in Africa, it
can increase the time depth of our understanding of these processes and test

                                                                                      15
African Civilizations

and ﬂesh out our historical sources, where such sources exist. The archaeo-
logical evidence reveals a remarkable diversity of both urbanism and state
formation in Africa’s past, suggesting that a world-wide reappraisal of these
aspects of social complexity might be required – a reappraisal that should
at last pay proper attention to the physical evidence from previous African
civilizations.




16
Chapter 2
Origins: social change on the lower Nile


The earliest example of social complexity in Africa was along the lower valley
of the River Nile. Some of the ﬁrst indications have been found at Hierakon-
polis, on the west bank of the Nile in southern Egypt, where extensive habita-
tion and cemetery sites date to the fourth millennium BC. This and other sites
suggest that social changes were already taking place amongst the formerly
dispersed agropastoral people of the region. Local elites were emerging, and by
about 3000 BC there is evidence for the First Dynasty of Pharaonic rulers of
‘Ancient Egypt’. This polity has long occupied a special place in Western
consciousness, both scholarly and public. Pharaonic Egypt has been regarded
as one of the great ‘civilizations’, as an almost mythical construct and treated
as separate from the overall study of Africa’s past. However, archaeologists
are now considering Egypt in its African context, for example, O’Connor and
Reid (2003b) and Exell (2011), but for a long time this was not done. It was
insisted that Egypt during the last three millennia BC demanded extensive
archaeological investigations, but until the middle of the twentieth century
the rest of the continent was given far less attention. Consequently, the
capacity for Egyptology to shed light on the processes leading to social
complexity, in Africa and elsewhere, has sometimes been overlooked. This is
unfortunate because the Egyptian evidence has great comparative value.
  That evidence is exceptional in three ways. First, the climate and environ-
ment of the Nile Valley and its surrounding deserts have resulted in the
survival of a range of organic materials rarely encountered in archaeological
contexts elsewhere in Africa. Second, the monumental expression of social
order by ancient Egyptians has left extensive physical evidence in the form of
pyramids, tombs, temples, statues, and other structures that have dominated
scholarly attention. Third, the development of writing, of which there was
already an early form by about 3300 BC (Davies and Friedman 1999: 36–7;
O’Connor 2011: 143–7), means that there are substantial documentary
sources, particularly for later periods, as well as archaeological evidence.
These factors have resulted in a massive quantity of data that has affected
much of its interpretation. The Ancient Egyptians recorded their history in
terms of the reigns and dynasties of their rulers, the latter numbered from one
to thirty. This has been presented as a sequence lasting three millennia, a
chronology originating from the work of a third-century BC Egyptian priest
called Manetho. The sequence comprises the Early Dynastic Period, the Old

                                                                             17
African Civilizations

Kingdom, the Middle Kingdom, the New Kingdom, and the Late Period, the
second and subsequent of these being separated from each other by three
Intermediate Periods of sociopolitical instability (Baines and Malek 2000;
Shaw 2000). This sequence provides the longest and most detailed historical
account in any part of Africa but has tended to encourage a conservative
approach to the archaeological study of Ancient Egypt.
  In contrast, during recent years there have been attempts to look at the
evidence more objectively and to ask either new questions of it or old questions
in new ways. We have a relatively detailed picture for much of the time
occupied by the mature Pharaonic state, characterized by periods of central-
ized power that alternated with periods of sociopolitical fragmentation, what
Kent Flannery (after Henry Wright) called ‘cycling’ (Flannery 1999: 4–5).
However, it is the earliest periods, generally referred to as the ‘Predynastic’,
that have the greatest capacity to throw light on the processes that led to the
emergence of social complexity in Egypt. Thus, Barry Kemp devoted a third of
his book Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization to the foundations of the
state (Kemp 1991) and David Wengrow (2006) traced relevant social trans-
formations from 10,000 to 2650 BC, ending his investigation near the point
where studies of Ancient Egypt have often begun.


Geographical location and environmental factors
Without the River Nile, Ancient Egypt would have been desert. As now, in
most places there was little rainfall, in some areas virtually none, with an
average monthly maximum temperature in June and July of 34C (for Cairo,
at present) and high evapotranspiration. However, the Nile, one of the world’s
great rivers, was fed with water from the Ethiopian mountains and from deep
in equatorial Africa. Once a year, usually without fail, it ﬂooded a narrow strip
of land on each side as well as other nearby low-lying areas. This not only
saturated the ground but also left fertile silt lying on top. Each year, after the
ﬂoodwaters had receded, highly productive agriculture ﬂourished on the irri-
gated land each side of the Nile and in the Nile Delta where the river entered
the Mediterranean Sea. The main crops were emmer wheat and barley, plus
lentils, chickpeas, vegetables, fruit, sesame, and ﬂax. Livestock included cattle,
sheep, goats, pigs, pigeons, ducks, geese, and bees. During the Pharaonic
period, as is still the case, Egypt was the gift of the Nile, and the Nile was
the gift of Africa. The river supported agricultural production that yielded a
large surplus, able to support a complex society with a dense population.
It also abounded in ﬁsh, reeds that were used in construction and matting,
and papyrus that provided writing materials. In addition, wild game beyond
the valley margins remained a hunting resource for a long time. Furthermore,

18
                                     Origins: social change on the lower Nile

the Nile provided transportation from one end of this long narrow country to
the other. With the prevailing wind blowing from the north and the river
ﬂowing from the south, boats could sail in one direction and drift or be rowed
back. In this way bulky commodities and heavy raw materials could be moved
and relatively easy communications could be maintained between different
communities (Fig. 2.1).
  With abundant food in most years, Ancient Egypt was a land of plenty with
a good transportation system. Yet each side of the narrow occupied area,
usually so close that it could be seen from the banks of the Nile itself, there
was desert, appearing to shut off this land of plenty from the outside world.
Also the Mediterranean Sea to the north and rocky cataracts in the Nile to
the south seemed to enclose Egypt from those directions. However, Ancient
Egyptians not only learnt to exploit the mineral and other resources of the
surrounding deserts but also traded with their southern neighbours along
the Nile in Nubia. In addition, trade was developed with people in the Levant
and with others as far away as Mesopotamia with its emerging city-states. The
Sinai Peninsula provided early contacts with those regions; by the late fourth
millennium BC the domestication of the donkey and its use as a pack animal
facilitated growing interaction with the southern Levant that acted as a funnel
for commodities from further aﬁeld (Wengrow 2006: 36, 136). In the third
millennium BC, maritime trade, particularly with Lebanon, became more
important; Egypt was supplied with the timber that it lacked, mostly cedar
that was used in boat construction (Wengrow 2006: 148). This combination of
resources, from both the Nile Valley and further aﬁeld, continued to beneﬁt
Egypt for many centuries, in spite of changes. After the Pharaonic period,
Egypt’s geographical position and its environment remained advantageous, in
turn under Persian, Ptolemaic, Roman, Byzantine, and Arab rule. To Imperial
Rome it was an important source of grain; in the late ﬁrst millennium BC
Alexandria became one of the world’s intellectual centres; by the early second
millennium AD al-Fustat (under modern Cairo) was one of Africa’s wealthiest
cities; and Egypt has continued to provide a link between Africa and the
Mediterranean, South-West Asia, the Red Sea, and the Indian Ocean. It was
not for nothing that Napoleon sought to occupy it at the end of the eighteenth
century AD or that Germany made it a strategic objective during World War II.
Post-Pharaonic Egypt can contribute to an understanding of subsequent state
and urban development in the rest of Africa, just as Pharaonic Egypt helps
us to understand their origins.
  Geographical and environmental advantages relevant to the Nile are dis-
cussed in greater detail in Chapter 4, on Nubia, although concerning the valley
south of Egypt. However, there were also constraints on human occupation in
both areas. In Egypt, a major problem was the very river that gave it life: not

                                                                            19
African Civilizations




Fig. 2.1 Principal archaeological sites and places on the lower Nile mentioned in the text.
Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.




20
                                      Origins: social change on the lower Nile

only was it a perennial source of river-borne diseases but in some years its
ﬂood could fail and in other years be so high that settlements and farmland
were swept away. Crops and livestock could be lost and famine could threaten.
Such events resulted from short-term climatic oscillations, but changes over
longer periods were of greater signiﬁcance. Thus the increasingly dry condi-
tions in much of the Sahara from about the fourth millennium BC (Hendrickx
and Vermeersch 2000: 35) must have had an impact on the Egyptian Nile
Valley, as people were forced out of the desert into its margins, including the
Mediterranean coast to its north and the Sahel to its south. It is surely
signiﬁcant that it was at about this time that signs of social complexity
appeared in Egypt, as its resources and those of its margins and oases attracted
more and more people (Hassan 2002: 323).


Sources of information
Historical evidence
There is information on social and political organization in Egypt over the last
six millennia, particularly for the Pharaonic period. Both documentary and
archaeological sources throw light on the emergence and vicissitudes of the
Ancient Egyptian state and on the character and role of its cities. A variety of
written material exists, both in hieroglyphs used for formal purposes and in
more rapidly written scripts such as hieratic and the later demotic (Baines and
Malek 2000: 198–201). Much of this is on papyrus, which the dry environ-
ment has often preserved, but there are also many inscriptions on other
materials, particularly stone. In conjunction with large numbers of painted
and/or carved depictions, these written sources show how the Ancient Egyp-
tians saw themselves and how they represented their past. Inevitably such
evidence requires critical interpretation, and this has generated a vast amount
of scholarship. Consequently, the development of writing in Ancient Egypt has
provided us with a picture of past society unparalleled in the rest of Africa for
that period. We have the names of real people and descriptions of actual
events; we are also provided with a detailed chronology of impressive length.
   Surviving documentation includes monumental and funerary inscriptions;
administrative records; correspondence; religious and ritual material; astro-
nomical, medical and mathematical texts; narrative ﬁction; poetry; and writing
for everyday purposes. Collectively, these sources provide valuable informa-
tion on the character of Pharaonic society; concerning the New Kingdom, for
example, even the details of private life can be reconstructed (Meskell 2002).
The documentary sources indicate an abundant agricultural surplus in most
years, supporting a complex society with a dense population, amongst whom a

                                                                              21
African Civilizations

substantial number of people appear to have been at least partly literate. There
is written evidence for government ofﬁcials, priests, craftsmen, artists, scribes,
soldiers, merchants, and many others, as well as for the numerous farmers who
produced the food. Documentation reveals a hierarchical state headed by an
absolute monarch with both secular and sacred authority, the Pharaoh, and a
government that became increasing bureaucratic as time passed. People lived
in cities, towns, and villages and on estates. There was a complex religious
ideology concerning both life and death; the central role of religion contributed
to Ancient Egypt’s long survival, by encouraging social and political cohesion
in spite of periods of instability and collapse. A concept of right order pro-
duced a society that appears to have been conservative, although there were
changes as time passed.


Archaeological evidence
Much can be learned from the extraordinary amount of archaeological evi-
dence, particularly for Pharaonic Egypt. Famously, this includes massive
public works such as pyramids, numerous temples, and statues and other
stone sculptures of rulers and gods, often with associated texts. It has been
suggested that the construction of the pyramids functioned as an ‘economic
engine’ that drove the Pharaonic state. The sheer size of each of these monu-
mental building projects involved the collection and redistribution of resources
on a massive scale, in order to support the necessary workforce and specialists.
Of the largest of the pyramids it has been claimed that, especially during the
Old Kingdom, they served as ‘a major catalyst for . . . the development of
Egypt as one of the world’s ﬁrst true states’ (Lehner 1997: 9). Building on such
a scale would have required complex organization efﬁciently directed, indicat-
ing the existence of a powerful centralized state. In addition to these monu-
mental structures, there were many other tombs and burials whose level of
sophistication reﬂected the hierarchical character of that state, as did the large
number of informative wall paintings within some tombs. Inevitably, it has
been pyramids, other tombs, and temples, often constructed in stone, and the
numerous sculptures and paintings, which have attracted the greatest attention
from archaeologists. As a result, the latter have usually been preoccupied with
elites and state ritual, although there is now a growing interest in the rest of the
Ancient Egyptian population. One consequence has been that until recently
relatively little attention was given to the archaeology of Pharaonic settle-
ments. Indeed, at one time it was thought that Ancient Egypt was a case of
‘civilization without cities’ (Wilson 1960), a belief now ﬁrmly rejected (Trigger
2003: 120). It was also presumed that most of the evidence for urbanization
was buried beneath Nile sediments or covered by modern occupation and that

22
                                        Origins: social change on the lower Nile

excavation would be difﬁcult because of ephemeral building materials, loose
spatial organization, and royal residences that shifted periodically.
   Nevertheless, there is archaeological evidence for the development of urbanism
as well as for the emergence of the Egyptian state. Although the Predynastic
period is principally known from burials, both the process of urbanization and
the rise of the state can be traced in the character and location of the cemeteries
(Wilkinson 1996: 86–8). In addition, there were villages clustered along the Nile,
and by about 3500 BC there were large settlements at Hierakonpolis, Koptos,
Naqada, and Abydos, all in Upper (southern) Egypt. These appear to have been
sprawling, low-density settlements, in contrast to later walled, brick-built towns
of higher population density. Subsequently, Ancient Egyptian towns and cities
seem to have developed for various reasons: as administrative, cult, or craft
centres; as military bases; or as a combination of several of these. Their ties with
agriculture remained strong because it usually formed their main resource base.
Inevitably, they competed with one another for assets, and during the Predynas-
tic period this must have led to some centres and some individuals gaining more
wealth and political power than others. By the late fourth millennium BC there
were a number of such centres of power, controlling limited areas and headed by
elite ﬁgures with both secular and sacred authority. It was out of their continuing
and apparently violent rivalry that the Egyptian Dynastic state emerged about
3100 BC (Kemp 1991). An indication of this centralizing process is provided by
the so-called Cities Palette (Kemp 1991: 50; Wengrow 2006: 209), a fragment
of a stone cosmetic palette that appears to depict seven walled cities under
attack, presumably by a locally powerful early ruler (Fig. 2.2). A similar repre-
sentation of a city under attack is present on the Narmer Palette from Hiera-
konpolis; it also shows Narmer, wearing the crown of Lower Egypt, inspecting
ten decapitated prisoners; on the other side of the palette, wearing the crown of
Upper Egypt, he is about to strike a prisoner (Wengrow 2006: 42–3).
   Archaeological investigations have provided information about the layout of
Pharaonic cities and other settlements. An early example is the Old Kingdom
mortuary-cult ‘town’, attached to the Valley Temple of King Sneferu of the
Fourth Dynasty at Dahshur (Kemp 1991: 148). Possibly occupied by only a
hundred people, already there are indications of planning in its layout. Indeed,
the Middle Kingdom town of Kahun, also known as Lahun, attached to the
pyramid of Senusret II, is evidence of orderly planning by central authority
(Fig. 2.3) and has been estimated as capable of containing a population of
about 5,000 (Kemp 1991: 149–57). Such state control is particularly evident in
the case of the Middle Kingdom fortress of Buhen, just north of the Second
Nile Cataract in Nubia, on what was then Pharaonic Egypt’s southern frontier
(Kemp 1991: 168–72). Although military considerations were clearly of pri-
mary importance in its plan, it was in effect a fortiﬁed town that probably had

                                                                                 23
African Civilizations




Fig. 2.2 One side of the ‘Cities Palette’ fragment, depicting seven walled towns under attack
by animals symbolizing the monarchy and wielding hoes. It is presumed that the palette,
which dates to about 3000 BC, celebrated victories in the expansion of the kingdom of
Hierakonpolis and that it provides evidence for early state development on the lower Nile.
From Kemp 1991: 50, ﬁg. 16.


a large population (Fig. 2.4). More important, however, was the New King-
dom city of El-Amarna, constructed for ‘the heretic king’ Akhenaten and
named Akhetaten, for which population estimates vary between 20,000 and
50,000 (Kemp 1991: 269). This short-lived city has been extensively excavated
over many years, providing information on both its layout and on the lives of
its inhabitants (Fig. 2.5). The spread of house sizes indicates a society grading
from poor to rich without any major gaps, the great gulf being between the
residents as a whole and the ruler and his family (Kemp 1991: 298, 300). In
contrast, layout details of the major cities of Memphis and Thebes are limited
because of their lengthy occupation, although ironically the entire plan of the
craftsmen’s village of Deir el-Medina (Fig. 2.6), near Thebes, has been revealed
by excavation (Meskell 2002: 42). However, the layout of the later city of
Alexandria, during the Ptolemaic and Roman periods, is known (Lloyd 2000:
406). It demonstrates the continuity of urbanism in Egypt, as also do the even
later Islamic cities of al-Fustat and al-Qahira (Fig. 2.7) from the seventh to
twelfth century AD (Kubiak 1987; Raymond 2000).
   Not only are the archaeological sites of Pharaonic and later Egypt informa-
tive; they have also yielded enormous quantities of cultural material of a

24
                                           Origins: social change on the lower Nile




Fig. 2.3 Plan of the Middle Kingdom town of Kahun, of which part has been lost to
cultivation. An early example of orderly planning by central authority, it was attached to
the pyramid of Senusret II (c. 1842–1837 BC) to house the workmen who built the pyramid
and the priests and others responsible for maintaining the cult of the dead king. After Kemp
1991: 150, ﬁg. 53.


variety unmatched in many other parts of the world. This includes pottery,
stone vessels, basketry, clothing, footwear, furniture, a great range of metal-
work, tools, weapons, jewellery, cosmetic objects, children’s toys, board
games, symbolic and religious items, and many other artefacts. There are also
the remains of boats, including one that is 43.3 metres (142 feet) long, dated to

                                                                                        25
African Civilizations




Fig. 2.4 Plan of the Middle Kingdom fortress of Buhen, an example of urban planning for
the military. This was constructed by Senusret I (c. 1918–1875 BC) to protect Egypt’s
southern border. From Kemp 1991: 170, ﬁg. 60.


slightly before 2500 BC, found in a pit adjacent to Khufu’s pyramid at Giza
(Lehner 1997: 119). Even earlier boats have been found in the boat-grave
cemetery at Abydos, which has provided evidence of the world’s oldest sewn
planked hulls by the fourth millennium BC (Ward 2006). Such boats not only
were used on the Nile but could also be dismantled for overland transport to
the Red Sea, where they enabled participation in maritime trade.

26
                                           Origins: social change on the lower Nile




Fig. 2.5 Perspective reconstruction of part of a residential area in the New Kingdom city
of El-Amarna. This was a new city, founded by Akhenaten (c. 1353–1336 BC) and
abandoned soon after his death. It is one of the few Pharaonic Egyptian cities to have been
extensively excavated. After Kemp 1991: 295, ﬁg. 98.



   In addition there are the remains of food and plants. This great range of
evidence has survived because of the dry climate but also because of Pharaonic
Egyptians’ concern that their afterlife should be a continuation of their real
life. Their tombs were frequently furnished with everything to achieve this; the
Eighteenth Dynasty tomb of Tutankhamun is the most famous example.
Amongst these items are models mainly of wood, which provide details of
everyday life during some periods. These depict a wide range of individual
activities, such as brewing beer, cooking, grinding grain, and milking a cow.
They also show group activities, such as ploughing with oxen, butchering,
workers in a granary, sailing and rowing boats, soldiers marching, and a cattle
census being taken (Tooley 1995). Add to these a variety of other funerary and
religious artefacts and it is apparent that a detailed picture of Pharaonic
Egyptian life can be reconstructed, suggesting how much archaeological

                                                                                       27
Fig. 2.6 Plan of Deir el-Medina village near Thebes, in the Nineteenth and Twentieth
Dynasties (c. 1292–1075 BC). This New Kingdom settlement housed scribes and workmen
who constructed the royal tombs, and their families, close to the Valley of the Kings. The site
has provided useful information about living conditions at the craftsman level of society.
From Stead 1986: 8, ﬁg. 6. Egyptian life, The Trustees of the British Museum, London.
                                           Origins: social change on the lower Nile




Fig. 2.7 Plan of the Fatimid city of al-Qahira, founded in AD 969, showing three periods of
city walls. This city was situated on the site of modern Cairo and excavations have shown
that it was much larger than seen here. This plan is from a coloured original in which
Gawhar’s Walls were yellow and do not show here; they enclosed a smaller area than the
later walls. Badr al-Gamali’s Walls were red and can be seen mostly parallel to Salah ad-
Din’s Walls, which were in black. Circled numbers 1, 2, 3, and 4 are the locations of
archaeological excavations conducted from 2001 to 2014. After Pradines 2015.
Reproduced by permission of Stephane Pradines.
                                                                                       29
African Civilizations

evidence must have been lost from many contemporary societies in other parts
of Africa. However, in the case of Ancient Egypt, perhaps it is human remains
that provide the most signiﬁcant evidence, especially those preserved by mum-
miﬁcation. Ideas about an existence after death resulted in great care being
devoted to mummiﬁcation and burial, for many lesser people as well as for
rulers and elites (Spencer 1982). This preservation of human tissues now
provides medical research with unique information on diseases from the third
millennium BC to the ﬁrst millennium AD (Lambert-Zazulak 2000). Even
animals and birds were mummiﬁed at times, providing valuable research
material for zoologists. The practice of human mummiﬁcation continued into
the Roman period, and by then a realistic portrait of the more wealthy
deceased was set into the head of the mummy case, probably painted during
the prime of life (Peacock 2000: 433).
  Because of the importance of Ancient Egypt for understanding state emer-
gence and the development of urbanism during the last few millennia BC, the
above discussion concentrates on that period, reﬂecting the major emphasis in
archaeological research and publication over many years. However, documen-
tary and archaeological evidence from Egypt during the ﬁrst and second
millennium AD is also of signiﬁcance to the study of increasing social com-
plexity in some other parts of the African continent.


Subsistence economy
Mixed agriculture provided the base of the Ancient Egyptian economy and of
the economies of periods succeeding it (Baines and Malek 2000: 190–2). The
main crops were wheat and barley, but a variety of vegetables, fruit, and other
plants including vines were also grown. Not only were the seasonally inun-
dated banks and basins of the Nile Valley highly productive in most years, but
large parts of the Nile Delta also contributed to a food surplus, of which grain
was routinely stored in silos, some controlled by the state. Ox-drawn ploughs
were in use (Fig. 2.8), as well as hoes, and the shaduf, a human-powered,
pivoted, weighted beam, was used to raise water to extend irrigated areas. In
later times water was also lifted by the saqia, an ox-driven waterwheel, but this
does not seem to have been introduced until early in the second millennium
AD. Although arable agriculture provided the most important part of subsist-
ence, particularly in the form of grain, large numbers of cattle, sheep, goats,
pigs, and poultry were raised. Nevertheless, it is signiﬁcant that the staple diet
for lower-status Egyptians consisted of bread and beer, the latter made from
partially cooked barley bread mixed with water to produce a gruel or soup.
This was not very alcoholic but it was highly nutritious, more of a food than a
drink (Kemp 1991: 120). Cattle were milked and milk products contributed to

30
                                        Origins: social change on the lower Nile




Fig. 2.8 Wooden model of a peasant ploughing with oxen, 43 centimetres long. From
a Middle Kingdom (c. 1975–1640 BC) tomb. Drawn by John Pratt after Stead 1986,
front cover. Egyptian life, The Trustees of the British Museum, London.

some diets, but for most people meat was probably limited and from small
stock, beef being mainly eaten by the elite. Fish from the Nile seem to have
been widely consumed, but hunting in the desert margins gradually became
limited to elite sport (Baines and Malek 2000: 193).
  Agricultural production depended on the labour of large numbers of peasant
farmers and remained so until the late second millennium AD. It provided the
bulk of the revenue that supported the Pharaonic Egyptian state and the later
polities of the Nile Valley. In Ancient Egypt, apart from oxen for ploughing,
donkeys to help with transport, and some mechanical assistance for raising
water, it was human sweat that underpinned subsistence, provided by a rural
population that was subjugated by a divine monarchy and a controlling
bureaucracy. Although horses were introduced to Egypt as a result of the
Hyksos invasion and swiftly adopted during the early Eighteenth Dynasty
(Wilkinson 2011: 257), they seem to have been restricted to elite sport and
to military use for pulling chariots. Camels, although thought to have been
present earlier, became important only during the ﬁrst millennium BC (Blench
2000: 316). Chickens appear to have been introduced to Egypt by the second
millennium BC (Dueppen 2011: 145), but the general impression of Pharaonic
agriculture is one of conservatism. It seems that the subsistence economy
of Ancient Egypt consisted of a highly productive arable and pastoral agricul-
ture, whose very strength discouraged innovation. It was not until the ﬁrst

                                                                                    31
African Civilizations

millennium AD, and particularly the early second millennium AD, that a range
of new crops was introduced that broadened Egyptian agricultural practices
(van der Veen 2011: 231).


Technology
Both documentary and archaeological evidence indicate an extraordinary
diversity of technical skill in the Pharaonic state (Lucas and Harris 1962; Shaw
2012). Extractive industries were amongst the most important, including
quarrying for building stone, some of it very hard (Lehner 1997: 206–7),
and mining for gold, copper, and semi-precious stones. Boats on the Nile
and sledges on land were used to transport quarried stone (Lehner 1997:
202–5), often in large and heavy pieces, to building sites, where the quality
of masonry and construction was generally high. In addition, stone was much
used for sculptures, particularly of pharaohs, gods, and historic events, and
ﬁne work was produced, often on a massive scale. Inscription-cutters demon-
strated their ability on many of the buildings, monuments, and sculptures.
Mud bricks were made and used, especially in less important buildings. There
was a very wide range of manufacturing (Stead 1986: 36–45; Baines and
Malek 2000: 194), including metals, wood, pottery, textiles, boat-building,
salt, jewellery, paint and varnish, papyrus and ink, glass (mainly during the
New Kingdom), and many other materials. Surveying, engineering, and archi-
tectural skills were highly developed, as were the mathematical and astronom-
ical knowledge that underpinned them (Lehner 1997: 212–14). Medical
knowledge was present (Majno 1975: 69–140) and an ability to write facili-
tated both intellectual and practical endeavours, although the extent of literacy
amongst society as a whole is uncertain (Baines 1983: 584). In addition,
the technology of warfare was given considerable attention; in the second
millennium BC, for instance, the Egyptian use of the horse-drawn chariot in
battle was highly effective, as were bows and arrows for many centuries
(Baines and Malek 2000: 202–3). Some domestic industries were organized
on a semi-industrialized scale (Baines and Malek 2000: 195), such as bread
and beer making, butchering, wine making, the production of honey, and the
manufacture of cosmetics.
  The range of technology in Egypt seems to have increased from the ﬁrst
millennium BC onwards, including a greater use of iron in a metallurgy
previously based on copper and later on bronze. Nevertheless, the diversity
of technology that existed during the main periods of the Pharaonic state is
most impressive. Clearly, functional specialization had attained a remarkable
level, well able to support a complex society of both primary producers and
urbanites that was normally controlled by a powerful, centralized, autocratic,

32
                                          Origins: social change on the lower Nile




Fig. 2.9 Two of the Giza pyramids: Menkaure’s in the foreground, Khafre’s in the distance.
Fourth Dynasty (c. 2520–2472 BC). Photograph by author, 1984.

and bounded state. What is most remarkable, however, is that this apparent
technological sophistication actually depended on simple technology. Indus-
tries seem to have had relatively little mechanical assistance; for example,
during earlier periods even wheeled vehicles were unknown. Instead, technol-
ogy relied heavily on manual skill and sweated labourers whose willingness
must at times have been doubtful. It is also apparent that an intellectual
capacity for problem solving enabled many tasks to be successfully accom-
plished that might otherwise have been impossible. The Giza pyramids are still
impressive even today (Fig. 2.9), although they were the product of what, in
modern terms, was a limited technology. They are notable examples of
achievement by sheer human endeavour. Like the subsistence economy of
Pharaonic Egypt, however, so successful was its technology that conservatism
became deeply ingrained (but see Shaw 2012), and it is arguable that Ancient
Egypt ultimately failed to keep pace with the changing world around it.


Social system
Pharaonic Egypt was an autocratic society in which the ultimate source of
power was a ruler with both sacred and secular authority (Wilkinson 2011).
Supporting that authority was a large priesthood, a literate bureaucracy, and
an eventually professional army, all three of which gained increasing inﬂuence

                                                                                       33
African Civilizations

within the state as time went on. During the three millennia that the Ancient
Egyptian state existed, there were periods of political weakness and even of
disintegration, but there were also periods when the central government was
strong and when the state extended its control into adjacent territories in
Nubia and the Levant. The Egyptian population was stratiﬁed into a hierarchy
headed by the ruler and his family, with an elite consisting of priests, govern-
ment ofﬁcials, and army ofﬁcers. Below them were craftsmen practising a wide
range of skills, merchants who contributed importantly to the economy, and
soldiers who later were professionals. At the bottom of society was a very large
peasant class, mostly of subsistence farmers who supplied the state with food,
in the form of taxes, and provided corvée labour on government mining,
quarrying, and construction projects (Meskell 2002: 13). Government could
demand such labour in lieu of taxes, because in theory all land belonged not to
the farmers but to the pharaoh, although in practice much of it was actually
the property of temples or of members of the elite. In addition, there were
slaves, seemingly captives from foreign wars. Wilkinson (2011: 364) has
painted a grim picture of life for the bulk of the Egyptian population, with a
lifespan of about thirty-ﬁve years (Meskell 2002: 13 gives thirty-six years),
afﬂicted by diseases, and kept ‘in a state of permanent penury’ by an oppres-
sive government and upper class who expended enormous resources on
making sure that they themselves lived and died luxuriously. It is hardly
surprising that desperate peasants, determined to have a share of the country’s
undoubted wealth, robbed many royal and elite tombs during the course of the
state’s existence.
   During the eighteenth century AD, Jean-Jacques Rousseau wrote about what
he called ‘the social contract’, an unwritten agreement between government
and the governed that beneﬁtted both (Rousseau 1966). In Pharaonic Egypt,
this contract depended on the people’s fundamental beliefs in a range of gods
with whom the pharaoh could commune on behalf of the country as a whole.
This, it was believed, would ensure that the Nile ﬂooded at the right time and
to the right level and that there was peace and stability within the country. In
return, particularly the lower classes laboured to do the pharaoh’s will.
Through the long course of Ancient Egyptian history, this situation varied
considerably, but it is apparent that slowly the contract failed. Droughts,
famines, succession problems, instances of weak leadership, political inﬁght-
ing, and external attack all contributed to this failure, as did the poor treat-
ment of many ordinary Egyptians by the state. Usually overtaxed and often
underfed, any resistance by the lower classes to the state was likely to be met
with violence: beatings, imprisonment, even death were the tools of a repres-
sive system. As Maisels (2010: 173) has written: ‘State formation in Egypt was
clearly a product of violence’, and violence was often a major element in

34
                                       Origins: social change on the lower Nile

ensuring the state’s continuity. The Ancient Egyptian passion for written
records has provided ample evidence that for the majority this was not the
golden age that some have subsequently thought it. Yet those same records
provide exceptions: although primogeniture within the royal family theoretic-
ally determined Pharaonic succession, nevertheless some pharaohs had humble
origins and achieved power partly by personal ability; there were even
instances when women governed in their own right and others where they
were highly inﬂuential within the state.
   Overall, it is astonishing that the Pharaonic state survived so long and was so
frequently able to remake itself after periods of failure. It was based on a
society characterized by extreme inequality; particularly during its later
periods it seems that its frequently corrupt and violent government neither
knew nor cared about the plight of many of its people. There must always be a
question of whether such a society can endure, but in the case of Ancient Egypt
it managed to do so for a very long time.


Population pressures
For Pharaonic Egypt, Kemp (1991: 10) stated that by the time of the late
New Kingdom the total population ‘had probably not exceeded 4 to 5
million’. In Roman Egypt, for which documentation is much better, Peacock
(2000: 444) estimated a total of 4.75 million, of which 1.75 million lived in
towns. These ﬁgures are modest by modern standards, but living conditions
were very different from those of the modern world. Given the limited
cultivatable land in the Nile Valley, although augmented by that in the
Nile Delta, and given a limited agricultural technology, it is possible that
Ancient Egypt did near its maximum carrying capacity in years of low
Nile levels when famine threatened. Nevertheless, it is apparent that com-
pared with neighbouring regions in most years it offered both a bountiful
environment and a strong economy that attracted migrants. The Asiatic
Hyksos, the so-called Sea Peoples, Libyans, Persians, Greeks, Romans, and
Arabs were amongst these. Eventually, migrant inﬂow led to both political
change and ethnic change and very likely caused population pressure. Indeed,
at a much earlier date, the origins of the Pharaonic state might be seen
as partly the consequence of an increasingly crowded upper Nile Valley, as
climatic deterioration drove in people from the fringing deserts (Hassan
2002: 323). Lehner (1997: 7) gives an estimated population for Egypt when
the Giza pyramids were built, in the third millennium BC, of 1.6 million,
compared with 58 million in AD 1995. He is of the opinion that Khufu’s
pyramid could have been built by teams of 25,000 men, each team working
three-month stints for twenty years (1997: 224). That such workforces

                                                                               35
African Civilizations

could have existed is indicative of a sizeable population. Another indication
that this was probably the case for much of Ancient Egypt’s history is the
treatment of those who transgressed: this was a totalitarian state very ready
to use violence on its population, even death when thought appropriate.
Life, it appears, was cheap, suggesting that the population was thought
sufﬁciently large to accommodate such measures of control. Furthermore,
an indication that life was expendable is the incidence of human sacriﬁce
at an early date, particularly in the late fourth to early third millennium
BC (Bard 2000: 71). Overall, it seems likely that population pressure was a
characteristic of Ancient Egypt, given its limited area, but that relatively
high productivity counterbalanced this in years when the Nile inundation
was normal.


Ideology
Ancient Egyptian ideology centred on the unifying role of an absolute ruler,
the pharaoh, as opposed to the chaos that could result from political and social
division. It was the divine ruler’s obligation to see that the Egyptian concept of
right order prevailed. So strongly held were these ideas that even during
periods of internal dissension or external threat, as Wilkinson (2011: 405)
has stated, ‘the sheer weight and antiquity of Pharaonic beliefs had a tendency
to win through in the end’. These beliefs involved numerous gods and god-
desses with a variety of functions, some of the deities local, some venerated
throughout the country. Ra, Amun, Horus, Osiris, and Isis were amongst
the more important, but there was great complexity in religious ideas, which
also changed as time went on (Baines and Malek 2000: 212–14). Large
numbers of temples and their priests ensured that appropriate religious cere-
monies were observed, in the process gradually becoming a powerful element
in state infrastructure. Thus religious ideology played a major role in the
functioning of the Pharaonic state, as is evident from the virtual revolution
that occurred when Amenhotep IV, Akhenaten, attempted to change the state
religion during the later fourteenth century BC (Wilkinson 2011: 279–300).
The power of tradition was such that, after his death, his successors speedily
reverted to previous practices. Ancient Egyptian ideology was more than
religion, however; there was also a fundamental conviction that Egypt was
the world, that it was superior, different from the inferior places and peoples
who lay beyond the deserts to east and west, beyond the Nile cataracts to the
south, and beyond the sea to the north. As Egypt came to play a greater
commercial and political role in the region around it, this idea inevitably
weakened. Although lip service continued to be paid to long-held traditions,
the desecration and plundering of the tombs of their predecessors by some

36
                                      Origins: social change on the lower Nile

later rulers (Wilkinson 2011: 395–7) was indicative of a cynicism that would
eventually contribute to the dissolution of the Pharaonic state. That state had
depended on a powerful ideological base; when its constituent beliefs failed, so
did the state.


External trade
Pharaonic Egypt’s location in a major alluvial valley, watered by the annual
inundation of the Nile, provided food and some resources but lacked other
raw materials, particularly minerals. However, as already discussed (p. 19),
Egypt’s geographical position enabled it to obtain these by trade or intimi-
dation from Nubia to its south and from the eastern Mediterranean and
South-West Asia to its north. Its commercial activities also extended into
the surrounding deserts and, by transporting dismantled boats across the
desert (Ward 2006), also along the Red Sea perhaps as far as the region of
modern Eritrea. The Nile provided access deep into the African interior,
with both waterborne transportation and overland routes that cut across
some of the bends in the river. Gold, ivory, ebony, animals and animal
skins, incense, and other African exotica were the main attractions to the
Egyptians. Sinai gave land access to the Levant, and Egyptian shipping
enabled heavy commodities to be transported relatively easily by sea.
Wood, copper, possibly tin, silver, precious stones, wine, and oil were
obtained, in exchange for gold, linen, grain, and, particularly in later
periods, even papyrus (Baines and Malek 2000: 20). Trade connections also
introduced to Egypt new elements of material culture, especially during the
Second Intermediate Period, such as bronze, new crops, the horse and
chariot, composite bows, and new musical instruments. Although Ancient
Egypt could provide many essentials, nevertheless trade with surrounding
regions was vital to its economy; the increasing importance to Egypt of
access to the resources of those regions partly explains its imperial ambi-
tions during the New Kingdom. Pharaonic Egypt’s decline as an inter-
national power during later periods occurred at the same time as a decline
in its international trade.
   Ancient Egypt was a nonmonetary economy; coinage was adopted only in
the late ﬁfth century BC, when the Athenian currency was introduced as
the monetary standard (Wilkinson 2011: 452–3). Therefore, for most of
its earlier history, commercial transactions in Egypt used barter but, as
Kemp (1991: 248, 250) explains, this was not as crude as it might seem.
It depended on a system in which everything ‘had a value, expressed in
various units which coincided with quantities of certain commodities’. This
might appear an inefﬁcient method of exchange, but it was clearly adequate

                                                                             37
African Civilizations

because it survived for a long time. However, by Ptolemaic, Roman, and
Islamic times a more complex economic system had developed, which sup-
ported a more extensive external trade.
  Light has been shed on this by archaeological investigations at the Ptolem-
aic and Roman port of Berenike (Fig. 2.10), of the third century BC to ﬁfth
century AD, on the Egyptian Red Sea coast (Cappers 2006; Sidebotham and




Fig. 2.10 Plan of the main part of the Graeco-Roman city of Berenike, a port on the
Egyptian Red Sea coast. Darker features are building remains, lighter rectangles are
excavation cuttings. Contours are at 0.5-metre intervals. After Cappers 2006: 52, ﬁg. 4.3.
Reproduced with permission of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology, University of
California, Los Angeles.


38
                                      Origins: social change on the lower Nile

Wendrich 2007). Archaeological evidence from the Roman (ﬁrst to third
centuries AD) and Islamic (eleventh to ﬁfteenth centuries AD) ports at Quseir
al-Qadim on the same coast is also highly informative (van der Veen 2011).
Situated in a coastal desert, to which food had to be transported from the
Nile Valley and water from possibly as far, the extremely dry conditions at
these sites have preserved a wide range of archaeological materials, including
botanical remains. From Quseir al-Qadim the latter included ninety-ﬁve
plants important to the economy, providing direct evidence of long-distance
seaborne commerce and of the introduction of South and South-East Asian
crops into Egypt and neighbouring areas. Like Berenike, Quseir al-Qadim
was a transit hub, situated at the Red Sea end of the shortest land route to the
River Nile, down which imports were passed to Alexandria and on to the
Mediterranean world and Western Europe. During the Roman period, black
pepper from India was the most important of the traded commodities, and
contemporary authors conﬁrm its frequent use in Rome. It continued to be
important in Islamic times, but the evidence from Quseir al-Qadim shows
that many other spices were also handled by then, including ginger, turmeric,
cardamom, fagara (a medicinal fruit from China or the Indian subcontinent),
and betel nut. In addition, the evidence for introduced crops amongst the
remains from Islamic Quseir al-Qadim include citron, rice, cotton, lime,
banana, aubergine, sugar cane, and taro. Huge potential proﬁts from the
Indian Ocean trade were a major reason for the existence of these ports,
although the risks involved were substantial. In Islamic times there was also
the added incentive of an ability to supply food, sourced from the Nile
Valley, to pilgrims going to or returning from Mecca across the Red Sea.
Other archaeological evidence from Quseir al-Qadim includes Roman ship-
rigging artefacts of wood and fragments of Islamic ship timbers, two of the
former being of teak, which is likely to have come from India. Furthermore,
participation in the Indian Ocean commerce during Islamic times is indicated
by the presence of Indian resist-dye textiles, Chinese celadon, and Thai
ceramics. In addition, details of that commerce during both periods are
available from documentary evidence. As indicated by the botanical evi-
dence, Egypt appears to have developed substantial trading contacts with
both South and South-East Asia by Roman and Islamic times (Fig. 2.11).
Indeed, maritime trade on the Red Sea and beyond was probably already
active at an earlier date. At the end of the seventh century BC, the Saite ruler
Nekau II (of the Twenty-sixth Dynasty) had started to dig a canal between
the Nile and the Red Sea, which the Persian king Darius I completed in 497
BC. Subsequently, it seems to have silted up, but this ﬁrst attempt at a Suez
Canal indicates how important the Red Sea trade must already have been to
Egypt (Wilkinson 2011: 451).

                                                                             39
40




     Fig. 2.11 Main trade routes during the Roman period in the Indian Ocean and related regions. This map indicates the extent to which Northeast and
     East Africa were in contact with other parts of the world. It is an important reminder that even the Africa of two millennia ago should not be
     considered in isolation. From Cappers 2006: 12, ﬁg. 1.1. Reproduced with permission of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology, University of
     California, Los Angeles.
                                        Origins: social change on the lower Nile

Conclusion
The archaeology of the Egyptian Nile Valley has frequently been studied
divorced from the rest of Africa (Exell 2011). Similarly, the archaeology of
the rest of Africa has usually been perceived as isolated from that of the lower
Nile. This situation can impede an understanding of state formation and the
emergence of urbanism in Africa as a whole. An opportunity is lost, not only to
investigate the earliest example of these processes in Africa, but also to trace
their vicissitudes over the course of many centuries. Pharaonic Egypt and
subsequent polities are richly documented by both historical and archaeo-
logical sources. They show how, in the long term, states and cities can emerge,
ﬂourish, dwindle, collapse, and form again, in a sequence that can recur as
political, economic, and social conditions change and as cultures and ideas
change. These complicated processes are easier to trace in the Egyptian past
than in that of much of the rest of Africa, where the available evidence is often
limited and restricted to shorter periods. To write about ‘the rise and fall of
Ancient Egypt’ (Wilkinson 2011) is surely to oversimplify a situation in which
such complex societies do not actually ‘fall’ but change into something differ-
ent as the world around them changes. In the case of Ancient Egypt, it is
apparent that religious beliefs and cultural practices were so strongly held that
they limited the capacity for change until the country came, in turn, under
Persian, Ptolemaic, Roman, and Arab control. It is a ﬁtting reminder that
culture is dynamic, not static, and that people who actively try to ‘preserve’
their culture are in the end imperilling their future, a danger that still exists in
the modern world.
   The succession of polities in the lower Nile Valley also permits an analysis of
the circumstances in which they developed, disintegrated, and formed again.
The major factor in the case of Egypt seems to have been its strong agricultural
base, capable of producing surplus food not only for local consumption but
also for export to surrounding, less fortunate lands. A second factor was the
extraordinarily versatile technology that is so richly documented in the arch-
aeological evidence. Although limited by its dependence on manual energy and
skill, with little mechanical input, its achievements are amongst the most
impressive examples of functional specialization from the premodern age. To
this should be added the third factor, a social system that provided an enduring
element within the state and its settlements. Ancient Egypt was a dictatorship,
a totalitarian state based on a stratiﬁed society in which the individual did
what he or she was told, at the risk of physical punishment or even death.
It seems likely that this situation was partly the product of the fourth factor,
population pressure particularly during periods of low Nile level. Labour and
life were cheap; the former could be expended extravagantly on public works


                                                                                 41
African Civilizations

of monumental scale, and loss of the latter was part of the price of political and
social stability and order. Of fundamental importance for the continued
survival of such an autocratic society was the ﬁfth factor: a powerful state
religion. In a situation where the ruler communed with the gods, or was even
perceived as one of them, to disobey was not only treason, it was also sacrilege.
Religious belief was only one element, however, although probably the most
important, in an ideology that insisted that everything was for the best as it
was and that it was vital that it continue. Literacy and education appear to
have been socially limited, and for the mass of the population it was vital
to believe that the sun would rise tomorrow and that the river would ﬂood at
the right season and to a desirable level. Lastly, the sixth factor is that of
external trade: it is clear that this was of great importance to Ancient Egypt.
It provided raw materials not available in Egypt itself and, along with highly
productive agriculture, formed a major part of the Egyptian economy.
   This analysis of the circumstances of states and cities in the lower Nile Valley
provides a template for understanding comparable phenomena in other parts
of Africa. It also serves as a reminder that Africa was never isolated in the past
and should not be studied as if it was. Egypt was a part of Africa, as it still is,
and was positioned ‘at the bridge between Africa and Asia, the tropics and
the temperate zone’ (Baines and Malek 2000: 20). It is vital to understand the
implications of this if one is to understand Ancient Egypt. Equally, it is vital
to understand Ancient Egypt if one is to understand Ancient Africa.




42
