Chapter 5
Isolation: the Ethiopian and Eritrean
Highlands
For many observers it has been the isolation of this region, particularly that
of the central highlands of Ethiopia and Eritrea, that has made the greatest
impression. The core of the region is a great block of mountains, everywhere
more than 1,000 metres in height, that reaches a general level of 2,300 metres
and in places exceeds 4,200 metres above sea level. One could not imagine
a less likely setting for state emergence and urbanization. Nevertheless, in
the modern countries of Ethiopia and Eritrea there is evidence for such
developments during the ﬁrst few centuries AD, and indications of their origins
during the ﬁrst millennium BC (D.W. Phillipson 2009a; 2009c; 2012). Not
only are these dates early for the attainment of social complexity in tropical
Africa, but these achievements were highly sophisticated. Almost 2,000 years
ago, the state of Aksum boasted urban centres; its own form of writing;
coinage in gold, silver, and bronze; masonry buildings of a distinctive archi-
tectural style; unique monuments that indicate quarrying and engineering
skills; extensive trading contacts both within and outside Africa; and a signiﬁ-
cant role in international politics. Indeed, Aksum seems to have been one of
the ﬁrst states to adopt Christianity (D.W. Phillipson 1998: 145 note 1).
However, the antecedents of Aksumite culture can be discerned as early as
the eighth century BC in the period formerly known as the Pre-Aksumite.
Large settlements existed at Yeha, in Ethiopia, and at Matara and Sembel, in
Eritrea, the last one of these belonging to the possibly earlier Ona Culture
(Schmidt and Curtis 2001; Schmidt et al. 2008; Curtis 2009; Fattovich 2009;
Schmidt 2009). In some places inscriptions appeared and there was sophisti-
cated stone masonry, sculpture, and metallurgy, although stone artefacts were
also still used. Furthermore, there were contacts with South Arabia and to a
lesser extent with the Nile Valley. Far from being isolated, Ethiopia and Eritrea
appear to have formed, at times, an important zone for cultural integration.
For Edward Ullendorff (1960: 23) the region was ‘a bridge between Africa
and Asia’.
  After the rise of Islam in the seventh century AD, Ethiopia did become
increasingly isolated, leading the eighteenth-century historian Gibbon to make
his famous exaggerated remark that: ‘Encompassed on all sides by the enemies
of their religion, the Aethiopians slept near a thousand years, forgetful of
the world by whom they were forgotten’ (Gibbon 1952: Vol. 2, 159–60).
However, the Ethiopians’ successful survival through those centuries can

                                                                            111
African Civilizations

hardly be likened to sleep; for some form of Ethiopian state did survive down
to modern times, albeit one of a mostly nonurban type. The Christian Church
of Ethiopia also survived, leaving as a legacy of those centuries some of the
most remarkable ecclesiastical architecture in the world. Clearly, apparent
isolation has had beneﬁts.


Geographical location and environmental factors
The northern end of the East African Rift Valley divides the mountains of
Ethiopia and Eritrea into two parts (Fig. 5.1). The highlands to the north
and west of this valley form the heartland of old Ethiopia, formerly called
Abyssinia. This huge area of mountains is roughly triangular; its northern end
lies close to the western shore of the Red Sea and is now part of Eritrea.
Compared with the dry, hot plains on both the African and the South Arabian
side of the Red Sea, the Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands offer relatively
attractive environments. As a result, cultural contact and even movement of
people might be expected from an early date. It was apparently from such
interaction that social complexity ﬁrst developed in the northern Ethiopian
and Eritrean Highlands.
   Proximity to the Red Sea had other consequences. For the ancient world, as
for the modern world, the Red Sea comprised a major shipping route, which
connected the Mediterranean with the trade of the Indian Ocean. Ethiopia and
Eritrea, able to tap the resources of the African interior, had direct access to
this major route, and this was an important contributory element in the rise of
the Aksumite state.
   The highlands consist of basalts and other lavas overlying sandstones and
limestones. Most of the region is tilted to the west and therefore drains into the
Nile, particularly into the upper Blue Nile, which issues from Lake Tana. The
drainage pattern has cut deeply into the landscape, carving spectacular gorges,
often hundreds of metres deep, which break up the surface of the high plateau.
Parts of the original high plateau have been so eroded that very little level
country remains, except in the form of ﬂat-topped ambas, isolated hills with
precipitous sides (Buxton 1970: 18–20).
   The most important environmental factor in the Ethiopian and Eritrean
Highlands is altitude. Within about 250 kilometres of each other lie the hot
dusty salt ﬂats of the Danakil Desert and the cool heights of the Semien
Mountains, which sometimes experience heavy snow falls (Buxton 1970:
18). Altitude is thus a major determinant of both climate and vegetation.
Ethiopians recognize three main climatic zones: dega, which is land above
2,400 metres with an average temperature of 16C; woina dega, which is land
between 1,800 and 2,400 metres with an average temperature of 22C; and

112
                                            The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands




Fig. 5.1 Principal archaeological sites and places in the Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands
mentioned in the text. 1, Sembel; 2, Adulis; 3, Kohaito; 4, Matara; 5, Aksum; 6, Yeha;
7, Debra Damo; 8, Haoulti Melazo; 9, Maqaber Ga‘ewa; 10, Addi Galamo; 11, Quiha;
12, Gondar; 13, Gouzara; 14, Lalibela Cave; 15, Lalibela. Based on Ullendorf 1960. Drawn
by Joe LeMonnier.


                                                                                     113
African Civilizations

kwolla, which is land below 1,800 metres with average temperatures of 26C
and higher. However, although temperatures vary greatly with altitude, there
is little seasonal variation. The major factor determining seasonality is rainfall.
The highlands occasion a somewhat greater rainfall than is usual at this
latitude in Africa, but because the rain is brought by winds from the south-
west, rainfall is heaviest and the wet season longest in the south-western
highlands; the far north has less rain and a shorter wet season. The average
annual rainfall in the central highlands is about 1,000 millimetres. The nearby
plains of the Red Sea coast, now mostly in Eritrea, have a comparatively slight
rainfall, but this occurs in January and February when the highlands are dry,
and the coastal plains are at their hottest and driest at the time when the
heaviest rain is falling in the highlands. Pastoralists and agriculturalists can
exploit this seasonal and altitudinal variation in rainfall (Ullendorff 1960:
26–8; Buxton 1970: 20–1; Phillipson 1998: 11–15).
   Given the height and open character of much of the Ethiopian Highlands,
exposure to wind is another environmental factor of signiﬁcance. Much of the
high plateau is sufﬁciently windswept for this to affect its utilization. Thus
Buxton (1970: 60) recorded that the population of the Debra Berhan area in
Shoa tended to cluster in and around the gorges, rather than on the open
plateau itself.
   The wide range of altitude and climate is responsible for a great variety of
vegetation. Within the boundaries of the modern states of Ethiopia and Eritrea
this extends from desert scrub to rainforest, but even within the highlands
there was originally an impressive range. Temperate forests of Podocarpus sp.
occurred below 2,200 metres and of Juniperus sp. above that level, but both
have been extensively destroyed by human activity, leaving most of the high
plateau bleak and empty. Nevertheless, much of the vegetation cover of the
high plateau now consists of short grass, which provides excellent grazing.
   The considerable altitudinal range of the Ethiopian Highlands has thus given
rise to great environmental diversity. Although soil erosion has been a prob-
lem, some 27 percent of Ethiopian and Eritrean soils have been classiﬁed as
good agricultural soils and a further 13 percent as fairly good (Ethiopian
Mapping Authority 1988: 8). Such a combination – a variety of environments
and the availability of fertile soils – has enabled agriculture to provide the most
important resources of the region. In many places it is possible to obtain two or
three crops in the same year, and in some places it is possible to sow and
harvest at any time. This is achieved by growing a great range of crops. Among
cereals, for instance, teff, wheat, barley, sorghum, and ﬁnger millet can all be
grown, although it is teff that is most commonly grown in areas of middle and
higher altitude. Ethiopia also produces a remarkable selection of vegetables
and many types of fruit. Other agricultural products of importance comprise

114
                                       The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

maize and ensete (in the high rainfall areas of the south-west), coffee, cotton,
chat (a narcotic), nug (a source of oil), various medicinal plants, and sugar-
cane. Agriculture also includes large numbers of livestock, particularly cattle
(for milk and meat), hair sheep (rather than wool sheep), and goats. Working
animals have included oxen for pulling ploughs – a use unique in tropical
Africa – horses, asses, and mules, the last important for carrying loads in the
broken landscape. Additional useful animals include chickens, dogs, and bees;
civet cats also are kept and the civet collected for use in perfume (Ullendorff
1960: 28–30; Pankhurst 1961: 200–19; Finneran 2007: 67–77).
   The native fauna of the Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands provided other
resources. Not only could ﬁshing and hunting supplement diet, but valuable
trade goods could be obtained from many wild animals, such as elephants,
rhinoceros, crocodiles, lions, leopards, giraffes, and zebras. Resources of
signiﬁcance also included minerals, of which gold and iron ore seem to have
been the most important, but copper, silver, lead, and tin could be found
(Pankhurst 1961: 224–9; Phillipson 2000: vol. 2, 470, 473). In addition the
region produced good building stone; timber became scarce only in more
recent centuries. Finally, human life, as so often in tropical Africa, provided
an important resource in the form of slaves. It has been estimated that between
1800 and 1850 about 1,250,000 slaves were exported. Numbers for earlier
periods are unknown, but the trade could still have been of signiﬁcance
(Alexander 2001). Overall, as with Nubia, the nonagricultural resources of
Ethiopia consisted in the main of commodities sought after in the ancient
Mediterranean world.
   The environment of the Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands was clearly an
attractive one for human settlement. Nevertheless, constraints did exist. The
ﬁrst is that extensive areas of the highlands were too rocky, too exposed, or
too high to have much agricultural value. In addition, much of the landscape
was so rough and so obstructed by gorges and other natural features that
communication remained difﬁcult until modern times. A second constraint
is that historical sources show that Ethiopia was not as healthy as it seems.
Thus Pankhurst (1961: 238–47) showed that the highlands have suffered
from occasional epidemics of great severity. Some of these cannot now be
identiﬁed, but it is apparent that smallpox, cholera, inﬂuenza, and bubonic
plague were amongst them. Dysentery, leprosy, eye diseases, guinea worm,
and elephantiasis are also mentioned amongst diseases found in Ethiopia; in
the lowlands malaria and other fevers were a serious problem. In the highlands
themselves, tapeworm was prevalent, largely because of the practice of eating
raw meat, but this afﬂiction has been customarily treated with indifference
because of the existence of the kosso tree, whose ﬂowers produce a drug that is
highly effective in expelling these intestinal worms. Perhaps the most serious

                                                                           115
African Civilizations

constraint in the highlands, however, has been the periodic recurrence of
famine, recorded as early as the ninth century and still a major concern in
modern times (Pankhurst 1961: 230–7). Famines could result from crop
failure, brought on by inadequate or even excessive rainfall, or by unusually
low temperatures. They could also result from crop destruction caused by
swarms of mice, troops of monkeys, or (most serious of all) massive invasions
of locusts. Serious as some of these constraints might appear, however, the
greater number were episodic, so that overall they seem to have had little
inhibiting effect on the growth of social complexity in the Ethiopian and
Eritrean Highlands.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
Oral traditional, historical, and archaeological sources all throw light
on the development of urbanization and state emergence in this region
(D.W. Phillipson 2009a: 1–2). Least valuable of them is oral tradition, which
attempts to explain the past with fantastic stories, and the Aksumite period is
somewhat beyond its range. Nevertheless, the most famous of Ethiopian oral
traditions, that concerning the visit of the Queen of Sheba to Solomon and
the consequent birth of the founder of the Ethiopian royal house (Buxton
1970: 34), does provide some support for the Semitic contribution to Ethiopia
indicated by other sources (Munro-Hay 1991: 9–16).
  Historical sources are more important and are of four types. First are
references to Ethiopia by ancient foreign writers (Finneran 2007: 16–24).
For example, Pliny the Younger (about AD 77) mentioned Adulis (Munro-
Hay 1991: 17), and the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, also of the ﬁrst century
AD, mentions Adulis, Koloè (possibly Kohaito or Matara), and Aksum
(Kobishchanov 1979: 41; Anfray 1981: 363). Classical sources indicate a
powerful Aksumite kingdom that was able to conquer parts of South Arabia
in the sixth century AD and, before that, was already partly urbanized and
exporting ivory, rhinoceros horn, tortoiseshell, and obsidian through Adulis
(Anfray 1981: 363).
  The second type of historical sources consists of inscriptions on stone found
in Aksumite or earlier contexts (Phillipson 2009c: 265–8) and inscriptions and
representations on Aksumite coins. Unlike Meroitic inscriptions, those from
Aksumite and earlier times can be read, being written in Ge’ez (the old
Ethiopian language), in Sabaean (South Arabian), or sometimes in Greek.
The inscribed stones provide information about military exploits, such as King
Ezana’s apparent expedition to Meroë in the fourth century AD and

116
                                         The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

King Kaleb’s campaigns in South Arabia in the sixth century AD (Munro-Hay
1991: 228, 230). In addition they tell us the names and titles of some of the
rulers of Aksum, as do the coins that might record as many as twenty-four
different Aksumite kings (Pankhurst 1961: 401). The coins are also informa-
tive in other ways, recording, for instance, the fourth-century acceptance
of Christianity, by replacing the pagan crescent and disc with the cross
(see Fig. 5.9).
   Few of these inscriptions are later than the fourth century, and probably
none is later than the ninth (Buxton 1970: 119). The Aksumite kingdom
disappeared sometime between the seventh and the tenth century AD
(Munro-Hay 1991: 93–4; Negussie 1994: 27–9). Its capital moved to an
unidentiﬁed location in eastern Tigray (D.W. Phillipson 2009a: 9), and there
followed some centuries for which there is little historical source material. It is
not until the end of the ﬁfteenth century that there is again a substantial body
of external sources, and these constitute the third type of historical data
(Munro-Hay 1991:19–25; Finneran 2007: 24–6). These writings, by European
visitors, throw a great deal of light on Ethiopian society from the sixteenth
century onwards. Amongst these accounts, those by the Portuguese Francisco
Alvares, relating to 1520–6, and by the Scotsman James Bruce, relating to
1768–73, stand out as remarkable (Pankhurst 1961: 100).
   The fourth type of historical sources consists of writings by Ethiopians
themselves. The oldest surviving manuscripts date from the thirteenth century,
but the greater part of Ethiopian writing was on religious subjects and pro-
vides little information on secular matters. However, royal chronicles were
also written from the fourteenth century onwards, and these form the principal
source for later Ethiopian history (Buxton 1970: 129; Taddesse 1972; Marcus
2002).


Archaeological evidence
The investigation and publication of the abundant archaeological evidence
has sometimes been deﬁcient. Excavation has concentrated on sites with
Aksumite masonry structures, and publication has tended to be descriptive
and preliminary, rather than concerned with analysis and synthesis. Michels,
in Kobishchanov’s book (1979: 1–34), emphasized the importance of the
pioneering work of the German Aksum expedition of 1906 and of research
by the Ethiopian Institute of Archaeology from the 1950s to the early 1970s.
Subsequently, however, political events in Ethiopia prevented further archaeo-
logical ﬁeldwork until the beginning of the 1990s. The resumption of such
work, particularly by David Phillipson, added substantially to knowledge of
ancient Aksum (D.W. Phillipson 1994; 2000; 2012). At about the same time,

                                                                              117
African Civilizations

several publications appeared which made the results of earlier research more
accessible (Munro-Hay 1989; 1991; Anfray 1990; Phillipson 1997; 1998).
   Relevant Ethiopian archaeological evidence was formerly divided into three
main periods: Pre-Aksumite, Aksumite, and Medieval–Modern Ethiopian.
Approximately, these periods represented the eighth century BC to the ﬁrst
century AD, the ﬁrst century AD to the seventh to tenth centuries AD, and the
seventh to tenth centuries AD to the present. It is the ﬁrst two of these that
are of greatest importance for this chapter, and it is these periods that have
attracted most archaeological attention. Francis Anfray, who was responsible
for much of the excavation in Ethiopia during the 1960s and early 1970s,
divided the Pre-Aksumite into a South Arabian period, lasting from the ﬁfth to
the fourth century BC, and an Intermediate period, lasting from the third
century BC to the ﬁrst century AD. He saw the Aksumite period as continuing
until the ninth century AD; Michels also argued for a long chronology (Anfray
1968: 355–8; Michels 2005). Fattovich (1990: 14–15) suggested a start for the
Pre-Aksumite possibly as early as the tenth century BC. He thought that
its origins lay in developments in social complexity beginning in the third
millennium BC with the Gash Group in the Eritrean-Sudanese lowlands,
developments that shifted to the Eritrean-Ethiopian Highlands early in the
ﬁrst millennium BC (Fattovich 2010). In contrast, Munro-Hay (1991), con-
sidering only the Aksumite period and drawing on his studies of Aksumite
coinage, preferred a short chronology. This consisted of six phases commen-
cing in the ﬁrst century AD and terminating in the early seventh century, with
the later seventh to the twelfth centuries placed in a Post-Aksumite period.
Furthermore, a comparison of the stratigraphic evidence from Aksum and
Matara led Negussie (1994) to conclude that (for the Aksumite period) a long
chronology was indicated for Aksum itself but only a short one for Matara,
possibly reﬂecting the greater importance of eastern Tigray, the location of
the latter site, towards the end of the ﬁrst millennium AD (D.W. Phillipson
2009a: 9). Subsequently, D.W. Phillipson (2009c) and Fattovich (2009)
suggested the abandonment of the term ‘Pre-Aksumite’ and its subdivisions.
A more realistic timetable might consist of merely recognizing contrasting
periods in the ﬁrst millennium BC, the ﬁrst millennium AD, and the second
millennium AD. Most recently Bard et al. (2014) have identiﬁed ﬁve phases of
development at Aksum, based on their Bieta Giyorgis excavations, from the
fourth century BC to possibly the ninth century AD. Archaeological research
in Eritrea (Schmidt and Curtis 2001; Schmidt 2009; Curtis 2009; Schmidt
et al. 2008) and in South Arabia (Finneran 2007: 111–13) now allows this
evidence to be seen in a regional and chronological context.
   The best-known Ethiopian site of the ﬁrst millennium BC is Yeha (Buxton
1970: 36–7; Anfray 1972b; 1990: 26–7; Michels, in Kobishchanov 1979:

118
                                            The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

10–12; de Contenson 1981; Fattovich 1990; 2009; D.W. Phillipson 2012).
Situated in the northern end of the highlands where the Aksumite state was to
develop, this place has the remains of a temple (Fig. 5.2) built of ashlar
sandstone masonry set on a stepped base. Parts of this ruin still stand to a
height of about 9 metres, and it is now thought to date from the seventh or
sixth century BC and to have similarities to contemporary South Arabian
buildings. According to Fattovich (1990: 4), the Yeha temple was originally
at least 13 metres in height and approximately 19 by 15 metres in area; the
size and quality of masonry are very impressive. It is perhaps older than




Fig. 5.2 Inside the temple at Yeha, Ethiopia, dating from the seventh or sixth
century BC. Parts of this ruin are 9 metres in height. Photograph by author, 1996.


                                                                                     119
African Civilizations

the Parthenon in Athens and implies a highly organized society. Yeha has
also produced a number of inscriptions that are written in a South Arabian
language and in a South Arabian script. There is, in addition, a cemetery of
subterranean tombs and the site of a stone building which excavation has
shown was destroyed by ﬁre and subsequently replaced by a new building.
Anfray, who excavated a part of this latter structure, which is known as
Grat-Be’al-Guebri, was of the opinion that it was a palace. Yeha also seems
to have other occupation deposits and may possibly have been an early urban
centre. Iron was already in use, and amongst the bronze objects recovered
from Yeha are thirteen ‘identity marks’, consisting of openwork geometrical or
animal designs which often incorporate alphabetical characters (Anfray 1990:
25–7; Fattovich 2009: 281). These have been regarded as personal seals, and
their impressions have been found on pottery. The larger ones might have been
animal brands (three illustrated in Buxton 1970: 37 are 8 to 11 centimetres
long), possibly for paint branding sheep because bronze would seem unsuit-
able for ﬁre branding. Paint consisting of red ochre and water could have
been used.
   The South Arabian inﬂuence seen at Yeha is also apparent in the two
localities of Haoulti-Melazo, situated in the same general area as Yeha, where
several sites have produced so-called Pre-Aksumite material. This includes
fragments of dressed stone with South Arabian inscriptions, two limestone
statues of seated female ﬁgures, and a sophisticated limestone throne decorated
with low-relief carving. There is symbolism associated with the moon god,
Almouqah, apparently venerated in the northern part of Ethiopia as well as in
South Arabia. The statues are comparable to one of similar date from Addi
Galamo, found with other things including a broken altar showing the crescent
and disc of Almouqah. Similar material is also known from Maqaber Ga‘ewa
(de Contenson 1962; van Beek 1967; Michels, in Kobishchanov 1979: 12–13;
de Contenson 1981; Fattovich 1990; 2009; D.W. Phillipson 2012: 28–9).
   So-called Pre-Aksumite material was recorded from numerous sites,
extending from northern Eritrea into Tigray (Fattovich 1990: 3). Many of
these sites are between Aksum and Yeha, having been identiﬁed during a
surface survey by Michels (2005), and there appears to have been cultural
continuity in north-east Tigray (D’Andrea et al. 2008). The earliest ‘Pre-
Aksumite’ culture was inﬂuenced by South Arabia, but from the beginning
Pre-Aksumite culture showed originality and gradually developed characteris-
tics of its own, while those of South Arabia faded. In particular, the language
and script used for inscriptions grew less like the South Arabian from which it
had originated and more like Ge’ez, the ancestor of the Eritrean and Ethiopian
languages Tigré, Tigrinya, and Amharic. South Arabian inﬂuence seems to
have been from the kingdom of Saba, which appears to have originated as

120
                                         The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

early as the late second millennium BC (Finneran 2007: 113). Inscriptions in
Sabaean have suggested the existence of a state known as D’mt by the mid-ﬁrst
millennium BC, located in Tigray and adjacent parts of Eritrea. This develop-
ment has been associated with modest urban growth at least at Yeha and
Matara. Disintegration is thought to have followed during the last two or three
centuries BC, however, and it is difﬁcult to relate the sociopolitical situation to
that of the subsequent Aksumite period (Fattovich 1990). D.W. Phillipson
(2009c: 266–8) questioned the evidence for the D’mt state, and Fattovich
(2009: 287) had similar doubts.
   Nevertheless, it is probable that Aksumite society did develop from the
cultures of the ﬁrst millennium BC in its region. This earlier archaeological
evidence could represent the origins of urbanization and state formation,
stimulated in part by South Arabian inﬂuences, but Aksumite evidence indi-
cates a society in which these processes had reached a mature stage. Some
suggestion of continuity between the two has been provided by excavations on
Bieta Giyorgis, a hill 1 kilometre to the north-west of Aksum. These have
revealed a sequence covering the mid- and late ﬁrst millennium BC, overlain by
early Aksumite deposits (Bard et al. 1997). Subsequently, they have also
provided a revised overall chronology for the Aksum area (Bard et al. 2014).
   The most thoroughly researched of the Aksumite sites is Aksum itself
(D.W. Phillipson 1994; 1997; 1998; 2000; 2003; 2012). It is famous for its
stelae, tall, thin, standing stones of which the largest have been carved to
represent multistoreyed buildings, although many stelae are small and undec-
orated. Similar standing stones are also known at other Aksumite sites, but
none of them with such enormous proportions or such careful ﬁnishing and
decoration as some of those in the main stelae group at Aksum. One of the
larger ones (Stela 3) of that group remained standing and consists of a single
block of granite 21 metres high (plus about 3 metres underground), carved to
represent nine storeys, with a false door at its base (Fig. 5.3). The fallen pieces
of a taller one (Stela 2, about 28 metres long and carved to represent ten
storeys) were taken to Rome in 1937 and erected there, although it was
reerected at Aksum in 2008 following its return to Ethiopia. The largest of
all, however (Stela 1), lies broken on the ground at Aksum and was nearly
33 metres in length, being carved to represent twelve storeys (on counting
storeys, see Buxton and Matthews 1974: 57). D.W. Phillipson (1994: 192)
described this monster stela as ‘a strong candidate for consideration as the
largest single monolith which humans have ever proceeded to erect’. Indeed,
van Beek (1967: 117) suggested that perhaps it fell while being erected, and
archaeological evidence has since supported this interpretation (Phillipson
2000: 161–4, 252–4). More than 140 stelae are known from four main groups
in Aksum, although most are far smaller than those just described. In addition,

                                                                              121
Fig. 5.3 Stelae 3 and 6 at Aksum, Ethiopia. Stela 3, which has continued to stand, is the
third largest of the storeyed stelae and Stela 6 the smallest. Stela 3 after Krencker 1913:
Tafel VI, as reproduced in D.W. Phillipson 1997: ﬁg. 30; Stela 6 after Krencker 1913: Tafel
II as reproduced in Phillipson 1997: ﬁg. 13. Stela 3 is 20.57 metres high, above ground level.
Stela 6 is 15.22 metres long. Reproduced by permission of David Phillipson.
                                         The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

more than 100 stelae (possibly up to 300), both Pre-Aksumite and early
Aksumite in date, are thought to have existed at the Ona Enda Aboi Zague
site on the northern side of Bieta Giyorgis hill (Bard and Fattovich 1993: 17).
   Excavations amongst the main stelae group at Aksum have addressed the
question of their purpose and the problem of their date. Work by Chittick
(Munro-Hay 1989) and Phillipson (2000) revealed extensive, subterranean,
multichambered Aksumite tombs, so it is apparent that the area was a cemet-
ery. The largest stela appears to have been intended to mark two monumental
underground tombs: a stone-built ‘Mausoleum’ to its west, more than
16 metres long and with ten side-chambers, and a possibly similar structure
to its east that has been only partly investigated and that might never
have been completed. As already stated, it seems that this giant stela fell and
broke during the process of erection. Only 2.8 metres (8.5 percent) of its 33-
metre length was intended to be set into the ground, and there is no sign of
base plates such as were ﬁtted to the other large stelae after erection, so it is
possible that the Mausoleum was never actually used for burial (or was later
heavily robbed). This stela probably represents the last of a series of storeyed
stelae, each having been taller than its immediate predecessor until the inevit-
able disaster occurred. Signiﬁcantly, no attempt seems to have been made to
clear up the debris or to replace the stela, suggesting that the project might
have been abandoned. Phillipson (2000: 164) dated this event to the fourth
century AD, and Munro-Hay (1991: 68) put it at approximately AD 400.
Broadly coinciding with the ofﬁcial adoption of Christianity at Aksum by King
Ezana, which Munro-Hay (1991: 78) estimated at around AD 333, it might
have been this ideological change that led to the project’s abandonment.
Certainly, the form of elite tombs changed at this time; the nearby ‘Tomb of
the False Door’, discovered and named by Chittick in the early 1970s, consists
of a subterranean granite-built chamber covered by a squat surface structure
which appears to have been intended to represent a temple or palace. Lacking
an associated stela but retaining a carving of a door similar to those on the
storeyed stelae, it appears that this represents an early stage in the Christianiz-
ing of the burial tradition, dating to the late fourth or early ﬁfth century AD
(Phillipson 2000: 427). A little to the north of Aksum lie twin subterranean
tombs traditionally attributed to the sixth-century kings Kaleb and Gabra
Maskal, which appear to mark a further stage in this process (Phillipson
2000: 427, 431).
   Other than the largest stela, it is often difﬁcult to associate these standing
stones with speciﬁc tombs and in many cases impossible, but it seems they were
primarily intended as tomb markers. It appears that the area of the main stelae
group at Aksum was used for burial from at least the ﬁrst or second century
AD. A series of platforms was gradually built up, on what originally must have

                                                                              123
African Civilizations

been a gentle slope. Stelae were erected on these platforms, beneath which
were subterranean tombs. This process continued for so long that a number of
stelae of rougher, earlier type were actually buried upright by later deposits,
and some of the later carved stelae had their lower parts covered (Munro-Hay
1989: 330). In addition to the tombs already mentioned, the main stelae area
contained several shaft tombs and an extensive rock-cut tomb called the
‘Tomb of the Brick Arches’, which was discovered and named by Chittick.
Probably dating to the fourth century AD (Phillipson 2000: 128–32), this
tomb had not suffered as much from robbers as most of the others investi-
gated, and excavations within it by both Chittick and D.W. Phillipson pro-
duced substantial amounts of important cultural material. More difﬁcult to
understand is the curious structure known as the Nefas Mawcha, which is
adjacent to the main stelae group and seems also to have been a tomb.
It consisted of a giant granite slab, 17.3 metres long, 6.5 metres wide, and
1.1 to 1.7 metres in thickness, which rested on supporting slabs and walls.
This enormous slab weighs about 360 tonnes, and its supporting structure
collapsed in antiquity when the slab was struck by the largest of the stelae
(Stela 1) as it fell, weighing as it did some 517 tonnes (Phillipson 1994: 192,
197). The Nefas Mawcha must, therefore, pre-date the fall of the largest stela;
Munro-Hay (1989: 120) suggested that it belongs to the third century AD.
Probably it was intended to be covered by rubble and soil, although it was
apparently unﬁnished when it was wrecked by the falling stela (Phillipson
2000: 481).
   Ancient tombs also exist in other parts of Aksum, usually associated with
stelae. To the south-east of the city, for instance, is the large rock-cut tomb
known as the ‘Tomb of King Bazen’, so completely robbed that it is undatable
but traditionally attributed to the legendary King Bazen, who was supposed to
have been contemporary with the birth of Christ (Munro-Hay 1991: 13).
More informative, however, is the so-called Gudit Stelae Field, with 594 large
stones, most of which were probably stelae. Situated just outside Aksum to its
south-west, this seems to have been a cemetery for ‘middle-class’ Aksumites,
rather than for the rulers and the elite for whom the other tombs were
constructed (Ayele 1996: 614; Phillipson 2000: 225–8). Nevertheless, modest
though Gudit Stelae Field tomb ‘GT II’ was, Chittick’s excavations of
1974 recovered early third-century glassware of high quality, in spite of the
depredations of tomb robbers (Munro-Hay 1989: 143–6, 190–1). Ayele’s
excavations of 1994, 1995, and 1996 suggested that the area was used for
nonelite burials from the mid-second to the mid-fourth centuries and possibly
for much of the ﬁrst ﬁve centuries AD.
   In addition to stelae and tombs at Aksum, there are a number of stone
platforms that have been interpreted as the bases of thrones. Such thrones

124
                                        The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

seem to have been important in Aksumite culture: one existed at the site of
Matara; they are mentioned in two inscriptions of King Ezana; and in the sixth
century Cosmas Indicopleustes saw one close to a stela at Adulis. Ezana’s
inscriptions also say that he erected metal statues, and although none of these
has been found, a stone slab was discovered in Aksum at the beginning of the
twentieth century that had hollowed-out footprints 92 centimetres long. If this
slab was the plinth for a statue, as has been claimed, then the statue must have
been enormous (Anfray 1981: 372; Phillipson 1998: 30; 2012: 136).
  Aksum is also notable for the discovery of several Greek, South Arabian, and
Ge’ez stone-cut inscriptions mostly of the fourth-century King Ezana, in whose
reign Christianity appears to have been adopted (Pankhurst 1961: 28–30;
Munro-Hay 1991: 224–9; D.W. Phillipson 2012: 57–63). It is rare that
African archaeological evidence can speak to us so directly: ‘I will rule the
people’, claims Ezana, ‘with righteousness and justice, and will not oppress
them’ (Pankhurst 1961: 30).
  Furthermore, Aksum has produced some remarkable residential building
evidence. At the beginning of the twentieth century, the German Aksum
expedition excavated three multiroomed structures of monumental scale,
which were provisionally identiﬁed as palaces. These are known, respectively,
by the names Enda Mika’el, Enda Semon, and Ta’akha Mariam (Phillipson
1997: 93–120). An attempt was made by the German expedition to produce
architectural reconstructions of these buildings. The result for the central part
of Enda Mika’el was a castle-like structure of four square towers, standing
four storeys high on a stepped base. In the case of Ta’akha Mariam the
reconstruction was even more impressive, producing a huge complex of court-
yards, towers, and connecting buildings, which measured overall 80 by 120
metres and was of two storeys and, in places, three storeys (Buxton 1970: 93;
Michels, in Kobishchanov 1979: 6; Phillipson 1998: 84–6). Reconsideration of
the evidence led Buxton and Matthews (1974: 55, ﬁgs. 6–8) to suggest that
Enda Mika’el was of only three storeys and of a somewhat different design,
but their reconstruction still indicated the former existence of an impressive
structure.
  These buildings, in common with other major Aksumite buildings, were of a
distinctive architectural style (Buxton 1970: 91–102; Buxton and Matthews
1974). They were built on a massive masonry podium with stepped sides, a
feature of Pre-Aksumite and South Arabian origin that must have increased
a building’s apparent height. They were also built with a characteristic
indented plan, both the podium and the wall surfaces being alternately
recessed and projecting, a design that must have given the buildings an
appearance of great strength. The upper storeys were apparently of mud-
mortared rubble reinforced with timber, a type of construction that left the

                                                                            125
African Civilizations

ends of some timbers projecting from the walls at the corners of windows and
doors and at intervals along the wall surfaces. This constructional method is
known from excavated archaeological evidence (Munro-Hay 1989: 138, plate
8.8), from its representation on the largest stelae (Buxton and Matthews
1974), and from the tenth- or eleventh-century church of Debra Damo, studied
by the German Aksum expedition and by Matthews and Mordini (1959) and
now dated by D.W. Phillipson (2009b: 63) to the ‘third quarter of the ﬁrst
millennium AD’. Matthews was even able to attempt reconstructions of Aksu-
mite interiors (Buxton 1970: 94–5; Buxton and Matthews 1974: ﬁgs. 12, 18,
28). However, Anfray (1981: 370) questioned whether the walls of such
structures would have been strong enough to support more than two storeys.
Nevertheless, he pointed out that in the sixth century AD Cosmas Indico-
pleustes wrote that in Ethiopia he saw a ‘royal dwelling with four towers’.
Whatever the details, it seems that these monumental residential structures
were attempting to appear of great height; even two storeys, set on a solid
masonry base, would have the appearance of a three-storey building. In fact,
Anfrey has demonstrated that they were imposing buildings, with his excav-
ation of the so-called Dongur Mansion, on the western side of Aksum.
Excavated in 1966–8, this was a forty-room complex occupying approxi-
mately 3,000 square metres, with remains still standing in places to a height
of 5 metres. Stone-built, it comprised a central structure and a series of interior
courtyards that created separate blocks of rooms (Fig. 5.4). It was thought by
its excavator to date to about the seventh century AD. Rather smaller than
Ta’akha Mariam, Anfray interpreted it as a villa of a member of the elite, not
a royal palace (Anfray 1968: 360–3; 1972a: plate 1 for plan; 1981: 365–6;
1990: 97, 100–3; Michels, in Kobishchanov 1979: 7–8). With its many rooms
and courtyards, the Dongur Mansion could have housed numerous retainers,
craftsmen, servants, and slaves, as well as an elite extended family. It might
also have provided storage for agricultural produce and trade goods. Indeed,
Munro-Hay (1991: 49) suggested that this and similar complexes might have
been village centres surrounding landlords’ houses.
   Excavations elsewhere in and around Aksum indicated the existence of other
stone buildings, some of which were for nonelite occupants. D Site at Kidane
Mehret consisted of the remains of a peasant settlement of the eighth to ﬁfth
century BC, followed by a long hiatus in occupation and then a Late Aksumite
settlement of the sixth to eighth century AD. This site was situated about a
kilometre north of Aksum, apparently separate from the city, and appeared
to have been a farming village. Similarly, K Site in Maleke Aksum indicated
the presence of nonelite occupants but within Aksum itself. They appeared to
have been involved in industrial and craft activities during the ﬁfth and sixth
centuries AD (Phillipson 2000: 372–9, 417–18). It seems likely that Aksum

126
                                          The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands




Fig. 5.4 Plan of the ‘Dongur Mansion’ at Aksum. After Anfray 1972a: planche 1.


was an extensive city during the ﬁrst millennium AD, and excavations by
Chittick at the base of the hill behind the main stelae group showed the impact
of the city on its immediate environment. An erosional cycle was indicated and
the hillside is now largely rocky, with little soil, suggesting that the eventual
decline of the city might have been linked to environmental deterioration
caused by a high population density.
   Amongst other Aksumite sites, Matara (Fig. 5.5) is one of the most exten-
sively investigated, although poorly published. Now in Eritrea, it lies about
halfway between the Aksumite port of Adulis and the capital Aksum and is
likely to have been a place of economic and political signiﬁcance. The site

                                                                                 127
African Civilizations




Fig. 5.5 Plan of Matara, Eritrea, providing an indication of Aksumite urban layout.
After Anfray 1974: ﬁg. 7.


occupies about 20 hectares, and deposits up to 5 metres deep contain evidence
of two main phases of occupation: ﬁrst in about 500 to 300 BC and then (after
a long abandonment) an Aksumite period of about AD 700. Anfray excavated
tombs, churches, and residential buildings, and amongst the latter were both
elite houses and ordinary dwellings. Mound B yielded a large, multiroomed

128
                                        The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

mansion; three other similar ‘villas’ were uncovered. In addition, however,
there were houses of only two or three rooms and others that were intermedi-
ate in size between these and the villas, suggesting a social hierarchy. Some
of the residents of Matara must have had considerable wealth, because a
remarkable hoard of goldwork of Roman and Byzantine origin was found.
In addition, some material sophistication is suggested by the presence of a
piped water supply, provided by ﬁtting the bodies of amphorae one within
the other, which served the baptistery of the principal church discovered. The
excavations at Matara also provided an important indication of Aksumite
urban layout (Anfray 1967; 1974; 1981: 367–8; Michels, in Kobishchanov
1979: 14–16).
   There are other Aksumite urban sites at Adulis, on the coast, and at Kohaito,
north of Matara, both now in Eritrea. The remains of stone buildings of
Aksumite style have been excavated at Adulis, and artefacts of both Aksumite
and Mediterranean origin have been found there, indicating its role in long-
distance trade (Paribeni 1907; Anfray 1974; Peacock and Blue 2007). Subse-
quent excavations have revealed an important chronological sequence relevant
to the southern Red Sea region and the Horn of Africa (Zazzaro et al. 2014).
Kohaito, like Matara sometimes thought to be the Koloè mentioned in the
Periplus of the Erythraean Sea (p. 116), has not been excavated but is best
known for a dam, built of carefully ﬁtted blocks of stone, that is 67 metres long
and about 3 metres high (Anfray 1981: 368). This dam was designed to form a
reservoir of water; Pankhurst (1961: 24) called it ‘one of the greatest engineer-
ing feats of the Aksumites’. Another Aksumite site is at Gobedra Hill, about
4 kilometres west of Aksum, where there are quarries from which came the
granite used for the dressed stones of local Aksumite buildings and for some of
the stelae. There are also traces of a road by which such material was trans-
ported to Aksum (Phillipson 2000: 229–51). In addition, de Contenson excav-
ated a late Aksumite stone structure at Ouchatei Golo nearby, suggesting that
it was a Christian church, and undressed stelae were found in its vicinity
(de Contenson 1961; Michels, in Kobishchanov 1979: 10; D.W. Phillipson
1994: 192; 1998: 92; 2012: 91).
   Far more Aksumite sites are known than have been excavated or published
in detail. Anfray (1973: 21) provided a site distribution map, which showed
that the nuclear area of the Aksumite state must have been located around
Aksum and Adulis. He also proposed a distinction between an eastern and a
western Aksumite province, the archaeological record suggesting that the
eastern province was more prosperous but that the western was the centre of
political power. However, it has been suggested that this centre moved east
in Late Aksumite times, with a new capital at a location not yet identiﬁed
(D.W. Phillipson 2009a: 9). In addition, Michels conducted a stratiﬁed

                                                                            129
African Civilizations

random sampling of archaeological evidence in 40 percent of a 500-square-
kilometre area, in the Aksum–Yeha region. About 260 sites were discovered,
ranging from single compounds to large towns and including temples, stelae
ﬁelds, tombs, and workshops. The survey suggested that much evidence still
remained to be located in other areas but shed some light on Aksumite
political organization, demonstrating that the fertile soil of the Aksumite
Plain had been a factor in the development of that organization (Michels,
in Kobishchanov 1979: 22–4; Michels 2005).
  Chronological problems (p. 118) make it difﬁcult to date the end of the
Aksumite period. Signiﬁcantly, the issue of coinage ceased early in the seventh
century, and subsequently there seem to have been few imports or stone
buildings. It appears that the economic and political base of the Aksumite
state was seriously weakened by the extension of Arab control over the Red
Sea trade route. Plague, drought, and environmental deterioration might also
have contributed to Aksumite decline. According to legend, an Agau chief-
tainess called Gudit from further south destroyed the Aksumite state late in the
tenth century AD. As a result of this or other problems, the political centre of
gravity moved south from eastern Tigray, where numerous ancient churches
suggest it was located by this time (D.W. Phillipson 2009b: 51–74, 87–107), to
the Lalibela area, in Lasta (Buxton 1970: 44; Munro-Hay 1991). An Ethiopian
state survived, but during the earlier part of the second millennium AD it seems
to have lost its previous urban character, its rulers now leading a semi-
nomadic life in a succession of camps, which Pankhurst (1979) called ‘moving
capitals’. Such a camp might consist of as many as 100,000 people; continual
movements seem to have been necessitated by the rapid exhaustion in any one
area of food and ﬁrewood. The sites of these transient settlements have a
comparatively low archaeological visibility and have had little attention from
archaeologists, although this is changing (Finneran 2009; 2012). The visible
archaeological evidence for the period from the sixth to the fourteenth centur-
ies AD has been dominated by ecclesiastical structures, for not only did
Christianity survive and ﬂourish but it also provided a stable element in
Ethiopian society. Some remarkable ‘built’ churches from this period have
been studied, including Debra Damo, already mentioned. Rock-hewn churches
are more numerous, however, having survived more readily. These have a long
history, but the most remarkable of them are at Lalibela. There are others in
Tigray Province and scattered across the Ethiopian Highlands, providing
evidence of technical skill and of an ability to marshal the material resources
implied by these vast undertakings. The church of Beta Giyorgis (St George) at
Lalibela, for instance, is a complex and sophisticated ‘building’ entirely carved,
inside and out, from one gigantic block of stone (10.6 metres high) that had
ﬁrst to be isolated in a huge quarry pit (Fig. 5.6). Past studies of the Lalibela

130
                                           The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands




Fig. 5.6 Beta Giyorgis, one of the Lalibela rock-hewn churches, Ethiopia. It is located
within a pit quarried into bedrock. From D.W. Phillipson 1998: plate 10. Reproduced by
permission of David Phillipson.


                                                                                   131
African Civilizations

churches have tended to be architectural or art-historical, but there are now
indications that archaeological structural analysis and excavation of associ-
ated deposits will provide new information about their chronology (Fauvelle-
Aymar et al. 2010). Published accounts of Ethiopian rock-hewn churches
include those of Buxton (1971), Gerster (1970), Plant (1985), and D.W.
Phillipson (2009b).
  In the latter half of the second millennium AD ‘static capitals’, as Pankhurst
(1979) called them, tended to replace the frequently moved camps, although
even these were shifted periodically or used only seasonally. Beginning in
the late sixteenth and early seventeenth century there grew up a practice of
constructing stone castles, which formed the nuclei of capitals. It was one
of these castles that was studied at Gouzara by Annequin (1965), but the
most successful of the castle-based capitals was that at Gondar (Fig. 5.7), north
of Lake Tana (Finneran 2007: 259–63), where no less than twenty successive
emperors made their capital prior to the nineteenth century. Right down to
modern times, Aksum, much reduced in size, continued to be important
as a religious centre. It is popularly believed by Ethiopians that the true
Ark of the Covenant is kept there, and such emperors as were able to do so
went there for their coronation (Pankhurst 1979: 4–6). This typiﬁes the
continuity often claimed to be characteristic of Ethiopian culture (Phillipson
2004). Archaeological evidence supports the idea of such continuity: some




Fig. 5.7 The seventeenth-century castle of Emperor Fasiladas, Gondar, Ethiopia, in the
1860s. From von Heuglin 1874.


132
                                         The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

ecclesiastical buildings make use of Aksumite ruins as foundations, such as the
‘Old Cathedral’ of Maryam Tsion at Aksum, and many built and rock-hewn
churches have Aksumite architectural features (D.W. Phillipson 2009b). How-
ever, until recently archaeologists paid little attention to the last thousand
years of Ethiopia’s past.


Subsistence economy
Until D.W. Phillipson’s excavations of the 1990s little archaeological attention
was given to economic evidence. Nevertheless, Kobishchanov was able to
reconstruct the Aksumite subsistence base from inscriptions and other histor-
ical sources. According to him, both terracing and irrigation were practised
and ox-drawn ploughs were in use. Wheat and other cereals were grown,
viticulture existed, and large herds of cattle, sheep, and goats were kept, as well
as asses and mules. He also claimed that elephants had been domesticated but
were reserved for use by the royal court (Kobish[ch]anov 1981: 383).
  Subsequently, D.W. Phillipson was able to conﬁrm much of this picture with
archaeological evidence. Excavation of the D Site at Kidane Mehret revealed a
farming village of the sixth to eighth century AD, a kilometre to the north of
Aksum. This site produced plant remains including wheat, barley, teff, oats,
a range of pulses, grape, gourd, noog (nug), linseed, cotton, and brassica
(Phillipson 2000: 366). Animal bones indicated that cattle were the most
common livestock, followed by sheep and goats. Chicken and equid (perhaps
donkey) were present (Phillipson 2000: 369). There is also evidence of earlier
subsistence from the D Site at Kidane Mehret, where deposits of the eighth to
ﬁfth centuries BC contained botanical and faunal remains almost comparable
to those of the Aksumite period at this site (Phillipson 2000: 364, 369).
In addition, a substantial quantity of ivory, found within the Tomb of the
Brick Arches, indicates the exploitation of elephants (Phillipson 2000:
116–25). The importance of cattle is further apparent from several animal-
model basins of pottery found in Aksum, each with a pair of yoked oxen of a
shorthorn, humpless breed (Munro-Hay 1989a: 240, 256–7; Phillipson 2000:
63–4). Additional archaeological evidence for subsistence comes from the hill
of Bieta Giyorgis, where excavations at the Ona Nagast settlement site yielded
cattle and sheep and/or goat bones, as well as evidence of wheat, barley, teff,
lentils, and grapes, from a context described as ‘Middle Aksumite’ (Bard et al.
1997: 395). Subsequent detailed study of the Bieta Giyorgis faunal remains
provided evidence from around 700 BC to AD 1200 that conﬁrms the domin-
ance of cattle, both Bos taurus and Bos indicus, which were intensively
exploited for meat, milk, and traction, as well as conﬁrming the presence of
domestic sheep and goats (Chaix 2013). Domesticated livestock seem to have

                                                                              133
African Civilizations

played an important role in the economy. Witness, for instance, the inscrip-
tions of Ezana, recording 31,957 head of cattle, 51,050 sheep, and 827 ‘beasts
of burden’; ﬁgures remarkable not only for their size but also for an exactitude
that suggests that they might have been the result of counting rather than
guesswork (Munro-Hay 1991: 227–8).
   Evidence of Pre-Aksumite subsistence also includes bronze sickles found at
Yeha and Haoulti; pottery models of cattle at the latter site, sometimes
wearing yokes; and grindstones found at various sites (Michels, in Kobishcha-
nov 1979: 14; de Contenson 1981: 356–7; Anfray 1990: 47). Examination of
grindstone material and wear has suggested a change from milling husked
grains during the Pre-Aksumite period to that of free-threshing wheat by late
Aksumite times (L. Phillipson 2012). Evidence of agriculture during the ﬁrst
millennium BC also came from the excavation by Joanne Dombrowski of
Lalibela Cave, east of Lake Tana, which produced cultivated barley, chick-
peas, and some unspeciﬁed legumes, together with bones tentatively identiﬁed
as cattle and small stock, associated with stone artefacts. Indeed, it seems that
agriculture developed at an earlier date than this in Ethiopia. Christopher
Ehret used linguistic evidence to argue that it originated as much as 7,000 or
more years ago. Some archaeological evidence supporting this claim is the
tentative identiﬁcation of domesticated cattle during the sixth millennium BC
at Quiha rock shelter (Barnett 1999). In addition, Ethiopian and Eritrean rock
paintings depict cattle and herdsmen, fat-tailed sheep, and even a man with an
ox-drawn plough, but these are undated.
   Clearly, by the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium AD a strong subsistence
base had been developed, consisting of broad-based, mixed agriculture.
It seems likely that wheat and barley played a particularly important part:
Munro-Hay (1991: 185–6) commented on the frequent depiction of ears
of wheat or barley framing the royal bust on Aksumite coins, and
D.W. Phillipson concluded that it is speciﬁcally emmer wheat that is repre-
sented. Pottery resembling the modern trays on which injera (the ﬂat bread
made from teff) is prepared appears only in the late Aksumite period
(Munro-Hay 1989: 308, 311). This would suggest that this small and hardy
cereal, which will grow at higher altitudes than wheat and barley and which
now forms an important part of diet in the highlands, was not of such
signiﬁcance in Aksumite times. It is important to stress again the signiﬁcance
of the high fertility of the Aksumite Plain. On the basis of local farmers’
opinions, Michels classiﬁed its soil as good to excellent, supporting a full
range of cereal crops on land that relies on seasonal rains. In short, the
heartland of the Aksumite state lay in an area that was advantaged so far
as cereal cultivation was concerned, and which almost certainly was capable
of producing a storable surplus.

134
                                        The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

Technology
Ethiopian and Eritrean archaeological evidence is highly informative on the
technology of the periods under discussion. As with the middle Nile, there
exists some difﬁculty in discriminating between things made in Ethiopia or
Eritrea by local craftsmen and those imported from elsewhere or made locally
by expatriate craftsmen (p. 99). Nevertheless, the technology of the Aksumite
period, in particular, ranks amongst the most sophisticated to be found in
precolonial tropical Africa.
  First, some Aksumite sites have provided evidence of remarkable engineering
skills. To quarry, transport, and attempt to erect such a monolith as the largest
of the stelae at Aksum must have required theoretical knowledge, practical
skill, and good organization. Furthermore, the giant granite slab of the Nefas
Mawcha and substantial numbers of other stelae, although smaller, also imply
the existence of considerable engineering ability (Phillipson 2000: 229–66).
This ability could be directed to practical as well as ceremonial purposes. The
dam at Kohaito and the Mai Shum reservoir at Aksum (Butzer 1981: 479)
suggest that such expertise was applied to the task of water storage, although
this was not for irrigation, as claimed from historical sources (Sulas et al.
2009). So far as archaeological evidence is concerned, it was in quarrying,
carving, and manipulating masses of stone that the Aksumites evinced their
main engineering ability. These skills had a long history, from the cutting of
subterranean tombs during the ﬁrst millennium BC to the quarrying of rock-
hewn churches during the second millennium AD.
  Aksumite archaeological evidence can throw a good deal of light on that
expertise (Phillipson 1994; 2000: 229–66). Granite quarries to the west of
Aksum have rows of slots that were cut for the insertion of either iron or
wooden wedges, the latter probably tightly driven while dry and then soaked
with water, so that their expansion split away the large pieces of stone needed
for stelae and other purposes. Indeed, some of the stelae still standing at
Aksum have traces of these slots, which were not completely removed by the
percussive stone dressing employed to ﬁnish their surfaces. The extent of such
ﬁnishing seems to have varied greatly, no doubt depending on the importance
of the client and the cost of the job, but the Aksumite masons were capable of
very high quality work. The storeyed stelae, for instance, have dressed surfaces
that are both smooth and attractive, with the north face of the one that
remained standing (Stela 3) faintly showing the bands of careful tooling that
were necessary to achieve this. Furthermore, indented parts of the decoration
on the largest stela have their edges undercut, so that when lit by the sun the
resulting shadows enhanced the relief. Even with the hardened iron tools that
must have been employed, it would have required an extraordinary


                                                                            135
African Civilizations

combination of skill and patience to produce such results in a material like
granite (although most of the stone called ‘granite’ at Aksum is technically
syenite, which is softer). In contrast, the archaeological evidence also suggests
that Aksumite knowledge of mechanics was sometimes deﬁcient. With only
8.5 percent of the total length of the largest stela intended to go into the
ground, it would appear that the centre of gravity either had not been calcu-
lated or had been calculated incorrectly. It is little wonder that it probably
fell during the course of erection (Phillipson 2000: 161), although architect
Ruth Plant (1985: 22) raised the possibility that an earthquake could have
been responsible.
  People in the highlands excelled in building construction, from the ﬁrst
millennium BC to the second millennium AD. Using mud-mortared stone-
work, reinforced with timber, to construct stepped and indented walls,
strengthened at the corners with dry-laid ashlar masonry, the Aksumites
constructed monumental elite residences of two or three storeys. It is possible
that the architecture of these buildings was inﬂuenced by Roman style,
conveyed perhaps via Syria, with which early Christian Ethiopia had con-
nections (Michels, in Kobishchanov 1979: 27), but whatever the source of
the style the workmanship was distinctively Aksumite. Building skills also
extended to tombs, temples, early churches, and other structures. In addition
to employing stone and timber, Aksumite builders learned both to manufac-
ture and to use ﬁred bricks, and the construction of brick arches and of brick
barrel vaulting were both understood. Lime mortar and lime render were
also used – although rarely, perhaps because of the quantity of wood needed
to burn the limestone (Munro-Hay 1989: 162–3). Concerning ordinary
domestic buildings, the small number of excavated stone houses (Anfray
1974: 756, ﬁgure 7; Phillipson 2000: 372–9) are supplemented by both
Aksumite and earlier pottery models. These came from Haoulti and from
Aksum (Munro-Hay 1989: 288; 1991: 254) and depict both rectangular and
round structures.
  Other skills were associated with building construction. These included
stone sculpture and inscription cutting. Because the latter used, at one time
or another, both South Arabian and Greek characters, it seems likely that
a foreign hand or a foreign-trained hand was sometimes present. Nevertheless,
the gradual ascendancy of Ge’ez would suggest that even this work was
eventually done by Aksumites. Also associated with building were ﬁne wall
paintings, which were a feature of the interiors of many Ethiopian churches.
Here again, the debt to foreign inﬂuences was great, but the style that
developed was distinctly Ethiopian (Buxton 1970: 136). The origins of Ethi-
opian wall painting are not really known, but probably the churches of
Christian Aksum were already decorated in this way (Phillipson 1998: 136).

136
                                         The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

  Although metallurgy seems to have developed early in Ethiopia and Eritrea
and to have achieved a high level of quality, there is evidence of stone-using
people at Gobedra, near Aksum, during the ﬁrst millennium BC and during the
same time at Lalibela Cave, east of Lake Tana. At other sites near Aksum,
there is similar evidence from the second millennium BC at Anqqer Baahti, and
from as far back as the tenth millennium BC at Baahti Nebait (Phillipson 2000:
22–6, 504). However, the use of stone artefacts continued into Aksumite times
at both Aksum and other sites. Research by Laurel Phillipson has shown how
such artefacts were still used in the ﬁrst millennium BC and until late in the ﬁrst
millennium AD, providing a cheap and readily available means of shaping
wood, ﬁnishing pottery, preparing hides, manufacturing leather clothing, and
producing parchment, as well as sometimes carving ivory (L. Phillipson 2009a;
2009b; 2013a; 2013b; Phillipson and Sulas 2005).
  Nevertheless, by the seventh or sixth century BC a partly literate urban
culture using bronze and iron was present at Yeha. This could have been the
result of inﬂuences from southern Arabia, where iron had been in use from
about 1000 BC, but it is possible that the use of copper had already reached
northern Ethiopia from the Nile Valley. Whatever the case, by the late ﬁrst
millennium BC, a range of iron and bronze artefacts was in use. During the
Aksumite period metal craftsmanship excelled both in the number of tech-
niques employed and in the variety and the quality of its products, which were
made in gold, silver, copper, bronze, and iron (Munro-Hay 1989: 210–34;
D.W. Phillipson 2012: 165–9). Among the more remarkable achievements was
the use of mercury gilding, to inlay gold on selected areas of silver and bronze
coins (Munro-Hay 1991: 177, 188). Admittedly some of the metalwork might
have been imported from elsewhere, but mineral resources were such (p. 115)
that iron must have been mined and smelted in Ethiopia, as perhaps some
other metals were. As for gold, supposedly one of Ethiopia’s exports, it could
probably have been obtained by panning superﬁcial alluvial sources rather
than by mining.
  Archaeological evidence from Aksumite sites also indicates other manufac-
turing skills. Again the difﬁculty is to untangle the imported items from the
locally produced. Most pottery was made locally and was at times remarkably
sophisticated considering that it was formed without the use of a wheel, but a
small amount came from the Mediterranean world, particularly from northern
Egypt, probably as containers for wine or olive oil (Munro-Hay 1989:
235–316). Leather working appears to have been practised (Munro-Hay
1989: 321), and it is surmised that textile production was important, although
textiles of foreign origin were also in use. Carving of high quality was done in
ivory (Phillipson 2000; 2012); bone was worked (Munro-Hay 1989: 321–2);
and civet was probably produced (von Endt 1978). The depiction of vines and

                                                                              137
African Civilizations

grapes on third-century AD ivory carvings found in the Tomb of the Brick
Arches; the recovery of grape seeds from the Kidane Mehret site, north of
Aksum; and the existence of several rock-cut tanks at Adi Tsehaﬁ, north-west
of Aksum, which might have been wine presses, suggest that wine making was
also practised (D.W. Phillipson 1997: 162–5; 1998: 59–60; 2012: 116–17).
From historical and ethnohistorical sources, it seems that salt was probably
obtained from the Danakil Desert, but there is no archaeological evidence for
this. Coins were struck in Ethiopia during Aksumite times for at least 350
years, although some coins were imported (D.W. Phillipson 2012: 181–93).
Finally, there were numerous luxury goods: jewellery, glass, and ﬁne metal-
work, for instance, which were of foreign origin. Nevertheless, although most
of the surprisingly large amount of glass found in Aksum seems to have come
from the eastern part of the Roman Empire or beyond, the characteristics of
some pieces (Fig. 5.8) suggest that they were made at Aksum (Munro-Hay
1989: 208–9). It now appears that fragmented glass from imports was
remelted and worked in a variety of ways (D.W. Phillipson 2012: 162–5).


Social system
Ethiopian and Eritrean archaeological evidence suggests that at least by Aksu-
mite times there was a considerable degree of social complexity. Society
appears to have been a stratiﬁed one. At the top was an absolute monarch,
frequently depicted on Aksumite coins wearing a crown and sometimes shown
seated on a throne (Fig. 5.9). Some of the inscriptions on the coins suggest that
these rulers were, nevertheless, concerned about popular opinion; for example,
‘May this be pleasing in the countryside’ (D.W. Phillipson 2012: 188) and ‘Joy
be to the peoples’ (Buxton 1970: 39) lack the usual tone of autocracy. How-
ever, monarchical government, whatever its exact character, is indicated also
by other archaeological evidence. Thus, at least some of the monumental,
multiroomed, residential buildings must have been royal palaces. In addition,
there are monumental tombs that must have been for royal burials and those
of other leading members of society. Other sorts of monumental structures
also hint at the existence of a monarchical state: temples in earlier periods,
churches in later ones, and the storeyed stelae at Aksum. One thing is common
to many of these structures: they are large. According to historian Kobish[ch]
anov (1981: 394), this ‘mania for the gigantic’ was intended ‘to instil awe-
inspiring admiration for the greatness and strength of the potentate to whom
the monuments were dedicated’. However, not all the ﬁne mansions or the
large tombs might have been intended for royalty; they seem too numerous for
that. Certainly, stelae of small or medium size are too common for such a
conclusion. In addition, the distribution of luxury goods, many obtainable

138
Fig. 5.8 Glass goblet from a third-century tomb in the Gudit Stelae Field, Aksum (height
125 millimetres). Probably a local manufacture imitating an Alexandrian product. From
D.W. Phillipson 2012: ﬁg. 60. Reproduced by permission of David Phillipson.

                                                                                    139
African Civilizations




Fig. 5.9 Ge‘ez-inscribed Aksumite copper coin of King Armah (sixth to seventh centuries
AD), showing the king crowned and throned holding a Christian processional cross, with
another cross on the reverse, its centre gilded. Diameter 20 millimetres. From D.W.
Phillipson 2012: ﬁg. 75. Reproduced by permission of David Phillipson.

only from trade with the outside world, is too widespread. It seems that there
was not only a monarch but also an elite section of society.
  Equally, the archaeological evidence suggests the existence of numerous
peasants and/or slaves. The existence of the latter might be assumed from
the long survival of slavery in Ethiopia, condoned as it was even by Ethiopian
Christianity (Pankhurst 1961: 372–3). In a burial excavated at Matara the
body apparently had worn iron shackles but might have been a criminal rather
than a slave. However, it seems likely that slaves were one of the exports of the
Aksumite state. Whatever the status of the sweating humanity that would have
toiled on such tasks as moving and raising the stelae, large labour forces must
have been involved. Constructional work on the scale frequently achieved in
Aksumite times implies a numerous and an obedient labour force. If the
modern world was built on machines, the ancient world was built on human
backs. Indeed, the necessarily agricultural basis of Aksumite society, and that
of earlier and later times, would require the existence of a large peasant
class, which during times of war would also have provided the bulk of the
ﬁghting men. As is often the case, such a class is not so well represented in
the archaeological record as that of the elite, but the smallest houses of those
excavated in the urban site of Matara would seem to conﬁrm its existence.
Furthermore, the large number of small rooms surrounding the central struc-
ture at such elite residences as the Dongur Mansion would suggest that many

140
                                         The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

of the lowest class lived in some sort of client relationship to society’s
more privileged people. Most, however, were probably scattered through the
countryside in villages and hamlets, such as those located in the survey by
Michels (2005).
  Intermediate-sized houses excavated at Matara would indicate that there were
also people who belonged to neither the elite nor the peasantry, at least in
Aksumite times. Phillipson (2000: 374) provided some conﬁrmation of this,
interpreting the Late Aksumite D Site at Kidane Mehret, just to the north of
Aksum, as representing ‘a middle-rank settlement’ with ‘a status well above that
of a peasant farmstead’. In addition, the burials of the Gudit Stelae Field, placed
in modest tombs that were nevertheless marked by medium-sized to small stelae
and in at least one case contained high-quality grave goods, have been inter-
preted as those of ‘middle-class’ Aksumites (p. 124). It might be expected that
such a class would include government ofﬁcials, scribes, priests of temple or
church, middle-ranking members of the army, merchants, and perhaps some
of the more skilled craftsmen. Amongst such a class there would probably be
some foreigners, permitted to live in Ethiopia because of their special skills.
  The archaeological evidence also suggests functional specialization. In Aksu-
mite times, as well as rulers, government ofﬁcials, and peasant farmers, there
were expert builders, including masons, brickmakers, carpenters, and joiners.
In addition, there must have been miners, quarrymen, iron smelters, black-
smiths, other metal workers, potters, ivory carvers, workers of leather, makers
of stone artefacts, and transporters of goods. One would expect merchants,
artists, scribes, coiners, some professional soldiers, and temple or church
ofﬁcials. Many of these specialists must have been urban dwellers, living in
towns and cities that apparently did not need protection by surrounding walls,
a lack that led D.W. Phillipson (2012: 119) to question their urban status.
However, we know little of the layout of these settlements, although Anfray
(1974: ﬁg. 7) threw some light on that of Matara (Fig. 5.5), and Michels
outlined the probable changing form of the city of Aksum during the ﬁrst
millennium AD.


Population pressures
The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands were attractive to human settlement,
providing climatic conditions and soils conducive to cereal–plough agriculture
and stock raising. Although large areas of the highlands were too rocky or too
exposed, this was offset by the beneﬁts of the great altitudinal range. This gave
diversity to the subsistence base, apparently leading to a growth in population
during the Aksumite period and probably to localized population pressures
that must have contributed to increasing social complexity.

                                                                              141
African Civilizations

  The antecedents of Aksum during the ﬁrst millennium BC were indigenous,
although absorbing some inﬂuences from South Arabia. These developments
and the subsequent Aksumite state were in a part of the highlands that in
recent times has had less rainfall and a shorter wet season than areas to the
south. The Aksumite region was probably prone to drought-induced famine,
and during the second millennium AD Ethiopia’s centre of gravity was consid-
erably further south. It is possible that the north-eastern highlands, with a
growing agricultural and urban population, suffered from recurrent episodes
of population pressure caused by drought and other crises, such as crop
destruction by locusts. In those circumstances, considerable power would
be placed in the hands of those who controlled the most productive agricul-
tural land. Furthermore, the long-term effects of tree clearance, cultivation,
and periodic drought could have caused the destruction of some agricultural
land by erosion, another factor that could place pressure on subsistence
agriculturalists.
  Using geoarchaeological evidence, Karl Butzer suggested that Aksumite
culture ﬂourished at a time of better spring rains than at present, and declined
when land pressure and erratic rainfall caused soil destruction during the
seventh and eighth centuries (Butzer 1981: 471). Bard et al. (2000: 80–1)
supported this interpretation, identifying a humid episode from the mid-ﬁrst
millennium BC to the mid-ﬁrst millennium AD during which agricultural
activity was intensiﬁed to sustain a state-level urban society. Consequently,
demographic pressure increased, reaching a peak in the mid-ﬁrst millennium
AD and causing progressive soil degradation that led to environmental deteri-
oration by the seventh and eighth centuries AD and famine in the ninth
century. Thus population increase stimulated by favourable climatic condi-
tions could have come under great pressure when conditions became less
favourable. Signiﬁcantly, ecological degradation does seem to have become a
problem in some areas. Evidence excavated by Chittick at Aksum suggested
serious erosion of a hillside following tree clearance and cultivation (p. 127).
  According to D.W. Phillipson, population growth in the Aksum area even-
tually led to environmental collapse and depopulation, to which a sixth-
century outbreak of bubonic plague might have contributed (D.W. Phillipson
2012: 206–7, 209). The consequent decline was probably one of the causes of
a shift in the centre of the Aksumite state to north-eastern Tigray after the sixth
century. Indeed, it seems that resources were unequally distributed in north-
eastern Ethiopia and Eritrea and that some areas were under greater settlement
pressure than others. Partial conﬁrmation of this is provided by the settlement-
pattern survey undertaken by Michels in the Aksum area (p. 129–30). This
stratiﬁed random sampling survey demonstrated a growth in the population of
Aksum during the period AD 450–750 to a total estimated at 39,603, followed

142
                                       The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

by a decline in the succeeding period of AD 750–850 and population collapse
after 850 AD (Michels 2005). Moreover, according to D.W. Phillipson (2012:
120), Michel’s ﬁgure for Aksum’s maximum population was signiﬁcantly
underestimated. A growing population could have contributed to the emer-
gence of the city and state of Aksum, just as its decline contributed to their
collapse.


Ideology
Archaeological evidence from Ethiopia and Eritrea indicates that religion
played an important role in the emergence of the Aksumite state and in the
continued existence of its successors. The evidence also suggests that religion
contributed to the process of urbanization before and during Aksumite times
and to the eventual reappearance of urban living in the second half of the
second millennium AD. At ﬁrst, religion consisted of a complex polytheism
probably of South Arabian origin. From the fourth century AD onwards, for
both the later Aksumites and subsequent Ethiopians, the principal religion has
been Christianity of a distinctive Ethiopian type (Phillipson 1998; Finneran
2002: 120–47). Ullendorff (1960: 97) called Ethiopian Christianity ‘the most
profound expression of the national existence of the Ethiopians’, and it is
possible that the beliefs that pre-dated it had a similar signiﬁcance.
  The most obvious indication of the role of religion consists of the numerous
and impressive remains of temples and churches. The temple of Yeha was so
well built that after more than 2,500 years its ruins still stand to a height of
about 9 metres; the churches of Ethiopia are the most important surviving
structures of their period. The direction of resources into such buildings must
have been in the hands of the ruler and the elite, who no doubt expected in
return an ideological legitimization of their position.
  That such a legitimization was claimed by the monarchical Aksumite state is
indicated on the coins that were minted. The earlier ones showed the crescent
and disc, representing the moon and sun of earlier beliefs; the later ones
included the cross (Fig. 5.9), among the earliest coins of any country to do
so, according to Buxton (1970: 40). The stone-cut inscriptions of Ezana also
demonstrate the support that the monarchy sought from religion, calling ﬁrst
on pre-Christian deities and subsequently on the Christian god.
  In addition there are the stelae, particularly the larger stelae at Aksum that
seem to have been grave markers for royal burials (D.W. Phillipson 1994;
2000; 2012). As such, they appear to have had a religious role as well as being
symbols of state authority. Groups of holes at the tops of the storeyed stelae
(Fig. 5.3) have been thought to indicate the ﬁxing of religious symbols to the
stone. These symbols were probably of metal, but none survives. Consequently

                                                                           143
African Civilizations

there has been debate as to whether the symbols consisted of the crescent and
disc or the Christian cross (e.g., van Beek 1967: 118, 121). D.W. Phillipson has
shown that these stelae are, in fact, pre-Christian in date, and indeed a stela at
Matara does have a crescent and disc carved at its top. The more important
of these monuments must have played a signiﬁcant role in reinforcing the
power of the state.
   Perhaps less obvious is the contribution that religion made to urbanization.
The temple at Yeha and the tombs and stelae at Aksum suggest that these
urban developments were religious centres as well as commercial and adminis-
trative ones. Certainly it was as a religious and a ceremonial centre that Aksum
survived into modern times, so that Bent (1893) could call it ‘the sacred city of
the Ethiopians’. Also, in Ethiopia during much of the second millennium AD it
was religion that maintained the few static settlements: Lalibela might have
been principally a religious centre but its archaeological remains imply that
there must have been many people living in its vicinity. When urban centres
appeared again in the second half of the second millennium AD, the Church
still played an important role: Gondar, for example, is said to have had no less
than forty-four churches (Pankhurst 1979: 5). Clearly, something more than
religious fervour was involved; there were the politics of propitiating a power-
ful clergy and there was prestige for the ruler and supporting elite.


External trade
Aksum had trading contacts with the Roman provinces of the eastern
Mediterranean and with Egypt, Nubia, South Arabia, the Persian Gulf, India,
and Sri Lanka (Phillipson 1998: 69). Kobishchanov (1979: 175) used both
historical and archaeological sources to put together an impressive list of
goods imported into the Aksumite kingdom. They consisted of iron and
nonferrous metals, and artefacts made of them; articles of precious metals;
glass and ceramic items; fabrics and clothing; wine and sugarcane; vegetable
oils; aromatic substances; and spices. From historical sources, Kobishchanov
(1979: 172) also reconstructed the exports of Aksum. They comprised ivory,
gold, obsidian, emeralds, aromatic substances, rhinoceros horn, hippopot-
amus teeth and hide, tortoiseshell, slaves, monkeys, and other live animals.
These details suggest that Aksumite external trade was extensive and, like the
Nubian trade of the middle Nile, basically involved the exchange of raw
materials and African exotica for manufactured and luxury articles. It seems
unlikely that trade prior to the rise of Aksum was so widespread, and it is
apparent that post-Aksumite Ethiopia suffered from a comparative trading
isolation. It is tempting, therefore, to conclude that the Aksumite state was a
product of the international trade of its day. If Nubia was the corridor to

144
                                       The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

Africa, as Adams thought (Chapter 4), then it might be claimed that for a time
Aksum, through its port of Adulis, was a front door to the continent. Indeed, it
has been suggested that the rise of Adulis damaged the Nile Valley trade and
contributed to the decline of Meroë after the ﬁrst century AD.
   As regards the commodities that were imported and exported, archaeology
is both informative and disappointing. As is the case with Nubia, exports are
not well represented in the archaeological record. However, an elephant tusk
was found at Adulis (Anfray 1981: 377), and the Tomb of the Brick Arches at
Aksum has yielded evidence not only for Aksumite involvement in the ivory
trade but also for ﬁne craftsmanship in its utilization (Phillipson 2000). It
seems that Aksum became ‘a major supplier of ivory’ to the Mediterranean
world (D.W. Phillipson 2012: 196). Furthermore, occasional gold artefacts
from excavations in Aksum (Munro-Hay 1989: 210) and the ﬁnding of more
Aksumite gold coins in South Arabia than in Ethiopia itself (Munro-Hay 1991:
183) are indications of a trade in gold. The problem is that many of the other
commodities exported would either not have survived or would need to be
identiﬁed as of Aksumite origin in the country to which they were traded.
Archaeological evidence for imports is much better, although durables tend
to survive and consumables do not. In addition, soil and climatic conditions in
the Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands are not as conducive to the preservation
of organic materials as they are in the middle Nile Valley. As a result, most of
the evidence for imports consists of artefacts of metal, ceramic, and glass.
For example, Aksum and Adulis have produced Byzantine bronze artefacts,
and from Matara has come a Byzantine bronze lamp, two Byzantine gold
crosses, a necklace of Roman silver coins of the second to third centuries AD,
and a bronze lamp of South Arabian origin depicting a dog catching an
ibex (Kobishchanov 1979: 173–4). Even more remarkable is the hoard of
104 Indian coins of third-century date that were found at Debra Damo
(Munro-Hay 1982: 111). Examples of ceramic and glass imports are more
numerous. Aksum, for instance, has yielded amphorae of Mediterranean
origin, pottery imitative of Roman ﬁne ware, and glass ointment ﬂasks of
Roman and Egyptian manufacture (Kobishchanov 1979: 173). Such imports
as wine and oil, however, which must have been inside some of these pottery
and glass containers, have left no trace. Even textiles, which were probably
imported in signiﬁcant quantities, are represented only by occasional discov-
eries such as that of silk fabrics at Debra Damo, which originated from Coptic,
Mesopotamian, and Islamic Egyptian sources of sixth- to twelfth-century AD
date (Kobishchanov 1979: 174).
   Some conﬁrmation of the importance of Aksumite external trade is offered
by several other pieces of evidence. Thus, Aksum was the ﬁrst state in tropical
Africa to mint its own coinage, which was produced in gold, silver, and

                                                                           145
African Civilizations

bronze. It is noticeable that the Aksumite monetary system was similar to the
Byzantine system in weight, standard, and form (Kobish[ch]anov 1981: 386)
and that many of its coins, particularly the gold ones, were inscribed in Greek,
not Ge’ez (Munro-Hay 1991: 180–95). Therefore, it would seem likely that
coins were introduced because of Aksum’s participation in an international
trade that was accustomed to such a means of exchange. The earliest Aksumite
coins belong to the third century AD, the latest to the seventh century (Munro-
Hay 1991: 67–8), and it is surely signiﬁcant that they ceased to be issued at a
time when Aksum’s external trading interests were in decline. Nevertheless, of
the several thousand coins that are known, 90 percent have been found in
northern Ethiopia itself and consist mainly of bronze coins. A few bronze coins
have also been found in Egypt, Meroë, Israel, and Aqaba, but most of the gold
coins have come from South Arabia and, less certainly, from India (Kobish-
chanov 1979: 184; Munro-Hay 1991: 184; Phillipson 1998: 69). It would
appear that the coinage of Aksum had a rather limited circulation, although
foreign coins were imported into Aksum from South Arabian, Roman, and
Indian sources.
  A further indication of the importance of external trade to Aksum is the
geographical location of this state. Situated in the extreme north-eastern part
of the Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands, it was in an advantageous position to
take part in the Red Sea trade. It was sitting at the side of one of the major sea
routes of the ancient world and had easy contact with Arabia across the Red
Sea (Pankhurst 2004). Just as the coinage died when Aksum was excluded
from these routes, so too did the Aksumite state fade away. Indeed, during the
second millennium AD the political and cultural centre of Ethiopia was located
far to the south. By then the need was not for access to the Red Sea but for
isolation from Ethiopia’s enemies.
  The geographical location of Aksum in relation to the network of trade
routes within this part of Africa provides still more evidence for the role of
external trade in the development of this state and of its cities. According to the
Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, the journey from Adulis to Koloè (either
Kohaito or Matara) took three days, and the journey from Adulis to Aksum
took eight, as it apparently still did at the beginning of the twentieth century
(Kobishchanov 1979: 185). By the standards of ancient trade routes this was a
brief journey, and this route from Adulis to Aksum was, in fact, merely the
beginning of a route that led from the Red Sea to the Nile Valley, ending near
Meroë. Another route ran north-west from Aksum to the Aswan region, across
the Nubian Desert, a journey which took thirty days according to Cosmas
Indicopleustes. Yet another route ran south from Aksum to Lake Tana and
Sasu, the latter reputedly a source of Aksumite gold. According to Cosmas
Indicopleustes this journey took ﬁfty days. Branches from this route led,

146
                                        The Ethiopian and Eritrean Highlands

respectively, to Shoa and into the region of the African Horn (Kobishchanov
1979: 185–6). Thus Aksum was at the centre of a web of regional trade routes
(Sernicola and Phillipson 2011) that tapped the resources of the African
interior and injected some of them into the Red Sea trade.


Conclusion
Ethiopian and Eritrean isolation was relative to the circumstances of the
surrounding world. The Aksumite state of the ﬁrst millennium AD was able
to beneﬁt from its participation in regional and international trade and for a
time ruled parts of southern Arabia; the Ethiopian state of much of the second
millennium AD was able to isolate itself from hostile neighbours. Situated, as it
were, on the roof of the world, ancient Ethiopians could join or reject that
world as they wished. Thus can be explained the paradox of a people who
have spent much of their history forgotten by the rest of humanity but who
were, nevertheless, the creators of one of the earliest states and some of the
earliest cities in tropical Africa.
   It can be argued, therefore, that the geographical location of Ethiopia and
Eritrea and their mountainous environment played a basic role in these devel-
opments. In particular, the diversity of well-established agriculture made
possible by the great altitudinal range and inﬂuences from South Arabia
during the ﬁrst millennium BC provided a foundation for what followed. It
is signiﬁcant that the growth of social complexity during the last few centuries
BC and the ﬁrst few centuries AD took place in that part of the Ethiopian and
Eritrean plateau most accessible from the Red Sea coast. However, compared
with the surrounding lowlands, the highlands were healthier, had better soils,
and a greater range of agricultural adaptations, providing a fertile seedbed for
social change. In particular, the heartland of the Aksumite state lay in an area
with a strong agricultural resource base in cereals, other crops, and livestock.
This appears to have triggered localized increases in population and in popu-
lation density during a relatively favourable climatic period early in the ﬁrst
millennium AD. In such a situation and given likely rainfall variability,
episodes of stress brought on by periodic drought-induced famine would have
created temporary population pressures, which could be exploited by those
with access to land that was more productive. Such land was probably a
limited resource, the control of which could have provided a power base for
an emerging elite. Archaeological evidence indicates that by Aksumite times
there had developed a partly urbanized stratiﬁed society consisting of mon-
arch, surrounding elite, ‘middle class’, and peasant/slave class. It also suggests
a fair degree of functional specialization with a sophisticated technological
base. Furthermore, it is clear that the social order was conﬁrmed and

                                                                             147
African Civilizations

legitimized by religious dogma. Even the change from pre-Christian to Chris-
tian beliefs may be seen as a reinforcement of the prevailing social system,
in which control of people must have been as important as control of
productive land.
   To all this must be added the impact of external trade, particularly the
export of ivory, a highly valued commodity in much of the ancient world.
Such trade was not in itself a cause of social complexity but, nevertheless, was
a contributory factor of some importance. It is clear that the apogee of the
Aksumite state and cities was coterminous with Aksum’s involvement in the
Red Sea trade, but it is equally apparent that the state of Ethiopia, if not its
cities, was able to survive many centuries of comparative isolation from
international trade during the second millennium AD. However, the Red
Sea trade, conducted by Aksum through its port of Adulis, was actually part
of a widespread network of trade that Aksum had developed throughout
much of north-east Africa. Thus Aksum proﬁted from the role of entrepôt,
acquiring wealth and prestige from commodities mostly obtained from others.
If Ethiopia and Eritrea appear to have been isolated, this was clearly an
isolation that had its beneﬁts.




148
Chapter 6
Opportunity and constraint: the West
African savanna
In May 2012 the United Nations estimated that 18 million people in the Sahel
region of West Africa were suffering from food shortages caused by drought
and conﬂict and that nearly 1.5 million children were near starvation. The
Sahel was deﬁned broadly, although technically it is only the driest of the
savanna zones south of the Sahara Desert. Nevertheless, how could it be that
one of the areas of early urbanization and state formation considered in this
book is situated within this apparently disastrous zone? Clearly, its occupants
did not always face the bleak situation that now exists. Particularly this seems
to have been the case immediately bordering the southern edge of the Sahara,
which was the setting for important social and political developments during
the ﬁrst and second millennia AD. Some historical sources indicate conditions
that were far from bleak. For example, in the early sixteenth century Leo
Africanus said of Jenné, situated in the Inland Niger Delta on the edge of the
Sahel zone: ‘This place exceedingly aboundeth with barlie, rice, cattell, ﬁshes,
and cotton’ (Africanus 1896: vol. 3, 822). This description was by an outsider,
for Leo Africanus came from North Africa, but a local scholar, al-Sa’di,
writing in about 1655, wrote: ‘This city is large, ﬂourishing and prosperous;
it is rich, blessed and favoured by the Almighty . . . The area around Jenné
is fertile and well populated; with numerous markets held there on all the days
of the week’ (al-Sa’di 1964: 22–4). Although it was pointed out that al-Sa’di
might have been biased in favour of Jenné (McIntosh and McIntosh 1980:
vol. 1, 49), Bovill (1968: 135) thought that this was a ‘convincing tribute’.
Thus, it seems from historical sources, oral tradition, and archaeological data
as if the West African savanna was in the past a zone that offered opportunities
as well as constraints to the people who lived there.


Geographical location and environmental factors
Throughout the history of the human race in Africa, the most important
ecosystem in the continent has probably been the savanna. Rich in faunal
and ﬂoral resources, by the Holocene attractive for both cereal agriculture and
livestock rearing, it offered conditions of relatively easy movement in which
natural resources and manufactured products could be readily exchanged. The
most extensive area of savanna in Africa consists of a broad zone that stretches


                                                                           149
African Civilizations

from the Atlantic Ocean to the Gulf of Aden. This chapter is concerned with
the western part of that zone, the savanna lands to the west of Lake Chad.
  The West African savanna consists of grassland with varying densities of
trees and shrubs, situated between the tropical rainforest to the south and
the Sahara Desert to the north. In the past the Sahara formed what Bovill
(1968: 1) called ‘one of the world’s greatest barriers to human movement’,
although, as Bovill showed, trade repeatedly breached that barrier. Beyond lay
the lands of the Mediterranean, heart of the Roman and of the Medieval
world, with contacts deep into Eurasia. To the south was the tropical rainfor-
est and beyond that only the Atlantic Ocean, bordering a coast that until the
middle of the second millennium AD was to remain isolated from the rest of
the world. This is in contrast to the East African coast, discussed in Chapter 8,
where external contact is known to have been present for some 2,000 years.
Much of the coast of West Africa is uninviting when approached from the
sea: natural harbours are relatively few and most of the coast is fringed
by mangrove swamps or exposed surf-pounded beaches or is backed by
inhospitable desert. The real problem, however, is that south of Morocco,
along the Saharan coast, the prevailing winds are always from the north.
Given the technology of the ships of the ancient and Medieval worlds, it was
possible to sail south but impossible to return (Mauny 1978: 292–3). As a
result, Cape Bojador at about latitude 26 north remained effectively the
furthest south to which outside ships were able to penetrate until towards
the middle of the ﬁfteenth century AD. It was only at that time that circum-
stances changed, because of the adoption of the lateen sail and of the stern-post
rudder by seafarers of the western Mediterranean and Atlantic seaboard,
which enabled ships to sail into the wind as well as with the wind. Bovill also
emphasized the importance of the discovery that it was possible to return from
the West African coast, not by ﬁghting contrary winds along the coast but by
striking west into the Atlantic to pick up winds blowing from the south and
west. This discovery, discussed by Crosby (1986: 112–14), occurred about
1440 and was made possible, Bovill suggested, by the Portuguese adoption of
the caravel, a vessel that was much more manoeuvrable than earlier ships
(Bovill 1968: 115). The caravel had both lateen sails and a stern-post rudder.
  If the ocean could remain a barrier for so long, it is perhaps surprising that
so formidable a barrier as the Sahara Desert should have been successfully
breached by trade at least eight centuries earlier. The fact that it was has often
been explained as the result of another cultural innovation: the introduction to
Africa of the domesticated camel as a mode of transport over long distances
through arid regions (Bulliet 1975). It will be argued below that the ‘ship of
the desert’, as the camel has been called, did not inaugurate trans-Saharan
trade but, in the hands of people who knew how best to utilize its peculiar

150
                                                     The West African savanna

physiology, it undoubtedly led to a very substantial development of that trade.
The camel seems to have been brought into use in the Sahara during the ﬁrst
few centuries AD, coming originally from Arabia, although it appears to have
been known in Egypt for many centuries previously (Rowley-Conwy 1988).
It was not until after the seventh century AD, however, that the coming of the
Arabs to North Africa brought about the development of trans-Saharan
commerce based on the use of camel transport (Mauny 1978: 286–92).
   It would be a mistake, however, to think of the West African savanna as
merely a uniform zone, isolated to varying degrees through time by the desert,
the forest, and the ocean. Rather, it was a world of its own and a highly
complex world, richly endowed with resources. Indeed, the West African
savanna consists of a parallel series of different environmental zones, running
roughly from west to east and forming a part of a greater series of such zones
extending from south to north across West Africa. These zones have usually
been characterized in terms of vegetation differences; one of the best-known
attempts to do this was the map produced by Keay (1959). Thus a hypothetical
traveller, journeying north from the Nigerian coast, could traverse in less than
1,500 kilometres a whole range of environments, from coastal mangrove
swamp to true desert (Fig. 6.1). On the way she or he would pass through
tropical rainforest, forest–savanna mosaic, relatively moist woodlands and
savanna, relatively dry woodlands and savanna, wooded steppe, and subdesert
steppe. The close proximity of these different environments must have had an
important inﬂuence on the development of human culture in West Africa.
Because of the range of ecozones and ecotones that they presented, there was
both the necessity and the occasion for the exchange of raw materials and
products across environmental boundaries. Each environment possessed some
resources but lacked others. Thus salt was available in the desert and along
the coast but was relatively difﬁcult to obtain in the savanna, where for cereal
agriculturalists it was a physiological necessity (Alexander 1993b). Thus the
forest was deﬁcient in meat but the savanna supported very large numbers of
domestic animals, particularly cattle (Buchanan and Pugh 1955: 120–3). There
are many other examples, but the important point is that the complexity of the
West African environment provided conditions conducive to the development
of a complex network of regional trade. Within that network the West African
savanna, relatively easy to traverse, played an essential part. It is likely that
such trading activity was almost as old as West African food production, and,
indeed, its remoter origins must have been even earlier.
   Consider the main resources that would probably have been available in
the West African savanna 2000 to 3000 years ago. Foremost of these would
have been agricultural products: cereals such as sorghum, millet, fonio,
and African rice; several indigenous yams; vegetable oils such as those

                                                                            151
152




      Fig. 6.1 West African environmental zones showing area of major yam cultivation. After Keay 1959 and Coursey 1980: ﬁg. 1.
                                                       The West African savanna

obtained from the shea-butter tree and the oil palm; two African groundnuts;
cowpeas; black beniseed; and other things (Harris 1976: 329–32). There
would also have been meat, dairy products, and hides and skins from
the numerous cattle, sheep, and goats. Furthermore, food supplies could
have been supplemented by hunting wild animals and by ﬁshing; such ‘wild’
resources could in addition have provided ivory. Moreover, a number of wild
plants and trees could have contributed to human sustenance, particularly in
times when cultivated crops failed, while at all times botanical sources would
have been able to supply a wide range of useful raw materials, for baskets,
canoes, medicines, rooﬁng, and many other purposes (Dalziel 1937; Casey
1998). Important inorganic materials would have been available in the West
African savanna, as well: in particular, iron ore, alluvial gold, rocks suitable
for making grindstones, good building earths, and potting clays. Last, a
relatively high population density would have provided a resource in itself
that could have been exploited: the slave trade has a history in West Africa
which goes further back than the advent of Europeans on the Guinea Coast
(Alexander 2001).
   Nevertheless, the West African savanna was a zone of constraints as well
as opportunities. Foremost of these constraints was water availability. The
rainfall is markedly seasonal, the amount less and the wet season shorter
the further north one goes. Also the temperature increases as one goes north,
leading to a greater loss of surface water to evaporation, so that much of the
northern parts of the savanna consist for most of the year of a virtually
waterless landscape. Although drinking water for both domestic animals
and human beings is usually available by digging wells of varying depths, in
such conditions the margins of perennial rivers and lakes assume an especial
attraction for agriculturalists. It is in such areas that ‘ﬂoodwater farming’ in
its various forms has been of great importance. Such farming techniques – of
which ‘recessional cultivation’ (the cultivation of naturally watered areas as
ﬂoodwaters recede) is probably the most common – were one of the principal
ways of intensifying African agricultural systems. Such techniques seem to
have underlain the growth of social complexity in the Egyptian Nile Valley,
and in West Africa they existed (and still exist) both in the Inland Niger Delta
in Mali (Harlan and Pasquereau 1969) and around the southern edge of Lake
Chad (Connah 1985), as well as probably in other places. Nevertheless,
there is a second environmental constraint in the West African savanna that
sometimes discourages human settlement around the very bodies of water that
attract it. Of the major diseases found in the savanna that can seriously
damage human or animal health, sleeping-sickness and animal trypanosomia-
sis, malaria, schistosomiasis, ﬁlariasis, river blindness, and a range of intestinal
parasites are associated in one way or another with water. Clearly the West

                                                                               153
African Civilizations

African savanna was no earthly paradise but did offer considerable opportun-
ities to human groups that could adapt to its constraints.
   Signiﬁcantly, this interplay of opportunities and constraints was not static
through time, because even over the last 3,000 years there have been variations
in the West African climate which have had profound effects on human
societies in the savanna. Although conditions in West Africa were becoming
steadily drier from about 4,500 years ago, Brooks (1998) identiﬁed an arid
period between about 300 BC and about AD 300, a period of increased
rainfall from about AD 300 to about 1100, another dry period from about
1100 to about 1500, another period of increased rainfall from about 1500 to
about 1630, and yet another dry period from about 1630 to about 1860.
Dating these periods is uncertain, and in addition there have been frequent
shorter ﬂuctuations in rainfall, resulting in droughts similar to those of recent
decades and sometimes more severe (Shanahan et al. 2009). Within the
savanna, economic and social responses to these changes have tended to be
characterized by stability and growth during moister periods, and instability
and decline during drier periods. This is to claim not that climate has been
deterministic, but that it has been one of the factors that have shaped the
complex dynamic relationship of people and environment.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
Until late in the twentieth century, knowledge of the precolonial cities and
states of the West African savanna was mainly based on historical sources.
Some of these originated as oral traditions, but many of them consist of
documentation, usually in Arabic and mainly written by outsiders who at best
had only visited the area. The principal of these were al-Masudi, ibn Hawqal,
al-Bakri, al-Idrisi, Yaqut, al-Umari, ibn Battuta, ibn Khaldun, Leo Africanus,
al-Maqrizi, ibn Said, al-Sa’di, and ibn Fartua. Collectively they throw light on
the period roughly from the tenth century AD to the seventeenth century.
Similar sources also provide brief references to the West African savanna back
to the eighth century AD. Drawing on all these and other sources (including
the writings of mainly nineteenth-century European travellers, such as Park,
Denham, Clapperton, Caillié, and Barth), modern historians have been able
to reconstruct, in varying degrees of detail, the history of the most important
states of this area over the last 1,200 years or so. For example, Nehemiah
Levtzion (1973) examined the old states of Ghana and Mali, and John
Hunwick (1971) those of Songhai, Borno, and Hausaland. In fact, there exists
an extensive literature on the history of the regions that were known as the

154
                                                         The West African savanna

Western and Central Sudan. It is the character of the sources on which that
literature is based, however, that for a long time determined the standard
explanation of the development of cities and states in the West African
savanna. That explanation was most clearly stated by Levtzion:
  Sahil is the Arabic word for ‘shore’, which is well understood if the desert is
  compared to a sea of sand, and the camel to a ship. Hence, the towns which
  developed in the Sahel . . . may be regarded as ports. These towns became both
  commercial entrepôts and political centres. Those who held authority in these
  strategic centres endeavoured to extend it in order to achieve effective control over
  the trade. Thus trade stimulated a higher level of political organization, while the
  emergence of extensive states accorded more security to trade. Political develop-
  ments in the Western Sudan, throughout its history, are related to the changing
  patterns of intercontinental and trans-Saharan trade routes. (Levtzion 1973: 10)

In other words, cities and states in this zone developed as a result of external
stimulus, in the form of long-distance trade. In addition, this view usually
emphasized the role of Islam in these developments. Such an explanation
might be expected, of course, if sources are limited to post-eighth-century
AD documents written by people of Islamic culture, who mostly belonged
to lands beyond the Sahara. As a view of the later developments in the West
African savanna, it is no doubt sound, but does it adequately explain the
origins of these developments? Fortunately, there is another source of infor-
mation that has neither the chronological limitations of the historical sources
nor their possible prejudices: this consists of archaeological evidence, a source
that deserves more attention than formerly (Fig. 6.2).


Archaeological evidence
The archaeology of the West African savanna is still limited by insufﬁcient
ﬁeldwork and excavation. Furthermore, much of the earlier work was tech-
nically inadequate and publication was often poor or absent. There was also
a tendency to adopt research strategies designed to throw more light on
historically known sites. Mauny (1961) synthesized this earlier work, but
so little was known about the archaeology of the area that in 1979 McIntosh
and McIntosh (1979: 227) called the three millennia preceding the earliest
historical documentation the ‘silent millennia’. Similarly, Mauny himself
used the phrase ‘les siècles obscurs’ (the obscure centuries) in the title of a
book about the interface of history and archaeology in tropical Africa
(Mauny 1970).
  Nevertheless, archaeological research in the West African savanna is now
throwing new light on the origins of cities and states in this area. Perhaps the

                                                                                  155
156




      Fig. 6.2 Principal archaeological sites and places in West Africa mentioned in the text. This map is relevant to both Chapters 6 and 7. 1, Teghaza;
      2, Azugi; 3, Majâbat Al-Koubrâ; 4, Tichitt; 5, Tegdaoust; 6, Rao; 7, Siouré; 8, Cubalel; 9, Sincu Bara; 10, Dakar; 11, Koumbi Saleh; 12, Dia;
      13, Tondidarou; 14, Kouga; 15, Koi Gourrey; 16, Timbuktu; 17, Karkarichinkat; 18, Essouk-Tadmakka; 19, Talohos; 20, Kidal; 21, Azelik; 22,
      Jenné; 23, Galia; 24, Doupwil; 25, Hamdallahi; 26, El-Oualedji; 27, Gao; 28, Oursi hu-beero; 29, Kissi; 30, Niani; 31, Kirikongo; 32, Kong; 33,
      Daboya; 34, Birimi; 35, New Buipe; 36, Begho; 37, Nsawkaw; 38, Kintampo; 39, Bono Manso; 40, Kumasi; 41, Adansemanso and Asantemanso;
      42, Lake Bosumtwi; 43, Abomey and Cana; 44, Katsina; 45, Durbi Takusheyi; 46, Daura; 47, Kano; 48, Dufuna; 49, Birnin Gazargamo;
      50, Gajiganna; 51, Zilum; 52, Kursakata; 53, Daima; 54, DGB sites; 55, Zaria; 56, Turunku; 57, Nok; 58, Bussa; 59, Old Oyo; 60, Oyo; 61, Ife; 62,
      Iwo Eleru; 63, Ijebu-Ode; 64, Benin City; 65, Nsukka; 66, Igbo-Ukwu; 67, Obobogo; 68, Akonétye. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.
                                                    The West African savanna

earliest sign of complex societies in semi-arid West Africa is the appearance,
from about 4000 BC, of what MacDonald (1998) termed ‘Mobile Elites’,
based on transitory accumulations of pastoral wealth and power. This devel-
opment is represented in the archaeological record by evidence for cattle
herding, the making of valued objects in polished stone, and the construction
of mounds – some for burial and others for the ritual disposal of objects
belonging to the deceased. MacDonald suggested that, in favourable regions,
additional climatic or cultural stimuli resulted in these Mobile Elites develop-
ing into semi-sedentary chiefdoms by about 1500 BC. One of these, he claims,
was in the Dhar Tichitt-Walata area, in south-eastern Mauritania, where Holl
(1985) studied a large series of drystone-built settlement sites dating from
about 4,000 to about 2,000 years ago, which are strung out along more than
100 kilometres of sandstone cliffs. Towards the end of their occupation these
sites formed a settlement hierarchy of four ranks: seventy-two hamlets with
less than twenty compounds each, twelve small villages with twenty to ﬁfty
compounds each, ﬁve large villages with 120 to 198 compounds each, and one
regional center, Dakhlet el Atrous I, measuring 92.75 hectares with 590
compounds, which could be described as a city. The communities in these
settlements practised mixed farming based on grain cultivation (particularly
bulrush millet: Pennisetum sp.) and the herding of cattle, sheep, and goats.
They also exploited wild grains and fruits, ﬁshed in the freshwater lakes that
then existed, and hunted a range of wild animals. Climatic deterioration
almost certainly played a part in concentrating population into this area. It
also eventually led to the abandonment of the settlements and their survival as
archaeological sites, providing us with some of the earliest indications of
developing social complexity in the West African savanna and the adjacent
Sahara (Fig. 6.3).
   The ideas of MacDonald and Holl challenged previous ideas about the
processes and timing of social change in West Africa. Perhaps the greatest
challenge, however, came from the work of Susan and Roderick McIntosh in
the late 1970s and early 1980s on the settlement mounds of the Inland Niger
Delta of Mali (McIntosh and McIntosh 1980; McIntosh 1995; McIntosh
1998; 2005). By combining regional surface investigations with excavations
at the sites of Jenné-jeno, Hambarketolo, and Kaniana, the McIntoshs were
able to trace the emergence of urbanism in this area, from its apparent origins
in about the third century BC to the foundation in the early second millen-
nium AD of the nearby historical city of Jenné. At Jenné-jeno the settlement
had grown to at least 12 hectares by about the ﬁrst century AD and reached
its maximum extent of 33 hectares by about the ninth century (Fig. 6.4).
At this latter stage it consisted of a packed mass of compounds, containing
both round and rectangular mud houses, that was surrounded by a

                                                                           157
158




      Fig. 6.3 Plan of Dakhlet el Atrous I, Mauritania, the largest Dhar Tichitt settlement site, 92.75 hectares in size. The dots represent
      tumuli, and the enclosures are stone compound and corral walls, not houses. After MacDonald 1998: ﬁg. 4.5.
                                                         The West African savanna




Fig. 6.4 Plan of Jenné-jeno, Mali, showing growth. After McIntosh 1995: ﬁg. 10.3.



mud-brick city wall some 2 kilometres long. Its population has been esti-
mated at between 4,800 and 12,800, and if the adjacent site of Hambarke-
tolo is included, along with twenty-ﬁve other contemporary satellite sites
clustered around Jenné-jeno within a 1-kilometre radius, a population of
10,000 to 26,700 is possible. Although such a high density might have been
exceptional, this is only a relatively small part of the Inland Niger Delta,
suggesting that there was an overall population buildup in the area from late
in the ﬁrst millennium BC to early in the second millennium AD. Excavated
evidence from Jenné-jeno suggests that the economic base for this develop-
ment consisted of mixed farming on the seasonally inundated ﬂoodplain and
its margins, particularly involving rice and cattle, but it is apparent that
ﬁshing, hunting, and the gathering of wild plant food were also important.

                                                                                    159
African Civilizations

In addition, both metallurgy and other craftsmanship were well developed,
and Jenné-jeno participated in a trading network with a radius of at least 350
kilometres. Yet so far as any external stimulus is concerned, such as that
suggested by Levtzion, ‘Jenné-jeno is too big, too early, and too far south’
(McIntosh and McIntosh 1980: vol. 2, 448).
   Although the evidence from Jenné-jeno has established a convincing case for
the indigenous development of urbanism in the Inland Niger Delta, it has not
demonstrated the existence there of a stratiﬁed sociopolitical hierarchy or
centralized authority (McIntosh and McIntosh 1993a), unless it is argued that
the construction of the city wall indicates the latter. As a result, the site
provides little information about the origins of state formation in the West
African savanna. Possibly we should reexamine our theoretical assumptions,
as the McIntoshs have suggested, but the amount of excavation that has been
done is still very small considering the size and number of the sites involved.
This is a characteristic problem of urban archaeology, although one that
systematic multiple coring of deposits might eventually overcome to some
extent. Nevertheless, the homogeneity of material culture over a considerable
area of the Middle Niger, the existence of a three-tier settlement hierarchy in
the Jenné-jeno area, and a positive correlation of site size with surface artefact
diversity on sites within a 4-kilometre radius of Jenné-jeno suggest that at its
maximum development the city might indeed have formed the centre of a
sociopolitical or economic development larger than its own immediate urban
environment (McIntosh 1995: 410). However, R.J. McIntosh (2005: 187) has
argued that this was not a hierarchy but ‘a highly complex society organized
horizontally, a heterarchy, with multiple overlapping and competing agencies
of resistance to centralization’. This is an important idea that calls into ques-
tion the traditional ideas of urban hierarchical evolution, for both Africa and
some other parts of the world.
   Archaeological ﬁeld research in other parts of the Middle Niger and
adjacent regions has shown that past urban development was no isolated
phenomenon. In the Timbuktu region, for instance, surface and excavated
evidence indicate settlement growth in the ﬁrst millennium AD, although
followed by decline caused by increasing aridity (Post Park 2010). The
same seems to have occurred in the Méma region to the west of the Inland
Niger Delta (Togola 2008), and probably also in the Lakes Region of
the Middle Niger (McIntosh 1994: 178). However, Gao Ancien, on the Niger
to the east of Timbuktu, revealed a sequence of archaeological deposits
from the sixth or seventh century AD to the ﬁfteenth or sixteenth century
(Insoll 1996a: 41). Subsequent work, at both Gao Ancien and the nearby
site of Gao Saney (Sané on p. 180), indicated occupation beginning in
the seventh or eighth century and produced substantial evidence for

160
                                                       The West African savanna

long-distance trade in glass beads and copper during the eighth to tenth
centuries (Cissé et al. 2013).
  More than 1,000 kilometres to the north-west, the Middle Senegal Valley
has presented a different picture from that of the Middle Niger. Although
this is also a ﬂoodplain initially colonized about 2,000 years ago, which
has a large number of clustered settlement mounds, most Middle Senegal
Valley sites remained small, and the excavated evidence from Cubalel and
Siouré indicates a small-scale society that changed little throughout the ﬁrst
millennium AD. Only at the end of that millennium did major changes in
scale and complexity take place, at the same time as a sudden expansion of
trading contacts, changes that led to the emergence of the so-called Takrur
Empire at the beginning of the second millennium AD. It has been suggested
that this contrast in the organization of society, on the Middle Niger and
the Middle Senegal, resulted from differences in the distribution of land-
forms. Evenly distributed subsistence opportunities on the Middle Senegal
favoured an even distribution of population in small groups, whereas on the
Middle Niger a very uneven distribution of such opportunities encouraged
more specialization. Jenné-jeno and a number of other settlements, such
as Kalifa Gallou (40 hectares), Dia (50 hectares), Toladie (85 hectares), and
Soy (110 hectares), grew up as urban centres because of their unusually
advantageous positions (McIntosh et al. 1992; McIntosh 1994: 178–9). An
apparent exception in the Middle Senegal Valley is the site of Sincu Bara,
of the ﬁrst millennium AD, 67 hectares in extent with occupation deposits
up to 3 metres in depth but lacking obvious mounds (McIntosh and
Bocoum 2000).
  The success of the McIntoshs’ research stems at least in part from their early
realization that:

  the most effective way to investigate the appearance and development of the pre-
  colonial town in West Africa is not to excavate only the town site, but to document
  and explain the evolution of the settlement hierarchy of which the town is the
  summit. (McIntosh and McIntosh 1980: vol. 2, 346)

Instead, much of the ﬁeld research by other archaeologists, particularly the
older work, has tended to focus on the sites of cities or towns which can, with
varying degrees of certainty, be identiﬁed in the historical sources (Fig. 6.2).
For instance, important excavations have been conducted at Tegdaoust, in the
Mauritanian desert, of which the main site is 12 hectares in size. Work over
many years revealed multiple phases of occupation, much of it the remains of
stone buildings provided with facilities including wells, hearths, and latrines
(Fig. 6.5). The earliest phase was preurban, and the entire occupation is
thought to extend from the seventh to the sixteenth century AD (Holl 2006

                                                                                161
African Civilizations

summarizes earlier publications). The site has been identiﬁed with the histor-
ically known town of Awdaghost, which was a desert port-of-trade on one of
the trans-Saharan routes. The excavated evidence indicates that Tegdaoust
became a ﬂourishing Islamic town, heavily involved with trade beyond the
desert. In contrast, the site of Niani, in Guinea, is of uncertain signiﬁcance.
Its excavator claimed it to have been the capital of the old state of Mali,
but excavations did not reveal the wealth of Arab imports that might have
been expected (Filipowiak 1969). Other writers suggested that the real
capital was much further to the north-east; Conrad (1994) argued that its
location changed more than once. The radiocarbon dates for Niani are from
the sixth to the tenth centuries AD and suggest a reoccupation in about the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries (Calvocoressi and David 1979: 15–16, 23;
Sutton 1982: 306, 311). The gap in these dates further reduces the likelihood
that this was the capital of the state of Mali at the height of its power in the
fourteenth century, although Holl (2006: 2–3) appears to think that it could
have been.
   However, the site of Koumbi Saleh, in Mauritania, is thought by most
scholars to have been the capital city of the old state of Ghana. Excavations
have been conducted there on a number of occasions, some of the earliest
being those of Thomassey and Mauny (1951; 1956). This site, of 49 hectares
with stone buildings of several storeys and extensive cemeteries, is clearly of
great importance. Although Thomassey and Mauny failed to explore its
lower occupation levels, excavations by Robert and Robert (1972) and later
by Berthier have remedied that omission. There are now radiocarbon dates
for the site extending from the ninth to the ﬁfteenth century AD (Berthier
1997: 102; Holl 2006: 13). The problem with Koumbi Saleh is that in the
eleventh century al-Bakri described it as consisting of two towns: an Islamic
town and a royal town (Levtzion 1973: 22–3). Unfortunately, it seems that it
is the Islamic town that has been excavated; evidence for indigenous origins
would be more likely to be found in the native town than in the strangers’
town.
   An important excavation of an early West African urban complex was
conducted in 2005 at the site of Essouk-Tadmakka, in Mali (Nixon 2009).
This was a major Saharan trading town at a place ﬁrst mentioned by Ibn
Hawqal in the tenth century AD. Its main site covers 50 hectares, and excav-
ation at the EKA location in its centre revealed horizontally stratiﬁed deposits
6.5 metres in depth, containing the remains of both dry-stone and pisé struc-
tures dating from the middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD to c. 1400. Excavation
at this location and at EKB and EKC shed light on the changing scale of trade
over time, in particular providing unprecedented eighth- and ninth-century AD
evidence for extensive trade. The investigations were also informative about

162
163   Fig. 6.5 Plan of Building Sequence 6, eleventh century AD, at Tegdaoust, Mauritania. This shows the site in its most developed stage.
      After Holl 2006, ﬁg. 13.
African Civilizations

the character of the Saharan trade, the town being advantageously situated in
the Sahel, on the route from North Africa to the Niger Bend. The discovery
in the EKA excavation of coin moulds containing traces of gold, dated to the
ninth to tenth century AD, is evidence of the early development of the gold
trade and of the ﬁrst coins in West Africa, although probably these were only
blanks that were subsequently minted in North Africa (Nixon et al. 2011).
Social conditions in the town are indicated by carefully built living spaces in
EKA and also by a latrine pit in the EKB excavation.
  There are many other archaeological sites of cities or towns that can be
identiﬁed, or tentatively identiﬁed, in the historical record. Although excav-
ations have been conducted at some of these places, they have tended to be
limited in scale and to concentrate on second-millennium Islamic deposits.
Examples include Azelik (Niger), possibly Takedda visited by ibn Battuta in
1353 (McIntosh and McIntosh 1984: 85); Birnin Gazargamo (Nigeria), capital
of Borno dating from the ﬁfteenth century AD (Bivar and Shinnie 1962;
Connah 1981); Kong (Ivory Coast), a trading town dating from the sixteenth
century AD (Sutton 1982: 306–7, 311); and Hamdallahi (Mali), which lasted
for only a few decades in the nineteenth century but has been called the biggest
city of precolonial West Africa (Gallay et al. 1990; Mayor 1996). Other places
that have been subject to excavation are Azugi, in Mauritania, and Marandet,
in Niger (Holl 2006). Kano, Zaria, and Katsina in Nigeria have not yet
attracted signiﬁcant attention from excavators.
  In addition to those historically known, there are numerous other large
settlement sites. For example, excavations at the settlement mound of Tongo
Maaré Diabal, on the eastern edge of the Middle Niger area, have shown
that this 9-hectare ‘town’ was occupied from about AD 200 to about 1200.
Also, work by Bedaux and others (1978) on the two settlement mounds of
Doupwil and Galia in the Inland Niger Delta revealed settlements that
were ﬁrst occupied in the eleventh century AD. Each of the latter sites
were probably about 8 hectares in area, before erosion, compared with
the approximately 12 hectares of Tegdaoust. Other settlement mounds
of importance are those south of Lake Chad, on the ﬁrki clay plains of
north-east Nigeria (Daima is the best known), some of which constitute the
remains of quite large settlements whose origins lie in the ﬁrst millennium BC
(Connah 1981). These are only part of a group of 822 known mounds that
also extend across northern Cameroon and into south-western Chad (Holl
1996: 581). Although many of the settlements represented by these mounds
were probably too small to be considered urban, they are nevertheless
relevant to an investigation of West African urban origins in the context of
a McIntosh regional settlement hierarchy. In northern Cameroon, for
instance, Holl (1996: 589) suggested a settlement hierarchy of at least three

164
                                                    The West African savanna

levels: ‘open mounds of different but generally small size; walled sites, former
village chiefdoms and later district centres; and ﬁnally paramount central
settlements’. Examples of the central settlements were from 7 to more than
20 hectares in area, and probably represent the origins of the walled cities
and small states that were historically recorded in this region from the
sixteenth to the nineteenth century AD (Gronenborn 2001). Also indicative
of sociopolitical change in the same region are the sixteen so-called DGB sites
in the Mandara Mountains of northern Cameroon. These remarkable dry-
stone structures, consisting of platforms, terraces, and other features, appear
to date from about the ﬁfteenth century AD, are mostly less than 4 hectares in
size, and remain of uncertain function. Nevertheless, their construction
required substantial labour and skill that suggest growing social complexity
(MacEachern and David 2013).
  Enclosing settlements with walls of stone or earth, with banks and ditches,
or merely with timber palisades or naturally grown vegetation seems to have
been widespread in Africa over the last 3,000 to 4,000 years (Connah 2000a;
2000b) but became particularly common in West Africa during the second
millennium AD. Probably this resulted from increased competition for
resources, as populations expanded or environmental conditions deteriorated.
In the West African savanna many towns and cities sought to protect them-
selves in this way, especially with the increasing use of horses in warfare from
the thirteenth or fourteenth century onwards. By about the ninth century,
however, Jenné-jeno was already walled. Much earlier is the evidence of a
fortiﬁed settlement at Zilum, in north-east Nigeria, in the middle of the ﬁrst
millennium BC (Fig. 6.6). This was a settlement of 12 hectares, with an
estimated population of 1,750 to 2,500. A combination of magnetic survey
and excavation revealed the details of this site, a reminder of how much might
be learned if a similar methodology was used at other large settlement sites
(Magnavita et al. 2006).
  Although primarily a protective strategy, almost certainly the enclosing of
large settlements had other functions as well: it assisted in the governance of
the inhabitants, made taxation and control of trade easier, clearly distin-
guished city-dwellers from outsiders, and imparted prestige to rulers. It has
also provided archaeologists with important physical evidence. The surviving
remains of these enclosures should have encoded in them information about
many aspects of the societies that constructed them. Archaeological investi-
gation of those remains might be able to throw light on the size and shape of a
former settlement and on changes through time in that size and shape, as well
as on numerous other matters. Appropriate research strategies include map-
ping of city enclosures, giving attention to location, layout, and structural
sequence, and the excavation of sections through the remains of such

                                                                           165
African Civilizations




Fig. 6.6 Magnetogram of the settlement at Zilum, north-east Nigeria, showing the
enclosing ditch and other features. The ‘anomaly-free-buffer’ is probably the location of a
vanished bank or wall. Z8, Z11, and Z17 indicate test excavations of the ditch. From
Magnavita et al. 2006, ﬁg. 5. Reproduced by permission of Africa Magna Verlag, Frankfurt
am Main.


structures and especially through the accumulated silt of any accompanying
ditch or ditches. However, relatively little such work has been done, and the
evidence is fast disappearing (Connah 2000a).
  An example that has been investigated to some extent is the formerly
massive city wall of Kano in the north of Nigeria, apparently constructed
of both mud-bricks and dumped earth. In the mid-1820s Captain Hugh
Clapperton recorded it as about 24 kilometres in length, with ﬁfteen entry
gates and with heights of more than 9 metres and a dry ditch on both the

166
                                                     The West African savanna

inner and outer sides (Denham et al. 1826, Clapperton’s Narrative, 50).
In 1885 Paul Staudinger claimed the wall to be ‘probably twenty metres
high’ (Staudinger 1889, trans. Moody 1990: vol. 1, 210), and Frederick
Lugard, faced with the task of storming the wall in 1902, admitted: ‘I have
never seen, nor even imagined, anything like it in Africa’ (Lugard 1903: 28).
It is therefore fortunate that we do have a surface archaeological
study of the remains of the wall as they were in the mid-1960s, in which
they were assessed in the context of the oral and documentary record
(Fig. 6.7). This study, by H.L.B. Moody, identiﬁed three phases of growth
in the Kano wall system: in the eleventh to twelfth century AD, the late
ﬁfteenth century, and the seventeenth century, a sequence documenting
the growing size and importance of the city (Moody n.d. [1970]). Sadly,
there have been few attempts to emulate this work, at least so far as
accessible publications indicate, although the 6-square-kilometre walled site
of Turunku, near Zaria in northern Nigeria, has been the subject of a
preliminary study (Effah-Gyamﬁ 1986). The seriousness of this omission
may be judged from the fact that in 1904 Lugard reported that there were
forty walled cities within a 48-kilometre radius of Kano alone (Moody n.d.
[1970]: 18). Clearly, ﬁeld survey and excavation of the precolonial city
and town walls of the West African savanna have the potential to add
signiﬁcantly to our understanding of the origins and development of urban-
ization in the region.
  In addition to settlement sites, there are numerous burial sites that can
provide information about the growth of social complexity in the West African
savanna. Best known of these are tumuli, or burial mounds, which are found
particularly in Mali but also occur as far west as the coast of Senegal and as far
east as the extreme north of Nigeria. McIntosh and McIntosh (1980: vol. 1,
31–6) distinguished three types of burial mound in Mali: stone tumuli, in the
Sahara; earthen tumuli, in the dry savanna to the west and east of the Inland
Niger Delta; and tumuli covering rock-cut tombs, in the wooded savanna. It is
the earthen tumuli, dating principally to the late ﬁrst and early second millen-
nium, which have provided the most relevant evidence for our inquiry. Both
the size of these tumuli and the grave goods buried with the dead indicate
differences in social status. Indeed, some of the larger earthen tumuli appear to
have been remarkable structures. Thus some of them had their outer layers of
clay baked rock-hard by numerous small ﬁres that were lit on the mound
surface. An example of such a tumulus is the 15- to 18-metre-high mound of
Koi Gourrey (also known as Killi) in Mali (Desplagnes 1903), where two
individuals had been buried with varied grave goods and with twenty-ﬁve to
thirty other people, presumably sacriﬁces. Equally impressive was the tumulus
of El-Oualedji, also in Mali, which was 12 metres high and contained a

                                                                             167
Fig. 6.7 Plans of the Kano city walls, Nigeria, from a survey in the mid-1960s,
identifying three phases of growth (a, b, and c). After Moody n.d. [1970]: 39–41.


168
                                                        The West African savanna

wooden funerary chamber, in which two individuals had been buried with
accompanying objects (Desplagnes 1951; R. J. McIntosh 1998: 224–7). These,
and perhaps a small number of other tumuli, indicate burial rites of the sort
recorded by al-Bakri in the middle of the eleventh century for the kings of the
state of Ghana:

  When the king dies, they build a huge dome of wood over the burial place. Then they
  bring him on a bed lightly covered, and put him inside the dome. At his side they
  place his ornaments, his arms and the vessels from which he used to eat and drink,
  ﬁlled with food and beverages. They bring in those men who used to serve his food
  and drink. Then they close the door of the dome and cover it with mats and other
  materials. People gather and pile earth over it until it becomes like a large mound.
  Then they dig a ditch around it so that it can be reached only from one place.
  (al-Bakri, as quoted by Levtzion 1973: 25–6)

Indications of the age of these large earthen tumuli are provided by radiocar-
bon dates: the early eleventh century AD for El-Oualedji (McIntosh and
McIntosh 1986: 428, 439); the tenth to eleventh century for a tumulus
at Kouga, in Mali (McIntosh and McIntosh 1980: vol. 1, 31); the eighth to
the eleventh century for three tumuli at Toyla, Tissalaten, and Kawinza, in the
Lakes Region of the Inland Niger Delta (McIntosh and McIntosh 1986:
428–9, 439); and the seventh century for tumuli associated with the Tondi-
darou standing stones, in Mali (Saliège et al. 1980; McIntosh and McIntosh
1986: 428, 439). It has been suggested that some of the grave goods from these
mounds reﬂect ‘the increasing wealth and power of groups controlling the ﬂow
of trade goods along the Middle Niger’. Possibly this increasing social stratiﬁ-
cation, plus the development of iron production in the Lakes Region and in the
adjacent Méma region and the urban growth of Jenné-jeno, were all related in
some way to the consolidation of the Empire of Ghana.
  Perhaps the most impressive burial evidence comes from a number of tumuli
in the Rao region of north-west Senegal, north-east of Dakar. These mounds
yielded a remarkable collection of grave goods, including jewellery of silver
and gold; one item of gold is a decorated disc of exceptional workmanship,
184 millimetres in diameter and 191 grams in weight. There were also an iron
sword, beads, and objects of copper (of which two were Moroccan lidded
bowls). These ﬁnds have been dated to a period for the northern Senegalese
tumuli from the tenth century AD, continuing into the second millennium
(Joire 1955; McIntosh and McIntosh 1993b: 104). It is thought that there
were until recently more than 10,000 tumuli in Senegal, and collective inhum-
ations often with rich grave furnishings have been found in a number of them
(McIntosh and McIntosh 1993b: 75). The southern tumuli have been dated to
approximately AD 700 to 1000, possibly earlier than those to the north but


                                                                                 169
African Civilizations

later than the earliest of the numerous megalithic sites, with which they
overlap in time and space (McIntosh and McIntosh 1993b: 104–5). Found
in both Senegambia and Mali, these arrangements of standing stones, in
Senegambia apparently with associated burials and evidence of human sacri-
ﬁce (Gallay et al. 1982), have proved difﬁcult to date, but radiocarbon and
pottery analysis suggest that they belong principally to the second half of the
ﬁrst millennium AD and the ﬁrst half of the second (Gallay 2010). Collectively,
the wealthy burials and monumental funerary structures of Senegal suggest
increasing social differentiation by people who were in touch with both the
gold-producing areas to their south and the Arab markets of the Mediterra-
nean world to the north. Perhaps this is an archaeological expression of state
emergence, in this case of the so-called Empire of Takrur (p. 161) or of some
related polity.
   Far to the south-east, between Katsina and Daura in northern Nigeria, the
tumuli of Durbi Takusheyi also provide evidence of an elite, in this area
relating to the emerging Hausa city-states of the fourteenth to sixteenth
centuries AD (Griffeth 2000). Excavation of three of the at least eight mounds
at this site revealed a single burial in each. Copper, bronze, brass, iron, silver
alloy, and gold grave goods accompanied these, as well as cowries, glass beads,
carnelian beads, ivory bracelets, and the remains of textiles (Fig. 6.8). The
copper/copper alloy items included bracelets and anklets, buckets, and other
items including bowls, one of which is inscribed in Arabic (p. 67) and indicates
trading contacts with North Africa or further aﬁeld (Fig. 3.10). Two of the
buried individuals are presumed to have been interred in a seated position and
were possibly male; the third was accompanied by two earrings, a pendant,
two rings, and other jewellery, all of gold, which suggest the deceased was
female. Overall, the Durbi Takusheyi burials are important evidence of an
hierarchical state with wide trading connections (Gronenborn 2011: 70–107;
Gronenborn et al. 2012).
   All the tumuli discussed above appear to represent non-Islamic burial prac-
tices, but such practices seem to have been varied; not only was there inhum-
ation in tumuli, but some small earthen tumuli west of the Inland Niger Delta
contained cremations in pottery urns. Indeed, the usual burial rite in the Inland
Niger Delta seems to have been inhumation in large pottery urns (McIntosh
and McIntosh 1980: vol. 1, 36–7). Other non-Islamic burial practices are also
recorded archaeologically from the last three millennia in the West African
savanna. However, although many of these are probably pre-Islamic in date,
some could be later than the introduction of Islam to the area, which was
certainly in progress by the eleventh century AD. This is because the replace-
ment of previous practices by Islamic rites is likely to have been a gradual
process, rather than an abrupt change.

170
Fig. 6.8 Elite burial in Tumulus 5, Durbi Takusheyi, northern Nigeria, probably of the
fourteenth century AD. The grave goods included two massive copper-alloy anklets, ingots
of brass, other metal items, ivory bracelets, and cowrie and glass beads. The burial had
probably been in a seated position from which it had subsequently collapsed. Drawing by
Vera Kassühlke, Römisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum (RGZM). Reproduced by
permission of Detlef Gronenborn (RGZM).
African Civilizations

Subsistence economy
Livestock husbandry and cereal cultivation seem to have been ﬁrmly established
in the West African savanna by the ﬁrst millennium BC (Klee and Zach 1999;
MacDonald and MacDonald 1999; Neumann 1999). For example, there
is evidence for domesticated cattle and small stock, as well as for both domesti-
cated and wild Pennisetum sp. (bulrush [pearl] millet) at Karkarichinkat (Mali)
in the second millennium BC (Smith 1992: 73–4). Also, Pennisetum was being
grown by the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium BC at Dhar Tichitt, in Maurita-
nia, as part of a mixed farming strategy that included the herding of cattle,
sheep, and goats (Munson 1976). Furthermore, from Jenné-jeno there is direct
evidence for the cultivation of Oryza glaberrima (African rice), Pennisetum, and
sorghum from about the third century BC onwards. These were apparently part
of a diversiﬁed subsistence economy that also included substantial amounts of
Brachiaria ramosa, a wild millet, and other wild cereals, as well as domesticated
cattle, sheep or goats, and hunting and ﬁshing. The occupation of Jenné-jeno
lasted until about the fourteenth century AD; the economy remained remarkably
stable throughout this period of approximately 1,600 years, although hunting
became less important and the breed of cattle changed (MacDonald 1995: 313).
This stability was despite climatic and demographic changes (McIntosh 1994:
172–3; 1995: 377–9). The strength of the subsistence base may be judged from
the growth of this settlement, from at least 12 hectares by the beginning of the
ﬁrst millennium AD to a maximum of about 33 hectares towards the end of
that millennium (Fig. 6.4). Indeed, the distribution of archaeological sites on
the ﬂoodplain near Jenné-jeno indicates that towards the end of the ﬁrst millen-
nium the population density of the Inland Niger Delta was probably greater
than at present. This was at a time when the climate of this area seems to have
been wetter than usual, so that to a large extent this could explain the greater
population density (McIntosh and McIntosh 1980: vol. 2, 428; R. J. McIntosh
2005: 84). Another factor of importance, however, might have been the practice
of recessional cultivation (the cultivation of naturally watered areas as ﬂood-
waters recede), probably for growing rice. Recessional cultivation can constitute
a form of agricultural intensiﬁcation (Connah 1985), so perhaps urban growth
in the Inland Niger Delta was supported by one of the relatively rare examples
of African intensive agriculture. Whatever the case, the subsistence economy of
the area seems to have been particularly successful. Indeed, the McIntoshs
suggest that it was the agricultural surplus of the Inland Niger Delta that
provided much of the food for urban centres situated in less fortunate areas
such as Timbuktu, Gao, and places further aﬁeld. In such movement of food-
stuffs, canoe transport on the Niger River seems to have played a major role
(McIntosh and McIntosh 1980: vol. 2, 448–50).


172
                                                    The West African savanna

  Cultivation was already practised by about 1000 BC both in the Chad basin
and in northern Burkina Faso. The settlement mound of Kursakata, in the
Nigerian part of the former area, has produced grains of cultivated Pennisetum
glaucum from the period between about 800 BC and about AD 100, and
domesticated cattle and sheep or goats were present at the two settlement
mounds of Gajiganna by about 1000 BC (Breunig et al. 1996; Neumann et al.
1996; Klee and Zach 1999). Signiﬁcantly, the Chad basin is another area
where recessional cultivation could have given the inhabitants an advantage,
and it seems likely that most cases of increasing social complexity in the West
African savanna had an agricultural base that was exceptional in some way,
and therefore had the potential to produce a surplus. Probably this was
frequently in the form of grain, which could be stored or transported. This
meant that the surplus produce of more fortunate regions could support urban
centres situated on trade routes at the edge of the desert. It also meant that
specialists could be supported within those urban centres. Climatic and envir-
onmental deterioration might by the twenty-ﬁrst century have rendered the
West African savanna less agriculturally viable than it was a thousand years
ago. The McIntoshs’ evidence for this in the Inland Niger Delta is not the only
evidence. A drop in the level of Lake Chad during the last millennium indicates
that such deterioration might have been general in the West African savanna
(Brunk and Gronenborn 2004), in spite of a relatively wetter period in about
the seventeenth century.
  The excavation of Oursi hu-beero, a house complex in northern Burkina
Faso belonging to the eleventh century AD, has provided a remarkable insight
into the details of a Sahelian subsistence economy (Petit et al. 2011). Pearl
millet (Pennisetum glaucum), cowpea (Vigna unguiculata), and Bambara
groundnut (Vigna subterranea) were the main cultivated plant foods, but
Sorghum bicolor and Hibiscus sp. were also consumed, as were a range of
wild plants and tree products. Domesticated animals included cattle, sheep,
and goats, and dogs were eaten. Chicken were kept and also horses or
donkeys. Fishing, hunting, and collecting molluscs contributed additional
animal protein; a wide variety of fauna was eaten including monitor lizards,
crocodiles, lesser pouched rats, hares, and antelopes. The use of such diverse
food resources seems to have been typical of the drier savanna, as a strategy to
minimise the risk of starvation, and has continued into modern times.


Technology
Iron technology emerged in West Africa no later than the middle of the ﬁrst
millennium BC (Pole 2010). Copper was also being smelted by a similar date
(McIntosh 1994: 173–5; Woodhouse 1998). Evidence from Jenné-jeno

                                                                           173
African Civilizations

indicates that the occupants of the settlement mounds in the Inland Niger
Delta were using iron from the time of their arrival late in the ﬁrst millennium
BC, in spite of the nearest iron ore being 50 kilometres away (McIntosh and
McIntosh 1986: 427; McIntosh 1995: 380). In addition, the builders of the
tumuli and of the megaliths discussed above seem to have been iron users.
Although the condition of excavated iron is often poor, it is clear that the metal
was being used for a variety of purposes by the ﬁrst millennium AD, ranging
from weapons and tools to bracelets and other jewellery (e.g., Fabre 2009:
ﬁgure 4). There is also evidence that these were indigenous products, in the
form of furnace remains, slag, and other indications that smelting and black-
smithing were widespread (e.g., Holl 2009). Indeed, iron production in the
Méma region of Mali in the late ﬁrst millennium and early second millennium
AD was on too great a scale for local requirements only (Håland 1980).
Similarly, in the Middle Senegal Valley the remains of some 60,000 iron-
smelting furnaces have been counted, in only a 15-kilometre portion of the
Mauritanian bank of the river, suggesting substantial iron production in the
ﬁrst half of the second millennium AD.
   Judging by evidence from Jenné-jeno, copper was also reaching the Inland
Niger Delta by the middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD, and crucible and mould
fragments as well as artefacts indicate that both it and bronze were being
worked at Jenné-jeno by late in the same millennium, with brass introduced
from the north at the end of that millennium (McIntosh 1995: 385). The early-
second-millennium AD tumulus of Koi Gourrey (Killi) produced copper and
bronze items, some of which appear to have been made by the lost-wax casting
technique, as was also the case with two massive copper-alloy anklets
(Fig. 6.8) in the probably fourteenth-century AD Tumulus 5 burial at Durbi
Takusheyi (Desplagnes 1903: 165; Gronenborn et al. 2012). In addition,
Bedaux and others (1978) excavated a mould for lost-wax casting from a
context dated to the end of the eleventh and the beginning of the twelfth
century, at the settlement mound of Doupwil in the Inland Niger Delta. Thus
it seems likely that items of copper and copper alloys were manufactured
locally, although the requisite metals were perhaps mined and smelted
elsewhere.
   Of less certain origin are the occasional items of silver and even gold
jewellery recovered from some of the tumulus burials, the most remarkable
being the gold disc from Rao (p. 169). Gold, although mentioned often in the
historical sources, is rare in the archaeological record, as might be expected in
view of its value. Nevertheless, an undated hoard of gold and silver excavated
at Tegdaoust included ﬁve gold ingots as well as gold jewellery (Robert 1970),
and crucibles with traces of copper and gold, from the same site, possibly
belong to the eighth century AD. In addition, excavations at Jenné-jeno

174
                                                     The West African savanna

produced a gold earring from a ninth century AD context (McIntosh 1995:
390); the probably fourteenth-century AD Tumulus 7 at Durbi Takusheyi
contained gold jewellery (Gronenborn et al. 2012); and coin moulds dated to
the ninth to tenth century AD containing traces of gold were found at Essouk-
Tadmakka (Nixon et al. 2011).
  There must have been miners, particularly of gold, but with the exception of
Kiéthéga (1983), archaeology has little to tell us of their techniques. This is in
spite of the general location of the gold deposits being known and in spite of
ethnohistorical observations of traditional gold-mining methods in West
Africa. There might also have been specialist builders, because mud architec-
ture dates from the early to middle ﬁrst millennium AD at Tongo Maaré
Diabal and Jenné-jeno, and from a similar date at Daima in north-east Nigeria.
Later in the same millennium at sites in the Inland Niger Delta, mud-bricks
rather than coursed mud (pisé) were used for building, and occasionally ﬁred
bricks were employed (McIntosh and McIntosh 1980: vol. 1, 188–92; Connah
1981: 147–9; McIntosh 1995: 364–5). A change from coursed mud to mud-
brick also occurred at Kirikongo, in Burkina Faso, about AD 700 (Dueppen
2012: 275). Furthermore, in both the Inland Niger Delta and the Chad basin
potsherd pavements were made late in the ﬁrst millennium AD (Connah 1981;
McIntosh 1995). In areas with suitable geology, building in stone was also
practised, as at Dhar Tichitt, Tegdaoust, Koumbi Saleh, and Essouk-
Tadmakka. In addition, some of the larger megalithic structures and tumuli
suggest the presence of people specialized in the necessary construction
techniques.
  Concerning other crafts, pottery making had reached an impressive technical
level by the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium AD. Although handmade, like
most traditional African pottery, it was generally thin-walled, symmetrically
shaped in many forms, and well ﬁred. It was usually painstakingly decorated,
often with impressions and sometimes, in parts of the northern savanna, with
painted patterns. Pottery ﬁgurines of both animals and humans were also
made, particularly in the Chad basin and the Inland Niger Delta, those of
the latter area demonstrating considerable artistic skill late in the ﬁrst millen-
nium and early in the second millennium AD. In addition, from this period at
Jenné-jeno there were even pottery drainpipes, further demonstrating the
versatility of ﬁred-clay technology (Connah 1981; McIntosh 1995: 368–9).
This was part of a tradition of ceramic craftsmanship in the West African
savanna, of which the mainly ﬁrst-millennium BC terracottas from Nok in
northern Nigeria are perhaps the most remarkable examples (Boullier et al.
2002–3).
  The production of textiles, as indicated by the archaeological occurrence
of spindle whorls, might not have developed until the end of the ﬁrst

                                                                             175
African Civilizations

millennium AD, by which time the spinning and weaving of cotton was
probably becoming established. Textile remains from Tongo Maaré Diabal
have been dated to the second half of the ﬁrst millennium AD, and woollen
textiles from burials at Kissi in Burkina Faso have been dated mainly to the
middle of that millennium, although it is uncertain whether they were pro-
duced locally or imported (Magnavita 2008). Previously, clothing was prob-
ably of leather and, with the long-standing traditions of livestock husbandry in
the area, it is reasonable to suppose that the working of hides and skins had a
long history. Other crafts that must also have been established for many
centuries would have included wood working, bone working, basketry, and
mat making. Although archaeological evidence for these activities can be
limited, the 8000-year-old dugout canoe from Dufuna in north-eastern
Nigeria, Africa’s oldest boat, emphasizes the antiquity of both wood-working
skills and water transportation in the West African savanna (Breunig 1996).
Equally, the bone tools from the ﬁrst-millennium BC deposits at Daima and
the mat impressions sometimes used as a pottery decoration in the part of
Nigeria south of Lake Chad serve as reminders of some of the other, less visible
crafts (Connah 1981; Sterner 2012).


Social system
It is difﬁcult to determine social organization from the available archaeological
evidence in the West African savanna. In particular, there has been insufﬁcient
area excavation of settlement layouts and house plans. Nevertheless, the
apparent density of sedentary settlement in the Inland Niger Delta, the Middle
Senegal Valley, or the plains south of Lake Chad suggests the emergence of
social complexity before a thousand years ago. So does the increasing size
of some of these settlements: Jenné-jeno, for example, grew from 12 hectares
early in the ﬁrst millennium AD to 33 hectares towards the end of that
millennium. With a population perhaps as large as 13,000 enclosed by a
2-kilometre city wall, beyond which perhaps as many people again lived
within a distance of 1 kilometre, there must surely have been developments
in order to maintain law and order and regulate trade. However, the McIn-
toshs question this assumption because of the lack of evidence for elites
(McIntosh 1995: 396) and the few indications of social or economic differ-
ences (McIntosh and McIntosh 1993a: 632). Roderick McIntosh has argued
that a heterarchy rather than a hierarchy existed, with authority arranged
horizontally rather than vertically (McIntosh 2005). This is an idea that might
explain other acephalous societies that nevertheless achieved social complex-
ity, such as the Igbo of eastern Nigeria (p. 206). However, until more extensive
excavation is done at Jenné-jeno and other early urban sites in the West

176
                                                      The West African savanna

African savanna, it seems premature to assume that social stratiﬁcation and
despotic authority were absent, particularly as they had developed by the time
the state of Ghana ﬁrst appears in the documentary record in the eighth to
ninth century AD. The gold earring found in the Jenné-jeno excavations
appears to be of a similar date and suggests that there, also, resources were
unequally distributed. Nevertheless, it is possible that social systems could
undergo major changes over time, for example, from clan-based village soci-
eties to elite hierarchies and subsequently to egalitarianism. An attempt to
identify archaeological evidence for such social transformations, in a Burkina
Faso settlement at Kirikongo during the ﬁrst and early second millennium AD,
has been made by Dueppen (2012).
   The burial evidence is less problematic: the size and sophisticated construction
of some of the larger tumuli, and the wealth of grave goods sometimes present,
are strongly suggestive of a social hierarchy. The owner of the Rao gold disc, for
instance, was no ordinary person. In addition, the presence of human sacriﬁces
with some other burials is indicative of the special status of the deceased.
It is surely signiﬁcant that the archaeological evidence, from some of the tumuli,
compares so closely with al-Bakri’s eleventh-century account of the burial of the
kings of Ghana quoted above (p. 169). The Senegambian megaliths also suggest
social differentiation: like the tumuli, they are evidence of the expenditure of
considerable effort and resources for the beneﬁt of a select group of people.
Nevertheless, the usual burial rite in the Inland Niger Delta during the ﬁrst
millennium AD seems to have been inhumation in large pottery urns, presum-
ably evidence of a large nonelite population that received more modest treat-
ment in death. However, it seems that trade in gold and iron, and the presence
of an agricultural surplus in more fortunate areas, were already stimulating
social and political changes giving rise to the state of Ghana before the earliest
Arab contact. In short, state formation was already in progress before the
growth of trans-Saharan trade with Arabic North Africa, and it seems likely
that during the earlier ﬁrst millennium AD ranked chiefdoms, such as might
have existed at Dhar Tichitt as early as the second millennium BC, were
becoming stratiﬁed societies. Also in the ﬁrst millennium AD, the development
of urban centres was in progress, as the evidence from Jenné-jeno indicates. The
culmination of such development can be seen at Tegdaoust or Koumbi Saleh,
with their stone-built houses, and in the great walled city of Kano, which in
1851 had a population estimated by Heinrich Barth at between 30,000 and
60,000 (Barth 1857–8: vol. 2, 124). Indeed, during the second millennium
AD, Kano and other Hausa cities became some of Africa’s most developed
city-states, supported by productive agriculture, varied technology, extensive
trading connections, complex bureaucracies, defensive and offensive military
organizations, and Islamic legitimization (Griffeth 2000).

                                                                              177
African Civilizations

  As well as social stratiﬁcation, the archaeological evidence suggests
the development of functional specialization prior to Arab contact. Many
craftsmen were already present in some West African savanna societies by
the ﬁrst millennium AD. There were also farmers, pastoralists, and ﬁshermen;
merchants and transporters; religious functionaries; and community leaders.
Thus the social system in some parts of the West African savanna could have
been particularly receptive of Arab and Islamic inﬂuences over the last millen-
nium or so. The outcome was a complex mixture of the old and the new, of the
indigenous and the alien.


Population pressures
The West African savanna is characterized by a dynamic interplay of oppor-
tunity and constraint, varying through time with ﬂuctuations of rainfall. Not
only have human populations had to come to terms with the speciﬁc con-
straints of each area, but the more productive areas have been bounded by less
fortunate areas. Areas of greater productivity have also varied in both size and
conditions in response to environmental variations, triggered by either climatic
change or activities such as iron smelting or the grazing of domesticated
animals. Such a situation would have been likely to produce population
pressures, not only on the occupants of the advantaged areas by their poorer
neighbours, but also within the more productive areas themselves if a period of
environmentally good conditions was followed by environmental deterior-
ation. From the McIntoshs’ work, it seems that this is what probably happened
in the Inland Niger Delta, where the unusual hydrological conditions allowed
the intensiﬁcation of agriculture by means of the recessional cultivation of rice.
This could have encouraged a concentration of population within this area.
The work done by the McIntoshs revealed a remarkable density of settlement
by the middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD. In addition, the area of the Inland
Niger Delta is conﬁned, and, as the McIntoshs have shown, its variety of
landforms is highly susceptible to environmental ﬂuctuations, so that by the
early second millennium AD many of its settlements had been abandoned.
Such an area, richly endowed with resources and yet subject to periodic stress,
could well have been the location of social changes. It is thought that the
Middle Niger supported a population with a relatively high density, and it has
been estimated that during the ﬁrst millennium AD the population of the Sahel
states (Mauritania, Mali, Niger, and Chad) doubled from 1 million to 2
million – by 1975 it was about 15 million (McEvedy and Jones 1978:
238–40). Given recurrent droughts and environmental degradation, social
and economic instability must have been a constant threat in this region.
Intergroup violence was probably one consequence, of which the burning of

178
                                                        The West African savanna

the Oursi hu-beero house complex and the death of three of its occupants in
the eleventh century AD provides some archaeological evidence (Petit et al.
2011: 210–14). Population pressure was surely one of the circumstances that
stimulated social changes leading to urbanization and state formation.


Ideology
Historical sources indicate that Islam had an important inﬂuence on the course
of West African urbanization and state formation. The Islamic world of the
early second millennium AD was a world of independent states, in which
substantial numbers of people lived in towns and cities that were often the
centre of mercantile activities. It was also a proselytizing world, seeking, with
ﬂuctuating enthusiasm, to convert the inﬁdel not only to its religious beliefs but
also to its way of life. Archaeology has revealed the remains of early mosques in
a number of places, at Koumbi Saleh, Tegdaoust, and elsewhere (Mauny 1961:
472–6; Robert 1970), and indeed some mosques still in use, such as that at
Jenné, are reputed to be of great age. However, archaeology has also conﬁrmed
historical evidence that the inhabitants of the earliest cities and states of the West
African savanna were not Muslims. The tumuli, in particular, indicate non-
Islamic practices, as also do the urn burials of the Inland Niger Delta and the
making of clay ﬁgurines in that and other regions. Some of this evidence might
represent a survival of traditional practices after Islam had been introduced to
the West African savanna, and historical sources indicate that this did happen.
Nevertheless, urban development at Jenné-jeno by early in the ﬁrst millennium
shows that the origins of urbanization and state formation in the West African
savanna were indeed pre-Islamic. The people involved with these developments
must have been animists, and the variety of non-Islamic burial practices in the
archaeological record of the West African savanna would suggest that there was
considerable diversity of belief among different human groups. It is not known
what these beliefs were, but the evidence of the tumuli, the megaliths, and
human sacriﬁce suggests that funerary cults were signiﬁcant. In such cults,
ancestors could have had an important role in which the clay ﬁgurines were
relevant, so that the monumental character of some of the associated structures
might indicate that ideology provided reinforcement for elite authority.


External trade
Using historical sources, both Bovill (1968: 236) and Levtzion (1973: 10) saw
long-distance trade as a vital stimulus to developments in the West African
savanna. Certainly, archaeological evidence of the trans-Saharan trade of
Bovill and Levtzion has been found often enough. For example, Koumbi Saleh

                                                                                 179
African Civilizations

produced stone plaques with Arabic inscriptions and Islamic decorations,
not to mention stone houses said to show Maghrebian inﬂuence (Thomassey
and Mauny 1951; 1956). Thus, also, Tegdaoust yielded imported pottery,
oil lamps, glass vessels, glass weights, and ingots of both copper and gold
(Robert 1970). Perhaps the most impressive of the archaeological evidence
for the trans-Saharan trade, however, is amongst the group of twelfth- and
thirteenth-century gravestones found at Sané, near Gao on the Niger in Mali.
Some of these are marble gravestones with inscriptions in Kuﬁc, an early angular
form of the Arabic alphabet. These inscribed stones have been closely dated to
AD 1100–1110 and are thought to have been made in Spain and carried by
camel across the Sahara (Flight 1975: 82). There is even archaeological evidence
of the difﬁculties that could assail such trans-Saharan camel transport, in the
form of the abandoned loads of a caravan buried in a sand dune in the lonely
Majâbat Al-Koubrâ, halfway across the desert. Dated to the twelfth century AD,
these loads consisted of large numbers of brass rods and of cowrie shells of
the species Monetaria moneta (Monod 1969). The presence of such shells, more
than 9,000 kilometres from their source in the Maldive Islands, south-west of
India, is eloquent testimony to the very extensive trading networks of which the
trans-Saharan trade formed a part (Hogendorn and Johnson 1986: 18).
  There is, indeed, a considerable amount of archaeological evidence for the
trans-Saharan trade. For instance, countless sites in the West African savanna
contain beads of glass or semi-precious stones; many of the earlier of these
must have originated from that trade. The source and date of manufacture of
such beads can be difﬁcult to determine, but some might indicate that the
trans-Saharan trade is older than has usually been thought. It is becoming
apparent that relay trading networks in the Sahara, rather than trade crossing
the whole desert, had already developed by Roman times (Wilson 2012). Of
six Jenné-jeno glass beads selected for chemical analysis, from contexts dating
from the last two centuries BC to AD 1400, the earliest is likely to have been
made in India or East or South-East Asia, while one of the later ones might
have come from India and another have been of Roman origin, from Egypt or
Italy. Only two of the beads appear to be from an Islamic source (McIntosh
1995: 252–6). Glass beads of Asian origin from burials at Kissi, in Burkina
Faso, also indicate the existence of a trans-Saharan trade during the ﬁrst
millennium AD before the arrival of Arab merchants (Magnavita 2003).
Furthermore, analysis of copper-alloy objects from the same site has shown
that most consisted of metal from North Africa and beyond (Fenn et al. 2009).
Other evidence for the Saharan trade consists of the location of some of the
West African cities and towns. Pushed well forward of the most viable agricul-
tural lands of the savanna or even into the desert proper, such places as
Timbuktu, Tegdaoust, or Essouk-Tadmakka were clearly located at strategic

180
                                                     The West African savanna

points on the trade routes, rather than in hinterlands that could support them.
Also, many of the savanna urban centres appear to have grown up at environ-
mental interfaces, between transportation systems. Thus at Timbuktu goods
were transferred from camel to canoe, and at Kano from camel to donkey.
A comparable situation will be seen in Chapter 7: trading centres growing up
at the junction of the savanna and forest, where the tsetse ﬂy made it necessary
to transfer goods from donkey to human head.
  However, archaeological evidence does not give the detailed picture of
Saharan trade reconstructed by historians (Fig. 6.9). Where in the archaeo-
logical evidence is any indication of the millions of tons of salt that must have
travelled south from the desert to the savanna (Lovejoy 1986)? Similarly,
where is the evidence of the cloth that was carried south from North Africa,
or of the thousands of slaves who were taken north (Meillassoux 1991:
44–64), or of the ivory, ostrich feathers, ﬁne leather, and pepper? For that
matter, who would realize, from the archaeological evidence, just how import-
ant the gold trade was? Clearly, some of the durable commodities, which were
traded to the south, had a greater chance of surviving in archaeological
contexts than the generally organic consumables, which dominated the trade
to the north. Thus there will be a tendency for the West African archaeological
evidence to be biased in favour of imports. This makes the discovery at Gao of
a tenth- to eleventh-century AD hoard of at least ﬁfty-three hippopotamus
tusks, apparently a hidden consignment of export ivory, particularly import-
ant (Insoll 1995; 1996a: 38, 40, 98). Also the discovery at Essouk-Tadmakka
of coin moulds with traces of gold, dated to the ninth to tenth century AD, has
provided evidence of the early development of the gold trade (Nixon et al.
2011). Furthermore, artistic representations of black Africans in the ancient
Mediterranean world is an indication that the Saharan slave trade was already
active in the ﬁrst millennium BC (Fentress 2011). Similarly, a review of the
archaeological evidence south of the Sahara by MacDonald (2011) has traced
the origins of the Saharan trade to the ﬁrst millennium BC and earlier.
  Of course, questions about the traded commodities lead to others. If West
African agriculture is at least 3,000 years old, as the evidence appears to
indicate, then why should we believe that the salt trade developed only towards
the end of the ﬁrst millennium AD with the advent of the Arabs and their camel
caravans? According to Nenquin (1961), an adult on a mixed diet needs 12 to
15 grams of salt per day. In the West African savanna, salt could be brought
from the coast where it has long been extracted from seawater, transported from
the Sahara where it is quarried from rock-salt deposits, or obtained by ﬁltering
plant ashes, which is possible only in certain areas and is not very efﬁcient
(Alexander 1993b). In practice, this leaves extensive areas where the local
supply is deﬁcient but where diet and climate make salt a necessity.

                                                                            181
182
                                                                                                          Sijilmasa                                                                          Ghadames
                                                           Marrakech



                        M
        Cape Bojador ea .P.,
                       t, d co
                           ate pp
                              s, er,                ces
                                ho                                                                                                                                                               Ghat
                                   rse            spi
                                       s
                     wh
                                             sla                                   Teghaza
                                                ves
                                                   ,
                                                               Salt
                                                             date , M.P.,
                                            ld,
                                                                                                                          M



                                                                                   Gold, slaves, spices
                                           Go                                                                                                               le
                                                                                                                       hor .P., d
                                                                                                                                                      att
                                                                 s, co                                                    ses ate              sla
                                                                       pper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Alum, slaves,
                                                                                                                             , co s               ve
                                                                                                                                                     s,
                                                                                                                                  ppe                   c                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                   er
                                                                                                                                                                                 Salt
                                                                                                                                                                                                     M.P., copp
                                                                                                                                      r    ld,                                          s
                                                                                                                                                                                 date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ivory, pepper
                                                                                                                                          Go
                               Salt             Awdaghust                                                                                                                                            Sa
                                                                              Timbuktu                                                                                                           t      lt
                                                                                                                                                                                           Mille



                                                                                                                                                                            Slaves, gold
                                           Koumbi Saleh                                                                      Gao
                                                                               Fish                                                                               er,
              Salt         Cotton-clot                                                                                                                         pop .P.
                                                                                                                                                            Co es, M
                                                                                                           lt
                                             h                                                            Sa
                                                                                                                                                                s                                                                               rses
                                                                                                   Cotton-cloth                                             hor                                                              Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M.P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ., ho
                                                                                                  Jenne                                                                                                                      chad
                                                                                                                                                                          Textiles,                                                              s, gold
                     Sla
                        ves                                                   lt                                                                                            M.P                                                            Slave
                                                                              Sa                                                                                                                            Slaves
                     Iron                                                                                                                                                Kano
                                                                                                                                     ola
                                                                                    v e s                                        d, k
                                                                                                                              Gol                                                                        main trade routes
                                                       Gold, kola,            S l a                                                                              Slaves
                                                                                               ld,
                                                                                             Go la                                                                                                       Gold                       Copper
                                                        pepper
                                                                       Kong                    ko                                Old Oyo
                                                                     Kola                                      Begho                                                                                     Salt                       Kola
                                                                                                                                            Ife Pepper Igbo-
                                                                                                                                           Benin City  Ukwu
                                             Pe                                                                                                                                                M.P. – manufactured products
                                                p pe
                                                       r
                                                                                                                                                                                             0                               500              1000 km


      Fig. 6.9 Precolonial trade routes and commodities in West Africa. After Mauny 1961: ﬁg. 55.
                                                       The West African savanna

Consequently, it is probable that trade networks within West Africa are likely to
be at least as old as the beginnings of food production in the region and that
trading contacts with the desert are therefore nearer to 3,000 than to 1,000
years old. In addition, no one has suggested that gold mining in West Africa
commenced because of stimulus from across the desert. On the contrary, histor-
ical sources tell us that West Africans were so secretive about the location of the
mines that outsiders had little idea where the gold came from. Furthermore,
there is evidence of gold at Jenné-jeno by AD 800. Thus there seem to be several
reasons for supporting the idea that a regional network of trade routes grew up
in West Africa before the advent of the Arab trans-Saharan trade. The McIn-
toshs (1980: vol. 2, 444–6) pointed out that because Jenné-jeno was using iron
from the time of its earliest occupation, and because there was no iron ore in the
vicinity, then supplies of raw materials or of ﬁnished iron must have been
brought from more than 50 kilometres away. Also, situated at the interface of
the dry savanna and the Sahel, on a fertile alluvial plain, and at the highest point
on the River Niger for reliable seasonal river transport, Jenné-jeno was well
placed to play an important role in a developing trade network.
  Paintings and engravings on rocks in the Sahara of horse-drawn chariots and
ox-drawn carts suggest that such a network could have had early connections
with the desert (Mauny 1978; Law 1980b). These are distributed along two
main axes, both of which stretch from North Africa to the Niger, axes which
have been called ‘chariot tracks’. It has been assumed that these rock drawings
date from the ﬁrst millennium BC, more likely from its second half. Most
scholars now doubt that these are representations of vehicles used in com-
merce, however, and Camps (1982) rejected the idea of ‘routes’, pointing out
that the distribution of this rock art merely reﬂects the distribution of rock
outcrops in the Sahara. Nevertheless, this art is important in indicating that
horse and ox traction and wheeled vehicles were known in the desert before
the advent of the camel during the ﬁrst few centuries AD (p. 151). Indeed,
Blench has argued that the small West African ponies mentioned in historical
sources ‘were produced by the dwarﬁng of horses brought across the Sahara in
the last three thousand years’ (Blench 1993: 103). Even Bovill could admit,
with characteristic wisdom: ‘There is certainly no reason to suppose that
caravan trafﬁc in the Sahara only became possible with the arrival of the
camel’ (Bovill 1968: 17). Timothy Garrard has indicated that such trafﬁc could
have been at least pre-Arab in origin. He has suggested the existence of a
Berber gold trade in the early ﬁrst millennium AD, between the savanna and
the Roman world, because the Carthage mint began issuing gold coins at the
end of the third century, although it had no local gold source (Garrard 1982).
In addition, the McIntoshs (1980: vol. 2, 445) have commented on the pres-
ence of copper at Jenné-jeno from the middle of the ﬁrst millennium AD; the

                                                                               183
African Civilizations

three closest known sources are all in the Sahara. The McIntoshs could well
have been correct when they argued that ‘the rapid establishment and expan-
sion of Arab trade in the Western Sudan was possible because it keyed into an
already-extant system of indigenous sub-Saharan trade networks’ (McIntosh
and McIntosh 1980: vol. 2, 450).


Conclusion
The emergence of urbanism and political centralization in the West African
savanna was formerly attributed to contact with the Mediterranean world,
resulting from long-distance trade. Suspiciously, the origins of that trade were
usually dated to the period of the earliest historical sources that touched on the
subject. Archaeology tended to play a conﬁrmatory role in the stock historical
interpretation. It was a case of so much historical information being available
that archaeologists failed to ask the sort of questions that they might have
asked otherwise. As a result, the quality of the archaeological data available to
shed light on the origins of cities and states in the West African savanna was
poor. This situation has now changed, and work at Jenné-jeno and related sites
in the Inland Niger Delta, as well as in other parts of the West African
savanna, has produced a very different picture. A review of the evidence makes
the long-accepted external-stimulus explanation untenable. It would appear
that the West African savanna by the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium AD
already had a sound agricultural base, with the potential for intensiﬁcation of
production in some more fortunate areas, and already had a varied iron-based
technology. Developing social complexity is already evident at Dhar Tichitt as
early as the second millennium BC, and it seems quite probable that during the
ﬁrst millennium AD, and prior to Arab contact, stratiﬁed societies were
emerging in the West African savanna, based on resource control stimulated
in part by localized population pressures. At the same time those pressures,
coupled with increasing functional specialization and expanding local trade,
encouraged a growth in size both of individual settlements and of aggregations
of settlements, leading to some of West Africa’s earliest examples of urbanism.
Such developments seem to have taken place before the advent of Islam but,
nevertheless, with the ideological support of a variety of animistic religions.
Finally, it seems most likely that an extensive trading network existed within
West Africa before the Arab trade across the Sahara began and that this
network had already developed contacts across the desert. The cities and
towns of the savanna were indeed to become ‘ports’ at the edge of the ‘sea of
sand’, as Levtzion (1973: 10) said (p. 155), but they were ports with a vast
trading hinterland that already existed. After all, what ship would ever visit a
port unless there was a chance of delivering or collecting a cargo?

184
