Chapter 7
Achieving power: the West African forest
and its fringes
In the second half of the ﬁfteenth-century AD European sailors ﬁrst set eyes on
the southerly coast of West Africa. What they saw was hardly encouraging:
from a distance, a vague grey line pencilled in between an immensity of sea
and sky; from close-in, either a dangerous, surf-pounded, sandy beach or an
uninviting network of mangrove swamp, creek, and river mouth. Whatever
the character of the shoreline, however, behind it there was nearly always
an impenetrable tangle of trees and other vegetation. Experience soon taught
such visitors that this was a coast to be reckoned with: ships’ crews died of
fever, and shipworms (Teredo spp.) ate the bottoms out of their ships. Yet it
was neither altruism nor curiosity that tempted most Europeans to such a
region; it was proﬁt. The very names they gave to different parts of this coast
indicate their motives: ‘The Grain [pepper] Coast’, ‘The Ivory Coast’, ‘The
Gold Coast’, ‘The Slave Coast’ (Bosman 1967: frontispiece map). Europeans
quickly discovered that behind the coast lay a forested and savanna hinterland
rich in resources, where the inhabitants were willing to trade on a considerable
scale. Not only that, but those inhabitants lived in highly organized commu-
nities, some of which took on a size and density which left the visitors in
no doubt about what they were dealing with. Within some parts of the West
African forest and its fringes there were, indeed, hierarchical states, towns,
and cities. Because of their conspicuousness, it was these large settlements that
particularly attracted European attention. Thus, writing in AD 1507–8, the
Portuguese Duarte Pacheco Pereira described Ijebu-Ode (now in Nigeria)
as ‘a very large city’ (Bascom 1959: 38). In a similar vein, the Englishman
Towerson, writing in 1557, could claim, perhaps with some exaggeration, that
a town in what is now Ghana was ‘by the estimation of our men, as big in
circuit as London’ (Blake 1942: vol. 2, 406).
  These quotations are selected from early in the history of European
West African contact, because state development and urbanization in the West
African forest and its margins have sometimes been written about as if they
were developments resulting from that contact rather than pre-dating it.
Although there is no doubt that European seaborne trade did play an import-
ant part in the later development of these states and their towns and cities,
historical sources suggest that some were in existence before that trade started.
Oral traditions give a similar impression, and, since the middle of the twentieth
century, archaeological evidence has pointed in the same direction. It seems

                                                                            185
African Civilizations

likely that there was increasing social complexity in some parts of the West
African forest and its fringes from late in the ﬁrst millennium AD onwards.
The question is why should such developments take place in and around the
West African rainforest, environments that to many outsiders have seemed
to constrain rather than to encourage human endeavour?


Geographical location and environmental factors
Compared with the West African savanna (Chapter 6), the tropical rainforest
of West Africa occupies a relatively small area. An extension of the equatorial
rainforest, it stretches from Cameroon to Sierra Leone but is broken between
the western frontier of Nigeria and eastern Ghana by a gap where forest–
savanna mosaic and relatively moist woodlands and savanna reach the ocean.
This is known as ‘The Dahomey Gap’ and its alternating absence and presence
in the past indicates the role of climatic change in determining the extent of the
rainforest (Salzmann and Hoelzmann 2005). At present, the belt of rainforest
is never wider than 400 kilometres, and in many places it is narrower. To the
south it is bounded by coastal mangrove swamp or by the Atlantic Ocean. To
the north it merges into forest–savanna mosaic, often called ‘derived savanna’
because it has been thought to result from agricultural exploitation, over many
centuries, of what was originally tropical rainforest. This would suggest high
population densities, although (as with the Dahomey Gap) climatic change is
also likely to have been an important factor. Whatever the cause, these
northern fringes of the forest form an ecotone that has been particularly
important in the history of the human race in West Africa. It is therefore
impractical to consider the West African rainforest without giving attention to
the adjacent savanna into which it merges.
   As recently as the middle of the twentieth century the West African forest,
where undisturbed, consisted of dense tropical rainforest. A few large trees
grew to a height of about 42 metres and many others to a height of about 27
metres, but they protruded above the main leaf canopy that was formed at
about 10 metres by most of the trees. Smaller trees and bushes densely
occupied the zone below. It is possible that in its natural state the forest often
lacked this dense tangle of lower growth, and the forest ﬂoor may have been
relatively easy to traverse (Richards 1952: ﬁg. 6, pp. 29–31). However, much
of the forest has now been taken over by secondary growth, often of no great
height but virtually impenetrable unless one chops a path through with a
machete. To some extent, this results from modern timber exploitation, but
even at the beginning of the twentieth century Thompson (1910–11: 131)
recorded that most of the forest consisted of secondary growth. It seems
probable that this situation resulted from the long practice of rotational

186
                                         The West African forest and its fringes

bush-fallow agriculture. In the area around Benin City, for instance, it was
shown during the 1960s that most of the apparently ‘well-grown forest of
considerable age’ had probably ‘been farmed at one time or another during the
past few hundred years’ (Allison 1962: 243, 244). The secondary growth that
has resulted is so dense that Boisragon and Locke, ﬂeeing for their lives after
the so-called Benin Massacre in 1897, found it very difﬁcult to travel through
the forest, which was ‘so thick that neither man nor beast can press through it’
(Boisragon 1897: 94). An 1817 account of part of the Asante forest, in what
is now Ghana, by Bowdich (1966: 20–1), indicated the problems of travel
even when fear was not forcing a cross-country route. Descriptions such
as these make it difﬁcult to understand how the West African rainforest could
have been the setting for the cultural developments that undoubtedly took
place there.
   In reality, the forest is much more complex and varied than descriptions by
culture-shocked Europeans, writing to impress other Europeans, have often
made it appear. In the area around Benin City, for example, it seems that
vegetation on the upper interﬂuves might originally have been less dense than
that of the lower valley slopes, and it has been shown that farming has tended
to concentrate on those more easily cleared areas. Darling suggested that the
forest environment around Benin varied in part because of the ever-changing
mosaic of plant succession following agricultural clearance and fallowing, but
also in part because of differences in soil characteristics. In addition, if we
consider local perceptions of the environment, we ﬁnd not the European
notion of continuous forest broken only by clearings for settlements but a
three-part division of the ‘forest’ itself into farmlands, fallow areas, and ‘wild’
forest. It is also possible that forest density has varied through time. Both
climatic change and human activity could have resulted in more open condi-
tions in the past. This is suggested by some historical accounts and by the
extensive earthworks in the Benin City region, discussed later in this chapter.
These ditches and banks are virtually invisible in dense rainforest or regrowth
and must have been constructed when there was far less vegetation cover than
in recent times; otherwise, they would have been of little use as boundaries
(von Hellermann 2010).
   In one respect the forest has an advantage over the savanna to its north:
it has more water. Rainfall is higher, the wet season longer, humidity greater,
and evapotranspiration lower. As a result, the forest has numerous rivers
and streams, many of which ﬂow all the year round. Also as a result, the
rate and ease of vegetal growth is phenomenal; even fences take root and
grow into thriving hedges or rows of trees. It is apparent that many forest
soils are moderately fertile, if this is measured in terms of productivity. This
is providing that farming practices minimize erosion and alternate brief

                                                                              187
African Civilizations

cropping periods with long periods of fallow, during which the ‘bush’ is
allowed to invade the ﬁelds.
   Many resources would probably have been available in the West African
forest and its fringes 2,000 to 3,000 years ago. The most signiﬁcant would
have been plant foods, including several species of yam, the oil palm, kola,
coffee, okra, ﬂuted gourd, and akee (a tree cultivated for its fruit). At the
western end of the forest belt there might also have been African rice and
Melegueta pepper, the so-called Grains of Paradise (Harris 1976: 329–33).
Introduced plants of South-East Asian and tropical American origin (such as
certain yams, plantain, banana, sugarcane, citrus fruits, cassava, sweet potato,
maize, papaw, and chilli pepper) have become so important now in this region
that it is easy to forget that the West African forest and its edges were already
well endowed with plant foods before these others arrived. Particularly
important amongst the indigenous plants would have been the various West
African yams and the oil palm, the former providing carbohydrates and the
latter supplementing these with both fat and vitamin A (Harris 1976: 351).
It should be noticed, however, that both yams and oil palms seem originally to
have belonged in the forest–savanna ecotone and must have been introduced
to the forest proper by people planting them on cleared land. Thus Coursey’s
West African ‘yam zone’ (Fig. 6.1) includes extensive areas of the southern
savanna as well as the more northerly parts of the forest (Coursey 1980:
Fig. 1). In contrast to plant foods, the forest was not so well provided with
animal foods as was the savanna. Tsetse ﬂies precluded the keeping of domesti-
cated livestock in the forest, with the exception of small numbers of
trypanosomiasis-resistant dwarf goats and cattle (Blench 1993). Furthermore,
the forest had fewer wild animals that could be hunted than did the savanna,
although a wide selection of those that were present have probably been eaten
in the past, including elephants, baboons, monkeys, bats, large rats, the giant
land snail (Achatina spp.), and anything else that could be caught. In addition,
ﬁsh from the sea, coastal lagoons, and rivers have almost certainly been an
important source of animal protein for a long time. The forest also possessed
numerous other resources, of which perhaps the most important were a great
many types of wood, suitable for everything from house building to canoe
making to carving to ﬁrewood. Various sorts of wood could also be burnt
to produce charcoal, potash, salt, and other things. In addition, the forest
could supply numerous medicinal substances, beeswax, gum, bark, rope,
and other commodities. There was also ivory; inorganic raw materials
included gold, iron ore, copper, lead, rocks suitable for making grindstones,
good building earths, and potting clays. Last, a population density that in
places was probably higher than in the more northerly savanna could be
exploited as a source of slaves.

188
                                       The West African forest and its fringes

  The West African forest zone and its edges suffered from constraints as
well as beneﬁting from substantial resources. The most serious constraints
were diseases that included trypanosomiasis that afﬂicted domestic animals
and, as sleeping sickness, humans as well. The latter was only part of a
heavy burden of human diseases; malaria, in particular, has been so serious
a problem for so long a time that some populations in the region have
developed a greater than normal incidence of the sickle-cell gene, a blood
anomaly that provides a measure of protection (Livingstone 1967). Other
serious diseases included yellow fever, dengue fever, ﬁlariasis, yaws, and a
wide selection of parasitic infections, particularly of the intestinal tract.
Disease levels in these areas might have been higher than those of the more
northerly, drier savanna. Another constraint within the forest and forest–
savanna mosaic was the availability of water during the dry season. In spite
of a greater rainfall than most of the savanna, a long dry season together with
generally permeable soils and high temperatures on cleared surfaces meant
that women and children frequently had to carry water long distances from
rivers and streams. Various strategies were used to alleviate this problem,
including wells, underground cisterns, and even artiﬁcial ponds. The extent
to which dry-season water supply could be a problem, however, particularly
for large groups of people on the move, is illustrated by the experience of the
British expedition against Benin City in 1897, for which water was a major
worry (Home 1982). That same expedition also showed how difﬁcult com-
munication within the forest could be, with movement restricted to narrow
paths and head loading the only means of shifting burdens. Communication
problems have, indeed, been another traditional constraint, particularly
during the wet season when paths are frequently reduced to rivers of mud.
Nevertheless, the people who lived in and around the forest adapted well to
such difﬁculties. Thus canoe transport on rivers and coastal lagoons was
extremely important, and the very impenetrability of parts of the forest could
be used as a defence by leaving a ring of uncleared land around settlements,
as was recorded in the nineteenth century for the ‘war-towns’ of Sierra Leone
(Siddle 1968).
  To people not accustomed to living in the West African forest and forest
fringes, the constraints might seem sufﬁcient discouragement from develop-
ing the undoubted resources. However, states, cities, and other aspects of
cultural complexity did develop in some parts of those zones, and these
developments probably commenced without external stimulus, because both
distance and environment attenuated inﬂuences from the northern savanna
and Sahel. Nevertheless, by the end of the ﬁrst millennium AD the forest and
forest–savanna ecotone were probably linked with the regions to their north
in a regional trading network (Insoll 1996b: 668; Casey 2010). Only the

                                                                           189
African Civilizations

appearance of European traders on the coast of West Africa reversed this
economic orientation and turned what had been a relatively remote hinter-
land into a major contact zone of long-distance trade.


Sources of information
Historical evidence
Most of what is known about precolonial urbanization and state formation
in the West African forest and its fringes comes from historical sources.
Numerous contemporary accounts by European visitors from the late ﬁfteenth
to the late nineteenth century represent the outsider’s view. These visitors were
of different national backgrounds: in particular, Portuguese, English, Dutch,
French, Danish, and German; and of a variety of professions, including sailors,
traders, explorers, and missionaries. To their number must be added others
who merely stayed at home and compiled books and maps from information
supplied by those who had actually visited the Guinea Coast. Some of
the principal accounts by outsiders are those by Adams, Barbot, de Barros,
Bosman, Bowdich, Burton, Dapper, de Marees, Landolphe, and Pacheco
Pereira. Such sources throw light on some of the societies of the West African
forest and its fringes during the 400 years prior to colonial takeover. A.F.C.
Ryder, for instance, was able to use them as the main basis for a study of
European relationships with the state of Benin (Ryder 1969). They are limited,
however, not only by their sometimes imperfect understanding of what was
observed but also by their short time range. Whereas external sources for the
West African savanna reach back for a little over a thousand years, those for
the forest zone and related areas cover only half that time. Fortunately,
however, they are complemented by the insider’s view, represented by the oral
traditions of West African societies themselves. European scholars collected
many of these in recent times, but the people to whom they refer also recorded
some of them. Perhaps the most notable of these are Samuel Johnson’s History
of the Yorubas, originally published in 1921 (Johnson 1921), and Jacob
Egharevba’s Short History of Benin, ﬁrst published in 1934 (Egharevba
1968). Such sources do throw a little light on the centuries before Europeans
appeared on the Guinea Coast; they take us back perhaps to the beginning of
the second millennium AD. Unfortunately, however, their information
on the earlier periods is limited and of doubtful reliability. Their chronologies
are particularly uncertain, as Bradbury demonstrated in the case of Benin City
(Bradbury 1959). Overall, therefore, the written and oral historical sources have
comparatively little to tell us about the origins of cities and states in the
forest and adjacent savanna, except that such developments either took place

190
                                         The West African forest and its fringes

during or had already taken place by the ﬁrst half of the second millennium AD.
From such sources, it has sometimes been implied that these developments
were later than those of the savanna because it took longer for long-distance
trade and postulated migrations to reach so far into the hinterland. In other
words, as in the savanna, external stimulus has been advanced as an explan-
ation, an explanation now thought to be unacceptable.


Archaeological evidence
Archaeological research, concerning recent millennia, commenced later in
the West African rainforest and its margins than further north. Nevertheless,
there has been a similar tendency to pursue research programmes aimed at
providing more information on historically known sites. Archaeological ﬁeld
prospection and survey is so difﬁcult in the forest itself that sites are not easily
found; it is easier to excavate sites that are known from documentary sources or
oral traditions. Patrick Darling’s work on the linear earthworks of Benin and
Ishan (Darling 1984; 1988; 1998) is one of the few cases where systematic search
has revealed previously unknown sites. Also, the artwork associated with some
of the historically known sites of southern Nigeria has often concentrated arch-
aeological attention on those sites, such as at Ife (Willett 1967). As a result,
archaeological ﬁeld research and excavation has been limited to relatively few
sites, particularly in Ghana and Nigeria, although there has also been activity in
Sierra Leone and the Republic of Benin. More recently, increasing attention has
been given to urban and state developments during the second half of the second
millennium AD. The archaeological evidence is more visible than that for earlier
periods, and associated documentary and oral sources enhance its interpretation,
suggesting the ways in which earlier developments might have taken place.
   Some of the archaeological evidence relevant to the origins of urbanization
and state formation in the forest and its fringes comes from investigations
into the Akan states, in what is now Ghana. These have been described as
city-states, which collectively comprised a city-state culture (Kea 2000). James
Anquandah (1982: 85–112) described the Akan as ‘a golden civilization’; these
states seem to have controlled part of the gold trade from the forest north to
the Inland Niger Delta. The Akan states already existed by the beginning of
the eighteenth century AD when they were mentioned by European visitors,
and a considerable amount is known about the last major Akan state, that of
Asante, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (McLeod 1981). The earlier
of these states were situated on the fringes of the forest, and archaeological
investigations at the site of Begho, in this region, have revealed the remains
of a large market town made up of four different ‘quarters’, which were
1 to 2 kilometres from one another (Posnansky 1987; 2010). These constituted

                                                                               191
African Civilizations

a dispersed pattern of residence, probably subject to episodic mobility
(Fletcher 1998). Each of these quarters consists of a group of mounds, about
1.5 metres high and 30 metres across, which are often L-shaped and which are
in most cases the remains of mud-walled houses. Some 1,500 of these mounds
have been counted, enabling Anquandah (1993: 648) to estimate that the
population of Begho peaked at 10,000 in the seventeenth century AD, when
the densest area of settlement covered about 3 square kilometres. At ﬁrst, oral
tradition and radiocarbon dates indicated that the town was occupied between
about 1400 and 1725, being most prosperous towards the beginning of
the seventeenth century, but radiocarbon dates from subsequent excavations
indicated that settlement probably began as early as the eleventh or twelfth
century (Posnansky and McIntosh 1976: 166, 189). Excavation of some of the
house mounds has yielded evidence of a population engaged in metallurgical,
textile, and ceramic industries, supported by an agricultural subsistence econ-
omy that included domestic cattle, sheep, goats, and pigs and by a substantial
long-distance trade (Anquandah 1993: 649).
   At Bono Manso (Fig. 7.1), another town site in the same region, occupation
appears to have commenced about the thirteenth century and to have continued
until about the middle of the eighteenth century (Effah-Gyamﬁ 1985). This seems
to have been a more nucleated settlement than Begho and perhaps more homo-
geneous in its ethnic composition, for there was a separate settlement of aliens
(probably Muslim merchants) about 4 kilometres away at Kramokrom. Like
Begho, numerous small mounds, most representing the remains of houses from
which population estimates could be made, characterized Bono Manso. Arch-
aeological investigations, including excavation, showed that Phase I of the
settlement had occupied a more extensive area than Phases II and III but that
its population, estimated at about 4,000, had actually been lower than the
approximately 10,000 and 8,000 estimated, respectively, for the two later phases.
A dispersed pattern of residence had apparently changed to a more compact one,
perhaps reﬂecting sociopolitical changes (Effah-Gyamﬁ 1985). This contraction
to a more densely occupied form of settlement is of considerable theoretical
interest because, according to Fletcher’s ‘interaction-communication model’,
‘Bono Manso contracted to precisely the maximum areal extent at which it
could have been nonliterate and permanently sedentary’ (Fletcher 1998: 125).
   Thus Begho and Bono Manso do throw some light on the origins of urban-
ization, and perhaps of state formation, on the fringes of the Ghanaian forest
during the early second millennium AD. Furthermore, excavations at Adanse-
manso and Asantemanso (Fig. 7.2) provided evidence of settlement growth
within the forest itself from the late ﬁrst millennium AD onwards, suggesting
even earlier developments (Vivian 1996; Shinnie 2005). Also, the second phase
of a site some 150 kilometres further north at New Buipe represents an

192
                                           The West African forest and its fringes




Fig. 7.1 Plan of the site of Bono Manso, in Ghana, indicating a change from a
dispersed pattern of residence to a more compact one. After Effah-Gyamﬁ 1979: ﬁg. 2.

iron-using community late in the ﬁrst millennium AD. Consisting of three
mounds with a total diameter of less than 200 metres, they seem to have been
part of a larger complex (York 1973). It might also be signiﬁcant that the area

                                                                                  193
African Civilizations




Fig. 7.2 Plan of the site of Asantemanso, in Ghana, showing areas of occupation during
different periods. After Shinnie 2005: ﬁg. 1. (Redrawn by Andrew Stawowczyk Long.)

194
                                       The West African forest and its fringes

of the early Akan states on the forest fringes (the centre of Akan power shifted
into the forest proper only after European contact) is the same area that
provided most of the evidence for the early food-producing Kintampo Trad-
ition of the late third to late second millennium BC (Watson 2010). In add-
ition, it is an area rich in iron ore and has produced a second-century AD
radiocarbon date for iron smelting at Hani, near Begho (Posnansky and
McIntosh 1976) and a fourth-century radiocarbon date for an iron-smelting
site adjacent to Bono Manso (Effah-Gyamﬁ 1985: 204). The problem is
linking such earlier evidence to the growth of urban communities in the second
millennium AD. This is in spite of excavations by Shinnie and Kense (1989) at
the town site of Daboya, on the White Volta River further north in the
savanna. Occupied during the last 4,000 years or so, its earliest evidence for
iron was in about the middle of the ﬁrst millennium BC. A source of salt,
Daboya probably became a link in an extensive trading network. However,
much later evidence from the Republic of Benin, dating from the seventeenth
to nineteenth centuries AD, shows how urban and state development could
occur in this region. Albeit spurred by the European-sponsored Atlantic trade,
the growth of urban centres, particularly at Abomey (Fig. 7.3) and Cana, and
the emergence of the states of Dahomey, Allada, and Hueda provide a model
for sociopolitical changes that might also have occurred earlier than archaeo-
logical evidence presently indicates (Monroe 2012; 2014).
   Other important archaeological evidence relevant to urbanization and
the growth of the state in the West African forest and forest fringes relates
to the Yoruba people of south-western Nigeria, many of whose larger settle-
ments were individual city-states that collectively constituted a city-state
culture (Peel 2000). As Bascom wrote: ‘They are undoubtedly the most urban
of all African peoples’ (Bascom 1955: 446). Studies of this phenomenon,
however, have concentrated on historical sources, most of which are of
nineteenth-century date. There has been less concern about origins, probably
because many people assume that the impressive urban developments in most
cases do not predate 1800. Indeed, the early-nineteenth-century Fulani
attacks on northern Yorubaland, and the Yoruba civil wars that followed,
do seem to have played a substantial part in the development of the urban
pattern that now exists. Nevertheless, some large urban centres, such as
Ijebu-Ode, clearly did exist amongst the Yoruba at an earlier date (Fletcher
1998: 128), and archaeological investigations are beginning to show this.
Excavation and oral tradition have also indicated that Early Osogbo, a small
town on the Upper Osun River, originated in the late sixteenth century
(Ogundiran 2014). Particularly important, however, were the excavations
and survey during the 1970s by Robert Soper at the site of Old Oyo, in the
southern savanna, which as the capital of a large Yoruba state was at the

                                                                           195
African Civilizations




Fig. 7.3 Plan of Abomey, Republic of Benin, showing the royal palaces and the remains of
the bank and ditch system. After Monroe 2014: ﬁg. 5.5.


height of its power in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries AD.
In common with many Yoruba towns and cities (Usman 2004), Old Oyo
was surrounded by a complex of earthen banks and ditches, from a study of
which Soper and Darling (1980) were able to gain some idea of the shape of
the former settlement and to suggest a tentative relative chronology for its
development (Fig. 7.4). Soper (1993) also surveyed the site of the ruler’s
palace within Old Oyo and showed how closely its plan compared with that
of the pre-1979 parts of the palace in the present city of Oyo, which lies
about 130 kilometres to the south. Radiocarbon dates from the excavations

196
                                            The West African forest and its fringes




Fig. 7.4 Plan of the city walls of Old Oyo, Nigeria. After Soper and Darling 1980: ﬁg. 1.



at Old Oyo indicate the existence of a substantial settlement of more than
1 square kilometre as early as the twelfth century AD (and perhaps as early as
the eighth century), which apparently pre-dated the earthwork complex
(Calvocoressi and David 1979: 19–20, 27; Agbaje-Williams 1990: 369).

                                                                                    197
African Civilizations

Old Oyo was, however, only the most important of numerous towns aban-
doned in the southern savanna as a result of the Fulani attacks. Near Old
Oyo, Agbaje-Williams (1990) drew attention to the sites of Koso and Ipapo
Ile, both of which have defensive earthworks.
   Even now Yoruba towns and cities tend to be concentrated in the transitional
zone between grassland and forest. Archaeologically, the most important of
those in the northern part of the forest itself is Ife, where according to Yoruba
traditions the world was created. Ife has remained of spiritual and ceremonial
importance to the Yoruba, and the remarkable terracottas, copper-based alloy
castings, and stone sculptures discovered there since the beginning of the twen-
tieth century have focused archaeological activity on this site (Willett 1967).
The art itself suggests emerging social stratiﬁcation, for some of it represents
personages of importance (Fig. 7.5); in addition, art on such a scale implies
patronage, particularly because the items of copper-based alloys are made from
materials that were probably imported (Willett and Sayre 2006). Excavations in
the present city of Ife (which covers the area of the ancient city), by Frank
Willett, Ekpo Eyo (Eyo 1974), and Peter Garlake, produced a radiocarbon
chronology suggesting that occupation commenced during the late ﬁrst millen-
nium AD. Archaeological deposits at Ife are difﬁcult to excavate, and rarely has
mud walling been isolated in the generally shallow deposits. Nevertheless, the
excavation of pavements of edge-laid potsherds and small stones has provided
some indication of the layout of domestic buildings (Willett 1967: ﬁgs. 16 and
17, plate 66; Garlake 1974: ﬁgs. 3 and 4; 1977: ﬁgs. 4 and 8). The main period
during which such pavements were made has been dated by radiocarbon to
approximately the twelfth to the ﬁfteenth century, and both radiocarbon and
thermoluminescence dates have been used to suggest that the most important
period of Ife art was in the late fourteenth to early ﬁfteenth century. Little,
however, can be said of the growth of the city itself, although a series of
concentric city walls (Fig. 7.6) suggests several phases in which the city grew
up around the palace of the ruler (Ozanne 1969). These walls have not been
adequately dated, and at least some of them belonged to only the last few
centuries. It seems, nevertheless, that the ancient city must have covered a
considerable area. Garlake (1977: 92) suggested that it was probably at least
as large as the nineteenth-century walled town, because two of the excavated
sites lie outside the western wall of that town while another lies beside and
just beyond the eastern wall. He also claimed: ‘There are strong indications
that buildings were sufﬁciently compact and close together for the settlement
to be ranked as urban.’ In addition, this was an urban development with a
thriving technological base, not only in metal casting but also in other activities,
probably including the manufacture of glass from its primary materials
(Freestone 2006; Lankton et al. 2006; Babalola 2011).

198
                                             The West African forest and its fringes




Fig. 7.5 ‘Bronze’ casting of an Oni of Ife. Height 467 millimetres. The Frank Willett
Collection. Image courtesy of The Hunterian, University of Glasgow 2014.

  More archaeological evidence relevant to the present discussion comes from
Benin City, also in southern Nigeria. Benin (not to be confused with the
Republic of Benin) is archaeologically fascinating not only because it is deep

                                                                                        199
African Civilizations




Fig. 7.6 Plan of Ife city walls, Nigeria. Single lines represent earlier walls, double lines
later walls. After Ozanne 1969.

within the rainforest but also because its origins are still unclear. Excavations
during the 1950s by Goodwin (1957) and by myself during the 1960s (Connah
1975) revealed substantial post-European-contact deposits (i.e. dating from
after the late ﬁfteenth century AD) on the site of the old palace. However, my
own work also demonstrated occupation of the city by about the thirteenth
century. The principal evidence for this consisted of radiocarbon dates for a
mass burial of at least forty-one young women, who lay at a depth of more than
12.5 metres in a narrow, well-like cistern (Fig. 7.7). Wearing clothing, bracelets,
ﬁnger rings, and beads, they appeared to have been dropped down the deep

200
                                            The West African forest and its fringes




Fig. 7.7 Section of shaft containing mass sacriﬁce, Benin City, Nigeria. After Connah
1975: ﬁg. 18.

                                                                                        201
African Civilizations

shaft in which they were found and must surely represent ritual sacriﬁce indica-
tive of centralized authority, particularly as the shaft lay within the area of the
old palace. There is documentary evidence for throwing the bodies of sacriﬁcial
victims into such pits as late as 1897 (Roth 1903). Deep beneath the modern city
of Benin there must surely be other similar pits, and it is possible that some of
them could be older than the one excavated. The 1960s excavations also
showed that edge-laid potsherd pavements had been made in Benin City during
or prior to the fourteenth century AD, a practice that appears to have ended
before European contact. As at Ife, such pavements suggest the existence of
formal architecture. Indeed, there is ethnohistoric, ethnographic, and archaeo-
logical evidence for postcontact architecture in coursed mud in Benin City. This
was distinguished by tall, steep-roofed entrances (Fagg 1963: plate 35); horizon-
tally grooved, polished red mud walls (Connah 1975: plates 8 and 17); and a
plan in which rooms were arranged around a series of rectangular courtyards
open to the sky, called impluvia (Roth 1903: ﬁgs. 180 and 185; Connah 1975:
plate 1). An important example of a chief’s house, which survived a ﬁre that
destroyed much of the city at the time of its British conquest in 1897, is
Ogiamien’s House, with its formal plan of rooms built in coursed mud that
combined domestic and symbolic-sacred functions (Fig. 7.8). Its ‘location and




Fig. 7.8 Ground plan of Ogiamien’s House, Benin City, Nigeria. Solid black indicates
coursed mud walls of the main structure, open lines are compound walls, dotted lines show
roof edges, and some other lines within rooms represent impluvia. The main entrance is to
the left, and the row of rooms at the top are wives’ quarters, with a menstruation room at
the extreme right. Nevadomsky et al. 2014: ﬁg. 1. Reproduced with permission of Springer
Science+Business Media, New York, and Copyright Clearance Center’s RightsLink.


202
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

design’ have been claimed as ‘roughly a thousand years old’ (Nevadomsky et al.
2014: 67), but there is no archaeological evidence for such antiquity. Attempts
to improve the dating of this house are overdue and might include dendrochron-
ology of its major timber components or thermoluminescence of samples from
its mud-wall cores.
   Also important are the so-called Benin City walls, the innermost of which
has been demonstrated by radiocarbon dating, historical documentation, and
oral tradition to have been constructed before European contact, possibly
around the middle of the ﬁfteenth century (Connah 1975). Consisting of
a massive earthen bank and ditch, with a total vertical height, from the
excavated bottom of the ditch to the top of the surviving bank, of as much
as 17.4 metres and a circumference of 11.6 kilometres, this earthwork repre-
sents an enormous investment of human effort that must have been directed
by a powerful centralized authority. Calculations have suggested that its
construction would have absorbed 5,000 people occupied for ten hours a
day, if it had been completed in one dry season, or 1,000 people if spread
over ﬁve dry seasons. The direction of labour on such a massive project must
have implications of the greatest signiﬁcance for our enquiry into state forma-
tion. That is not the whole story, however, because surveys by myself during
the 1960s in the tangled vegetation around Benin City revealed a vast network
of further interlocking enclosures, consisting of more than 145 kilometres of
earthworks. These appeared to hint at a process of synoecism (‘the union
of several towns or villages into or under one capital city’ (Oxford English
Dictionary 1933)) by which a group of villages had developed into a city, at a
date prior to the construction of the innermost and most massive of the ‘walls’.
   Subsequent work by Darling (1984; 1988; 1998) and by others (Maliphant
et al. 1976; Roese 1981) showed that even this outer network mapped by me
(Connah 1975) was only a small peripheral part of more extensive rural
earthwork enclosures. These cover an area of about 6,500 square kilometres,
with an estimated total length in excess of 16,000 kilometres (Fig. 7.9). At least
150,000,000 person-hours of work over several centuries are implied. As
Darling showed, these earthworks probably have more to tell us about the
process of state formation (reﬂecting power struggles for agricultural land)
than about the urban origins of Benin City itself. Indeed, on the basis of the
distribution and character of the earthworks and of a statistical analysis of
surface-collected potsherds, he proposed a settlement model for both the Benin
area and that of Ishan to its north from the late ﬁrst millennium AD onwards.
He argued that there was ‘a strong southward colonization by savannah/
savannah–forest ecotone Edo speakers [Edo is the language of Benin] into
the rainforest’. The area over which this movement is thought to have taken
place has a dense network of enclosures, ‘whereas there is an almost total

                                                                             203
African Civilizations




Fig. 7.9 Earthwork enclosures in the Benin City area. Dotted line indicates limits of
modern city in the 1960s to 1970s. After Darling 1982.



204
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

absence of them amongst the Urhobo speakers’ just to the south (Darling
1988: 122–3). Darling could well be right, but as he admitted, his archaeo-
logical survey remains ‘largely undated’ (Darling 1988: 133). It is regrettable
that a satisfactory series of radiocarbon dates for the land surfaces beneath
these earthworks has still not been obtained. Six radiocarbon determinations
are available, but two of them give ‘modern’ dates, one gives a nineteenth-
century date, and three give dates in the thirteenth to ﬁfteenth centuries (Sutton
1982: 309, 312). Furthermore, the other radiocarbon dates for Benin City,
obtained by myself in the 1960s, need to be replaced by modern assessments
now that techniques have improved so greatly.
   Chronological problems also remain regarding the artistic use of copper-
base alloys in Benin. My excavations of the 1960s showed that these materials
were used artistically as early as the thirteenth century AD, but those excav-
ations recovered no evidence of casting these metals prior to European contact.
In spite of the numerous artistic studies that have been made of the famous
Benin castings (e.g., Forman et al. 1960; Dark 1973), we still have little
evidence about their detailed chronology. In view of the implications of these
castings, indicating both an hierarchical power structure and considerable
artistic patronage, it is unfortunate that so few have been recovered from
controlled stratigraphic excavations. Although a small number of Benin cast-
ings have been dated on the basis of the thermoluminescence of ﬁred clay core
remaining within them, they were all found to date from about the ﬁfteenth
century AD or later (Willett and Fleming 1976). Nevertheless, stable lead
isotope analysis indicated that the source of the metal used in both Ife and
during an early period in Benin was faraway France (Willet and Sayre 2006:
77), an indication of the extent of the trading networks in which these cities
participated.
   A question concerning Benin City and the state of which it formed the capital
is whether they were always within the rainforest. As von Hellermann (2010)
suggested, it is possible that forest density has varied through time; both
climatic change and human activity could have created more open conditions
in the past (p. 187). Talbot and Delibrias (1977) found evidence of drier
conditions between 700 and 200 years ago in their investigations of Lake
Bosumtwi, in Ghana, and some historical accounts support their interpret-
ation. In addition, the extensive earthworks in the Benin City region discussed
above are useless as boundaries in the heavily overgrown conditions in which
many are now situated. The ditches and banks are virtually invisible in dense
rainforest or regrowth. They must have been constructed when there was far
less vegetation cover than at present. Rees (in Connah 1975: 237–42) raised
the possibility of a formerly different environment in an area of forest near
Benin City that was cleared for planting oil palms; he found pits and mounds

                                                                             205
African Civilizations

as well as earthworks, indicating denser settlement in the past. Technology
now exists in the form of aerial LiDAR (light detection and ranging) that can
see through the vegetation in order to investigate this possibility (Eve 2014).
   Archaeological evidence seemingly irrelevant to state formation and urban-
ization comes from Igbo-Ukwu, east of the River Niger in Nigeria. This is in an
area occupied by the Igbo people, who have long interested anthropologists
precisely because they developed neither cities nor states until recent times, in
spite of a high population density. As late as the 1930s the Igbo could still
boast that ‘there is no one who owns us’ (that is to say: we have no rulers), and
their society remained characterized by ‘a dispersal rather than a concentration
of authority’ (Green 1947: 145, 73). What, then, is one to make of Igbo-Ukwu,
where the burial of a clearly important individual (Fig. 7.10), a repository of
sophisticated regalia, and a ritual pit produced, amongst other things,
685 copper and bronze objects and some 165,000 stone and glass beads?
Thurstan Shaw, the excavator of this site, suggested that this indicates the
former existence of a local ‘priest king’ who was the holder of a politico-ritual
title in the democratized title-taking system of this area (Shaw 1970; 1977).
Some ethnohistorical evidence supports this interpretation, although it is
uncertain whether this should be applied to archaeological data a thousand
years old. This date, at the end of the ﬁrst millennium AD, is based on
radiocarbon dates that were formerly the subject of argument, but subse-
quently there was a greater readiness to accept them (Posnansky 1980). The
approximately tenth-century date for the Igbo-Ukwu evidence is of importance
not only because of the sophisticated metallurgy and unique art forms but
also because it implies early trading connections between the West African
rainforest and the Mediterranean or even India. Analyses have shown that
some of the copper and copper alloy probably came from the lead, zinc, and
copper deposits of the Benue Rift, only 100 kilometres to the east of the site
(Chikwendu et al. 1989), where there is evidence of mining dating to the end of
the ﬁrst millennium AD (Craddock et al. 1997). Nevertheless, stable lead
isotope analysis indicated that some of the metal came from Tunisia or
Morocco (Willet and Sayre 2006: 77), and the glass and carnelian beads must
have resulted from trade either across the Sahara or east-west through the
Sahel. Indeed, Insoll (1996a: 80) suggested that elephant ivory was being
shipped north up the River Niger to Gao, from where it was transported
across the desert by camel caravan. If that was the case, then Gao could have
been the immediate source of many of the beads found at Igbo-Ukwu, having
been sent south in exchange for the ivory but originating from more distant
locations (Insoll and Shaw 1997).
   Clearly there was participation in both local and long-distance trade by
people living in the Igbo-Ukwu area, and some of the products of this trade

206
                                             The West African forest and its fringes




Fig. 7.10 Plan of the burial at Igbo-Ukwu, Nigeria. 1, 15, and 22, Elephant tusks; 2,
decorated copper roundels; 3, crown; 4, decorated copper plate; 5, pectoral plate; 6 and 19,
position of point of bracket; 7, 10, 13, 17, and 18, copper anklets; 8, copper strap; 9,
skull; 11, spiral copper bosses set in wood: remains of stool; 12, beaded armlets; 14,
copper handle for calabash; 16, copper fan holder; 20, position of point of rod
supporting bronze leopard’s skull; 21, bronze horseman hilt; X, iron nails and staples.
After Shaw 1970: ﬁg. 14.


                                                                                       207
African Civilizations

were concentrated on one individual. Elsewhere, such archaeological evidence
would probably be thought indicative of an emergent state or a ranked
chiefdom. Until we know more about the late ﬁrst millennium AD in this part
of Nigeria, there are three tentative conclusions. First, we should be careful
when deducing sociopolitical organization from archaeological evidence for
‘rich burials’. Second, the social and political organization observed in any
area during the last few centuries does not necessarily indicate the situation a
thousand years ago; societies are dynamic, not static. Third, Igboland raises
questions about the nature of West African urbanism. In 1955 this region had
one of the densest populations in Nigeria, with estimates for some areas of
‘well over 1000 per square mile [259 hectares]’ (Buchanan and Pugh 1955:
60). Perhaps for mainly socioeconomic reasons, Igbo settlement was dispersed
rather than nucleated, like that of the Yoruba, each Igbo farmstead lying in the
middle of its own cultivated area near a road or bush path. Given such
population densities, it seems pointless to ask about the ‘absence’ of urbanism.


Subsistence economy
Unfortunately, forest soils are usually destructive of bone, and the recovery
of botanical evidence by means of ﬂotation has sometimes been neglected.
However, the preservation of organic materials in the Benin cistern containing
the sacriﬁced women suggests that exceptional conditions do exist if archae-
ologists can ﬁnd them. Meanwhile, evidence from the second millennium BC
Kintampo sites, at the junction of forest and savanna in Ghana, remains
of value even for this later period. From these sites there is evidence of
domesticated dwarf sheep or goats and possibly of small domesticated cattle.
In addition, cowpeas, oil palm, and perhaps yam were exploited, although it is
unknown whether these were domesticated or not, and several wild plants
were also eaten. Similarly, faunal and artefactual evidence indicates that
hunting and ﬁshing remained a signiﬁcant part of the basic subsistence (Stahl
2005a; Watson 2005a; 2005b). To the north, in the southern savanna, the
second to ﬁrst millennium BC Kintampo site of Birimi showed that pearl millet
(Pennisetum glaucum) was grown (D’Andrea et al. 2001); this savanna crop
was also being cultivated in the rainforest of southern Cameroon during
the ﬁrst millennium BC, suggesting a period of forest recession (Kahlheber
et al. 2009).
  From sites of the late ﬁrst millennium AD or early second millennium AD,
there is less evidence for subsistence. At Daboya the faunal remains indicated
the presence of domesticated cattle, sheep, or goats and chicken or guinea
fowl over the last 2,000 years or so, and wild animals remained an important
resource. However, the site provided no evidence for domesticated plants

208
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

(Shinnie and Kense 1989: 223–7). At Bono Manso the faunal material
indicated the keeping of goats and chickens, as well as the exploitation of
wild species, but little bone was recovered and most was undiagnostic.
Furthermore, most of the bones came from the later phases, and, again, there
was no evidence for cultivated plants (Effah-Gyamﬁ 1985: 98–9). In the case
of Ife there is slight evidence of sheep or goat associated with potsherd
pavements (Garlake 1977: 91), and terracottas of a bull and of a ram’s head
were found at Lafogido (in Ife) in a twelfth-century context (Eyo 1974). As for
Benin City, there is no evidence of value (Connah 1975: 218), and although
the ritual disposal pit at Igbo-Ukwu yielded a moderate number of bones, they
were all of wild though edible fauna, a circumstance perhaps explained by
the presumed ritual character of the pit (Shaw 1970: vol. 1, 247–8).
  With so little direct archaeological evidence, it is necessary to fall back on
indirect evidence and on evidence from nonarchaeological sources. As already
discussed (p. 188), there were substantial plant-food resources in the rain-
forest, and all the sites that have been mentioned are situated within the West
African ‘yam zone’ (Figs. 6.1 and 6.2). Furthermore, those sites tend to be in
the more northern parts of the forest or in the southern savanna, where yams
and oil palm originally grew more readily, and it is those plants that are likely
to have become the major components in forest subsistence (D’Andrea et al.
2006). The main deﬁciency would probably have been animal protein, as in
recent times, but small numbers of dwarf goats and cattle, large quantities of
ﬁsh, and extensive hunting in the forest (Gautier and Van Neer 2005) could
have rendered this less of a problem than it is for the present, exploding
population. Overall, this food-production system was almost certainly indi-
genous in its development and of substantial antiquity. Pottery, ground stone
axes, and possible sickle components appear at the Nigerian rock shelter of
Iwo Eleru during the last 5,000 years BC (Shaw and Daniels 1984: 55), and
during the last few millennia BC many of the stone-using peoples of the forest
made pick-like and hoe-like implements, which some archaeologists have
interpreted as digging tools for the collection and eventual cultivation of
yams. Sowunmi (1993: 15) detected a ‘sharp rise’ in the occurrence of oil palm
at about 800 BC in a Niger delta deposit, along with the appearance of weeds
of cultivation. Furthermore, those trypanosomiasis-resistant goats and cattle
must have taken a considerable time to acquire the resistance that enables them
to survive in the forest.
  Apparently, by the end of the ﬁrst millennium AD, and perhaps 1,000
or 2,000 years earlier, a sound agricultural system had grown up on the
interﬂuves of the more northerly parts of the forest. This system was based on
the rotational bush-fallow cultivation of extensive areas of forest land, which
were cleared by slashing and burning and then abandoned to regeneration when

                                                                            209
African Civilizations

soil exhaustion reduced productivity. The possibility that this human impact,
combined with climatic change, led to a more open landscape in some parts
of the forest must also be considered (von Hellermann 2010). One of the
main crops was probably yams, and yams are a food that can be stored and
transported. Therefore, it seems likely that by the early second millennium AD
the subsistence economy of the rainforest was able to produce a surplus and
to provide adequate support for the growing social complexity of which the
archaeological record provides evidence. Then, during the later second millen-
nium AD, the subsistence of the area was subject to major changes brought on
by the participation of West Africa in the Atlantic trade (Stahl 2001; Ogundiran
and Falola 2007; Monroe and Ogundiran 2012). Maize, cassava, various beans,
tobacco, and other plants from the Americas were added to the economy. In
addition, the acquisition of European trade goods from the coast had important
socioeconomic consequences that stimulated the substantial urban and state
developments in the West African forest and its margins that were observed
by early European travellers but had originated earlier.


Technology
Killick (2004) and Alpern (2005) have reviewed the evidence for early iron
smelting in Africa, and it seems that at least some of the occupants of the West
African forest were working iron from early in the ﬁrst millennium AD and
probably earlier. Smelting was already present at Hani in Ghana, just north of
the forest, by about the second century AD, and evidence from Nsukka, in
eastern Nigeria, and Obobogo, in Cameroon, indicates that in the southern
savanna smelting probably commenced in the second half of the ﬁrst millen-
nium BC (Okafor 1993; Woodhouse 1998). Also, iron objects from probable
graves at Akonétye, in southern Cameroon, date from the ﬁrst half of the ﬁrst
millennium AD (Meister and Eggert 2008). At the earliest Nsukka sites, the
smelters were already using furnaces that were ‘extremely efﬁcient’ (McIntosh
1994: 174). Certainly the iron-working skills of West African forest peoples
became in time highly sophisticated; there is evidence of this by the end of
the ﬁrst millennium AD at Igbo-Ukwu (Shaw 1970: vol. 1, 97–103). Also, the
description by Bellamy (1904), recording the operation of an impressive
induced-draught furnace near Oyo in Yorubaland, indicates a long-established
tradition. The adoption of iron by people living in and on the fringes of the
forest must have made the agricultural exploitation of those zones more
practicable than previously, enabling cultivation on a scale that could support
communities of increasing size.
  In addition to the working of iron, copper and copper-base alloys were
being handled with great skill by the close of the ﬁrst millennium AD. The

210
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

evidence from Igbo-Ukwu shows that both lost-wax casting and smithing
and chasing had been mastered. Indeed, by the second quarter of the second
millennium AD, metalsmiths in Ife were also producing copper-base alloy
castings of a technical excellence and an artistic reﬁnement that is very
impressive. A little later, craftsmen in Benin City were excelling in a similar
fashion. and the Akan were producing copper-alloy weights for weighing
gold dust, as well as casting an impressive range of jewellery in gold. Modern
experts have described the Igbo-Ukwu material as ‘extremely ambitious in
design and executed by highly skilled and experienced craftsmen’ (Craddock
and Picton 1986: 4).
  Perhaps the most impressive aspect of the forest-dwellers’ technology, how-
ever, was its diversity. Thus the artists of ancient Ife excelled in the making of
terracotta representations as well as ones of copper-base alloy. Furthermore,
they also carved hard stone such as granite-gneiss and quartz, to produce
accomplished sculptures. Some of these were decorated in a distinctive way,
by driving iron nails into holes drilled into the stone (Willett 1967: 79–84,
plates 72–4, 77–9). Also at Ife, the complex pavements of potsherds and stones
hint at considerable architectural sophistication, a sophistication that was still
apparent in the much later mud palaces of some Yoruba rulers. Indeed, some
of the coursed-mud architecture of the West African forest was quite remark-
able. That of the Asante, for instance, with its polished red and white walls
decorated with low reliefs (e.g., McLeod 1981: 56), remained an impressive
demonstration of what was possible in this building material, as also did that
of Benin, with its polished, ﬂuted red walls. Indeed, Benin City has provided a
time capsule of traditional technology in the form of the varied collection of
objects looted from the city at the time of its capture by the British in 1897
(e.g., Pitt Rivers 1900). The Bini were proﬁcient not only in iron working,
‘brass working’, and building but also in carpentry, wood and ivory carving,
mud and terracotta sculpture, pottery, leather working, weaving, and bead-
work (Dark 1973). In addition, the earthworks in the Benin and Ishan areas
suggest an understanding of surveying and civil engineering, as well as a
capacity to move monumental amounts of earth.
  The full range of technological skills amongst some forest communities,
during the last 500 to 1,000 years, is too great to discuss in detail, but two
other activities deserve a mention. First, a number of sites at Ife have yielded
evidence of glass melting, in the form of fragments of crucibles coated with
waste glass (e.g., Garlake 1977: 89–90). This might mean only that imported
glass was being melted to turn into beads or other small objects (Willett 1977:
22), or it could mean that glass was being made from its primary materials, as
now seems likely (Freestone 2006; Lankton et al. 2006; Babalola 2011).
Radiocarbon dates for a site described as a glass-bead-making factory indicate

                                                                             211
African Civilizations

a date between the late eleventh and the fourteenth centuries (Sutton 1982:
309, 312). Second, although there has been little archaeological investigation
of gold mining in southern Ghana, there are ethnohistorical accounts of
mining in the Akan forest to a depth of as much as 46 metres. Clearly, the
miners must have known a considerable amount about their craft. Traces
of mining have also been reported in the Nigerian lead, zinc, and copper
deposits east of Igbo-Ukwu, where open cuts and tunnelling reached depths
of about 10 metres (Chikwendu et al. 1989: 31). A radiocarbon date in the
tenth century AD, for charcoal associated with mining debris, suggests that
these mines were in use at the time that the Igbo-Ukwu copper and copper-
alloy objects were being made (McIntosh 1994: 176; Craddock et al. 1997).
Awaiting further investigation are the tunnels and spoil heaps of iron-ore
mining in the Republic of Benin, thought to date to the ﬁrst half of the second
millennium AD (Randsborg 2010: 81).
  Thus by early in the second millennium AD, if not before, there was a varied
and sophisticated level of technology in at least some of the West African forest
communities. There must have been a growth in functional specialization
amongst the societies concerned.


Social system
Ethnohistorical and oral sources have more to tell us about social organization
in the West African rainforest during the last half millennium than does
archaeological evidence. Nevertheless, the latter can augment the other
sources, and it is our major source of information for the crucial earlier
formative periods. Archaeological data indicate that by late in the ﬁrst millen-
nium AD, or early in the second millennium, there was growing social stratiﬁ-
cation in some locations based on the control of trade resources and
agricultural surplus. This took place particularly in the northerly parts of the
forest and in the forest–savanna ecotone. It led in some places to increasing
centralization of authority, particularly in the form of divine kingship. The
copper-base alloy castings of Ife and Benin are evidence of that institution and,
in the case of Benin, of the social and political hierarchy that supported it. In
particular, it seems likely that the famous ‘bronze’ heads of Ife were made for
attachment to wooden bodies which, provided with clothing, crowns, and
other regalia, were carried in funeral processions of rulers, members of their
families, and perhaps some of their more important chiefs. Such ﬁgures could
have represented not only the deceased but also the authority of the ofﬁce that
he or she had held, much as was the case in Medieval and Early Modern
Europe where similar practices were recorded (Willett 1966). Furthermore,
some idea of the power that such authority could wield is given by the

212
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

thirteenth-century sacriﬁcial victims at Benin and by the scale of the earth-
works of that city and its surrounding settlements.
  Similarly, whatever the sociopolitical signiﬁcance of the Igbo-Ukwu evi-
dence, it clearly indicates a concentration of ‘wealth’ on one individual,
an individual who held institutionalized power of some sort. The burial is
especially persuasive in this respect. As shown in Caroline Sassoon’s recon-
struction painting (Shaw 1970: vol. 1, frontispiece; McIntosh 1999: ﬁg. 1.2),
the deceased sat on an ornamented stool, clothed, crowned, and with regalia
and jewellery. It is likely that stools were already symbols of authority, as was
later the case with the Asante of Ghana (McLeod 1981: 112–18). Indeed, some
stools of exceptional workmanship from Benin, made of wood or of copper
alloy (e.g., Pitt Rivers 1900: plate 41; Roth 1903: ﬁgs. 111 and 112; Dark
1973: plate 40), and from Ife, carved out of stone (e.g., Willett 1967: plate 77),
must have had a similar role. Regrettably, we still lack structural evidence such
as the layout of palace buildings, other than much later examples at Old Oyo,
Benin City, or Abomey. Nevertheless, the material record does provide signs
of emergent city-states in the West African forest by early in the second
millennium AD.
  There are also signs of urbanization by this time; at the very least Begho,
Bono Manso, Ife, and Benin were already of increasing size with tendencies
to nucleation. Archaeological evidence for the beginnings of urbanization in
the West African forest is poor, but technological developments suggest a
growth of specialist crafts, and with this a growth in functional specialization
within society that Mabogunje thought fundamental to the development of
urbanization. Furthermore, it seems that by the early second millennium AD,
Mabogunje’s ‘limiting conditions’ (p. 5) for urbanization were also being
met in some parts of the West African forest. There was almost certainly a
surplus of food; there were in some areas small groups of people able to
exercise power; and very likely there was a class of traders and merchants. In
some places, however, whether or not these conditions were met, urbaniza-
tion did not take place. There is the example of the Igbo people of eastern
Nigeria who, in spite of what might have been a large population, developed
a form of sociopolitical organization that was dispersed rather than nucle-
ated. The origins of Igbo society would merit careful archaeological examin-
ation, for if we understood why there were no Igbo cities, then we might
understand more about the overall process of urbanization in the West
African rainforest. Roderick McIntosh (2005) might well have the answer,
as discussed in Chapter 6, with his idea of heterarchy, authority arranged
horizontally, rather than hierarchy, authority arranged vertically. It is appar-
ent that large numbers of people living in a small area might choose different
ways of organizing their society.

                                                                             213
African Civilizations

Population pressures
The West African rainforest would appear to be an unlikely place for popula-
tion pressures; there seems to be almost limitless unused land, and water stress
is not as acute as in the savanna. Indeed, it is possible that the iron-using
farmers of the ﬁrst and early second millennium AD did enjoy for some
centuries a virtual ‘frontier’ situation, in which there was always sufﬁcient
fresh land to meet increases in population. This might even be the reason why
urbanization and state development were apparently later phenomena in the
forest than in the savanna.
   However, Darling’s work around Benin City showed that forest soils and
environments varied in their attractiveness to farmers. It seems probable that
the best farmlands were situated on the upper interﬂuves, where the vegetation
might have been easier to clear and the soils were better drained. Also there seems
to have been a preference for ecotonal environments on the fringes of the forest.
Given a rotational bush-fallow agricultural system of the sort practised in the
forest during recent centuries, each piece of farmland would have to be fallowed
for ten to ﬁfteen years, after only three or four years of cultivation. During those
brief periods of cultivation each piece of land would be relatively productive and
capable of producing a food surplus. This might stimulate population growth,
but a time would come when the best land would become harder to ﬁnd, unless
farmers reduced the fallowing period, thereby reducing productivity and food
supplies. This is supposition, but for the area around Benin City, Allison (1962:
244) produced evidence that most of the forest had been farmed at one time or
another. Indeed, the vast pattern of earthworks mapped by Darling (1984)
is surely indicative of an expanding farming population competing for land.
Communities do not indulge in such monumental labour unless there is good
reason. Whether such competition existed also in other areas of the West African
forest remains to be seen. The area occupied by the Igbo, for instance, has been
said to have ‘among the poorest of Nigerian soils – highly leached, extremely
acid, suited only to a limited range of crops and eroding rapidly under conditions
of overcropping’ (Buchanan and Pugh 1955: 60). It might be that population
dispersal was the most appropriate strategy for dealing with such generally poor
soils, whereas nucleation on areas of better soils tended to take place where
there was a greater variation in soil quality. There is also the possibility that
climatic change and human impact altered the environment in the past, with
a drier, more open landscape between 700 and 200 years ago, followed by a
moister, more forested one in recent centuries (p. 205). This could have resulted
in a high population density that led to political turmoil and warfare as condi-
tions changed and to the decline in which British observers found the Benin state
at the end of the nineteenth century (von Hellermann 2010).


214
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

Ideology
Prior to European contact, the religions of West African forest peoples seem
to have consisted of a varied collection of beliefs. From ethnohistorical
sources and oral tradition, it appears that pantheons of deities as well as
ancestors played a part in these beliefs and that the ruler of a community
often fulﬁlled the function of its chief priest. Thus in Benin City the Oba
appears to have been the principal ofﬁciant in major religious ceremonies
(Bradbury 1957: 52–60), and at least some of these involved human sacriﬁces
in which the victim or victims were asked to carry a message to the gods
(Roth 1903: 71–2). Likewise, the Oni of Ife was a spiritual leader; the Akan
chiefs seem to have had spiritual as well as temporal powers (McLeod 1981);
and rulers of Dahomey reinforced their control with rituals that included
human sacriﬁces (Monroe 2012). Therefore, ideology might have played a
crucial role in the emergence of West African forest states, particularly
as a means of legitimizing and reinforcing centralized authority. In view of
the importance of a food surplus in the development of both states and cities,
it is interesting that in many parts of the forest and its fringes some of the
most signiﬁcant ceremonies of the religious year were concerned with the
yam harvest.
   There is some archaeological evidence that suggests that the role of religion
might have been similar in the early centuries of the second millennium AD.
In Ife, for instance, Garlake excavated fourteenth-century altars built into
the edge of potsherd pavements and comparable to those dedicated to past
Obas that were still to be seen in the royal palace of Benin late in the twentieth
century (Garlake 1977: 69). At Benin itself there is evidence of human sacriﬁce
in the thirteenth century. In addition, many of the Benin copper-base alloy
castings of sixteenth- to nineteenth-century date, particularly those in the form
of human heads, apparently represented former Obas and were important
liturgical furnishings of the altars (Gore 2007). The ‘bronze’ and terracotta
heads from Ife of fourteenth- to ﬁfteenth-century date were perhaps intended
for similar use or, in some cases, for funeral ceremonies. Herbert (1984: 302)
suggested that such items were ‘actual containers of power’, not merely
‘passive signiﬁers’ of it. For earlier periods, however, the interpretation of
religious symbolism can be difﬁcult, such as with the thousand-year-old
Igbo-Ukwu evidence for the existence of a ‘priest king’ (Shaw 1977). Neverthe-
less, whatever its signiﬁcance might be, that site does suggest that the combin-
ing of spiritual and temporal authority is indeed an ancient practice in the
West African forest. An amalgam of deeply embedded beliefs, rituals, and
state-sponsored violence underpinned a number of the forest hierarchies
and their rulers.


                                                                             215
African Civilizations

External trade
In Chapter 6 (p. 151) it was argued that the range of environments in West
Africa would have provided both the necessity and the occasion for the
exchange of raw materials and products across environmental boundaries.
Thus one might expect an early development of regional trading both within
and between the various ecozones and ecotones of West Africa. The forest and
forest fringes must have played a part in such development, just as the drier
savanna and Sahel to their north did. Furthermore, the wooded savanna in
between these contrasting environments, sometimes referred to as the ‘Middle
Belt’, would have provided a vital trading link between the two, although one
that needs more attention from archaeologists (Casey 2010). Forest products
that were probably exchanged in local markets and traded to greater distances
could have included yams, other vegetables, vegetable oils, palm wine, dried
ﬁsh, salt, Melegueta pepper, kola nuts, dyewoods, various gums, cloth, pots,
canoes, charcoal, ivory, gold, and slaves. A number of these stimulated long-
distance trade, particularly gold, ivory, slaves, pepper, and kola nuts. By the
end of the ﬁrst millennium AD some of these were being carried across the
Sahara, and by the middle of the second millennium AD seaborne European
traders were seeking them on the coast and, in addition, developing what was
to become an almost insatiable demand for vegetable oils. Because of its gold
production, it has been claimed that ‘West Africa was for centuries a center of
the world economy’ (Kea 2012: 347).
  In return for their exports, the forest and forest fringes received an assort-
ment of goods, of which luxury items that gave status to the recipients formed
a substantial part. This is not to deny that meat-on-the-hoof from the savanna
was important in the forest probably from an early date or that salt from the
Sahara must have reached as far south. Nevertheless, it appears that amongst
the most important of the commodities reaching the forest from the Saharan
trade were copper-base alloys, either as ingots or manufactures. These were
much sought after by peoples of the forest, and from the time of their arrival
on the West African coast European traders were quick to take advantage of
this demand. Clearly, copper and its alloys were luxury materials of consider-
able sociopolitical and economic importance. There is evidence that France
was one source of the metal used in Ife and of that used at an early date in
Benin City (Willett and Sayre 2006: 77), a remarkable indication of the extent
of the trading networks in which these cities participated, involving European,
Mediterranean, Saharan, Sahelian, savanna, and forest transportation
systems. In addition, cowrie shells were an important commodity traded into
the forest, originally across the Sahara but eventually to the coast on European
ships (Johnson 1970a; 1970b; Hogendorn and Johnson 1986). It has been


216
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

estimated that about 16 billion cowries were brought into West Africa during
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (Ogundiran 2007: 94). Used both
decoratively and as currency, their possession was again an important indica-
tor of status. The same could be said of many of the other imports to the West
African forest. As indicated by European records of ships’ cargoes, there was a
demand for a variety of manufactured goods, particularly glass beads, coral
beads, ﬁne cloths, metalware of all sorts (especially iron knives), iron bars,
alcohol, tobacco, gunpowder, guns, and mirrors (Ryder 1969). One of the
most remarkable status symbols, however, was the horse. Used in the forest
fringes, horses were also known as deep in the forest as Benin City; they were
brought there from the savanna and, in later times, occasionally from Euro-
pean traders on the coast (Law 1980a). With trypanosomiasis in the forest, it is
unlikely that horses could have lived long in such an environment. It would
seem that their use in Benin represented a remarkable example of conspicuous
consumption.
   Much of the above is based on ethnohistory and oral tradition, mainly from
post-European-contact times. The advent of European traders on the West
African coast, from the sixteenth century onwards, reversed the orientation of
trade from north to south; incoming commodities increasingly came via the
coast, outgoing ones went the same way (Monroe and Ogundiran 2012). The
trans-Saharan trade gradually faded away, so that by the twentieth century little
of it survived. Consequently, to ﬁnd evidence of external trade in the forest,
from before about 500 years ago, we must turn to archaeology. The most
important of such evidence is Igbo-Ukwu. Although it seems that some of the
metal used in the items of copper-base alloy at that site came from no great
distance (Chikwendu et al. 1989), it appears that the rest came from North
Africa (Willett and Sayre 2006: 77), and the large number of glass and carnelian
beads must imply similar or other trading links. So must the mounted horse or
donkey on one of the Igbo-Ukwu castings (Shaw 1970: vol. 2, plates 365 and
366). Even if based on another work of art rather than on direct observation,
this indicates a connection with the savanna. Sutton (1991) suggested trading
contacts with Egypt and Nubia, and although an Indian origin has often been
assumed for the carnelian because of an apparent lack of African sources, it
‘occurs abundantly’ in Egypt (Lucas and Harris 1962: 391).
   However, irrespective of where the beads came from, the problem is to know
what the people of Igbo-Ukwu were giving in exchange. Shaw (1970: vol. 1,
284–5) suggested ivory, in the form of elephant tusks, and added that probably
slaves and perhaps kola nuts had also been exported. His suggestions seem
reasonable, but the location of Igbo-Ukwu in the northern margin of the forest,
near to the Niger River and not far from the Niger Delta, makes one wonder
whether salt, dried ﬁsh, and perhaps other delta products might also have been

                                                                            217
African Civilizations

amongst the goods traded to the north. As already mentioned (p. 206), Insoll
(1996a: 80) suggested that some of the ivory was carried up the River Niger to
Gao, from where it was fed into the Saharan trade, and that Gao might therefore
have been the immediate source of many of the beads found at Igbo-Ukwu,
whatever their remoter origin. Indeed, beads excavated from Gao are similar to
those from Igbo-Ukwu (Insoll and Shaw 1997). However, Sutton (1991: 154)
pointed out that both elephants (for ivory) and people (as slaves) were common
south of the Sahara a thousand years ago, and he argued that to produce so
much wealth as far south as Igbo-Ukwu there must have been ‘some other
valued commodity speciﬁc to that place’. It is an important point because,
whatever else they represent, the objects found at Igbo-Ukwu do indicate a
considerable concentration of wealth, which (on present knowledge) was unique
in that region at that time. Sutton has suggested that the special commodity
might have been silver, which apparently occurs in small quantities in copper
ore in south-eastern Nigeria, and of which traces have been found in the copper-
alloy objects from Igbo-Ukwu. It is an attractive idea, for here indeed was a rare
commodity of considerable international value at the relevant time, particularly
sought after for use in the currencies of both the Islamic and Christian worlds.
However, Craddock et al. (1997: 424) have described Sutton’s suggestion that
silver was being smelted in the Igbo-Ukwu area as ‘very unlikely’.
   Further to the west, the location of Begho and other sites thought to relate to
the early Akan states is surely indicative of an early trade in gold and other
forest commodities. To the south of Begho lay many of West Africa’s gold
mines and substantial resources of kola. To the north lay more gold mines, and
the Akan states seem to have developed astride a major trade route from the
coast to the region of Jenné in the Inland Niger Delta. Copper-base alloy
basins and bowls that have survived in eight or more localities in the Akan
area provide some conﬁrmation of this trade. These appear to have had a
North African origin; indeed, three items from Nsawkaw have Arabic inscrip-
tions, and one of those three is thought to be possibly of fourteenth-century
date. Also remarkable is the fourteenth-century English bronze jug that was
amongst the loot taken by the British from Kumasi in 1896. However, there
was probably a wider range of imports into the Akan area than such items
would suggest. Similarly, the commodities exported could have consisted of
things other than just gold and kola, such as ivory, dried ﬁsh, slaves, and salt.
It was on this part of the coast of West Africa that an eighteenth-century
European visitor recorded salt production (by seawater evaporation) on such a
scale that a number of storehouses were seen which each contained about
50 tonnes of salt (Nenquin 1961: 115–16).
   At both Ife and Benin City the only ﬁrm archaeological evidence for external
trade prior to European contact consists of items of copper-base alloys.

218
                                        The West African forest and its fringes

Craddock and Picton (1986: 9) found ‘signiﬁcant analytical differences’ between
such metal used at these places from the thirteenth to the ﬁfteenth century AD
and that which had been used at Igbo-Ukwu, ‘showing that new sources of
metal, probably imported, were now used’. Indeed, Willett and Sayre (2006: 77)
have since suggested that France was its most likely origin. To some extent this
reﬂects the growth of a trans-Saharan trade in brass, which European maritime
trade later took over. As an indication of the range of pre-European trade within
the forest itself, by the fourteenth century objects of copper-base alloys were
even reaching the Niger Delta, implying canoe-borne trading. In the case of
Ife, it has been suggested that a trade route ran north from Yorubaland to a
crossing of the Niger below Bussa, where copper-base-alloy castings known as
the ‘Tsoede Bronzes’ were found. Signiﬁcantly, some of these contain a small
percentage of zinc, which suggests the use of imported brass from the Saharan
trade (Craddock and Picton 1986: 8–9). This could have been an important
trade route from the forest zone, and the commodities probably traded out of
Yorubaland would have been kola nuts (important in the savanna because kola
is the only stimulant permitted by Islam), ivory, salt, dried ﬁsh, and slaves.
Similar goods would probably have been exported from Benin City, although
Melegueta pepper was probably more important than kola. Also trade in
vegetable oils is likely to have long pre-dated European contact. The location
of Benin City seems never to have been adequately explained in terms of trade
routes, although it was well placed to maintain contact with both the Niger
Delta to its south and the Niger River to its east.
   Although direct archaeological evidence is limited, there seems no doubt that
external trade was important for the peoples of the West African forest and its
margins long before European traders arrived on the coast. Such trade had
probably commenced at least by the ﬁrst millennium AD, and its origins might
be much earlier. Although long-distance contacts with trans-Saharan trade
must have stimulated the movement and procurement of certain commodities,
there seems no reason why the inauguration of such contacts should be
claimed as the beginning of forest-zone trade. It appears that a regional
network of trade routes existed in West Africa before the advent of the Arab
trans-Saharan trade. Such a network must have included the forest and its
margins, as well as the wooded savanna to their north.


Conclusion
Why did cities and states develop in the West African rainforest and its fringes?
Why should dense settlements and hierarchical social systems appear in this
region? Many explanations have drawn on external trade to explain such
developments, and indeed they took place at approximately the same time as

                                                                            219
African Civilizations

the appearance of Arab trade across the Sahara. Such an external stimulus
hypothesis remains untested, however, until we know more about the archae-
ology of the ﬁrst millennium AD within the forest and adjacent environments.
Until then, it seems almost certain that the origins of these cities and states lay
within the forest and its margins. The forest possessed abundant resources and
the potential to produce a food surplus. By early in the ﬁrst millennium AD
there existed an iron-based technology sufﬁciently sophisticated to exploit the
forest environment more successfully than before. The diversity of this tech-
nology gave rise to functional specialization, and this, probably combined with
localized population pressures reﬂecting variations in land productivity and
short-term climatic change, helped to stimulate the growth of larger, more
heterogeneous communities. It was possibly population pressures also that in
certain areas led to an increasing stratiﬁcation of society, in which control of
resources fell into fewer and fewer hands. In some places this culminated in
centralization of authority on one individual, whose power was frequently
reinforced by the assumption of spiritual as well as temporal attributes, with
social control expressed as state-sponsored violence. This situation seems to
have developed by the early second millennium AD, if not before.
   However, one cannot ignore the part that trade, both local and external, did
play in the development of urbanization and state formation in this zone. It was
an important factor in the growth and location of cities. Such cities tended to be
located in the northern part of the forest or even in the southern savanna, so that
they were situated at the interface between donkey transport and human
portage. There was also a tendency for them to be located on important trade
routes. In addition, the growth of states within this zone was undoubtedly
stimulated by control of trading resources or of the trade routes. As Law
(1978) showed, for instance, West African rulers in later times drew their
incomes both directly and indirectly from trade. Furthermore, imported com-
modities provided both status symbols to enhance the position of local rulers
and a source of moveable wealth that could be used to reward supporters. It is
little wonder that rulers in the West African forest often insisted that it was their
right to control the trade that was carried on in their territories, particularly
after Europeans drew West Africa into the Atlantic world during the second
half of the second millennium AD. Trade, however, was only one factor in
the appearance of cities and states in the West African forest, and, like other
factors, its origins were probably within that zone rather than external to it.




220
Chapter 8
Indian Ocean networks: the East African
coast and islands
‘Kilwa is one of the most beautiful and well-constructed towns in the world.’
This is how the much-travelled ibn Battuta described, ﬁrst-hand, ‘the principal
town on the [East African] coast’ in 1331. Kilwa (properly called Kilwa
Kisiwani), situated in what is now Tanzania, was no isolated phenomenon.
On the same coast, in what is now Somalia, was Mogadishu, of which
he wrote that it was ‘a very large town’ (Freeman-Grenville 1975: 27–31).
Ibn Battuta represented the scholarly opinion of the fourteenth-century Islamic
world. By the end of the following century there were less-scholarly visitors
from the Christian world of Western Europe, but they also were impressed
with settlements on the East African coast. Thus in 1498, the unknown author
of the Journal of the First Voyage of Vasco da Gama, 1497–1499 compared
‘the town of Malindi’ (now in Kenya) to Alcouchette, a town near Lisbon in
his native Portugal (Freeman-Grenville 1975: 55–6). Indeed, the account of
Vasco da Gama’s second voyage (1502) by Gaspar Correa (written about
1561) describes Kilwa as follows:
  The city is large and is of good buildings of stone and mortar with terraces, and the
  houses have much wood works. The city comes down to the shore, and is entirely
  surrounded by a wall and towers, within which there may be 12,000 inhabitants.
  The country all round is very luxuriant with many trees and gardens of all sorts of
  vegetables, citrons, lemons, and the best sweet oranges that were ever seen, sugar-
  canes, ﬁgs, pomegranates, and a great abundance of ﬂocks, especially sheep, which
  have fat in the tail, which is almost the size of the body, and very savoury. (Freeman-
  Grenville 1975: 66)

The East African settlements would be expected to make a favourable impres-
sion on sailors several months outward bound from Portugal, who had just
endured the eastern Atlantic on a dull if not inadequate diet. Nevertheless,
historical sources such as these demonstrate that settlements of considerable
size had already developed on the East African coast before the middle of the
second millennium AD. Archaeological and oral traditional evidence supports
this conclusion. The problem has been to explain how such a development
took place, a development that was limited to a narrow strip comprising 3,500
kilometres of coastline, from southern Somalia to southern Mozambique and
including various offshore islands, as well as the Comoro Archipelago and
parts of Madagascar.


                                                                                    221
African Civilizations

   The distinctive culture that developed along this coastal strip was at least
partly urban, mercantile, literate, and Islamic. Modern scholars often refer to it
as the ‘Swahili Culture’, because many of the inhabitants are now speakers of
one or another form of ki-Swahili, a north-eastern Bantu language rich in loan
words from Arabic and a number of other languages, although it is uncertain
if the term ‘Swahili’ should be used in contexts earlier than the last few
centuries (Horton and Middleton 2000: 16). Nonetheless, whatever one calls
the developments along this coast prior to the arrival of the Portuguese, they
were clearly impressive. Consequently, it is not surprising that external stimu-
lus was formerly advanced as the most likely explanation for such develop-
ments. Thus we were told that: ‘We should picture this civilization as a remote
outpost of Islam’ (Chittick 1971: 137). Subsequently, however, this ‘colonial-
origins interpretation’ has been rejected (Allen 1993), and archaeological as
well as other evidence has increasingly suggested that the development of the
coastal culture owed more to its African origins than to external inﬂuences,
contributory though these obviously were (Horton 1987a; 1996). So, was the
East African coast merely the edge of the Islamic world, or was it the centre of
an indigenous African development of substantial signiﬁcance? Viewed simply,
the latter now seems the case, but culture change on this coast was highly
complex, as might be expected in such an interaction zone, and Swahili culture
did incorporate both local and foreign elements.


Geographical location and environmental factors
The area with which this chapter is concerned consists of a long narrow
coastal strip and adjacent islands. Extending from about 2 north to about
16 south and perhaps to as much as 24 south, this comprises a large part of
the eastern coast of Africa (Fig. 8.1). Relevant cultural developments seem to
have been mainly restricted to that coast, although there are indications that
the hinterland played a bigger role than is sometimes stated (Pawlowicz 2012;
Kusimba et al. 2013). Nevertheless, the development of social complexity
clearly had a maritime orientation. This situation contrasts with that of West
Africa, discussed in Chapters 6 and 7. In that case, cities and states developed
far from the coast in the northern savanna, before they did so in the forested
coastal region. When such developments did take place in the forest, they were
always inland and often in or near the forest–savanna ecotone. Until the
advent of European sailors in the ﬁfteenth century AD, the coast itself
remained relatively remote and was not the scene of any major cultural
developments. The explanation of this contrast can be found in the different
locations and marine environments of these two coasts. On the West African
coast, the Atlantic Ocean was a barrier rather than a highway, until knowledge

222
                                                The East African coast and islands




Fig. 8.1 Principal archaeological sites and places on the East African coast and islands
mentioned in the text. 1, Aden; 2, Warsheikh; 3, Mogadishu; 4, Lake Naivasha; 5, Bur Gao;
6, Lamu Archipelago; 7, Ungwana; 8, Ras Kipini; 9, Malindi; 10, Mgombani; 11, Gedi;
12, Kilepwa; 13, Mombasa; 14, Vumba Kuu; 15, Mtambwe Mkuu, on Pemba Island;
16, Pujini, on Pemba Island; 17, Dakawa; 18, Unguja Ukuu, on Zanzibar Island;

                                                                                    223
African Civilizations

of the winds improved and changes in sailing technology took place during the
ﬁfteenth century. Only then could European ships both avoid and sail against
the prevailing northerly winds and currents that had previously made it
impossible to return from a visit to this coast (Crosby 1986: 112–14). In
addition, the more environmentally attractive parts of the West African coast
are a long way from Western Europe; a voyage from Lisbon to Ghana, for
instance, would be roughly 5,500 kilometres as indicated by modern marine
distance tables (Caney and Reynolds 1976). The East African coast, on the
other hand, has the great advantage of ease of navigation from coastal south-
ern and western Asia. The winds and currents of the Indian Ocean are seasonal
and reverse their direction every few months. Thus, from December to March
the prevailing wind on the East African coast is the north-easterly monsoon,
but from April until November it is the south-westerly monsoon. This enables
voyages to be made from the southern Arabian coast, the Persian Gulf, and the
north-west coast of the Indian subcontinent. Furthermore, it is possible to
return to such places from the East African coast within the same year. Also,
the length of such a voyage need not be so great as those to the West African
coast; a voyage from southern Arabia to the Kenyan coast, for example, would
be roughly 2,800 kilometres (Caney and Reynolds 1976). Currents also con-
tribute to the ease of navigation to and from East Africa. In particular, the
main Indian Ocean currents ﬂow east–west, reversing each half-year, and thus
make it easier to sail to and from western and southern India, Indonesia, and
South-East Asia. These differences between the west and east coasts of Africa
have had a marked effect on their respective histories. On the west coast,
seaborne contact with the outside world has existed for only 500 years, but
on the east coast such seaborne contact has certainly been a reality for more
than 1,000 years (e.g., Ricks 1970), and, judging by the ﬁrst-century Periplus
of the Erythraean Sea (Casson 1989: 6–7), there was also such contact during
the Roman period. Indeed, since Miller (1969: 145–8) wrote about a Roman
‘Cinnamon Route’ from Indonesia to Madagascar and East Africa, there has
been an increasing acceptance that the Indian Ocean has long been a means of
interaction rather than a barrier for the people living on its rim (Beaujard
2007; Mack 2007). In particular, the remarkable evidence for long-distance
seaborne trade found at Quseir al-Qadim in Egypt, discussed in Chapter 2
(p. 39), has demonstrated this interaction (van der Veen 2011).

Caption for Fig. 8.1 (cont.) 19, Mkadini; 20, Ras Nunge and Kaole; 21, Mkukutu and
Kivinja; 22, Dar es Salaam; 23, Ukunju Cave, on Juani Island close to Maﬁa Island;
24, Kilwa and Sanjé ya Kati; 25, Songo Mnara, on Songo Mnara Island; 26, Nsudjini;
27, Itsandra; 28, M’Bachile; 29, Sima; 30, Domoni; 31, Dembeni and Acoua-Agnala M’kiri;
32, Mahilaka; 33, Murrapania; 34, Antsoheribory; 35, Kingany; 36, Ankadivory;
37, Antananarivo; 38, Sofala; 39, Chibuene; 40, Inhambane. Drawn by Joe LeMonnier.


224
                                            The East African coast and islands

   The environment varies along the East African coastal strip, although most
of it belongs to the same vegetational subregion (Sinclair 1991: 181). To its
north, the coast of Somalia from Cape Guardafui to round about Mogadishu
is open, has few harbours, and an arid hinterland. From Mogadishu to near
the present border of Somalia and Kenya, harbours are more numerous, but
the coast is still exposed, hazardous, and somewhat barren. South of the
border of Somalia and Kenya, however, there is a fair rainfall and numerous
natural harbours. Along the northern part of this coast there is also a string of
coral islands, close offshore, known as the Bajun Islands. Between them and
the mainland is a sheltered channel; at their southern end are the islands of the
Lamu Archipelago: Pate, Manda, and Lamu (Fig. 8.2). Only a narrow,
mangrove-fringed channel separates these islands from the mainland, and
from here southwards there is an almost continuous offshore coral reef,
providing protected inshore waters along which there are many small creeks
and harbours. Much of the mainland coast is fringed with mangrove swamps,
but there are also stretches of sandy beach, the foreshores of which shelve so
gradually that at low tide the sea retreats for long distances. The more
protected of these beaches provide ideal landing places. The lightly built sewn
boats that were used along this coast in the past could be anchored on the high
tide and unloaded at low tide while they were high and dry. On the islands
along the coast, fresh water could usually be obtained by digging wells, and
consequently they provided locations for human settlements. To the south, the
large ocean islands of Pemba, Zanzibar, and Maﬁa, less than a day’s voyage
from the mainland, are particularly important, but south of them are the
inshore islands of Kilwa and Songo Mnara and further south again the
Kerimba Archipelago and Mozambique Island, the last islands of the coral
reef. South of the Zambezi estuary the sea is too cold for coral growth; beyond
Inhambane the coast is not relevant (Chittick 1971: 108–9; Garlake 1978a:
95–6). Both the Comoro Islands and parts of Madagascar are, however, and
their inclusion adds further to the range of environments. The former are
volcanic, tropical, and, with the exception of Ngazidja, well watered, whilst
Madagascar is characterized by environmental diversity resulting from altitud-
inal differences and oceanic location.
   The environment of the coastal strip and adjacent islands would have been
attractive to human settlement. Much of the area has a rainfall of about 1,000
millimetres per year, and its maritime, tropical climate has encouraged agri-
culture in areas where there are suitable soils. The character of the coast and
adjacent islands would have stimulated the development of coastal shipping,
and because of the winds and currents of the Indian Ocean, the people of the
East African coast and islands were bound to come into contact with other
maritime peoples. During the ﬁrst and early second millennium AD many

                                                                            225
226




      Fig. 8.2 Principal archaeological sites in the Lamu Archipelago, Kenya.
      Fig. 8.3 East Africa’s place in the Eurasian and African world system during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries AD, before the development
227   of European maritime contact. After Beaujard 2007: ﬁg. 4. Copyright British Institute in Eastern Africa, reproduced with permission.
African Civilizations

ports in East Africa became part of a vast trading network (Fig. 8.3), which
extended as far as South-East Asia and has been called the Eurasian and
African world system (Beaujard 2007).
   In contrast to this narrow coastal strip and islands, the environment of the
interior has been described as relatively unattractive. According to this view,
behind the generally narrow, sandy, often fertile coastal plain, where fresh
water could be found in many places, lies a gently rising belt of dry, scrubby,
savanna bushland, 100 to 200 kilometres in width, difﬁcult to penetrate,
harbouring tsetse ﬂies, and offering little to people adapted to a maritime
environment. Furthermore, there are few permanent rivers, and of these only
the Zambezi, at the southern end of the coastal strip, is navigable for any
distance. Consequently, it has been assumed that, although there was contact
between the coast around Sofala and the Zimbabwe Plateau, there was
little between the Kenya–Tanzania coast and the interior until recent centuries.
However, the idea of an attractive coast and an unattractive hinterland needs
to be questioned (Kusimba et al. 2013). A closer examination indicates a
greater variety of environments, at least in some areas. Thus, in the stretch
of coast and hinterland between Bur Gao (Somalia) and Ras Kipini (Kenya),
Horton (1987a: 292) identiﬁed a range of ecological areas including driest
woodland, riverine woodland, lowland wet forest, coastal swamps, island
savanna, and reefs and littorals. Consequently, within relatively short dis-
tances are pastoralists, agriculturalists, hunter-gatherers, and ﬁshing people,
comprising a wide range of ethnic groups of which the pastoralists and some of
the hunter-gatherers speak Cushitic languages and the farming and ﬁshing
communities speak Bantu languages. Particularly important for East African
coastal societies are the cultivable fertile soils along the lower parts of some of
the coastal rivers, such as the Shibeli and Juba in Somalia, the Tana and
Galana in Kenya, and the Pangani and Ruﬁji in Tanzania.
   The East African coast possessed a variety of resources that must have
played an important part in its cultural developments. By the middle of the
second millennium AD, documentary sources tell us that millet, rice, sorghum,
cocoyam, coconuts, bananas, citrus fruits, pomegranates, ﬁgs, sugarcane, and
vegetables were being grown. Fat-tailed sheep, goats, cattle, and chickens were
raised; ﬁsh and probably other marine foods were exploited; and bees were
kept in hives (Chittick 1971: 136; 1974: vol. 1, 236, 248–51). Amongst the
food plants were a number that had been introduced to Madagascar from
South-East Asia during the ﬁrst millennium AD, including rice, the greater
yam, coconut, and Indian saffron, as well as bananas and taro that had
reached the East African coast at an earlier date (Beaujard 2011). The most
important indigenous African plant foods were probably millet, sorghum, and
a number of vegetables; there is archaeological evidence from the hinterland of

228
                                             The East African coast and islands

the Kenyan coast for the cultivation of Sorghum bicolor (sorghum), Pennise-
tum glaucum (pearl millet), and Eleusine coracana (ﬁnger millet) during the
ﬁrst millennium AD (Helm et al. 2012). Food resources were substantial and
varied, and the environmental diversity of the coast and adjacent areas must
have encouraged an early development of local exchange systems handling
these and other resources (Kusimba et al. 2005; Wright 2005). Indeed, by the
nineteenth century the East African coast was exporting grain, including
sorghum, maize, and sesame (Spear 1978: 81–2). The last two were introduced
to Africa, maize from the Americas in the sixteenth century AD and sesame
from India by the second millennium BC (Bedigian 2003). By the nineteenth
century AD the volume of this trade was probably much greater than in
previous centuries, but it is likely that grain export to the dry lands of southern
Asia had a long history. Records in Aden show that rice was imported there
from Kilwa prior to Portuguese contact, and it is thought that much of the rice
actually came from Madagascar.
  It was with other East African resources, however, that the export trade of
this coast was principally developed. Most important seems to have been
ivory, already mentioned in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea in the ﬁrst
century AD (Casson 1989: 16, 42) and still important in the nineteenth
century (Spear 1978: 81–2). It appears to have been obtainable from the
coast, but some tusks came from deep in the interior (Ylvisaker 1982: 221).
The Periplus also mentions rhinoceros horn and tortoiseshell (actually from
sea turtles) and pearly shell (on the latter, see Chittick 1981: 186). At a later
date there were, in addition, numerous other resources that became import-
ant trade commodities during the ﬁrst half of the second millennium AD.
From Sofala, in the south, came gold and copper, both of which must have
been from the interior. From the Horn of Africa, to the north, came frankin-
cense and myrrh, aromatic gum resins much sought after in some parts of the
world. From more central parts of the East African coast, mangrove poles,
ebony, and perhaps other timbers were exported, as was iron, ambergris, and
sandalwood. Slaves were probably exported from the more northerly parts of
the coast, in the later second millennium AD mainly to markets in Arabia
and the Persian Gulf (Vernet 2003). However, it is likely that the slave
trade from this coast had a long history, judging from the revolt of appar-
ently East African slaves that took place in southern Iraq in the late ninth
century AD (Trimingham 1975: 116–18). Nineteenth-century exports also
included other commodities that are an additional indication of the range
of East African resources. Excluding obviously late introductions, these
comprised copal (a tree resin used in the manufacture of varnish), hides,
wax, hippopotamus teeth, coconuts, orchilla (a vegetable dye), beans, shells,
and livestock (Spear 1978: 82).

                                                                              229
African Civilizations

   Some of these nonfood resources, such as iron, copper, and perhaps ivory,
would have been important for local use as well as for export. Timber would
also have mattered, particularly for building construction and shipbuilding.
In addition, there were other resources that were of local signiﬁcance only
or formed the basis of production for trade with the interior. Thus the coral
reefs and the coral on dry land provided important building materials: both
stone and lime for mortar and plaster. A considerable amount of cotton was
grown on the coast and manufactured locally into cloth. Even silk was pro-
duced. Furthermore, the coast probably produced salt and also made use
of some marine molluscs, either as raw material for beads or, in the case
of cowries, perhaps for decoration, although in this area not as currency
(Hogendorn and Johnson 1986: 102). Various coastal palms provided many
things, including coconuts, wine, rope, matting, and caulking for ships.
Finally, the coast had fresh water, often a problem in the dry hinterland and
so crucial both for human settlements and for ships’ crews anxious to replenish
their supplies.
   With such resources, it is difﬁcult to understand why so many settlement
sites of the ﬁrst half of the second millennium AD were abandoned, in some
cases prior to the arrival of the Portuguese. The main cause was probably
unreliable water supply. In the Lamu Archipelago, for example, the best fresh
water is found in wells closest to the sea, where it ﬂoats on the heavier, salt
water. If the wells are overdrawn or the well shafts made too deep, the supply
becomes salty and unusable. In fact, the wells at the abandoned settlements on
these islands are today salty. As there is little or no surface water on this coast,
the only alternative to such fragile well supply would have been rainwater
cisterns. Another constraint on this coast would have been soil fertility, which
in some places seems to have been poor and could have been damaged by
agricultural exploitation. A range of tropical diseases could have provided
further problems, and perhaps the maritime contacts of this coast complicated
this situation by introducing and reintroducing such diseases as smallpox,
cholera, and plague. There were also other constraints. Problems of overland
communication, particularly with the interior of East Africa, have probably
been exaggerated, but nevertheless it would have been so much easier to move
by boat along the coast that communications would have concentrated around
a coastal axis. The coast-clinging locations of the larger settlements, however,
would have rendered them vulnerable to attack, both by those inland peoples
over whom they had no control and from the sea that brought them so much
of their livelihood. That vulnerability was clearly demonstrated during the
ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries AD by the Galla and the Zimba from inland
and by the Portuguese from the sea.


230
                                              The East African coast and islands

Sources of information
Historical evidence
Compared with West Africa, historical documentation is extensive, commencing
with the ﬁrst-century Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, thought to have been
written by an Egyptian Greek merchant from personal experience and including
an account of the East African coast (Casson 1989: 7–10). Another early source
is Claudius Ptolemy’s Geographia, originally written in about AD 150 but in its
ﬁnal form probably an edited compilation of about AD 400 (Freeman-Grenville
1975: 3). Both of these sources contain information about the East African coast,
but it is difﬁcult to use them and there is no further information until the ninth
and tenth centuries. From then on there is a series of documentary sources, mostly
from Arabic authors (Trimingham 1975) but some from Chinese writers (Wheat-
ley 1975), until the arrival of the Portuguese at the end of the ﬁfteenth century.
Perhaps the most informative of these sources are al-Masudi in the tenth century,
al-Idrisi in the twelfth century, and ibn Battuta in the fourteenth century. None of
these provides the wealth of ethnohistorical evidence in the sixteenth-century
accounts of Portuguese writers, such as the anonymous authors of the Journal of
the First Voyage of Vasco da Gama, 1497–1499 and The Voyage of Pedro
Alvares Cabral to Brazil and India. Other useful early Portuguese sources include
Gaspar Correa’s Lendas da India, João de Barros’s Da Asia and an account
written by Duarte Barbosa (Freeman-Grenville 1975). In addition, there are
many other European sources concerning the last few centuries before colonial
rule, although most date only from the nineteenth century.
   All this historical documentation consists of the writings of outsiders, visitors
to East Africa and some who had never even been there and merely repeated
information that was at best second hand. It is fortunate, therefore, that we also
have the oral traditions of the people who lived in some of the East African
coastal settlements. Best known is the ‘Kilwa Chronicle’, available both as a
sixteenth-century Portuguese version and as an Arabic version that was copied
in Zanzibar in 1862. These record the traditions about Kilwa that were current
in the earlier sixteenth century and give some account of its origins (Chittick
1974: vol. 1, 13–14). There are also a number of other traditional accounts, but
they seem to have been written down only in the nineteenth or early twentieth
century. Perhaps the best known of these is the ‘History of Pate’, written
about 1910 but covering the period back to 1204 (Freeman-Grenville 1975:
preface, 241). Although some of these traditional histories include useful infor-
mation, much of their content consists of myth and genealogy, difﬁcult to use
historically. For example, a substantial literature has grown up on the inter-
pretation of the Kilwa Chronicle story of a ‘Shirazi’ immigration to the East


                                                                               231
African Civilizations

African coast from the Persian Gulf (e.g., Chittick 1965; Allen 1982; Horton
1996: 3; Sutton 1998: 118). Nevertheless, Thomas Spear, on the traditions
of the Mijikenda peoples, and J. de V. Allen, on those about Shungwaya,
demonstrated how some of the inland traditions indicate a greater indigenous
contribution to the coastal culture than the better-known oral histories suggest
(Spear 1978; Allen 1983; 1993). However, neither oral nor documentary
historical sources are able to explain the origins and early development of
the coastal cities and states.


Archaeological evidence
Archaeological investigations on the East African coast commenced shortly
after the Second World War. Substantial research programmes, including
excavation, have been organized by the British Institute in Eastern Africa, based
in Nairobi, by Uppsala University, in Sweden, and by the University of Dar es
Salaam, in Tanzania. Nevertheless, until late in the twentieth century, work
concentrated on sites with stone ruins, rather than looking at these sites in their
overall archaeological context. This resulted from the assumption that the
remarkable stone buildings derived from the cultural inﬂuence of Muslim
immigrants from the Persian Gulf and parts of the Arabian coast, an assumption
that the stone buildings helped to perpetuate. It was admitted that such Arab
immigrants had been integrated with the local people, but it was insisted of the
resulting culture that there was little contributed by Africans. This interpret-
ation of the culture of the East African coast inﬂuenced much of the archaeo-
logical research. While the coastal cities were thought of as semi-alien trading
centres clinging to the edge of the African continent and relevant only as the
periphery of an international trading system, there seemed little point in investi-
gating their relationship with the ‘indigenous’ settlements of the coast or the
interior, nor in bothering about their local antecedents. As a result, much of
the archaeological survey and excavation concentrated on the highly visible
stone ruins of mosques, tombs, and houses (e.g., Kirkman 1954; 1963; 1964;
1966; Garlake 1966; Chittick 1974; Wilson 1978; 1980). There was relatively
little investigation of those parts of settlements built in mud, wood, and thatch
or of those settlements built only of such materials. In addition, the presence of
complex architectural features, of inscriptions, of coins, and of imported glazed
earthenware, porcelain, glassware, and beads tended to focus research on
artefact studies and particularly on the chronology that they provided. By the
1970s and 1980s, however, the emphasis was changing, as some archaeologists
realized the basically indigenous character of the coastal culture and began to
see the cities as part of a process of African social and economic change, rather
than the result of alien colonization (e.g., Horton 1987a; 1996; Wilson 1982).

232
                                                  The East African coast and islands




Fig. 8.4 Plan of Gedi, Kenya. After Pradines (2010: ﬁg. 4). This shows more detail than the
plans in Kirkman (1964: ﬁg. 7) or Pradines (2004: ﬁg. 72). Included are two phases of city
walls and their gates. 1, north gate well (70 metres north of 20); 2, Great mosque, 11th to
14th centuries; 3, dated tomb, 14th century; 4, houses of the dhow and of the double court;
5, North-east Quarter; 6, mosque between the walls; 7, mosque of three bays; 8, eastern
gate; 9, south defensive work; 10, south necropolis; 11, mosque against the south wall;
12, house against the south wall; 13, south-west barred corner; 14, small mosque; 15, large
house with arches; 16, mosque of the sarcophagus; 17, western gate; 18, house against the
west wall; 19, north-west gate; 20, north gate; 21, North-west Quarter; 22, palace and large
pillar tomb; 23, Great mosque, 15th to 16th centuries; 24, south gate; 25, south barred
corner. Reproduced by permission of Stéphane Pradines.

  There are 173 settlement sites with stone ruins between Warsheikh (north
of Mogadishu) and the Tanzania–Mozambique frontier. In addition, there
are relevant sites in Mozambique, the Comoro Archipelago, and northern
Madagascar (Duarte 1993; Wright 1993; Chami 1994), and many sites that lack
stone ruins have not received much attention. While there must be a large number
of sites spread over a great length of coast and its adjacent islands, most of
the archaeological investigations have been on the Kenyan or Tanzanian coasts.

                                                                                       233
African Civilizations

One of the ﬁrst sites to be excavated was the city of Gedi, on the mainland
of Kenya, where Kirkman revealed a skeletal city plan (Kirkman 1954: 185).
He showed the layout of its city walls, which clearly represented two structural
phases: an earlier city of about 18 hectares and a later, smaller city of about
7 hectares (Kirkman 1975: 239). Within the latter were a so-called palace, several
houses, and a number of mosques and tombs. Subsequently, Pradines (2004:
ﬁg. 72; 2010: ﬁg. 4) provided plans of the city that were more detailed (Fig. 8.4),
but even these have extensive empty spaces, many of which must have been
ﬁlled with buildings of mud, wood, and thatch: the houses of the bulk of the
inhabitants. The angular outline of the city walls would suggest that they enclosed
tightly an irregular mass of houses, similar to that at Shanga (Horton 1996:
ﬁgs. 5, 9, and 10), where mud and thatch houses partly surrounded a central
core of stone structures (cf. Figs. 8.4 and 8.5).
   Kirkman’s chronology of Gedi (1975: 237–9) was revised by Pradines
(2004: 205), who identiﬁed ﬁve periods in the city’s history (later revised to
six periods, Pradines 2010: 199, 211), from the eleventh to the beginning of
the seventeenth century. The city attained its greatest size in the late fourteenth
to early ﬁfteenth century, its outer city wall dating from the middle of the
ﬁfteenth to the middle of the sixteenth century and its inner city wall from
the middle of the sixteenth to the beginning of the seventeenth century. Most
of the excavated buildings were of ﬁfteenth-century date, and house plans
(Garlake 1966: 194) throw light on pre-Portuguese social organization. The
coral ragstone houses comprised several narrow oblong rooms, averaging about
2.4 metres wide, the maximum rafter span. The basic plan both at Gedi and in
other coastal settlements consisted of two of these long narrow rooms, one
behind the other in parallel, with the ﬁrst one fronting an enclosed courtyard
and the rear one opening into two or three smaller rooms behind. None of these
rooms had windows, but sometimes there was another courtyard behind the
smaller rooms. Probably each house was intended for a separate family, with the
rooms providing a graded privacy: most public in the front courtyard, most
private in the back rooms. The stone houses in archaeological sites such as Gedi
are in the same tradition as the mostly eighteenth-century, stone-built mansions
of Lamu, some of which are still occupied (Ghaidan 1976; Donley 1987). This
would suggest that by the ﬁfteenth century there already existed a class of
cultured, wealthy, mercantile urbanites (similar to those later known as the
wa-ungwana). They reinforced their position by reserving to themselves the
right to build their houses in stone, thus making use of what Linda Donley
called ‘house power’ (Donley 1982; Donley-Reid 1990). The Gedi house plans
suggest that a number of such families sometimes built their houses in interlock-
ing groups, each group representing a distinct lineage or kin. Such people seem
to have lived at a level of material comfort higher than that of most of their

234
235   Fig. 8.5 Plan of Shanga, Kenya. The broken line indicates the limits of the settlement. Note the areas of mud and thatch buildings as
      well as those of stone. After Horton 1996: ﬁg. 5. Copyright British Institute in Eastern Africa, reproduced with permission.
African Civilizations

contemporaries. Houses had plastered walls, indoor latrines, washplaces with
bidets, underﬂoor soakaways, and rainwater drains. Indeed, at Gedi one group
of houses was identiﬁed by Kirkman as a palace. With its monumental arched
entrance and its generous provision of courtyard space, this might well represent
the houses of a particular lineage which, having become the hereditary ruling
family, had adapted its dwellings to suit its new status.
   Kirkman also excavated at other sites in Kenya and Tanzania. One was
Ungwana, a walled city of about 18 hectares on the northern Kenyan coast
near the estuary of the River Tana (Kirkman 1966). Kirkman concentrated on
the mosques and tombs, although the ruins of stone houses were present.
According to his plan, however, extensive areas of this city were empty space
(Kirkman 1966: 71); as with Gedi, it seems likely that much of this space
must have been ﬁlled with buildings of mud, wood, and thatch. Apparently,
Kirkman’s excavation strategy was not designed for this possibility. Thus at
Kilepwa, a small thirteenth- to sixteenth-century settlement near Gedi, the
remains consisted of a small mosque, two pillar tombs, and a group of houses.
According to Kirkman, this was just a family unit, yet we are told that ‘sherds
of sgrafﬁato [imported glazed earthenware of eleventh- and twelfth-century
date] were found all over the site, so it may have had a large population in the
pre-building period’ (Kirkman 1975: 239–40). To this excavator, it seems, a
building that was not made of stone was not a building.
   Buildings of mud, wood, and thatch must have constituted a large part of
some settlements on the East African coast and islands, as some archaeologists
have recognized (Fleisher and LaViolette 1999). If this was the case, the
indigenous African contribution to the growth of these settlements is likely
to have been important. For example, the town of Songo Mnara, on the island
of that name off the Tanzanian coast, must have consisted of more structures
than just a collection of stone houses, a so-called palace, and several mosques,
within a large walled area. These, after all, appear to have been recorded
without excavation (Garlake 1966: ﬁg. 74). Similarly, at Kilwa (Sutton
1998), in the same area, where there have been extensive excavations, the city
site covers about 1 square kilometre but the stone ruins consist of only a scatter
of structures. As its excavator admitted: ‘Many, and perhaps most, of the
buildings at Kilwa, even at the height of its prosperity, were built of mud-and-
wattle, evidently in a similar style to that which can be seen on the coast today’
(Chittick 1974: vol. 1, 24). However, it appears that the ratio of buildings of
stone to buildings of less permanent materials varied from site to site. For
instance, the ﬁnal phases of Shanga, abandoned in the ﬁfteenth century and
comprising a town of 8.68 hectares on the shore of Pate Island (Kenya),
probably consisted mainly of stone structures, which took up 6.57 hectares
of the occupied area (Fig. 8.5). The three mosques, approximately 400 tombs

236
                                                The East African coast and islands




Fig. 8.6 Plan of Takwa, Kenya. After Wilson 1982: ﬁg. 2, revised on his advice.


outside the town, other tombs within the town, and about 220 houses were all
built of stone, leaving some but not much space for buildings of other materials
(Horton 1996: 33, 38, 63). Another case is Takwa, a town probably occupied
from the tenth to the seventeenth century (Abungu and Mutoro 1993: 695).
Situated near the shore of the Kenyan island of Manda, the ﬁnal phases of

                                                                                  237
African Civilizations

this stone-built walled town of a little over 4 hectares contained a mosque,
a well, and 137 other structures, most of which were probably houses
(Fig. 8.6). Allowing for open spaces for gardens and markets, or cemeteries
and public performances, as has been suggested for Songo Mnara (Fleisher and
Wynne-Jones 2012; Fleisher 2013), there were still some empty areas that
could have contained mud, wood, and thatch buildings, but they were limited
(Wilson 1982). In contrast to Shanga and Takwa, the stone remains at Dondo,
on the coast of the Kenyan mainland close to Pate Island, consist of only two
mosques, two wells, two groups of tombs, and two structures suspected to be
Portuguese. The excavator of this site concluded that this unwalled town, of
about 5 hectares, was occupied between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries
by people of sufﬁcient wealth to build lavish tombs and two mosques who
were, nevertheless, living in nonstone structures (Horton 1996: 23–4).
Geophysical survey of such sites, as at Vumba Kuu, in Kenya (Wynne-Jones
2012), has the potential to provide more information about them, particularly
if followed by excavation.
   If mud, wood, and thatch buildings meant indigenous contribution, does this
imply that stone buildings meant alien contribution? At one time many writers
thought so; now the question is more difﬁcult to answer. Garlake, seeking
the origins of the architectural styles of the stone buildings, found various
parallels in different parts of South-West Asia but came to the conclusion that
before the eighteenth century the architectural style of the coast was, ‘to a large
extent, indigenous to the coast’ (Garlake 1966: 116). Clearly, alien inﬂuences
might be seen in the fourteenth-century palace and commercial centre of
Husuni Kubwa, just outside the city of Kilwa, with its audience court, open-
sided pavilion, bathing pool, domed and vaulted roofs, and Arabic inscrip-
tions. The same might be said of the nearby site of Husuni Ndogo, a large
rectangular enclosure that could have been a mosque, a market, a barracoon
(an enclosure for slaves), or possibly (Sutton 1998: 157) a caravanserai for
visiting merchants and their servants. These sites, however, are exceptional,
and the stone buildings of the coast and islands have a far wider range of
quality. Thus, Takwa consisted mainly of small stone houses not much better
than those of mud and thatch. Indeed, as already argued, stone buildings were
only one aspect of these coastal settlements. Thomas Wilson showed that
coastal sites in southern Somalia and Kenya could be subdivided into ﬁve
classes, based on their size, ranging from more than 15 hectares to less than 2.5
hectares. Signiﬁcantly, the smaller sites tended to have fewer buildings built of
stone and tended to lack stone-built houses (Wilson 1982). So stone buildings
were an integral part of an overall settlement pattern, rather than the major
features of coast-clinging cities of alien merchants. Moreover, when that
settlement pattern is analysed for location and date, it appears that this

238
                                           The East African coast and islands

supposedly coast-clinging culture has 30 percent of the southern Somalian,
Kenyan, and Tanzanian sites located in places that have poor or no harbours
(including six that are actually inland), and it seems that although Swahili
society became overwhelmingly sea oriented, it might have been less so in
earlier centuries.
  The signiﬁcance of building in stone is bound up with the question of the
origin of these coastal settlements. Ceramics excavated at Ras Hafun, near
Cape Guardafui in the far north of Somalia, indicate trading contacts with
the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, and perhaps South Asia as early as the ﬁrst
century BC, and with the Persian Gulf and South Asia in the second to ﬁfth
centuries AD (Smith and Wright 1988). Nevertheless, the earliest substantial
indications of trading settlements further south on the East African coast
belong to the last quarter of the ﬁrst millennium AD. In spite of the mention
in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea of an East African port called Rhapta, it
has not been possible to identify this early-ﬁrst-millennium site (Datoo 1970),
which was most likely in the Ruﬁji Delta region (Chami 1999a: 210).
However, potsherds from Ukunju Cave, on Juani Island close to Maﬁa Island,
near the Ruﬁji Delta, have suggested contact with India, South-East Asia, and
the Red Sea during the ﬁrst millennium BC and the ﬁrst millennium AD. In
addition, four glass beads of Roman origin have been recovered from an
approximately fourth-century AD deposit at Mkukutu in the Ruﬁji Delta
(Chami 1999b), and two sherds of Roman pottery were found in a ﬁfth-
century AD context at Unguja Ukuu on the island of Zanzibar (Juma 1996).
Nevertheless, none of the supposed discoveries of early-ﬁrst-millennium coins
on this coast is thought to be reliable.
  Kilwa was an early trading settlement; its excavator Neville Chittick thought
that its occupation commenced about AD 800. Dating the various excavated
‘periods’ was partly from imported ceramics, indicating that the settlement had
overseas trading contacts from its beginning. In Period Ia (ninth century to
about 1000) buildings were at ﬁrst lacking and were then in mud and thatch
with a little coral stone used with mud mortar. Similar buildings were found in
Period Ib (about 1000 to late twelfth century). It was only in Period II (late
twelfth to late thirteenth century) that the ﬁrst substantial building in lime-
mortared stone occurred, but Sutton (1998: 166) thought this began 150 or
200 years earlier. This period was when the ﬁrst coins appeared. It was not
until Periods IIIa and IIIb (late thirteenth century to about 1400, and about
1400 to about 1500, respectively) that the ﬂoruit of stone building occurred.
Chittick thought that the earliest settlement was a pre-Islamic ﬁshing village,
with Islam beginning to arrive in Period Ib and becoming ﬁrmly established by
Period II, by which time ‘Kilwa had become a substantial and prosperous
town’ (Chittick 1974: vol. 1, 18–19, 28–9, 235–41). Thus the early evidence

                                                                           239
African Civilizations

at Kilwa suggests the gradual development of both building techniques and
settlement complexity, rather than any sudden arrival of these cultural
characteristics from outside.
   Another early settlement is Manda, on the island of the same name in the
Lamu Archipelago. This was also excavated by Chittick and showed the
existence of a town as early as the ninth century, occupied until perhaps
the nineteenth century. Again, there was evidence of overseas trade from the
beginning of the settlement, but in this case buildings of both mud, wood, and
thatch and of stone were constructed from the start, the stonework of the latter
sometimes being set in lime mortar, sometimes in red earth. There were also
‘sea walls’, some of which were of massive masonry that was set without
mortar. In addition, unique on the East African coast, there were structures
made of burnt bricks set in mud mortar, and it was suggested that these could
have been imported from the Persian Gulf, perhaps as ships’ ballast. Chittick
concluded that immigrants from the Persian Gulf founded the town and that at
least some of the inhabitants were Muslim from the settlement’s beginning
(Chittick 1971; 1984). This made Manda an exception, compared with similar
sites on the East African coast, and Horton (1986) convincingly challenged
Chittick’s conclusions. The earliest stone buildings were shown to be later than
the excavator had thought and to be inﬂuenced from the Red Sea rather than
the Persian Gulf. However, later excavations at the town site of Sanjé ya Kati,
near Kilwa, dating from AD 950 to 1250, did produce evidence for the arrival
of people from the Persian Gulf who, it was argued, contributed to urban
development on the East African coast (Pradines 2009).
   Only 15 kilometres from Manda is the town site of Shanga, on Pate Island.
Excavations over nine years made Shanga (Fig. 8.5) of major importance for
the origins of urbanism on the East African coast. Its excavator, Mark Horton,
established a building sequence from mud, wood, and thatch to stone, with
imported ceramics throughout. This sequence extends from the late eighth
century to the beginning of the ﬁfteenth; mud mortar and stone buildings ﬁrst
appeared in the tenth century and lime-mortared stone buildings not until the
twelfth century, becoming more important by the fourteenth century. It seems
that the primary occupation at Shanga was non-Islamic, but there are remains
of mosques from the end of the eighth century onwards. The sequence at this
site suggests the indigenous origins of coastal culture, and the ten stages
identiﬁed during the excavation of its central area show the evolution of the
settlement over a period in excess of 600 years (Horton 1996).
   Other coastal sites appear to have had an early origin. Mogadishu was
occupied by the eleventh century AD (Broberg 1995; Dualeh 1996), Mombasa
by about 1000 (Sassoon 1980), and Pate by about 800 (Wilson 1982: 214–15;
Wilson and Lali Omar 1997: 63); in the Lamu Archipelago there are eleven

240
                                               The East African coast and islands




Fig. 8.7 Examples of Triangular Incised Ware sherds from the Tanzanian coast and
hinterland. After Chami 1994: ﬁg. 9.


sites with probable occupation in the ninth century (Horton 1986: 204). In
addition, an archaeological study of the cultural landscape concentrating on
the Tanzanian sites of Kilwa and Kaole produced evidence as early as the sixth
century AD (Pollard 2008). Even more remarkable, because it is so far south
on the Mozambique coast, is Chibuene, an occupation site belonging to the
last quarter of the ﬁrst millennium AD that contained imported Islamic glazed
wares as well as glass beads and bottle fragments (Sinclair 1982; 1987: 86–91,
168; 1991: 190, 216; Sinclair et al. 2012: 734). Thus, early sites are so widely
distributed that one would have to postulate a huge migration from southern
Asia to attribute their simultaneous development to external stimulus. Such
stimulus doubtless existed, but its relative unimportance is indicated by the
very small percentage of imported wares in excavated sites (0.2 percent in
Period Ia at Kilwa (Chittick 1974: vol. 2, 302)). Most of the recovered sherds
are of indigenous wares, and in the earliest periods there is general uniformity
amongst pottery from widely separated areas, although some regional diver-
sity is present (Fleisher and Wynne-Jones 2011).

                                                                                   241
African Civilizations

   This pottery (Fig. 8.7) is known as ‘Triangular Incised Ware’ (TIW) (Chami
1994), previously called ‘Early Kitchen Ware’ (Chittick 1974: vol. 2, 320–2;
1984: 109–18) and also referred to as pottery of ‘the Tana tradition’ (Horton
1987a: 315–17) or ‘early Tana Tradition’ (ETT) (Fleisher and Wynne-Jones
2011: 246, footnote). It has been found on many coastal sites dating to the
tenth century and earlier, extending from Somalia to southern Mozambique,
and on the Comoro Islands and in northern Madagascar. Similar pottery has
also been found inland, particularly along river valleys such as that of the Tana
River in Kenya, where it has been recorded 250 kilometres upstream (Abungu
1995). In addition, it has been excavated from some of the Mijikenda kaya
sites of the coastal hinterland in Kenya (Mutoro 1994–5). There has been
disagreement about the antecedents of this pottery. Horton (1987a: 315–17;
1996: 410–11) and Abungu (1995: 253–5) preferred an ancestry in ‘Pastoral
Neolithic’ pottery made by Cushitic pastoralists of the interior, whereas Chami
(1994: 94–8; 1995) has seen its origins in ‘Early Iron Age’, or what he calls
‘Early Iron-Working’ (EIW) wares produced by Bantu agriculturalists. The
presence of Triangular Incised Ware, in ﬁrst-millennium AD contexts on the
East African coast, argues strongly for an indigenous origin for the settlements
concerned. This probability is strengthened by the work of Chami and
Msemwa (1997) on the central coast of Tanzania, investigating sites dating
from the ﬁrst to the seventh century AD. They found evidence of Early Iron-
Working farmers both on the coast and islands and in the interior, with
Triangular Incised Ware clearly overlying Early Iron-Working pottery at the
important site of Kivinja that dates to the ﬁfth and sixth centuries. Also at that
site were imported ceramics from the Middle East and glass from the Graeco-
Roman world, showing that both local and transoceanic trade had already
developed by the middle of the ﬁrst millennium. Conﬁrmation of this is
provided by other sites, such as Unguja Ukuu, on Zanzibar Island, where
again both forms of indigenous pottery have been found, in conjunction with
imports dating from the ﬁfth to seventh centuries from India, the Middle East,
and even Roman sources. Indeed, both Triangular Incised Ware and Early
Iron-Working pottery were also found at an eighth-century site near Dakawa,
some 200 kilometres inland from Dar es Salaam on the Tanzanian coast, along
with indications of substantial iron production (Haaland 1994–5). Increas-
ingly, therefore, archaeological evidence is providing veriﬁcation of the pre-
Islamic origins of the East African trading network.
   That network also included the Comoro Archipelago and Madagascar.
The commencement of settlement was most likely in about the eighth century
in the Comoro Islands (Sinclair 1995: 101–2; Allibert and Vérin 1996), but the
earliest known settlement in Madagascar was in the early or middle ﬁrst millen-
nium AD, although there are traces by the third century BC (Mitchell 2004).

242
                                             The East African coast and islands

Linguistic evidence indicates that Malagasy, the most commonly spoken
language in Madagascar, has its closest relatives in Indonesia (Adelaar 1996;
Blench 2007), but archaeology has been unable to conﬁrm the arrival of people
from there (Dewar and Wright 1993; Wright 1993: 659), and it seems likely that
settlers from the East African coast were also important (Dewar 1996; Beaujard
2011). By the late ﬁrst millennium AD, iron-using villagers on the Comoro
Islands, whose basic subsistence depended on ﬁshing and domesticated animals
and plants, were also trading with the Persian Gulf, East Asia, and the coast of
East Africa, as shown by ceramics, glass beads, and glass vessels recovered from
their sites (Wright 1984). Best known is Dembeni, a large village of mud, wood,
and thatch buildings on the island of Maore (also known as Mayotte), its
earliest occupation dating from about AD 850 to 880, and a later one from
about the tenth to eleventh centuries (Allibert et al. 1990). Subsequent excav-
ation has shown that from the ninth to the twelfth centuries this settlement
received a variety of imported ceramics from Persian, Chinese, and Islamic
sources, apparently mainly in exchange for rock crystal, a valuable commodity
traded from Madagascar from where vessels of chlorite-schist (sometimes
described as soapstone) were also obtained. Rock crystal was important in
international trade because of its beauty and religious and mystical properties.
Widely exchanged, it reached many distant places, including Europe (Pradines
2013). The occupants of settlements such as Dembeni were probably also
supplying tortoiseshell, marine shell, and other commodities for the Indian
Ocean trade. The presence of Triangular Incised Ware indicates contact with
the East African coast, just as the rock crystal and chlorite-schist show connec-
tions with Madagascar. Furthermore, the bones of house mice in several Dem-
beni Phase sites suggest that some of the ships visiting the Comoros were large,
long-distance vessels (Wright 1992: 84–5). As Sinclair (1995: 101) claimed, the
Comoro Islands ‘were signiﬁcant hubs of the western Indian Ocean trading
systems’. In origin, these developments were pre-Islamic, but Islam gradually
became established as the settlements increased in size; the towns of Sima and
Domoni, on the island of Nzwani, grew to about 8 hectares during the eleventh
to thirteenth centuries (Wright 1992: 124). Excavations at Acoua-Agnala
M’Kiri, on the northwest coast of Maore (Mayotte) Island, have revealed
a walled settlement that participated in the western Indian Ocean trade between
the twelfth and ﬁfteenth centuries, providing a port of call for ships sailing from
Madagascar to the Swahili coast (Pauly 2013). By the eighteenth century
the Comoros seem to have been characterized by fortiﬁed towns, such as
Itsandra and Ntsudjini on Ngazidja Island, which controlled adjacent territories
(Dahalani 1992).
   Archaeological research has also traced the process of urbanization and state
formation in some parts of Madagascar. By the 1850s both developments were

                                                                              243
244




      Fig. 8.8 Antananarivo, Madagascar, in the 1850s, showing a royal procession passing along its eastern side. From Ellis 1859: 365.
                                             The East African coast and islands

advanced, as recorded by the Reverend William Ellis (1859) during his visits
(Fig. 8.8). Amongst early archaeological evidence is that from Kingany on the
north-west coast of Madagascar, a town site with stone ruins that seems to
have been occupied from the ninth or tenth century AD to about the sixteenth
century, and some of whose inhabitants participated in the Indian Ocean trade
(Vérin 1986: 161–7). Subsequently, a town on the island of Antsoheribory, in
the same area, was occupied from the late sixteenth to the early eighteenth
century and has evidence of trading contacts with the Near East, the Far
East, and Europe (Wright et al. 1996: 55–66). Another early town site is
Mahilaka, further north along the same coast. Occupied from the tenth to
the ﬁfteenth century, this site had a walled area of more than 60 hectares,
within which were a few stone structures but many others of less permanent
materials (Wright 1993: 668; Radimilahy 1998). Mahilaka had wide trading
connections, possibly exporting rock crystal, chlorite-schist and gold, as
well as mangrove wood, copal, tortoiseshell, and slaves. Rat bones from the
site suggest plague, brought to the island by visiting ships, as one possible
cause of the town’s abandonment (Radimilahy 1998: 110, 202–6, 208–11).
However, it was in the central highlands that most sociopolitical develop-
ments took place, leading to the emergence of the Merina state by the
eighteenth century (Crossland 2001). Ankadivory, near present-day Antana-
narivo, is one of many ditched settlements in this area and has been dated
to about the thirteenth century. It has also produced evidence that by that
time even inland Madagascar was in contact with the Indian Ocean
trade (Wright and Rakotoarisoa 1990: 28–9; Sinclair 1991: 196–8), in which
slaves from the Comoro Islands and Madagascar became particularly import-
ant from the sixteenth century onwards (Vernet 2003).
   As research has progressed, attention has been given to the overall layout of
Swahili towns, rather than concentrating on stone buildings. Prospecting
techniques such as geophysical survey as at Kilwa (Fleisher et al. 2012), or a
combination of geophysical survey, geochemical testing, and geoarchaeology
as at Songo Mnara (Fleisher 2013: 271), are revealing more information about
the towns and their contexts.


Subsistence economy
Archaeologists have sometimes neglected the subject of subsistence in this part
of Africa, and John Mack (2007: 8) pointed out that in a maritime context
such as this ‘trade was itself subsistence’. Nevertheless, archaeological evidence
for people’s food resources is essential if we are to understand their socio-
economic situation. For example, the cultivation of sorghum in the eleventh
and twelfth centuries is attested by the recovery of carbonized sorghum from a

                                                                             245
African Civilizations

layer attributed to Period Ib at Kilwa (Chittick 1974: vol. 1, 52–3). Also the
early deposits at Kilwa produced evidence for the eating of ﬁsh and shellﬁsh,
while a well dated to the late thirteenth to fourteenth centuries contained the
mandible of an immature camel (Chittick 1974: vol. 1, 28, 43, 98).
   There is evidence from Chibuene for sheep, cattle, ﬁsh, and shellﬁsh in the
lower occupation level, dating from about AD 600 to 1000, although there
are no indications of plant husbandry (Sinclair 1982: 152, 162; 1987: 88;
1991: 190, 216; Sinclair et al. 2012). Also Badenhorst et al. (2011) reported
livestock, chickens, and wild animals, with ﬁsh, turtle, and shark most
common. At Shanga botanical evidence is lacking but the faunal record is
substantial; seafood seems to have been important and included ﬁsh of reef,
inshore, and (rarely) deep-sea type; dugong; turtles; and shellﬁsh. In addition,
there were cattle, sheep, goats, camels, and chickens; cats and dogs were also
kept. The hunting of wild animals contributed a small part of the diet.
Signiﬁcantly, the black rat was present, suggesting relatively dense human
occupation and, as a vector of bubonic plague, perhaps one of the causes for
the eventual abandonment of the site. Probably a mixed economy was prac-
tised at Shanga, although the absence of plant food evidence is a problem
(Horton and Mudida 1993; Horton 1996: 378–93). Excavations at Manda
suggested a similar subsistence economy, with evidence of sheep or goat, cattle,
domestic fowl, and domesticated cat. In addition, dugong, turtles, and ﬁsh
were exploited. Camel was present and a little game was hunted. Again, this
site lacks evidence for plant food (Chittick 1984: 215). Fortunately, there is
evidence from Mgombani, some 16 kilometres from the Kenyan coast, for the
cultivation of Sorghum bicolor (sorghum), Pennisetum glaucum (pearl millet),
and Eleusine coracana (ﬁnger millet) during the ﬁrst millennium AD (Helm
et al. 2012). The authors described this as ‘the ﬁrst signiﬁcant evidence for
early agriculture on the Kenyan coast’.
   Excavations at Dembeni, Old Sima, and M’Bachile in the Comoro Islands
provided more information on diet. There was substantial use of ﬁsh, particu-
larly from the coral reefs; turtles and some wild animals and birds were
hunted; and domesticated sheep or goats were kept, most probably goats.
There was also botanical evidence for the cultivation of rice (Oryza sativa),
millet (possibly Setaria), coconut (Cocos nucifera) and sesame (Sesamum cf.
indicum) (Wright 1984: 48–54; Allibert et al. 1990: 153). The site of Mahi-
laka, in Madagascar, provided evidence of rice cultivation and the use of
coconut; the keeping of cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, chickens, guinea fowl, and
ducks; and the hunting of wild animals and birds; as well as ﬁshing, turtle
catching, and shellﬁsh gathering (Radimilahy 1998: 195–9). The approxi-
mately thirteenth-century site of Ankadivory produced evidence for the keep-
ing of cattle in the central highlands of Madagascar (Sinclair 1991: 196).

246
                                           The East African coast and islands

  It seems that by late in the ﬁrst millennium AD, when the earliest identiﬁable
coastal cities and towns were settled (earlier sites could have been lost to
coastline changes), there already existed a mixed economy exploiting the
resources of both sea and land. Fishing and livestock husbandry could have
provided ample animal protein, and plant food must have made a signiﬁcant
contribution to the diet. In particular, it is likely that plants originating in
South-East Asia, introduced during the ﬁrst millennium, played an important
role. Asian rice, the greater yam, coconut, and Indian saffron were probably
brought to Madagascar by settlers from Indonesia at that time; bananas, taro,
and other yams had probably reached the East African coast from a similar
source at an earlier date (Beaujard 2011). Shepherd (1982) argued that the
southern end of the East African coast, particularly the Comoro Islands,
played an important early role in the development of the coastal culture. If
this was so, then perhaps the enhancement of the coastal subsistence economy
by the South-East Asian food plants was a factor in the growth of the coastal
settlements. Rather than being peripheral to the African coast, Madagascar
and the Comoro Islands might have been a gateway for new ideas. Whether or
not this was so, it is clear that by the second half of the ﬁrst millennium AD,
the subsistence economy of the East African coast must have been producing
a surplus adequate to support increasing social complexity.


Technology
Archaeological evidence from East African coastal and island sites indicates
considerable technological sophistication, although it is uncertain how much of
it was of foreign origin rather than indigenous. Particularly important was
metalworking. Iron was both smelted and forged, and evidence of one or both
processes occurred, often at an early date, at Kilwa, Manda, Shanga, and
Chibuene, as well as at Dembeni and Old Sima in the Comoro Islands, and at
Mahilaka in Madagascar. Kusimba (1999: 101–7) emphasized the role of iron
working on the Swahili coast, and indeed the twelfth-century writer al-Idrisi
mentioned iron as an important export commodity (Horton 1996: 416). Prob-
ably smelting was usually in the hinterland, where more wood was available for
fuel; the inland site of Dakawa had evidence of iron smelting as early as the
seventh to ninth century AD (Haaland 1994–5). In addition, some of the coastal
sites produced evidence of working in copper or copper-base alloy, in the form
of slag or of crucibles with metal traces, and there are also indications that
gold, silver, and lead were sometimes worked (Chittick 1974; 1984; Wright
1984; Sinclair 1987; Horton 1996; Radimilahy 1998). Metal artefacts seem
to have been manufactured on the coast and islands, but it was the minting of
coins that was most notable. These have been recovered from many coastal sites,

                                                                           247
African Civilizations

being produced at Kilwa, Maﬁa, Zanzibar, Mogadishu, and perhaps other
places. Usually they were of copper or copper-base alloy, like the more than
300 coins from a deposit excavated at Songo Mnara that is attributed to the end
of the fourteenth or very early ﬁfteenth century (Perkins et al. 2014). However,
more than half of the coins found at Shanga are of silver (Brown 1996), and most
of the more than 2,000 coins in the eleventh-century hoard found at Mtambwe
Mkuu on Pemba Island are of silver (Horton et al. 1986). Also from East African
coastal sites are less common coins from other parts of the Islamic world and
even from China, with most of the gold coins coming from the former.
  The most remarkable aspect of East African coastal technology, however,
was building. As well as working in timber, mud, and thatch, considerable
skills were developed in the construction of stone buildings. Coral was
quarried, either from offshore reefs or on land; Horton (1996: 26–7) distin-
guished between well-coursed walls of dressed pieces of Porites solida, from
the ﬁrst source, and rougher walls of coral rag from the second. Traces of
quarrying for both materials have been found near Shanga, and those for
Porites coral are underwater, implying knowledge of underwater quarrying
(Horton 1986: 206). Intertidal quarrying was also carried out, as at Ras
Nunge, near the site of Kaole in Tanzania, although for ‘cemented shelly
sandstone’, not coral (Pollard (2008: 180, ﬁgs 7.6 and 7.36). Both types of
coral walling could be bonded with mud or lime mortar, the latter obtained




Fig. 8.9 Section through the Small Domed Mosque, Kilwa. After Garlake 1966: ﬁg. 14.


248
                                            The East African coast and islands

by burning coral and mixing sand with the lime produced. Several approxi-
mately thirteenth-century lime kilns were found at Kilwa (Chittick 1974:
vol. 1, 39–43). The use of lime mortar seems to have become more common
with time; plaster for internal wall surfaces and rendering for external
surfaces also had a lime base. Some stone structures were high, and scaffold-
ing, presumably with lashed mangrove poles, seems to have been used. Roofs
consisted usually of mangrove rafters, stone, and lime mortar but could
also be supported with columns and beams or consist of vaults or domes
(Fig. 8.9). Doors and windows usually had ﬁtted woodwork; most houses
possessed internal latrines and washing places; and drainage was provided
both inside and outside some buildings (Garlake 1966). Wells were dug
to provide convenient water supplies. This implies functional specialization:
there must have been quarrymen, lime burners, stone masons, plasterers, and
carpenters, as well as others. In addition, some knowledge of architecture
was obviously present. Whatever the contributions to this overall expertise
from alien sources, the bulk of the actual work was surely done by local
craftsmen, and it is signiﬁcant that the so-called pillar tomb, that is common
on the East African coast, has no known parallels elsewhere.
  An important part of coastal technology must have been boat building,
although there is as yet no archaeological evidence for this. Nevertheless, the
Periplus of the Erythraean Sea recorded sewn boats on this coast nearly 2,000
years ago (Casson 1989: 9), and the Portuguese remarked on them at the end
of the ﬁfteenth century (Ravenstein 1898: 26). All the materials needed to
construct these boats were available on the East African coast, and it is likely
that the dau la mtepe and the mtepe, with their sewn hulls and matting sails,
were often built there. Although we have few details of how they were built
(Prins 1982), grafﬁti of such boats, scratched into the wall plaster of houses
and mosques along the coast, show how important they must have been
(Chittick 1974: vol. 2, 266–7). Boats constructed in this manner stand up well
to the frequent strandings necessary on much of the eastern coast. It is
apparent that some of them were of considerable size: in 1866 David Living-
stone had one loaded with ‘six camels, three buffaloes, and a calf, two mules,
and four donkeys’ (Waller 1874: vol. 1, 9). Furthermore, it seems that the
people of the East African coast had not only developed the skills to build these
boats but also knew how to use them. Evidence of contact between Madagas-
car, the Comoro Islands, and the East African coast, as well as with South and
South-East Asia, implies a substantial knowledge of seamanship.
  Of the other crafts practised on the coast, probably the most important was
spinning and weaving cotton cloth, suggested by the number of spindle whorls
which occur in contexts dated to the ﬁrst half of the second millennium (e.g.,
Horton 1996: 337–41). Seawater was evaporated to produce salt, an activity

                                                                            249
African Civilizations

for which there is some evidence at Mkadini on the Tanzanian coast. In
addition, ivory and bone were carved and shell beads made, as well as beads
of rock crystal and carnelian (e.g., Horton 1996: 323, 332–3, 346–7, 349–50).
A range of pottery included some with complex painted patterns and included
lamps (Chittick 1974). Of particular interest is evidence from Mahilaka that
indicates glass-bead manufacture, probably by melting broken glass from
imported items (Radimilahy 1998: 184, plate 7.1d, h, j, k), and the possibility
exists of similar activity at Shanga (Horton 1996: 332).


Social system
Archaeological evidence for social organization includes many settlements, some
of them walled, ranging from villages to cities. The use of stone for some
buildings has left clear indications of the character of urbanization prior to
Portuguese contact. This was a society where many people lived in towns or
cities but where many remained in the rural areas in villages, and there has been
discussion of the relationship of urban and rural settlements (LaViolette and
Fleisher 2005: 339–43). The level of functional specialization was probably
higher in larger settlements, with most of the inhabitants of smaller settlements
engaged in primary production. In addition, the degree of social stratiﬁcation
seems to have been greater in the larger settlements. This is suggested by the
range in quality and size of the houses, both within the settlements and between
different settlements. At the bottom end of the scale were mud, wood, and
thatch buildings, about which less is known, although the excavations at Shanga
have shed some light on them (Horton 1996: 235–42). Above these were small
stone houses of one to three rooms, like those at Takwa (Wilson 1982: ﬁg. 2),
but with the larger houses provided with latrines. Higher again were multi-
roomed houses with an enclosed courtyard, like some of those at Songo Mnara
(Garlake 1966: ﬁg. 74). At the top of the scale were large multiroomed houses
with multiple courtyards and monumental features, such as imposing entrances,
like the so-called palace at Gedi (Kirkman 1963: ﬁg. 2).
   This is an example of social and economic stratiﬁcation apparent in arch-
aeological evidence. A society is suggested that ranged from ruling merchant
princes at the top to wealthy merchants to successful artisans to slaves or
lowly menials. There are also signs that social differentiation became more
marked with time. For example, building in mud, wood, and thatch was at
ﬁrst usual, but building in stone gradually became more common.
Furthermore, the so-called palaces of Gedi and Songo Mnara probably
originated as interlocking houses belonging to one extended family. These
could have been subsequently transformed into a ‘palace’ by the addition of
monumental features, when the head of that family became the hereditary

250
                                             The East African coast and islands

ruler of the settlement (p. 236). An indication of the status to which some of
these rulers eventually aspired is given by the coins bearing their names,
particularly during the twelfth to fourteenth centuries. Indeed, at least
one ruler seems to have been outstandingly ambitious, if the luxury of the
‘palace’ of Husuni Kubwa at Kilwa is considered. It appears, both from
the number of medium to large stone houses and from the wide use of imported
ceramics, that there emerged a socially superior merchant class comparable to
the wa-ungwana of recent Swahili towns and cities (Donley 1982; Donley-Reid
1990). Indeed, the many stone tombs that were constructed along the East
African coast also suggest the existence of such a class.
   It is difﬁcult to decide the extent to which these social developments led to
state formation, because the archaeological evidence offers little relevant infor-
mation. There are also geographical differences in that information. Towns on
the northern Swahili coast had relatively more stone buildings and fewer mud,
wood, and thatch buildings, and it has been suggested that they had ‘a more
horizontally differentiated power base, with numerous leaders (merchant,
religious, political)’. In contrast, towns on the southern Swahili coast con-
tained fewer stone buildings and more mud, wood, and thatch buildings, and it
has been proposed that they had ‘a small-scale, ranked hierarchy, whose leader
ruled through custom and consent’ (LaViolette and Fleisher 2005: 340).
However, the existence of a few much larger settlements, and their geograph-
ical relationships to neighbouring settlements of medium or small size, suggests
that some cities, for example, Mogadishu, Pate, Malindi, Mombasa, and
Kilwa, controlled the territory around them, a possibility reinforced by the
issue of coinage in some places. Indeed, the prosperity apparent in the early
fourteenth century at Kilwa suggests an extension of control over the gold
trade from Sofala, far to the south in what is now Mozambique. A coin minted
in Kilwa even got as far as Great Zimbabwe. It seems likely that some of the
east coast cities did function as small city-states from early in the second
millennium AD and that, sometimes, certain city-states came to dominate
others. In addition, collectively, the Swahili cities were part of a city-state
culture, as discussed by Sinclair and Håkansson (2000: 479). In spite of local
variations, they shared the same religion, same language, same architectural
tradition and material culture, and a kinship-based political organization,
often with both elected kings and a degree of consensus.


Population pressures
The distribution, number, and size of settlement sites along the East African
coast and on its islands suggest that, prior to Portuguese contact, the region
supported a substantial population. It is thought that Swahili towns with stone

                                                                             251
African Civilizations

buildings each had in excess of 5,000 inhabitants, and places such as Kilwa
and Mombasa had more than 15,000 (LaViolette and Fleisher 2005: 340). In
addition, villages of mud, wood, and thatch buildings proliferated in many
coastal areas, as on the island of Pemba (LaViolette and Fleisher 2009). With
both land and sea resources, with food supplies augmented by South-East
Asian domesticated plants, and with fresh water available in many places,
the coast and its islands must have contrasted with the dry lands of the interior.
Thus the coast could have stimulated population growth, but there was
nowhere for excess population to go, other than north or south along the
coast or onto its islands. This is because coastal peoples would have been
unlikely to adapt to the dry interior. The result was the long, narrow distribu-
tion of the East African coastal culture. However, the optimum coastal condi-
tions gradually petered out to both north and south. In addition, even within
the best areas, soil character and water availability varied, making some
localities more attractive for settlement than others. Thus, population pres-
sures could have been one of the factors that contributed to urbanization and
state development.
  Two things suggest that such pressures existed. First, a signiﬁcant number of
settlements, on the coast itself and also in the Comoro Islands and Madagas-
car, were protected by walls, suggesting that population levels had reached
a point where competition for resources was causing intergroup conﬂict or
threat of conﬂict. A remarkable example is the ﬁfteenth- to seventeenth-
century fortiﬁed site of Pujini, on Pemba Island, Tanzania, which ‘appears to
have been a manifestation of, and contributor to, island tensions – political,
economic, social’ (LaViolette 1996: 81). Second, although relevant archaeo-
logical evidence is difﬁcult to identify, the export of slaves from this coast
seems to have had a long history (Trimingham 1975: 116–18; Horton 1996:
415–16), implying the existence of excess population that provided a source.
However, some of the slaves might have come from inland.
  Not all the hinterland is dry, unattractive country. As already pointed out
(p. 228), cultivable fertile soils along the lower parts of some of the rivers must
have made important contributions to the coastal economy, so that Mogadi-
shu, for instance, although situated on a dry coast mostly unsuitable for
cultivation, was largely maintained by the productivity of the Shibeli River
inland to its west (Dualeh 1996). That such interaction of coast and inland
riverine plains was important in the past is indicated by the coastal and interior
distribution of ﬁrst-millennium AD Triangular Incised Ware in both Kenya
and Tanzania (Abungu 1995; Chami 1995). It was this relationship of coastal
and interior peoples that must have formed the basis of the trading networks
that provided the commodities sought by the Indian Ocean trade (Mutoro
1998). Like the coast, however, the more productive inland areas were limited

252
                                             The East African coast and islands

in extent and are likely to have experienced population pressures, particularly
during periods of environmental stress.
  It has also been suggested that there were dry conditions in Ethiopia and
Equatorial Africa between about AD 500 and 800 (Hassan 1997: 219–20). In
addition, the sediments of Lake Naivasha, in Kenya, provide a climatic record
for equatorial East Africa over the last 1,100 years, suggesting that it was
generally drier than today from AD 1000 to 1270, but fairly wet from 1270 to
1850, although interrupted around 1380 to 1420, 1560 to 1620, and 1760 to
1840 by episodes of aridity more severe than any drought of the twentieth
century (Verschuren et al. 2000). Such climatic oscillations would have
allowed population growth during moister periods but caused population
pressure during drier periods, periods that might be correlated with socio-
economic growth or contraction on the Swahili coast and islands.


Ideology
As in the West African savanna (Chapter 6), Islam was the major ideology on
the East African coast and islands (Insoll 2003). Wright (1993: 671–2) argued
that Islam, along with trade, was the crucial factor in Swahili urban develop-
ment. It bound together the people in the towns and bound the towns to
surrounding villages, thus contributing also to state formation. Islam was
not just a religion, it was a way of life. Islamic belief brought with it distinct
patterns of symbolic and material culture, including social behaviour, art,
music, literacy, scientiﬁc knowledge, scholarship, education, coinage, and even
the layout of settlements (Insoll 1999). At many Swahili archaeological sites
there is at least one stone-built mosque; signiﬁcantly, the main congregational
mosque usually occupies a central position within each settlement. In addition,
the care and expense that was often lavished on the building of mosques show
how important the role of Islam was in coastal life. Islam was the faith of
urban, mercantile, literate South-West Asia, and its adoption brought East
Africa into a huge common market; it ensured commercial and cultural
intercourse with Arab lands to the north. In Swahili the word for ‘civilization’
is ustaarabu, often understood to mean ‘becoming like an Arab’ (Chittick
1971: 112; Jahadhmy 1981: 10). On the East African coast, to become like
an Arab meant to follow Islam, to live in a stone house in a city, and to be
involved in trade.
  However, Islam was not the primary cause of urbanization and state devel-
opment on the East African coast, whatever its later inﬂuence on those
developments. As in the West African savanna, Islam seems to have arrived
after the initial changes had taken place. Thus, in the fourteenth century when
ibn Battuta visited Kilwa, Islam had already been accepted there, but in the

                                                                             253
African Civilizations

tenth century when al-Masudi visited the East African coast some at least of
its occupants were animists: ‘Every man worships what he pleases, be it a
plant, an animal or a mineral’ (Freeman-Grenville 1975: 31–2, 16–17). The
available archaeological evidence conﬁrms that Islam was usually adopted
only after initial settlement. For example, the primary occupation at Shanga,
dated from about AD 760 to 780, contained no evidence for Islam, although
from the late eighth century onwards there was a succession of buildings which
have been interpreted as mosques (Horton 1996: 394–406). At Gedi there
might have been a much longer pre-Islamic period, because houses probably
occupied the site of the congregational mosque until as late as the middle of the
ﬁfteenth century (Kirkman 1954: 8–9, 14). At Kilwa its excavator thought that
Islam began to arrive in the eleventh to twelfth centuries. We can conclude
that although Islam played a big part in the developments on the East African
coast, it did not necessarily inaugurate them. So far as ideological input was
concerned, unknown animistic beliefs probably contributed substantially.
The strength of those beliefs may be judged from the fact that East African
Islam has remained syncretic until recent times.


External trade
So considerable is the archaeological evidence for long-distance external trade
in East African coastal and island sites that it has often dominated discussion
of those sites and inﬂuenced interpretations. The cities and city-states have
been seen as a direct response to the growth of that trade: trading bases for
overseas mercantile interests, clinging to the coast of a hostile continent, in
which they had no interest other than the acquisition of primary products
for export. These colonial settlements, it was thought, had little impact on
the African interior and were gradually Africanized by intermarriage, as some
aspects of the alien culture were adopted and the distinctive Swahili culture
evolved.
  This interpretation is no longer accepted, and the coastal and island settle-
ments are now seen as part of an enormous interaction zone that included the
Indian Ocean, Arabia, South and East Asia, East Africa, and the African
interior. Of crucial importance for contacts within this zone were ships able
to make long trading voyages and crews with the necessary knowledge of
the winds and currents as well as navigational skills. In the Indian Ocean zone
the ship provided the vital link, just as the camel did in the Sahara (Insoll 2003:
143). In the same way that the trans-Saharan trade penetrated deep into the
lands south of the desert, so Swahili trade reached far into East and Central
Africa. Historically documented inland trade routes of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries very likely followed routes that were of great antiquity

254
                                             The East African coast and islands

(Wynne-Jones and Croucher 2007). The idea that there was little interaction
between the coastal settlements and the African interior has become increas-
ingly untenable (Kusimba et al. 2005).
   The evidence for long-distance, overseas trade is remarkable. Much of this
consists of imported ceramics, material that is quite distinct from African
pottery traditions and can usually be assigned both to an area of origin and
to an approximate date. At Kilwa, for example, the earliest deposits of the
ninth and tenth centuries contained Islamic glazed wares that probably origin-
ated in the Persian Gulf or were trans-shipped there. Although the wares
changed with time, and the places from which they came also changed to
some degree, such Islamic glazed wares continued to be imported until well
after Portuguese contact. In addition, from about the thirteenth century,
Chinese ceramics began to arrive in Kilwa; indeed, from about the fourteenth
century onwards they equalled or exceeded the quantity of Islamic glazed
wares. It is these Chinese products, at both Kilwa and other East African
coastal sites, which have convinced archaeologists of the extent of the long-
distance trade of this coast. No doubt the Chinese material was usually trans-
shipped several times, but the distances involved are still most impressive. In
addition, imports other than ceramics have also been found in East African
coastal sites. At Kilwa, for instance, glass vessels and beads of glass, carnelian,
and other semi-precious stones were found, widely distributed through time.
The carnelian and perhaps the glass beads might have come from western
India; the other items probably from various parts of the Islamic world
(Chittick 1974; Insoll et al. 2004). Furthermore, these trade goods consist only
of those that happen to have survived in the archaeological record. As was the
case with the trans-Saharan trade discussed in Chapter 6 (p. 181), one wonders
about the imports that have left no trace. For instance, it is thought that cloth
would have been one of the principal imports, particularly high-quality cloth
and coloured cloth. Such a commodity could have come from a very wide area
indeed. So extensive and substantial was East Africa’s international trade that
Islamic, Indian, Sri Lankan, and Chinese coinage reached the Swahili coast,
and, to facilitate commercial transactions, local rulers struck their own coins.
Remarkably, many bronze coins were exported from China, for use as a metal
source in regions around the Indian Ocean, including East Africa. For
example, a bronze lion ﬁgurine excavated from Shanga was either cast in India
or more probably cast in East Africa by Indian craftsmen, possibly using
Chinese coins (Horton and Blurton 1988; Horton 1996: 358).
   In return for the things supplied to the East African coast and islands,
overseas traders were tapping the natural resources of the coast and interior.
These primary products included ivory, rhinoceros horn, tortoiseshell, amber-
gris, gold, copper, iron, rock crystal, frankincense, myrrh, mangrove poles,

                                                                              255
African Civilizations

ebony and other timbers, sandalwood, and slaves, not to mention spices, about
which there is less certainty. Without access to these commodities, the socio-
economic development of the Swahili coast would not have occurred, because
its settlements could not have attracted interest from the Indian Ocean traders.
Many of the exports would have come from deep in the African interior, but
the imported goods have rarely been found in the interior. A notable exception
is a very small quantity of the Chinese pottery known as ‘celadon’, which
reached the site of Great Zimbabwe in the fourteenth century. In addition,
glass beads reached sites in the Limpopo Valley, such as Indian and Persian
examples found in a ninth-century context at Schroda (p. 270) (Pwiti 2005:
382). Glass beads also occurred in the Upemba Depression in south-east
Democratic Congo, in the thirteenth to ﬁfteenth centuries, along with cowrie
shells, which had already appeared there by the tenth to twelfth centuries
(p. 311). This is 1,500 kilometres from the East African coast, from which
the cowries must have come and presumably the glass beads as well (Insoll
2003: 378). Furthermore, at a date around the fourteenth century, a few glass
beads, along with a single cowrie shell (probably Monetaria annulus), found
their way to Kibiro on the eastern shore of Lake Albert (Connah 1996).
   Nevertheless, evidence for coastal-interior contacts remains limited; so what
sort of a trade could have gathered so many African resources but apparently
given so little in exchange? The answer lies partly in the differential preserva-
tion of the archaeological evidence, for not only would imported cloth not
have survived, but, without historical sources, we would know little even
about the exports. However, this does not explain why imports that survive
in the coastal sites are not in general found in the interior; after all, Chinese
ceramics are tough material. The most likely explanation is that trade was
more complex than a simple exchange of overseas goods for African commod-
ities. Chittick distinguished not two categories of goods that were traded, that
is to say imports and exports, but four categories. These consisted of (1)
African goods sought for export, (2) goods imported for trade with the inter-
ior, (3) goods imported for use in the coastal towns, and (4) goods produced in
those towns for trade with the interior. Thus, the East African coastal settle-
ments were acting as entrepôts, that is to say, as commercial centres of import,
export, collection, and distribution. Two sorts of imports arrived from over-
seas: cloth that could be traded into the interior and luxury goods that were
sought by the more successful occupants of the coastal cities and towns for
prestige purposes. These exotic manufactures, of which ceramics and some
other items are all that have survived, were probably restricted by economic
and social factors to the coastal elite. To trade with the peoples of the interior,
the merchants of the coastal settlements used much of the cloth that had been
imported from overseas, but they also transported into the interior cotton

256
                                             The East African coast and islands

cloth manufactured in the coastal settlements. In addition, before the thir-
teenth century, beads of marine shell were manufactured on the coast, and
large numbers of cowrie shells were collected. Both of these were probably
used for the inland trade, although imported glass beads seem to have taken
the place of shell beads in later times.
   It is also likely that coastal communities traded some agricultural surplus into
the interior, just as inland riverine cultivators must have traded surplus both to
the coast and to more immediate neighbours (Kusimba et al. 2005: 260).
Nomadic pastoralists, hunter-gatherers, and even the farmers of the drier areas
would probably have welcomed additions to their diet. They would also have
welcomed salt, which was probably produced on the coast. In return for these
and other commodities, recipients in the inland gave the primary products
that the coastal merchants sought and which they exported overseas. The
antiquity of such contacts between coast and inland is indicated by the seated
burial excavated at the site of Murrapania IV, near Nampula, in the interior of
Mozambique. Dated to the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium AD, the burial was
associated with an elephant tusk and pottery decorated with marine-shell
impressions (Sinclair 1991: 188).
   A key factor in this complex trade was local input, of primary products and
manufactures from the coast itself. Environmental diversity and the conse-
quent unevenness of resource distribution must have necessitated the early,
pre-Islamic development of local exchange systems on the East African coast
and between it and its hinterland. In particular, coastal trading in small vessels
would have developed early on a coast that was generally suited to inshore
navigation. Some indication of this trade network was found at Kilwa, where
stone vessels made of chlorite-schist appeared from about the eleventh to
twelfth centuries onward. These are thought to have originated in Madagascar
(Chittick 1974: vol. 1, 237). In addition, it was no doubt because of such a
coastal trading network that Kilwa was able to proﬁt from the export of gold,
from the Zimbabwe Plateau, by southern Mozambique coastal settlements.
Indeed, it seems that the more successful of the coastal cities, such as Kilwa,
were successful not only because of their location on trade routes connecting
the interior to overseas markets but also because of their location on coastal
trade routes which enabled them to act as collecting points for local products
and as distribution points for imports. Horton (1987b) wrote of what he called
‘The Swahili Corridor’, stressing movement of goods along the coast, but
Sinclair (1995: 107) preferred the idea of a ‘Swahili trading wheel’, with its
hub located in different places at different times, such as the Comoro Islands,
Kilwa, or Zanzibar. Insoll (2003: ﬁg. 4.4) provided a map of how the pre-
Islamic trade networks might have looked. Such a circular trading network, or
a series of such networks, might have linked the long East African coastal strip

                                                                              257
African Civilizations

to the offshore islands and to Madagascar, as well as to parts of the African
interior such as the Zimbabwe Plateau, and then linked the whole system into
the Indian Ocean trade.
  Thus the East African towns and cities did not result simply from the
development of external trade with overseas markets. Such trade had a sub-
stantial inﬂuence on their subsequent history but was only part of a complex
network involving local exchange systems, which almost certainly pre-dated
the overseas connections and deﬁnitely pre-dated the arrival of Islam.


Conclusion
Urbanization and state formation on the East African coast and adjacent
islands have sometimes been treated as though they resulted from external
stimulus. In particular, the larger settlements of this coast have been regarded
as Islamic trading cities, founded by colonists who originated from the
Persian Gulf at the end of the ﬁrst millennium AD. Such a view has held that
this coast was signiﬁcant only as the edge of the Indian Ocean trading
network, to which it supplied the products of the African interior and from
which it received some of the products of the most sophisticated cultures of
its time. Unfortunately, this interpretation has been arrived at by looking at
the results rather than at the causes of the remarkable East African coastal
developments.
   Eventually, external trade was extremely important to the settlements of this
coast; no doubt there were some mercantile colonists from outside. However,
it is necessary to ask what already existed on this coast to attract such attention.
This question cannot be answered by excavating the stone-built settlements of
the thirteenth to ﬁfteenth centuries, on which much of the archaeological ﬁeld
research has been concentrated. It is doubtful if it can even be answered by
excavating the important settlement deposits of the ninth and tenth centuries,
which have also commanded attention. The answer must lie in the investigation
of the coastal settlement archaeology of the last millennium BC and the earlier
part of the ﬁrst millennium AD, a task to which archaeologists are now giving
attention. In addition, the large coastal settlements of the ﬁrst half of the second
millennium AD will undoubtedly be better understood if they can be viewed
in the context of the whole settlement pattern of which they formed a part:
in short, archaeologists are having to look for and investigate the smaller
settlements that were contemporary with such places as Kilwa, Gedi, or Shanga.
As these things are done, it is becoming clear that the indigenous contribution to
cultural development on the East African coast was much more substantial than
previously thought and that the origins of the East African coastal culture were
African, not Asiatic.

258
                                           The East African coast and islands

   We have seen that there existed a strong subsistence base, capable of produ-
cing a surplus, encouraging complex local exchange networks. It is also
probable that the introduction of South-East Asian food plants, some 2,000
years ago, had a catalytic effect on coastal cultural evolution. To these things
should be added the existence of a sophisticated technology that encouraged
functional specialization, and there should also be added the possibility of
complex population pressures within increasingly hierarchical societies, whose
socioeconomic order could be legitimized ﬁrst by indigenous animism and
later by Islam. It is signiﬁcant that, during the later ﬁrst millennium AD,
similar locally made pottery was in use both at widely separated coastal
settlements and in parts of the interior. It is also signiﬁcant that some early
coastal sites show a gradual change from construction in mud, wood, and
thatch to stone and that some of the later coastal sites remained substantially
settlements of mud, wood, and thatch buildings, some of the less important
ones almost entirely so. In addition, so widespread were these coastal and
island settlements that a massive immigration would have to be invoked if they
are to be explained as alien foundations. One must conclude that the large
settlements of the East African coast and islands were not merely the edge of
an Indian Ocean trading network but the focus of complex African networks,
which subsequently incorporated substantial elements from the Indian
Ocean world.




                                                                           259
