=== CACHE SLICE range_3_v1_1075_2000 ===
=== Source: Darwin, Descent of Man (1871 Appleton), vol1 lines 1075-2000 ===
=== Expected content: Ch VIII principles of sexual selection + Ch IX-X start lower animals/insects ===

CHAPTER VIII.


Principles of Sexual Selection.





Secondary sexual characters—Sexual selection—Manner of action—Excess of males—Polygamy—The male alone generally modified through sexual selection—Eagerness of the male—Variability of the male—Choice exerted by the female—Sexual compared with natural selection—Inheritance, at corresponding periods of life, at corresponding seasons of the year, and as limited by sex—Relations between the several forms of inheritance—Causes why one sex and the young are not modified through sexual selection—Supplement on the proportional numbers of the two sexes throughout the animal kingdom—On the limitation of the numbers of the two sexes through natural selection.



With animals which have their sexes separated, the males necessarily differ from the females in their organs of reproduction; and these afford the primary sexual characters. But the sexes often differ in what Hunter has called secondary sexual characters, which are not directly connected with the act of reproduction; for instance, in the male possessing certain organs of sense or locomotion, of which the female is quite destitute, or in having them more highly-developed, in order that he may readily find or reach her; or again, in the male having special organs of prehension so as to hold her securely. These latter organs of infinitely diversified kinds graduate into, and in some cases can hardly be distinguished from, those which are commonly ranked as primary, such as the complex appendages at the apex of the abdomen in male insects. Unless indeed we confine the term “primary” to the reproductive glands, it is scarcely possible to decide, as far as the organs of prehension are concerned, which ought to be called primary and which secondary.

The female often differs from the male in having organs for the nourishment or protection of her young, as the mammary glands of mammals, and the abdominal sacks of the marsupials. The male, also, in some few cases differs from the female in possessing analogous organs, as the receptacles for the ova possessed by the males of certain fishes, and those temporarily developed in certain male frogs. Female bees have a special apparatus for collecting and carrying pollen, and their ovipositor is modified into a sting for the defence of their larvæ and the community. In the females of many insects the ovipositor is modified in the most complex manner for the safe placing of the eggs. Numerous similar cases could be given, but they do not here concern us. There are, however, other sexual differences quite disconnected with the primary organs with which we are more especially concerned—such as the greater size, strength, and pugnacity of the male, his weapons of offence or means of defence against rivals, his gaudy colouring and various ornaments, his power of song, and other such characters.

Besides the foregoing primary and secondary sexual differences, the male and female sometimes differ in structures connected with different habits of life, and not at all, or only indirectly, related to the reproductive functions. Thus the females of certain flies (Culicidæ and Tabanidæ) are blood-suckers, whilst the males live on flowers and have their mouths destitute of mandibles.336 The males alone of certain moths and of some crustaceans (e.g. Tanais) have imperfect, closed mouths, and cannot feed. The Complemental males of certain cirripedes live like epiphytic plants either on the female or hermaphrodite form, and are destitute of a mouth and prehensile limbs. In these cases it is the male which has been modified and has lost certain important organs, which the other members of the same group possess. In other cases it is the female which has lost such parts; for instance, the female glow-worm is destitute of wings, as are many female moths, some of which never leave their cocoons. Many female parasitic crustaceans have lost their natatory legs. In some weevil-beetles (Curculionidæ) there is a great difference between the male and female in the length of the rostrum or snout;337 but the meaning of this and of many analogous differences, is not at all understood. Differences of structure between the two sexes in relation to different habits of life are generally confined to the lower animals; but with some few birds the beak of the male differs from that of the female. No doubt in most, but apparently not in all these cases, the differences are indirectly connected with the propagation of the species: thus a female which has to nourish a multitude of ova will require more food than the male, and consequently will require special means for procuring it. A male animal which lived for a very short time might without detriment lose through disuse its organs for procuring food; but he would retain his locomotive organs in a perfect state, so that he might reach the female. The female, on the other hand, might safely lose her organs for flying, swimming, or walking, if she gradually acquired habits which rendered such powers useless.

We are, however, here concerned only with that kind of selection, which I have called sexual selection. This depends on the advantage which certain individuals have over other individuals of the same sex and species, in exclusive relation to reproduction. When the two sexes differ in structure in relation to different habits of life, as in the cases above mentioned, they have no doubt been modified through natural selection, accompanied by inheritance limited to one and the same sex. So again the primary sexual organs, and those for nourishing or protecting the young, come under this same head; for those individuals which generated or nourished their offspring best, would leave, cæteris paribus, the greatest number to inherit their superiority; whilst those which generated or nourished their offspring badly, would leave but few to inherit their weaker powers. As the male has to search for the female, he requires for this purpose organs of sense and locomotion, but if these organs are necessary for the other purposes of life, as is generally the case, they will have been developed through natural selection. When the male has found the female he sometimes absolutely requires prehensile organs to hold her; thus Dr. Wallace informs me that the males of certain moths cannot unite with the females if their tarsi or feet are broken. The males of many oceanic crustaceans have their legs and antennæ modified in an extraordinary manner for the prehension of the female; hence we may suspect that owing to these animals being washed about by the waves of the open sea, they absolutely require these organs in order to propagate their kind, and if so their development will have been the result of ordinary or natural selection.

When the two sexes follow exactly the same habits of life, and the male has more highly developed sense or locomotive organs than the female, it may be that these in their perfected state are indispensable to the male for finding the female; but in the vast majority of cases, they serve only to give one male an advantage over another, for the less well-endowed males, if time were allowed them, would succeed in pairing with the females; and they would in all other respects, judging from the structure of the female, be equally well adapted for their ordinary habits of life. In such cases sexual selection must have come into action, for the males have acquired their present structure, not from being better fitted to survive in the struggle for existence, but from having gained an advantage over other males, and from having transmitted this advantage to their male offspring alone. It was the importance of this distinction which led me to designate this form of selection as sexual selection. So again, if the chief service rendered to the male by his prehensile organs is to prevent the escape of the female before the arrival of other males, or when assaulted by them, these organs will have been perfected through sexual selection, that is by the advantage acquired by certain males over their rivals. But in most cases it is scarcely possible to distinguish between the effects of natural and sexual selection. Whole chapters could easily be filled with details on the differences between the sexes in their sensory, locomotive, and prehensile organs. As, however, these structures are not more interesting than others adapted for the ordinary purposes of life, I shall almost pass them over, giving only a few instances under each class.

There are many other structures and instincts which must have been developed through sexual selection—such as the weapons of offence and the means of defence possessed by the males for fighting with and driving away their rivals—their courage and pugnacity—their ornaments of many kinds—their organs for producing vocal or instrumental music—and their glands for emitting odours; most of these latter structures serving only to allure or excite the female. That these characters are the result of sexual and not of ordinary selection is clear, as unarmed, unornamented, or unattractive males would succeed equally well in the battle for life and in leaving a numerous progeny, if better endowed males were not present. We may infer that this would be the case, for the females, which are unarmed and unornamented, are able to survive and procreate their kind. Secondary sexual characters of the kind just referred to, will be fully discussed in the following chapters, as they are in many respects interesting, but more especially as they depend on the will, choice, and rivalry of the individuals of either sex. When we behold two males fighting for the possession of the female, or several male birds displaying their gorgeous plumage, and performing the strangest antics before an assembled body of females, we cannot doubt that, though led by instinct, they know what they are about, and consciously exert their mental and bodily powers.

In the same manner as man can improve the breed of his game-cocks by the selection of those birds which are victorious in the cockpit, so it appears that the strongest and most vigorous males, or those provided with the best weapons, have prevailed under nature, and have led to the improvement of the natural breed or species. Through repeated deadly contests, a slight degree of variability, if it led to some advantage, however slight, would suffice for the work of sexual selection; and it is certain that secondary sexual characters are eminently variable. In the same manner as man can give beauty, according to his standard of taste, to his male poultry—can give to the Sebright bantam a new and elegant plumage, an erect and peculiar carriage—so it appears that in a state of nature female birds, by having long selected the more attractive males, have added to their beauty. No doubt this implies powers of discrimination and taste on the part of the female which will at first appear extremely improbable; but I hope hereafter to shew that this is not the case.

From our ignorance on several points, the precise manner in which sexual selection acts is to a certain extent uncertain. Nevertheless if those naturalists who already believe in the mutability of species, will read the following chapters, they will, I think, agree with me that sexual selection has played an important part in the history of the organic world. It is certain that with almost all animals there is a struggle between the males for the possession of the female. This fact is so notorious that it would be superfluous to give instances. Hence the females, supposing that their mental capacity sufficed for the exertion of a choice, could select one out of several males. But in numerous cases it appears as if it had been specially arranged that there should be a struggle between many males. Thus with migratory birds, the males generally arrive before the females at their place of breeding, so that many males are ready to contend for each female. The bird-catchers assert that this is invariably the case with the nightingale and blackcap, as I am informed by Mr. Jenner Weir, who confirms the statement with respect to the latter species.

Mr. Swaysland of Brighton, who has been in the habit, during the last forty years, of catching our migratory birds on their first arrival, writes to me that he has never known the females of any species to arrive before their males. During one spring he shot thirty-nine males of Ray’s wagtail (Budytes Raii) before he saw a single female. Mr. Gould has ascertained by dissection, as he informs me, that male snipes arrive in this country before the females. In the case of fish, at the period when the salmon ascend our rivers, the males in large numbers are ready to breed before the females. So it apparently is with frogs and toads. Throughout the great class of insects the males almost always emerge from the pupal state before the other sex, so that they generally swarm for a time before any females can be seen.338 The cause of this difference between the males and females in their periods of arrival and maturity is sufficiently obvious. Those males which annually first migrated into any country, or which in the spring were first ready to breed, or were the most eager, would leave the largest number of offspring; and these would tend to inherit similar instincts and constitutions. On the whole there can be no doubt that with almost all animals, in which the sexes are separate, there is a constantly recurrent struggle between the males for the possession of the females.

Our difficulty in regard to sexual selection lies in understanding how it is that the males which conquer other males, or those which prove the most attractive to the females, leave a greater number of offspring to inherit their superiority than the beaten and less attractive males. Unless this result followed, the characters which gave to certain males an advantage over others, could not be perfected and augmented through sexual selection. When the sexes exist in exactly equal numbers, the worst-endowed males will ultimately find females (excepting where polygamy prevails), and leave as many offspring, equally well fitted for their general habits of life, as the best-endowed males. From various facts and considerations, I formerly inferred that with most animals, in which secondary sexual characters were well developed, the males considerably exceeded the females in number; and this does hold good in some few cases. If the males were to the females as two to one, or as three to two, or even in a somewhat lower ratio, the whole affair would be simple; for the better-armed or more attractive males would leave the largest number of offspring. But after investigating, as far as possible, the numerical proportions of the sexes, I do not believe that any great inequality in number commonly exists. In most cases sexual selection appears to have been effective in the following manner.

Let us take any species, a bird for instance, and divide the females inhabiting a district into two equal bodies: the one consisting of the more vigorous and better-nourished individuals, and the other of the less vigorous and healthy. The former, there can be little doubt, would be ready to breed in the spring before the others; and this is the opinion of Mr. Jenner Weir, who has during many years carefully attended to the habits of birds. There can also be no doubt that the most vigorous, healthy, and best-nourished females would on an average succeed in rearing the largest number of offspring. The males, as we have seen, are generally ready to breed before the females; of the males the strongest, and with some species the best armed, drive away the weaker males; and the former would then unite with the more vigorous and best-nourished females, as these are the first to breed. Such vigorous pairs would surely rear a larger number of offspring than the retarded females, which would be compelled, supposing the sexes to be numerically equal, to unite with the conquered and less powerful males; and this is all that is wanted to add, in the course of successive generations, to the size, strength and courage of the males, or to improve their weapons.

But in a multitude of cases the males which conquer other males, do not obtain possession of the females, independently of choice on the part of the latter. The courtship of animals is by no means so simple and short an affair as might be thought. The females are most excited by, or prefer pairing with, the more ornamented males, or those which are the best songsters, or play the best antics; but it is obviously probable, as has been actually observed in some cases, that they would at the same time prefer the more vigorous and lively males.339 Thus the more vigorous females, which are the first to breed, will have the choice of many males; and though they may not always select the strongest or best armed, they will select those which are vigorous and well armed, and in other respects the most attractive. Such early pairs would have the same advantage in rearing offspring on the female side as above explained, and nearly the same advantage on the male side. And this apparently has sufficed during a long course of generations to add not only to the strength and fighting-powers of the males, but likewise to their various ornaments or other attractions.

In the converse and much rarer case of the males selecting particular females, it is plain that those which were the most vigorous and had conquered others, would have the freest choice; and it is almost certain that they would select vigorous as well as attractive females. Such pairs would have an advantage in rearing offspring, more especially if the male had the power to defend the female during the pairing-season, as occurs with some of the higher animals, or aided in providing for the young. The same principles would apply if both sexes mutually preferred and selected certain individuals of the opposite sex; supposing that they selected not only the more attractive, but likewise the more vigorous individuals.

Numerical Proportion of the Two Sexes.—I have remarked that sexual selection would be a simple affair if the males considerably exceeded in number the females. Hence I was led to investigate, as far as I could, the proportions between the two sexes of as many animals as possible; but the materials are scanty. I will here give only a brief abstract of the results, retaining the details for a supplementary discussion, so as not to interfere with the course of my argument. Domesticated animals alone afford the opportunity of ascertaining the proportional numbers at birth; but no records have been specially kept for this purpose. By indirect means, however, I have collected a considerable body of statistical data, from which it appears that with most of our domestic animals the sexes are nearly equal at birth. Thus with race-horses, 25,560 births have been recorded during twenty-one years, and the male births have been to the female births as 99·7 to 100. With greyhounds the inequality is greater than with any other animal, for during twelve years, out of 6878 births, the male births have been as 110·1 to 100 female births. It is, however, in some degree doubtful whether it is safe to infer that the same proportional numbers would hold good under natural conditions as under domestication; for slight and unknown differences in the conditions affect to a certain extent the proportion of the sexes. Thus with mankind, the male births in England are as 104·5, in Russia as 108·9, and with the Jews of Livornia as 120 to 100 females. The proportion is also mysteriously affected by the circumstance of the births being legitimate or illegitimate.

For our present purpose we are concerned with the proportion of the sexes, not at birth, but at maturity, and this adds another element of doubt; for it is a well ascertained fact that with man a considerably larger proportion of males than of females die before or during birth, and during the first few years of infancy. So it almost certainly is with male lambs, and so it may be with the males of other animals. The males of some animals kill each other by fighting; or they drive each other about until they become greatly emaciated. They must, also, whilst wandering about in eager search for the females, be often exposed to various dangers. With many kinds of fish the males are much smaller than the females, and they are believed often to be devoured by the latter or by other fishes. With some birds the females appear to die in larger proportion than the males: they are also liable to be destroyed on their nests, or whilst in charge of their young. With insects the female larvæ are often larger than those of the males, and would consequently be more likely to be devoured: in some cases the mature females are less active and less rapid in their movements than the males, and would not be so well able to escape from danger. Hence, with animals in a state of nature, in order to judge of the proportions of the sexes at maturity, we must rely on mere estimation; and this, except perhaps when the inequality is strongly marked, is but little trustworthy. Nevertheless, as far as a judgment can be formed, we may conclude from the facts given in the supplement, that the males of some few mammals, of many birds, of some fish and insects, considerably exceed in number the females.

The proportion between the sexes fluctuates slightly during successive years: thus with race-horses, for every 100 females born, the males varied from 1O7.1 in one year to 92.6 in another year, and with greyhounds from 116.3 to 95.3. But had larger numbers been tabulated throughout a more extensive area than England, these fluctuations would probably have disappeared; and such as they are, they would hardly suffice to lead under a state of nature to the effective action of sexual selection. Nevertheless with some few wild animals, the proportions seem, as shewn in the supplement, to fluctuate either during different seasons or in different localities in a sufficient degree to lead to such action. For it should be observed that any advantage gained during certain years or in certain localities by those males which were able to conquer other males, or were the most attractive to the females, would probably be transmitted to the offspring and would not subsequently be eliminated. During the succeeding seasons, when from the equality of the sexes every male was everywhere able to procure a female, the stronger or more attractive males previously produced would still have at least as good a chance of leaving offspring as the less strong or less attractive.

Polygamy.—The practice of polygamy leads to the same results as would follow from an actual inequality in the number of the sexes; for if each male secures two or more females, many males will not be able to pair; and the latter assuredly will be the weaker or less attractive individuals. Many mammals and some few birds are polygamous, but with animals belonging to the lower classes I have found no evidence of this habit. The intellectual powers of such animals are, perhaps, not sufficient to lead them to collect and guard a harem of females. That some relation exists between polygamy and the development of secondary sexual characters, appears nearly certain; and this supports the view that a numerical preponderance of males would be eminently favourable to the action of sexual selection. Nevertheless many animals, especially birds, which are strictly monogamous, display strongly-marked secondary sexual characters; whilst some few animals, which are polygamous, are not thus characterised.

We will first briefly run through the class of mammals, and then turn to birds. The gorilla seems to be a polygamist, and the male differs considerably from the female; so it is with some baboons which live in herds containing twice as many adult females as males. In South America the Mycetes caraya presents well-marked sexual differences in colour, beard, and vocal organs, and the male generally lives with two or three wives: the male of the Cebus capucinus differs somewhat from the female, and appears to be polygamous.340 Little is known on this head with respect to most other monkeys, but some species are strictly monogamous. The ruminants are eminently polygamous, and they more frequently present sexual differences than almost any other group of mammals, especially in their weapons, but likewise in other characters. Most deer, cattle, and sheep are polygamous; as are most antelopes, though some of the latter are monogamous. Sir Andrew Smith, in speaking of the antelopes of South Africa, says that in herds of about a dozen there was rarely more than one mature male. The Asiatic Antilope saiga appears to be the most inordinate polygamist in the world; for Pallas341 states that the male drives away all rivals, and collects a herd of about a hundred, consisting of females and kids: the female is hornless and has softer hair, but does not otherwise differ much from the male. The horse is polygamous, but, except in his greater size and in the proportions of his body, differs but little from the mare. The wild boar, in his great tusks and some other characters, presents well-marked sexual characters; in Europe and in India he leads a solitary life, except during the breeding-season; but at this season he consorts in India with several females, as Sir W. Elliot, who has had large experience in observing this animal, believes: whether this holds good in Europe is doubtful, but is supported by some statements. The adult male Indian elephant, like the boar, passes much of his time in solitude; but when associating with others, “it is rare to find,” as Dr. Campbell states, “more than one male with a whole herd of females.” The larger males expel or kill the smaller and weaker ones. The male differs from the female by his immense tusks and greater size, strength, and endurance; so great is the difference in these latter respects, that the males when caught are valued at twenty per cent. above the females.342 With other pachydermatous animals the sexes differ very little or not at all, and they are not, as far as known, polygamists. Hardly a single species amongst the Cheiroptera and Edentata, or in the great Orders of the Rodents and Insectivora, presents well-developed secondary sexual differences; and I can find no account of any species being polygamous, excepting, perhaps, the common rat, the males of which, as some rat-catchers affirm, live with several females.

The lion in South Africa, as I hear from Sir Andrew Smith, sometimes lives with a single female, but generally with more than one, and, in one case, was found with as many as five females, so that he is polygamous. He is, as far as I can discover, the sole polygamist in the whole group of the terrestrial Carnivora, and he alone presents well-marked sexual characters. If, however, we turn to the marine Carnivora, the case is widely different; for many species of seals offer, as we shall hereafter see, extraordinary sexual differences, and they are eminently polygamous. Thus the male sea-elephant of the Southern Ocean, always possesses, according to Péron, several females, and the sea-lion of Forster is said to be surrounded by from twenty to thirty females. In the North, the male sea-bear of Steller is accompanied by even a greater number of females.

With respect to birds, many species, the sexes of which differ greatly from each other, are certainly monogamous. In Great Britain we see well-marked sexual differences in, for instance, the wild-duck which pairs with a single female, with the common blackbird, and with the bullfinch which is said to pair for life. So it is, as I am informed by Mr. Wallace, with the Chatterers or Cotingidæ of South America, and numerous other birds. In several groups I have not been able to discover whether the species are polygamous or monogamous. Lesson says that birds of paradise, so remarkable for their sexual differences, are polygamous, but Mr. Wallace doubts whether he had sufficient evidence. Mr. Salvin informs me that he has been led to believe that humming-birds are polygamous. The male widow-bird; remarkable for his caudal plumes, certainly seems to be a polygamist.343 I have been assured by Mr. Jenner Weir and by others, that three starlings not rarely frequent the same nest; but whether this is a case of polygamy or polyandry has not been ascertained.

The Gallinaceæ present almost as strongly marked sexual differences as birds of paradise or humming-birds, and many of the species are, as is well known, polygamous; others being strictly monogamous. What a contrast is presented between the sexes by the polygamous peacock or pheasant, and the monogamous guinea-fowl or partridge! Many similar cases could be given, as in the grouse tribe, in which the males of the polygamous capercailzie and black-cock differ greatly from the females; whilst the sexes of the monogamous red grouse and ptarmigan differ very little. Amongst the Cursores, no great number of species offer strongly-marked sexual differences, except the bustards, and the great bustard (Otis tarda), is said to be polygamous. With the Grallatores, extremely few species differ sexually, but the ruff (Machetes pugnax) affords a strong exception, and this species is believed by Montagu to be a polygamist. Hence it appears that with birds there often exists a close relation between polygamy and the development of strongly-marked sexual differences. On asking Mr. Bartlett, at the Zoological Gardens, who has had such large experience with birds, whether the male tragopan (one of the Gallinaceæ) was polygamous, I was struck by his answering, “I do not know, but should think so from his splendid colours.”

It deserves notice that the instinct of pairing with a single female is easily lost under domestication. The wild-duck is strictly monogamous, the domestic-duck highly polygamous. The Rev. W. D. Fox informs me that with some half-tamed wild-ducks, kept on a large pond in his neighbourhood, so many mallards were shot by the gamekeeper that only one was left for every seven or eight females; yet unusually large broods were reared. The guinea-fowl is strictly monogamous; but Mr. Fox finds that his birds succeed best when he keeps one cock to two or three hens.344 Canary-birds pair in a state of nature, but the breeders in England successfully put one male to four or five females; nevertheless the first female, as Mr. Fox has been assured, is alone treated as the wife, she and her young ones being fed by him; the others are treated as concubines. I have noticed these cases, as it renders it in some degree probable that monogamous species, in a state of nature, might readily become either temporarily or permanently polygamous.



With respect to reptiles and fishes, too little is known of their habits to enable us to speak of their marriage arrangements. The stickle-back Gasterosteus, however, is said to be a polygamist;345 and the male during the breeding-season differs conspicuously from the female.

To sum up on the means through which, as far as we can judge, sexual selection has led to the development of secondary sexual characters. It has been shewn that the largest number of vigorous offspring will be reared from the pairing of the strongest and best-armed males, which have conquered other males, with the most vigorous and best-nourished females, which are the first to breed in the spring. Such females, if they select the more attractive, and at the same time vigorous, males, will rear a larger number of offspring than the retarded females, which must pair with the less vigorous and less attractive males. So it will be if the more vigorous males select the more attractive and at the same time healthy and vigorous females; and this will especially hold good if the male defends the female, and aids in providing food for the young. The advantage thus gained by the more vigorous pairs in rearing a larger number of offspring has apparently sufficed to render sexual selection efficient. But a large preponderance in number of the males over the females would be still more efficient; whether the preponderance was only occasional and local, or permanent; whether it occurred at birth, or subsequently from the greater destruction of the females; or whether it indirectly followed from the practice of polygamy.

The Male generally more modified than the Female.—Throughout the animal kingdom, when the sexes differ from each other in external appearance, it is the male which, with rare exceptions, has been chiefly modified; for the female still remains more like the young of her own species, and more like the other members of the same group. The cause of this seems to lie in the males of almost all animals having stronger passions than the females. Hence it is the males that fight together and sedulously display their charms before the females; and those which are victorious transmit their superiority to their male offspring. Why the males do not transmit their characters to both sexes will hereafter be considered. That the males of all mammals eagerly pursue the females is notorious to every one. So it is with birds; but many male birds do not so much pursue the female, as display their plumage, perform strange antics, and pour forth their song, in her presence. With the few fish which have been observed, the male seems much more eager than the female; and so it is with alligators, and apparently with Batrachians. Throughout the enormous class of insects, as Kirby remarks,346 “the law is, that the male shall seek the female.” With spiders and crustaceans, as I hear from two great authorities, Mr. Blackwall and Mr. C. Spence Bate, the males are more active and more erratic in their habits than the females. With insects and crustaceans, when the organs of sense or locomotion are present in the one sex and absent in the other, or when, as is frequently the case, they are more highly developed in the one than the other, it is almost invariably the male, as far as I can discover, which retains such organs, or has them most developed; and this shews that the male is the more active member in the courtship of the sexes.347



The female, on the other hand, with the rarest exception, is less eager than the male. As the illustrious Hunter348 long ago observed, she generally “requires to be courted;” she is coy, and may often be seen endeavouring for a long time to escape from the male. Every one who has attended to the habits of animals will be able to call to mind instances of this kind. Judging from various facts, hereafter to be given, and from the results which may fairly be attributed to sexual selection, the female, though comparatively passive, generally exerts some choice and accepts one male in preference to others. Or she may accept, as appearances would sometimes lead us to believe, not the male which is the most attractive to her, but the one which is the least distasteful. The exertion of some choice on the part of the female seems almost as general a law as the eagerness of the male.

We are naturally led to enquire why the male in so many and such widely distinct classes has been rendered more eager than the female, so that he searches for her and plays the more active part in courtship. It would be no advantage and some loss of power if both sexes were mutually to search for each other; but why should the male almost always be the seeker? With plants, the ovules after fertilisation have to be nourished for a time; hence the pollen is necessarily brought to the female organs—being placed on the stigma, through the agency of insects or of the wind, or by the spontaneous movements of the stamens; and with the Algæ, &c., by the locomotive power of the antherozooids. With lowly-organised animals permanently affixed to the same spot and having their sexes separate, the male element is invariably brought to the female; and we can see the reason; for the ova, even if detached before being fertilised and not requiring subsequent nourishment or protection, would be, from their larger relative size, less easily transported than the male element. Hence plants349 and many of the lower animals are, in this respect, analogous. In the case of animals not affixed to the same spot, but enclosed within a shell with no power of protruding any part of their bodies, and in the case of animals having little power of locomotion, the males must trust the fertilising element to the risk of at least a short transit through the waters of the sea. It would, therefore, be a great advantage to such animals, as their organisation became perfected, if the males when ready to emit the fertilising element, were to acquire the habit of approaching the female as closely as possible. The males of various lowly-organised animals having thus aboriginally acquired the habit of approaching and seeking the females, the same habit would naturally be transmitted to their more highly developed male descendants; and in order that they should become efficient seekers, they would have to be endowed with strong passions. The acquirement of such passions would naturally follow from the more eager males leaving a larger number of offspring than the less eager.

The great eagerness of the male has thus indirectly led to the much more frequent development of secondary sexual characters in the male than in the female. But the development of such characters will have been much aided, if the conclusion at which I arrived after studying domesticated animals, can be trusted, namely, that the male is more liable to vary than the female. I am aware how difficult it is to verify a conclusion of this kind. Some slight evidence, however, can be gained by comparing the two sexes in mankind, as man has been more carefully observed than any other animal. During the Novara Expedition350 a vast number of measurements of various parts of the body in different races were made, and the men were found in almost every case to present a greater range of variation than the women; but I shall have to recur to this subject in a future chapter. Mr. J. Wood,351 who has carefully attended to the variation of the muscles in man, puts in italics the conclusion that “the greatest number of abnormalities in each subject is found in the males.” He had previously remarked that “altogether in 102 subjects the varieties of redundancy were found to be half as many again as in females, contrasting widely with the greater frequency of deficiency in females before described.” Professor Macalister like wise remarks352 that variations in the muscles “are probably more common in males than females.” Certain muscles which are not normally present in mankind are also more frequently developed in the male than in the female sex, although exceptions to this rule are said to occur. Dr. Burt Wilder353 has tabulated the cases of 152 individuals with supernumerary digits, of which 86 were males, and 39, or less than half, females; the remaining 27 being of unknown sex. It should not, however, be overlooked that women would more frequently endeavour to conceal a deformity of this kind than men. Whether the large proportional number of deaths of the male offspring of man and apparently of sheep, compared with the female offspring, before, during, and shortly after birth (see supplement), has any relation to a stronger tendency in the organs of the male to vary and thus to become abnormal in structure or function, I will not pretend to conjecture.

In various classes of animals a few exceptional cases occur, in which the female instead of the male has acquired well pronounced secondary sexual characters, such as brighter colours, greater size, strength, or pugnacity. With birds, as we shall hereafter see, there has sometimes been a complete transposition of the ordinary characters proper to each sex; the females having become the more eager in courtship, the males remaining comparatively passive, but apparently selecting, as we may infer from the results, the more attractive females. Certain female birds have thus been rendered more highly coloured or otherwise ornamented, as well as more powerful and pugnacious than the males, these characters being transmitted to the female offspring alone.

It may be suggested that in some cases a double process of selection has been carried on; the males having selected the more attractive females, and the latter the more attractive males. This process however, though it might lead to the modification of both sexes, would not make the one sex different from the other, unless indeed their taste for the beautiful differed; but this is a supposition too improbable in the case of any animal, excepting man, to be worth considering. There are, however, many animals, in which the sexes resemble each other, both being furnished with the same ornaments, which analogy would lead us to attribute to the agency of sexual selection. In such cases it may be suggested with more plausibility, that there has been a double or mutual process of sexual selection; the more vigorous and precocious females having selected the more attractive and vigorous males, the latter having rejected all except the more attractive females. But from what we know of the habits of animals, this view is hardly probable, the male being generally eager to pair with any female. It is more probable that the ornaments common to both sexes were acquired by one sex, generally the male, and then transmitted to the offspring of both sexes. If, indeed, during a lengthened period the males of any species were greatly to exceed the females in number, and then during another lengthened period under different conditions the reverse were to occur, a double, but not simultaneous, process of sexual selection might easily be carried on, by which the two sexes might be rendered widely different.

We shall hereafter see that many animals exist, of which neither sex is brilliantly coloured or provided with special ornaments, and yet the members of both sexes or of one alone have probably been modified through sexual selection. The absence of bright tints or other ornaments may be the result of variations of the right kind never having occurred, or of the animals themselves preferring simple colours, such as plain black or white. Obscure colours have often been acquired through natural selection for the sake of protection, and the acquirement through sexual selection of conspicuous colours, may have been checked from the danger thus incurred. But in other cases the males have probably struggled together during long ages, through brute force, or by the display of their charms, or by both means combined, and yet no effect will have been produced unless a larger number of offspring were left by the more successful males to inherit their superiority, than by the less successful males; and this, as previously shewn, depends on various complex contingencies.

Sexual selection acts in a less rigorous manner than natural selection. The latter produces its effects by the life or death at all ages of the more or less successful individuals. Death, indeed, not rarely ensues from the conflicts of rival males. But generally the less successful male merely fails to obtain a female, or obtains later in the season a retarded and less vigorous female, or, if polygamous, obtains fewer females; so that they leave fewer, or less vigorous, or no offspring. In regard to structures acquired through ordinary or natural selection, there is in most cases, as long as the conditions of life remain the same, a limit to the amount of advantageous modification in relation to certain special ends; but in regard to structures adapted to make one male victorious over another, either in fighting or in charming the female, there is no definite limit to the amount of advantageous modification; so that as long as the proper variations arise the work of sexual selection will go on. This circumstance may partly account for the frequent and extraordinary amount of variability presented by secondary sexual characters. Nevertheless, natural selection will determine that characters of this kind shall not be acquired by the victorious males, which would be injurious to them in any high degree, either by expending too much of their vital powers, or by exposing them to any great danger. The development, however, of certain structures—of the horns, for instance, in certain stags—has been carried to a wonderful extreme; and in some instances to an extreme which, as far as the general conditions of life are concerned, must be slightly injurious to the male. From this fact we learn that the advantages which favoured males have derived from conquering other males in battle or courtship, and thus leaving a numerous progeny, have been in the long run greater than those derived from rather more perfect adaptation to the external conditions of life. We shall further see, and this could never have been anticipated, that the power to charm the female has been in some few instances more important than the power to conquer other males in battle.





LAWS OF INHERITANCE.


In order to understand how sexual selection has acted, and in the course of ages has produced conspicuous results with many animals of many classes, it is necessary to bear in mind the laws of inheritance, as far as they are known. Two distinct elements are included under the term “inheritance,” namely the transmission and the development of characters; but as these generally go together, the distinction is often overlooked. We see this distinction in those characters which are transmitted through the early years of life, but are developed only at maturity or during old age. We see the same distinction more clearly with secondary sexual characters, for these are transmitted through both sexes, though developed in one alone. That they are present in both sexes, is manifest when two species, having strongly-marked sexual characters, are crossed, for each transmits the characters proper to its own male and female sex to the hybrid offspring of both sexes. The same fact is likewise manifest, when characters proper to the male are occasionally developed in the female when she grows old or becomes diseased; and so conversely with the male. Again, characters occasionally appear, as if transferred from the male to the female, as when, in certain breeds of the fowl, spurs regularly appear in the young and healthy females; but in truth they are simply developed in the female; for in every breed each detail in the structure of the spur is transmitted through the female to her male offspring. In all cases of reversion, characters are transmitted through two, three, or many generations, and are then under certain unknown favourable conditions developed. This important distinction between transmission and development will be easiest kept in mind by the aid of the hypothesis of pangenesis, whether or not it be accepted as true. According to this hypothesis, every unit or cell of the body throws off gemmules or undeveloped atoms, which are transmitted to the offspring of both sexes, and are multiplied by self-division. They may remain undeveloped during the early years of life or during successive generations; their development into units or cells, like those from which they were derived, depending on their affinity for, and union with, other units or cells previously developed in the due order of growth.

Inheritance at Corresponding Periods of Life.—This tendency is well established. If a new character appears in an animal whilst young, whether it endures throughout life or lasts only for a time, it will reappear, as a general rule, at the same age and in the same manner in the offspring. If, on the other hand, a new character appears at maturity, or even during old age, it tends to reappear in the offspring at the same advanced age. When deviations from this rule occur, the transmitted characters much oftener appear before than after the corresponding age. As I have discussed this subject at sufficient length in another work,354 I will here merely give two or three instances, for the sake of recalling the subject to the reader’s mind. In several breeds of the Fowl, the chickens whilst covered with down, in their first true plumage, and in their adult plumage, differ greatly from each other, as well as from their common parent-form, the Gallus bankiva; and these characters are faithfully transmitted by each breed to their offspring at the corresponding period of life. For instance, the chickens of spangled Hamburghs, whilst covered with down, have a few dark spots on the head and rump, but are not longitudinally striped, as in many other breeds; in their first true plumage, “they are beautifully pencilled,” that is each feather is transversely marked by numerous dark bars; but in their second plumage the feathers all become spangled or tipped with a dark round spot.355 Hence in this breed variations have occurred and have been transmitted at three distinct periods of life. The Pigeon offers a more remarkable case, because the aboriginal parent-species does not undergo with advancing age any change of plumage, excepting that at maturity the breast becomes more iridescent; yet there are breeds which do not acquire their characteristic colours until they have moulted two, three, or four times; and these modifications of plumage are regularly transmitted.

Inheritance at Corresponding Seasons of the Year.—With animals in a state of nature innumerable instances occur of characters periodically appearing at different seasons. We see this with the horns of the stag, and with the fur of arctic animals which becomes thick and white during the winter. Numerous birds acquire bright colours and other decorations during the breeding-season alone. I can throw but little light on this form of inheritance from facts observed under domestication. Pallas states,356 that in Siberia domestic cattle and horses periodically become lighter-coloured during the winter; and I have observed a similar marked change of colour in certain ponies in England. Although I do not know that this tendency to assume a differently coloured coat during different seasons of the year is transmitted, yet it probably is so, as all shades of colour are strongly inherited by the horse. Nor is this form of inheritance, as limited by season, more remarkable than inheritance as limited by age or sex.

Inheritance as Limited by Sex.—The equal transmission of characters to both, sexes is the commonest form of inheritance, at least with those animals which do not present strongly-marked sexual differences, and indeed with many of these. But characters are not rarely transferred exclusively to that sex, in which they first appeared. Ample evidence on this head has been advanced in my work on Variation under Domestication; but a few instances may here be given. There are breeds of the sheep and goat, in which the horns of the male differ greatly in shape from those of the female; and these differences, acquired under domestication, are regularly transmitted to the same sex. With tortoise-shell cats the females alone, as a general rule, are thus coloured, the males being rusty-red. With most breeds of the fowl, the characters proper to each sex are transmitted to the same sex alone. So general is this form of transmission that it is an anomaly when we see in certain breeds variations transmitted equally to both sexes. There are also certain sub-breeds of the fowl in which the males can hardly be distinguished from each other, whilst the females differ considerably in colour. With the pigeon the sexes of the parent-species do not differ in any external character; nevertheless in certain domesticated breeds the male is differently coloured from the female.357 The wattle in the English Carrier pigeon and the crop in the Pouter are more highly developed in the male than in the female; and although these characters have been gained through long-continued selection by man, the difference between the two sexes is wholly due to the form of inheritance which has prevailed; for it has arisen, not from, but rather in opposition to, the wishes of the breeder.

Most of our domestic races have been formed by the accumulation of many slight variations; and as some of the successive steps have been transmitted to one sex alone, and some to both sexes, we find in the different breeds of the same species all gradations between great sexual dissimilarity and complete similarity. Instances have already been given with the breeds of the fowl and pigeon; and under nature analogous cases are of frequent occurrence. With animals under domestication, but whether under nature I will not venture to say, one sex may lose characters proper to it, and may thus come to resemble to a certain extent the opposite sex; for instance, the males of some breeds of the fowl have lost their masculine plumes and hackles. On the other hand the differences between the sexes may be increased under domestication, as with merino sheep, in which the ewes have lost their horns. Again, characters proper to one sex may suddenly appear in the other sex; as with those sub-breeds of the fowl in which the hens whilst young acquire spurs; or, as in certain Polish sub-breeds, in which the females, as there is reason to believe, originally acquired a crest, and subsequently transferred it to the males. All these cases are intelligible on the hypothesis of pangenesis; for they depend on the gemmules of certain units of the body, although present in both sexes, becoming through the influence of domestication dormant in the one sex; or if naturally dormant, becoming developed.

There is one difficult question which it will be convenient to defer to a future chapter; namely, whether a character at first developed in both sexes, can be rendered through selection limited in its development to one sex alone. If, for instance, a breeder observed that some of his pigeons (in which species characters are usually transferred in an equal degree to both sexes) varied into pale blue; could he by long-continued selection make a breed, in which the males alone should be of this tint, whilst the females remained unchanged? I will here only say, that this, though perhaps not impossible, would be extremely difficult; for the natural result of breeding from the pale-blue males would be to change his whole stock, including both sexes, into this tint. If, however, variations of the desired tint appeared, which were from the first limited in their development to the male sex, there would not be the least difficulty in making a breed characterised by the two sexes being of a different colour, as indeed has been effected with a Belgian breed, in which the males alone are streaked with black. In a similar manner, if any variation appeared in a female pigeon, which was from the first sexually limited in its development, it would be easy to make a breed with the females alone thus characterised; but if the variation was not thus originally limited, the process would be extremely difficult, perhaps impossible.

On the Relation between the period of Development of a Character and its transmission to one sex or to both sexes.—Why certain characters should be inherited by both sexes, and other characters by one sex alone, namely by that sex in which the character first appeared, is in most cases quite unknown. We cannot even conjecture why with certain sub-breeds of the pigeon, black striæ, though transmitted through the female, should be developed in the male alone, whilst every other character is equally transferred to both sexes. Why, again, with cats, the tortoise-shell colour should, with rare exceptions, be developed in the female alone. The very same characters, such as deficient or supernumerary digits, colour-blindness, &c., may with mankind be inherited by the males alone of one family, and in another family by the females alone, though in both cases transmitted through the opposite as well as the same sex.358 Although we are thus ignorant, two rules often hold good, namely that variations which, first appear in either sex at a late period of life, tend to be developed in the same sex alone; whilst variations which first appear early in life in either sex tend to be developed in both sexes. I am, however, far from supposing that this is the sole determining cause. As I have not elsewhere discussed this subject, and as it has an important bearing on sexual selection, I must here enter into lengthy and somewhat intricate details.

It is in itself probable that any character appearing at an early age would tend to be inherited equally by both sexes, for the sexes do not differ much in constitution, before the power of reproduction is gained. On the other hand, after this power has been gained and the sexes have come to differ in constitution, the gemmules (if I may again use the language of pangenesis) which are cast off from each varying part in the one sex would be much more likely to possess the proper affinities for uniting with the tissues of the same sex, and thus becoming developed, than with those of the opposite sex.

I was first led to infer that a relation of this kind exists, from the fact that whenever and in whatever manner the adult male has come to differ from the adult female, he differs in the same manner from the young of both sexes. The generality of this fact is quite remarkable: it holds good with almost all mammals, birds, amphibians, and fishes; also with many crustaceans, spiders and some few insects, namely certain orthoptera and libellulæ. In all these cases the variations, through the accumulation of which the male acquired his proper masculine characters, must have occurred at a somewhat late period of life; otherwise the young males would have been similarly characterised; and conformably with our rule, they are transmitted to and developed in the adult males alone. When, on the other hand, the adult male closely resembles the young of both sexes (these, with rare exceptions, being alike), he generally resembles the adult female; and in most of these cases the variations through which the young and old acquired their present characters, probably occurred in conformity with our rule during youth. But there is here room for doubt, as characters are sometimes transferred to the offspring at an earlier age than that at which they first appeared in the parents, so that the parents may have varied when adult, and have transferred their characters to their offspring whilst young. There are, moreover, many animals, in which the two sexes closely resemble each other, and yet both differ from their young; and here the characters of the adults must have been acquired late in life; nevertheless, these characters in apparent contradiction to our rule, are transferred to both sexes. We must not, however, overlook the possibility or even probability of successive variations of the same nature sometimes occurring, under exposure to similar conditions, simultaneously in both sexes at a rather late period of life; and in this case the variations would be transferred to the offspring of both sexes at a corresponding late age; and there would be no real contradiction to our rule of the variations which occur late in life being transferred exclusively to the sex in which they first appeared. This latter rule seems to hold true more generally than the second rule, namely, that variations which occur in either sex early in life tend to be transferred to both sexes. As it was obviously impossible even to estimate in how large a number of cases throughout the animal kingdom these two propositions hold good, it occurred to me to investigate some striking or crucial instances, and to rely on the result.

An excellent case for investigation is afforded by the Deer Family. In all the species, excepting one, the horns are developed in the male alone, though certainly transmitted through the female, and capable of occasional abnormal development in her. In the reindeer, on the other hand, the female is provided with horns; so that in this species, the horns ought, according to our rule, to appear early in life, long before the two sexes had arrived at maturity and had come to differ much in constitution. In all the other species of deer the horns ought to appear later in life, leading to their development in that sex alone, in which they first appeared in the progenitor of the whole Family. Now in seven species, belonging to distinct sections of the family and inhabiting different regions, in which the stags alone bear horns, I find that the horns first appear at periods varying from nine months after birth in the roebuck to ten or twelve or even more months in the stags of the six other larger species.359 But with the reindeer the case is widely different, for as I hear from Prof. Nilsson, who kindly made special enquiries for me in Lapland, the horns appear in the young animals within four or five weeks after birth, and at the same time in both sexes. So that here we have a structure, developed at a most unusually early age in one species of the family, and common to both sexes in this one species.

In several kinds of antelopes the males alone are provided with horns, whilst in the greater number both sexes have horns. With respect to the period of development, Mr. Blyth informs me that there lived at one time in the Zoological Gardens a young koodoo (Ant. strepsiceros), in which species the males alone are horned, and the young of a closely-allied species, viz. the eland (Ant. oreas), in which both sexes are horned. Now in strict conformity with our rule, in the young male koodoo, although arrived at the age of ten months, the horns were remarkably small considering the size ultimately attained by them: whilst in the young male eland, although only three months old, the horns were already very much larger than in the koodoo. It is also worth notice that in the prong-horned antelope,360 in which species the horns, though present in both sexes, are almost rudimentary in the female, they do not appear until about five or six months after birth. With sheep, goats, and cattle, in which the horns are well developed in both sexes, though not quite equal in size, they can be felt, or even seen, at birth or soon afterwards.361 Our rule, however, fails in regard to some breeds of sheep, for instance merinos, in which the rams alone are horned; for I cannot find on enquiry,362 that the horns are developed later in life in this breed than in ordinary sheep in which both sexes are horned. But with domesticated sheep the presence or absence of horns is not a firmly fixed character; a certain proportion of the merino ewes bearing small horns, and some of the rams being hornless; whilst with ordinary sheep hornless ewes are occasionally produced.

In most of the species of the splendid family of the Pheasants, the males differ conspicuously from the females, and they acquire their ornaments at a rather late period of life. The eared pheasant (Crossoptilon auritum), however, offers a remarkable exception, for both sexes possess the fine caudal plumes, the large ear-tufts and the crimson velvet about the head; and I find on enquiry in the Zoological Gardens that all these characters, in accordance with our rule, appear very early in life. The adult male can, however, be distinguished from the adult female by one character, namely by the presence of spurs; and conformably with our rule, these do not begin to be developed, as I am assured by Mr. Bartlett, before the age of six months, and even at this age, can hardly be distinguished in the two sexes.363 The male and female Peacock differ conspicuously from each other in almost every part of their plumage, except in the elegant head-crest, which is common to both sexes; and this is developed very early in life, long before the other ornaments which are confined to the male. The wild-duck offers an analogous case, for the beautiful green speculum on the wings is common to both sexes, though duller and somewhat smaller in the female, and it is developed early in life, whilst the curled tail-feathers and other ornaments peculiar to the male are developed later.364 Between such extreme cases of close sexual resemblance and wide dissimilarity, as those of the Crossoptilon and peacock, many intermediate ones could be given, in which the characters follow in their order of development our two rules.

As most insects emerge from their pupal state in a mature condition, it is doubtful whether the period of development determines the transference of their characters to one or both sexes. But we do not know that the coloured scales, for instance, in two species of butterflies, in one of which the sexes differ in colour, whilst in the other they are alike, are developed at the same relative age in the cocoon. Nor do we know whether all the scales are simultaneously developed on the wings of the same species of butterfly, in which certain coloured marks are confined to one sex, whilst other marks are common to both sexes. A difference of this kind in the period of development is not so improbable as it may at first appear; for with the Orthoptera, which assume their adult state, not by a single metamorphosis, but by a succession of moults, the young males of some species at first resemble the females, and acquire their distinctive masculine characters only during a later moult. Strictly analogous cases occur during the successive moults of certain male crustaceans.

We have as yet only considered the transference of characters, relatively to their period of development, with species in a natural state; we will now turn to domesticated animals; first touching on monstrosities and diseases. The presence of supernumerary digits, and the absence of certain phalanges, must be determined at an early embryonic period—the tendency to profuse bleeding is at least congenital, as is probably colour-blindness—yet these peculiarities, and other similar ones, are often limited in their transmission to one sex; so that the rule that characters which are developed at an early period tend to be transmitted to both sexes, here wholly fails. But this rule, as before remarked, does not appear to be nearly so generally true as the converse proposition, namely, that characters which appear late in life in one sex are transmitted exclusively to the same sex. From the fact of the above abnormal peculiarities becoming attached to one sex. long before the sexual functions are active, we may infer that there must be a difference of some kind between the sexes at an extremely early age. With respect to sexually-limited diseases, we know too little of the period at which they originate, to draw any fair conclusion. Gout, however, seems to fall under our rule; for it is generally caused by intemperance after early youth, and is transmitted from the father to his sons in a much more marked manner than to his daughters.

In the various domestic breeds of sheep, goats, and cattle, the males differ from their respective females in the shape or development of their horns, forehead, mane, dewlap, tail, and hump on the shoulders; and these peculiarities, in accordance with our rule, are not fully developed until rather late in life. With dogs, the sexes do not differ, except that in certain breeds, especially in the Scotch deer-hound, the male is much larger and heavier than the female; and as we shall see in a future chapter, the male goes on increasing in size to an unusually late period of life, which will account, according to our rule, for his increased size being transmitted to his male offspring alone. On the other hand, the tortoise-shell colour of the hair, which is confined to female cats, is quite distinct at birth, and this case violates our rule. There is a breed of pigeons in which the males alone are streaked with black, and the streaks can be detected even in the nestlings; but they become more conspicuous at each successive moult, so that this case partly opposes and partly supports the rule. With the English Carrier and Pouter pigeon the full development of the wattle and the crop occurs rather late in life, and these characters, conformably with our rule, are transmitted in full perfection to the males alone. The following cases perhaps come within the class previously alluded to, in which the two sexes have varied in the same manner at a rather late period of life, and have consequently transferred their new characters to both sexes at a corresponding late period; and if so, such cases are not opposed to our rule. Thus there are sub-breeds of the pigeon, described by Neumeister,365 both sexes of which change colour after moulting twice or thrice, as does likewise the Almond Tumbler; nevertheless these changes, though occurring rather late in life, are common to both sexes. One variety of the Canary-bird, namely the London Prize, offers a nearly analogous case.

With the breeds of the Fowl the inheritance of various characters by one sex or by both sexes, seems generally determined by the period at which such characters are developed. Thus in all the many breeds in which the adult male differs greatly in colour from the female and from the adult male parent-species, he differs from the young male, so that the newly acquired characters must have appeared at a rather late period of life. On the other hand with most of the breeds in which the two sexes resemble each other, the young are coloured in nearly the same manner as their parents, and this renders it probable that their colours first appeared early in life. We have instances of this fact in all black and white breeds, in which the young and old of both sexes are alike; nor can it be maintained that there is something peculiar in a black or white plumage, leading to its transference to both sexes; for the males alone of many natural species are either black or white, the females being very differently coloured. With the so-called Cuckoo sub-breeds of the fowl, in which the feathers are transversely pencilled with dark stripes, both sexes and the chickens are coloured in nearly the same manner. The laced plumage of the Sebright bantam is the same in both sexes, and in the chickens the feathers are tipped with black, which makes a near approach to lacing. Spangled Hamburghs, however, offer a partial exception, for the two sexes, though not quite alike, resemble each other more closely than do the sexes of the aboriginal parent-species, yet they acquire their characteristic plumage late in life, for the chickens are distinctly pencilled. Turning to other characters besides colour: the males alone of the wild parent-species and of most domestic breeds possess a fairly well developed comb, but in the young of the Spanish fowl it is largely developed at a very early age, and apparently in consequence of this it is of unusual size in the adult females. In the Game breeds pugnacity is developed at a wonderfully early age, of which curious proofs could be given; and this character is transmitted to both sexes, so that the hens, from their extreme pugnacity, are now generally exhibited in separate pens. With the Polish breeds the bony protuberance of the skull which supports the crest is partially developed even before the chickens are hatched, and the crest itself soon begins to grow, though at first feebly;366 and in this breed a great bony protuberance and an immense crest characterise the adults of both sexes.





Finally, from what we have now seen of the relation which exists in many natural species and domesticated races, between the period of the development of their characters and the manner of their transmission—for example the striking fact of the early growth of the horns in the reindeer, in which both sexes have horns, in comparison with their much later growth in the other species in which the male alone bears horns—we may conclude that one cause, though not the sole cause, of characters being exclusively inherited by one sex, is their development at a late age. And secondly, that one, though apparently a less efficient, cause of characters being inherited by both sexes is their development at an early age, whilst the sexes differ but little in constitution. It appears, however, that some difference must exist between the sexes even during an early embryonic period, for characters developed at this age not rarely become attached to one sex.

Summary and concluding remarks.—From the foregoing discussion on the various laws of inheritance, we learn that characters often or even generally tend to become developed in the same sex, at the same age, and periodically at the same season of the year, in which they first appeared in the parents. But these laws, from unknown causes, are very liable to change. Hence the successive steps in the modification of a species might readily be transmitted in different ways; some of the steps being transmitted to one sex, and some to both; some to the offspring at one age, and some at all ages. Not only are the laws of inheritance extremely complex, but so are the causes which induce and govern variability. The variations thus caused are preserved and accumulated by sexual selection, which is in itself an extremely complex affair, depending, as it does, on ardour in love, courage, and the rivalry of the males, and on the powers of perception, taste, and will of the female. Sexual selection will also be dominated by natural selection for the general welfare of the species. Hence the manner in which the individuals of either sex or of both sexes are affected through sexual selection cannot fail to be complex in the highest degree.

When variations occur late in life in one sex, and are transmitted to the same sex at the same age, the other sex and the young are necessarily left unmodified. When they occur late in life, but are transmitted to both sexes at the same age, the young alone are left unmodified. Variations, however, may occur at any period of life in one sex or in both, and be transmitted to both sexes at all ages, and then all the individuals of the species will be similarly modified. In the following chapters it will be seen that all these cases frequently occur under nature.

Sexual selection can never act on any animal whilst young, before the age for reproduction has arrived. From the great eagerness of the male it has generally acted on this sex and not on the females. The males have thus become provided with weapons for fighting with their rivals, or with organs for discovering and securely holding the female, or for exciting and charming her. When the sexes differ in these respects, it is also, as we have seen, an extremely general law that the adult male differs more or less from the young male; and we may conclude from this fact that the successive variations, by which the adult male became modified, cannot have occurred much before the age for reproduction. How then are we to account for this general and remarkable coincidence between the period of variability and that of sexual selection,—principles which are quite independent of each other? I think we can see the cause: it is not that the males have never varied at an early age, but that such variations have commonly been lost, whilst those occurring at a later age have been preserved.

All animals produce more offspring than can survive to maturity; and we have every reason to believe that death falls heavily on the weak and inexperienced young. If then a certain proportion of the offspring were to vary at birth or soon afterwards, in some manner which at this age was of no service to them, the chance of the preservation of such variations would be small. We have good evidence under domestication how soon variations of all kinds are lost, if not selected. But variations which occurred at or near maturity, and which were of immediate service to either sex, would probably be preserved; as would similar variations occurring at an earlier period in any individuals which happened to survive. As this principle has an important bearing on sexual selection, it may be advisable to give an imaginary illustration. We will take a pair of animals, neither very fertile nor the reverse, and assume that after arriving at maturity they live on an average for five years, producing each year five young. They would thus produce 25 offspring; and it would not, I think, be an unfair estimate to assume that 18 or 20 out of the 25 would perish before maturity, whilst still young and inexperienced; the remaining seven or five sufficing to keep up the stock of mature individuals. If so, we can see that variations which occurred during youth, for instance in brightness, and which were not of the least service to the young, would run a good chance of being utterly lost. Whilst similar variations, which occurring at or near maturity in the comparatively few individuals surviving to this age, and which immediately gave an advantage to certain males, by rendering them more attractive to the females, would be likely to be preserved. No doubt some of the variations in brightness which occurred at an earlier age would by chance be preserved, and eventually give to the male the same advantage as those which appeared later; and this will account for the young males commonly partaking to a certain extent (as may be observed with many birds) of the bright colours of their adult male parents. If only a few of the successive variations in brightness were to occur at a late age, the adult male would be only a little brighter than the young male; and such cases are common.

In this illustration I have assumed that the young varied in a manner which was of no service to them; but many characters proper to the adult male would be actually injurious to the young,—as bright colours from making them conspicuous, or horns of large size from expending much vital force. Such variations in the young would promptly be eliminated through natural selection. With the adult and experienced males, on the other hand, the advantage thus derived in their rivalry with other males would often more than counterbalance exposure to some degree of danger. Thus we can understand how it is that variations which must originally have appeared rather late in life have alone or in chief part been preserved for the development of secondary sexual characters; and the remarkable coincidence between the periods of variability and of sexual selection is intelligible.

As variations which give to the male an advantage in lighting with other males, or in finding, securing, or charming the female, would be of no use to the female, they will not have been preserved in this sex either during youth or maturity. Consequently such variations would be extremely liable to be lost; and the female, as far as these characters are concerned, would be left unmodified, excepting in so far as she may have received them by transference from the male. No doubt if the female varied and transferred serviceable characters to her male offspring, these would be favoured through sexual selection; and then both sexes would thus far be modified in the same manner. But I shall hereafter have to recur to these more intricate contingencies.

In the following chapters, I shall treat of the secondary sexual characters in animals of all classes, and shall endeavour in each case to apply the principles explained in the present chapter. The lowest classes will detain us for a very short time, but the higher animals, especially birds, must be treated at considerable length. It should be borne in mind that for reasons already assigned, I intend to give only a few illustrative instances of the innumerable structures by the aid of which the male finds the female, or, when found, holds her. On the other hand, all structures and instincts by which the male conquers other males, and by which he allures or excites the female, will be fully discussed, as these are in many ways the most interesting.





Supplement on the proportional numbers of the two sexes in animals belonging to various classes.


As no one, as far as I can discover, has paid attention to the relative numbers of the two sexes throughout the animal kingdom, I will here give such materials as I have been able to collect, although they are extremely imperfect. They consist in only a few instances of actual enumeration, and the numbers are not very large. As the proportions are known with certainty on a large scale in the case of man alone, I will first give them, as a standard of comparison.

Man.—In England during ten years (from 1857 to 1866) 707,120 children on an annual average have been born alive, in the proportion of 104.5 males to 100 females. But in 1857 the male births throughout England were as 105.2, and in 1865 as 104.0 to 100. Looking to separate districts, in Buckinghamshire (where on an average 5000 children are annually born) the mean proportion of male to female births, during the whole period of the above ten years, was as 102.8 to 100; whilst in N. Wales (where the average annual births are 12,873) it was as high as 106.2 to 100. Taking a still smaller district, viz., Rutlandshire (where the annual births average only 739), in 1864 the male births were as 114.6, and in 1862 as 97.0 to 100; but even in this small district the average of the 7385 births during the whole ten years was as 104.5 to 100; that is in the same ratio as throughout England.367 The proportions are sometimes slightly disturbed by unknown causes; thus Prof. Faye states “that in some districts of Norway there has been during a decennial period a steady deficiency of boys, whilst in others the opposite condition has existed.” In France during forty-four years the male to the female births have been as 106.2 to 100; but during this period it has occurred five times in one department, and six times in another, that the female births have exceeded the males. In Russia the average proportion is as high as 108.9 to 100.368 It is a singular fact that with Jews the proportion of male births is decidedly larger than with Christians: thus in Prussia the proportion is as 113, in Breslau as 114, and in Livonia as 120 to 100; the Christian births in these countries being the same as usual, for instance, in Livonia as 104 to 100.369 It is a still more singular fact that in different nations, under different conditions and climates, in Naples, Prussia, Westphalia, France and England, the excess of male over female births is less when they are illegitimate than when legitimate.370

In various parts of Europe, according to Prof. Faye and other authors, “a still greater preponderance of males would be met with, if death struck both sexes in equal proportion in the womb and during birth. But the fact is, that for every 100 still-born females, we have in several countries from 134.6 to 144.9 still-born males.” Moreover during the first four or five years of life more male children die than females; “for example in England, during the first year, 126 boys die for every 100 girls,—a proportion which in France is still more unfavourable.”371 As a consequence of this excess in the death-rate of male children, and of the exposure of men when adult to various dangers, and of their tendency to emigrate, the females in all old-settled countries, where statistical records have been kept,372 are found to preponderate considerably over the males.

It has often been supposed that the relative ages of the parents determine the sex of the offspring; and Prof. Leuckart373 has advanced what he considers sufficient evidence, with respect to man and certain domesticated animals, to shew that this is one important factor in the result. So again the period of impregnation has been thought to be the efficient cause; but recent observations discountenance this belief. Again, with mankind polygamy has been supposed to lead to the birth of a greater proportion of female infants; but Dr. J. Campbell374 carefully attended to this subject in the harems of Siam, and he concludes that the proportion of male to female births is the same as from monogamous unions. Hardly any animal has been rendered so highly polygamous as our English race-horses, and we shall immediately see that their male and female offspring are almost exactly equal in number.

Horses.—Mr. Tegetmeier has been so kind as to tabulate for me from the ‘Racing Calendar’ the births of race-horses during a period of twenty-one years, viz. from 1846 to 1867; 1849 being omitted, as no returns were that year published. The total births have been 25,560,375 consisting of 12,763 males and 12,797 females, or in the proportion of 99.7 males to 100 females. As these numbers are tolerably large, and as they are drawn from all parts of England, during several years, we may with much confidence conclude that with the domestic horse, or at least with the race-horse, the two sexes are produced in almost equal numbers. The fluctuations in the proportions during successive years are closely like those which occur with mankind, when a small and thinly-populated area is considered: thus in 1856 the male horses were as 107.1, and in 1867 as only 92.6 to 100 females. In the tabulated returns the proportions vary in cycles, for the males exceeded the females during six successive years; and the females exceeded the males during two periods each of four years: this, however, may be accidental; at least I can detect nothing of the kind with man in the decennial table in the Registrar’s Report for 1866. I may add that certain, mares, and this holds good with certain cows and with women, tend to produce more of one sex than of the other; Mr. Wright of Yeldersley House, informs me that one of his Arab mares, though put seven times to different horses, produced seven fillies.

Dogs.—During a period of twelve years, from 1857 to 1868, the births of a large number of greyhounds, throughout England, have been sent to the ‘Field’ newspaper; and I am again indebted to Mr. Tegetmeier for carefully tabulating the results. The recorded, births have been 6878, consisting of 3605 males and 3273 females, that is, in the proportion of 110.1 males to 100 females. The greatest fluctuations occurred in 1864, when the proportion was as 95.3 males, and in 1867, as 116.3 males to 100 females. The above average proportion of 110.1 to 100 is probably nearly correct in the case of the greyhound, but whether it would hold with other domesticated breeds is in some degree doubtful. Mr. Cupples has enquired from several great breeders of dogs, and finds that all without exception believe that females are produced in excess; he suggests that this belief may have arisen from females being less valued and the consequent disappointment producing a stronger impression on the mind.

Sheep.—The sexes of sheep are not ascertained by agriculturists until several months after birth, at the period when the males are castrated; so that the following returns do not give the proportions at birth. Moreover, I find that several great breeders in Scotland, who annually raise some thousand sheep, are firmly convinced that a larger proportion of males than of females die during the first one or two years; therefore the proportion of males would be somewhat greater at birth than at the age of castration. This is a remarkable coincidence with what occurs, as we have seen, with mankind, and both cases probably depend on some common cause. I have received returns from four gentlemen in England who have bred lowland sheep, chiefly Leicesters, during the last ten or sixteen years; they amount altogether to 8965 births, consisting of 4407 males and 4558 females; that is in the proportion of 96.7 males to 100 females. With respect to Cheviot and black-faced sheep bred in Scotland, I have received returns from six breeders, two of them on a large scale, chiefly for the years 1867-1869, but some of the returns extending back to 1862. The total number recorded amounts to 50,685, consisting of 25,071 males and 25,614 females, or in the proportion of 97.9 males to 100 females. If we take the English and Scotch returns together, the total number amounts to 59,650, consisting of 29,478 males and 30,172 females, or as 97·7 to 100. So that with sheep at the age of castration the females are certainly in excess of the males; but whether this would hold good at birth is doubtful, owing to the greater liability in the males to early death.376

Of Cattle I have received returns from nine gentlemen of 982 births, too few to be trusted; these consisted of 477 bull-calves and 505 cow-calves; i.e. in the proportion of 94·4 males to 100 females. The Rev. W. D. Fox informs me that in 1867 out of 34 calves born on a farm in Derbyshire only one was a bull. Mr. Harrison Weir writes to me that he has enquired from several breeders of Pigs, and most of them estimate the male to the female births as about 7 to 6. This same gentleman has bred Rabbits for many years, and has noticed that a far greater number of bucks are produced than does.

Of mammalia in a state of nature I have been able to learn very little. In regard to the common rat, I have received conflicting statements. Mr. R. Elliot of Laighwood, informs me that a rat-catcher assured him that he had always found the males in great excess, even with the young in the nest. In consequence of this, Mr. Elliot himself subsequently examined some hundred old ones, and found the statement true. Mr. F. Buckland has bred a large number of white rats, and he also believes that the males greatly exceed the females. In regard to Moles, it is said that “the males are much more numerous than the females;”377 and as the catching of these animals is a special occupation, the statement may perhaps be trusted. Sir A. Smith, in describing an antelope of S. Africa378 (Kobus ellipsiprymnus), remarks, that in the herds of this and other species, the males are few in number compared with the females: the natives believe that they are born in this proportion; others believe that the younger males are expelled from the herds, and Sir A. Smith says, that though he has himself never seen herds consisting of young males alone, others affirm that this does occur. It appears probable that the young males when expelled from the herd, would be likely to fell a prey to the many beasts of prey of the country.





BIRDS.


With respect to the Fowl, I have received only one account, namely, that out of 1001 chickens of a highly-bred stock of Cochins, reared during eight years by Mr. Stretch, 487 proved males and 514 females: i.e. as 94.7 to 100. In regard to domestic pigeons there is good evidence that the males are produced in excess, or that their lives are longer; for these birds invariably pair, and single males, as Mr. Tegetmeier informs me, can always be purchased cheaper than females. Usually the two birds reared from the two eggs laid in the same nest consist of a male and female; but Mr. Harrison Weir, who has been so large a breeder, says that he has often bred two cocks from the same nest, and seldom two hens; moreover the hen is generally the weaker of the two, and more liable to perish.

With respect to birds in a state of nature, Mr. Gould and others379 are convinced that the males are generally the more numerous; and as the young males of many species resemble the females, the latter would naturally appear to be the most numerous. Large numbers of pheasants are reared by Mr. Baker of Leadenhall from eggs laid by wild birds, and he informs Mr. Jenner Weir that four or five males to one female are generally produced. An experienced observer remarks380 that in Scandinavia the broods of the capercailzie and black-cock contain more males than females; and that with the Dal-ripa (a kind of ptarmigan) more males than females attend the leks or places of courtship; but this latter circumstance is accounted for by some observers by a greater number of hen birds being killed by vermin. From various facts given by White of Selbourne,381 it seems clear that the males of the partridge must be in considerable excess in the south of England; and I have been assured that this is the case in Scotland. Mr. Weir on enquiring from the dealers who receive at certain seasons large numbers of ruffs (Machetes pugnax) was told that the males are much the most numerous. This same naturalist has also enquired for me from the bird-catchers, who annually catch an astonishing number of various small species alive for the London market, and he was unhesitatingly answered by an old and trustworthy man, that with the chaffinch the males are in large excess; he thought as high as 2 males to 1 female, or at least as high as 5 to 3.382 The males of the blackbird, he likewise maintained, were by far the most numerous, whether caught by traps or by netting at night. These statements may apparently be trusted, because the same man said that the sexes are about equal with the lark, the twite (Linaria montana), and goldfinch. On the other hand he is certain that with the common linnet, the females preponderate greatly, but unequally during different years; during some years he has found the females to the males as four to one. It should, however, be borne in mind, that the chief season for catching birds does not begin till September, so that with some species partial migrations may have begun, and the flocks at this period often consist of hens alone. Mr. Salvin paid particular attention to the sexes of the humming-birds in Central America, and he is convinced that with most of the species the males are in excess; thus one year he procured 204 specimens belonging to ten species, and these consisted of 166 males and of 38 females. With two other species the females were in excess: but the proportions apparently vary either during different seasons or in different localities; for on one occasion the males of Campylopterus hemileucurus were to the females as five to two, and on another occasion383 in exactly the reversed ratio. As bearing on this latter point, I may add, that Mr. Powys found in Corfu and Epirus the sexes of the chaffinch keeping apart, and “the females by far the most numerous;” whilst in Palestine Mr. Tristram found “the male flocks appearing greatly to exceed the female in number.”384 So again with the Quiscalus major, Mr. G. Taylor385 says, that in Florida there were “very few females in proportion to the males,” whilst in Honduras the proportion was the other way, the species there having the character of a polygamist.





FISH.


With Fish the proportional numbers of the sexes can be ascertained only by catching them in the adult or nearly adult state; and there are many difficulties in arriving at any just conclusion.386 Infertile females might readily be mistaken for males, as Dr. Günther has remarked to me in regard to trout. With some species the males are believed to die soon after fertilising the ova. With many species the males are of much smaller size than the females, so that a large number of males would escape from the same net by which the females were caught. M. Carbonnier,387 who has especially attended to the natural history of the pike (Esox lucius) states that many males, owing to their small size, are devoured by the larger females; and he believes that the males of almost all fish are exposed from the same cause to greater danger than the females. Nevertheless in the few cases in which the proportional numbers have been actually observed, the males appear to be largely in excess. Thus Mr. R. Buist, the superintendent of the Stormontfield experiments, says that in 1865, out of 70 salmon first landed for the purpose of obtaining the ova, upwards of 60 were males. In 1867 he again “calls attention to the vast disproportion of the males to the females. We had at the outset at least ten males to one female.” Afterwards sufficient females for obtaining ova were procured. He adds, “from the great proportion of the males, they are constantly fighting and tearing each other on the spawning-beds.”388 This disproportion, no doubt, can be accounted for in part, but whether wholly is very doubtful, by the males ascending the rivers before the females. Mr. F. Buckland remarks in regard to trout, that “it is a curious fact that the males preponderate very largely in number over the females. It invariably happens that when the first rush of fish is made to the net, there will be at least seven or eight males to one female found captive. I cannot quite account for this; either the males are more numerous than the females, or the latter seek safety by concealment rather than flight.” He then adds, that by carefully searching the banks, sufficient females for obtaining ova can be found.389 Mr. H. Lee informs me that out of 212 trout, taken for this purpose in Lord Portsmouth’s park, 150 were males and 62 females.

With the Cyprinidæ the males likewise seem to be in excess; but several members of this Family, viz., the carp, tench, bream and minnow, appear regularly to follow the practice, rare in the animal kingdom, of polyandry; for the female whilst spawning is always attended by two males, one on each side, and in the case of the bream by three or four males. This fact is so well known, that it is always recommended to stock a pond with two male tenches to one female, or at least with three males to two females. With the minnow, an excellent observer states, that on the spawning-beds the males are ten times as numerous as the females; when a female comes amongst the males, “she is immediately pressed closely by a male on each side; and when they have been in that situation for a time, are superseded by other two males.”390





INSECTS.


In this class, the Lepidoptera alone afford the means of judging of the proportional numbers of the sexes; for they have been collected with special care by many good observers, and have been largely bred from the egg or caterpillar state. I had hoped that some breeders of silk-moths might have kept an exact record, but after writing to France and Italy, and consulting various treatises, I cannot find that this has ever been done. The general opinion appears to be that the sexes are nearly equal, but in Italy as I hear from Professor Canestrini, many breeders are convinced that the females are produced in excess. The same naturalist, however, informs me, that in the two yearly broods of the Ailanthus silk-moth (Bombyx cynthia), the males greatly preponderate in the first, whilst in the second the two sexes are nearly equal, or the females rather in excess.

In regard to Butterflies in a state of nature, several observers have been much struck by the apparently enormous preponderance of the males.391 Thus Mr. Bates,392 in speaking of the species, no less than about a hundred in number, which inhabit the Upper Amazons, says that the males are much more numerous than the females, even in the proportion of a hundred to one. In North America, Edwards, who had great experience, estimates in the genus Papilio the males to the females as four to one; and Mr. Walsh, who informed me of this statement, says that with P. turnus this is certainly the case. In South Africa, Mr. R. Trimen found the males in excess in 19 species;393 and in one of these, which swarms in open places, he estimated the number of males as fifty to one female. With another species, in which the males are numerous in certain localities, he collected during seven years only five females. In the island of Bourbon, M. Maillard states that the males of one species of Papilio are twenty times as numerous as the females.394 Mr. Trimen informs me that as far as he has himself seen, or heard from others, it is rare for the females of any butterfly to exceed in number the males; but this is perhaps the case with three South African species. Mr. Wallace395 states that the females of Ornithoptera crœsus, in the Malay archipelago, are more common and more easily caught than the males; but this is a rare butterfly. I may here add, that in Hyperythra, a genus of moths, Guenée says, that from four to five females are sent in collections from India for one male.

When this subject of the proportional numbers of the sexes of insects was brought before the Entomological Society,396 it was generally admitted that the males of most Lepidoptera, in the adult or imago state, are caught in greater numbers than the females; but this fact was attributed by various observers to the more retiring habits of the females, and to the males emerging earlier from the cocoon. This latter circumstance is well known to occur with most Lepidoptera, as well as with other insects. So that, as M. Personnat remarks, the males of the domesticated Bombyx yamamai, are lost at the beginning of the season, and the females at the end, from the want of mates.397 I cannot however persuade myself that these causes suffice to explain the great excess of males in the cases, above given, of butterflies which are extremely common in their native countries. Mr. Stainton, who has paid such close attention during many years to the smaller moths, informs me that when he collected them in the imago state, he thought that the males were ten times as numerous as the females, but that since he has reared them on a large scale from the caterpillar state, he is convinced that the females are the most numerous. Several entomologists concur in this view. Mr. Doubleday, however, and some others, take an opposite view, and are convinced that they have reared from the egg and caterpillar states a larger proportion of males than of females.

Besides the more active habits of the males, their earlier emergence from the cocoon, and their frequenting in some cases more open stations, other causes may be assigned for an apparent or real difference in the proportional numbers of the sexes of Lepidoptera, when captured in the imago state, and when reared from the egg or caterpillar state. It is believed by many breeders in Italy, as I hear from Professor Canestrini, that the female caterpillar of the silk-moth suffers more from the recent disease than the male; and Dr. Staudinger informs me that in rearing Lepidoptera more females die in the cocoon than males. With many species the female caterpillar is larger than the male, and a collector would naturally choose the finest specimens, and thus unintentionally collect a larger number of females. Three collectors have told me that this was their practice; but Dr. Wallace is sure that most collectors take all the specimens which they can find of the rarer kinds, which alone are worth the trouble of rearing. Birds when surrounded by caterpillars would probably devour the largest; and Professor Canestrini informs me that in Italy some breeders believe, though on insufficient evidence, that in the first brood of the Ailanthus silk-moth, the wasps destroy a larger number of the female than of the male caterpillars. Dr. Wallace further remarks that female caterpillars, from being larger than the males, require more time for their development and consume more food and moisture; and thus they would be exposed during a longer time to danger from ichneumons, birds, &c., and in times of scarcity would perish in greater numbers. Hence it appears quite possible that, in a state of nature, fewer female Lepidoptera may reach maturity than males; and for our special object we are concerned with the numbers at maturity, when the sexes are ready to propagate their kind.

The manner in which the males of certain moths congregate in extraordinary numbers round a single female, apparently indicates a great excess of males, though this fact may perhaps be accounted for by the earlier emergence of the males from their cocoons. Mr. Stainton informs me that from twelve to twenty males may often be seen congregated round a female Elachista rufocinerea. It is well known that if a virgin Lasiocampa quercus or Saturnia carpini be exposed in a cage, vast numbers of males collect round her, and if confined in a room will even come down the chimney to her. Mr. Doubleday believes that he has seen from fifty to a hundred males of both these species attracted in the course of a single day by a female under confinement. Mr. Trimen exposed in the Isle of Wight a box in which a female of the Lasiocampa had been confined on the previous day, and five males soon endeavoured to gain admittance. M. Verreaux, in Australia, having placed the female of a small Bombyx in a box in his pocket, was followed by a crowd of males, so that about 200 entered the house with him.398

Mr. Doubleday has called my attention to Dr. Staudinger’s399 list of Lepidoptera, which gives the prices of the males and females of 300 species or well-marked varieties of (Rhopalocera) butterflies. The prices for both sexes of the very common species are of course the same; but with 114 of the rarer species they differ; the males being in all cases, excepting one, the cheapest. On an average of the prices of the 113 species, the price of the male to that of the female is as 100 to 149; and this apparently indicates that inversely the males exceed the females in number in the same proportion. About 2000 species or varieties of moths (Heterocera) are catalogued, those with wingless females being here excluded on account of the difference in habits of the two sexes: of these 2000 species, 141 differ in price according to sex, the males of 130 being cheaper, and the males of only 11 being dearer than the females. The average price of the males of the 130 species, to that of the females, is as 100 to 143. With respect to the butterflies in this priced list, Mr. Doubleday thinks (and no man in England has had more experience), that there is nothing in the habits of the species which can account for the difference in the prices of the two sexes, and that it can be accounted for only by an excess in the numbers of the males. But I am bound to add that Dr. Staudinger himself, as he informs me, is of a different opinion. He thinks that the less active habits of the females and the earlier emergence of the males will account for his collectors securing a larger number of males than of females, and consequently for the lower prices of the former With respect to specimens reared from the caterpillar-state, Dr. Staudinger believes, as previously stated, that a greater number of females than of males die under confinement in the cocoons. He adds that with certain species one sex seems to preponderate over the other during certain years.

Of direct observations on the sexes of Lepidoptera, reared either from eggs or caterpillars, I have received only the few following cases:—

Males. Females.

The Rev. J. Hellins400 of Exeter reared, during 1868, imagos of 73 species, which consisted of 153 137

Mr. Albert Jones of Eltham reared, during 1868, imagos of 9 species, which, consisted of 159 126

During 1869 he reared imagos from 4 species, consisting of 114 112

Mr. Buckler of Emsworth, Hants, during 1869, reared imagos from 74 species, consisting of 180 169

Dr. Wallace of Colchester reared from one brood of Bombyx cynthia 52 48

Dr. Wallace raised, from cocoons of Bombyx Pernyi sent from China, during 1869 224 123

Dr. Wallace raised, during 1868 and 1869, from two lots of cocoons of Bombyx Yamamai 52 46

—— ——

Total 934 761

So that in these eight lots of cocoons and eggs, males were produced in excess. Taken together the proportion of males is as 122.7 to 100 females. But the numbers are hardly large enough to be trustworthy.

On the whole, from the above various sources of evidence, all pointing to the same direction, I infer that with most species of Lepidoptera, the males in the imago state generally exceed the females in number, whatever the proportions may be at their first emergence from the egg.

With reference to the other Orders of insects, I have been able to collect very little reliable information. With the stag-beetle (Lucanus cervus) “the males appear to be much more numerous than the females;” but when, as Cornelius remarked during 1867, an unusual number of these beetles appeared in one part of Germany, the females appeared to exceed the males as six so one. With one of the Elateridæ, the males are said to be much more numerous than the females, and “two or three are often found united with one female;”401 so that here polyandry seems to prevail. With Siagonium (Staphylinidæ), in which the males are furnished with horns, “the females are far more numerous than the opposite sex.” Mr. Janson stated at the Entomological Society that the females of the bark-feeding Tomicus villosus are so common as to be a plague, whilst the males are so rare as to be hardly known. In other Orders, from unknown causes, but apparently in some instances owing to parthenogenesis, the males of certain species have never been discovered or are excessively rare, as with several of the Cynipidæ.402 In all the gall-making Cynipidæ known to Mr. Walsh, the females are four or five times as numerous as the males; and so it is, as he informs me, with the gall-making Cecidomyiiæ (Diptera). With some common species of Saw-flies (Tenthredinæ) Mr. F. Smith has reared hundreds of specimens from larvæ of all sizes, but has never reared a single male: on the other hand Curtis says,403 that with certain species (Athalia), bred by him, the males to the females were as six to one; whilst exactly the reverse occurred with the mature insects of the same species caught in the fields. With the Neuroptera, Mr. Walsh states that in many, but by no means in all, the species of the Odonatous groups (Ephemerina), there is a great overplus of males: in the genus Hetærina, also, the males are generally at least four times as numerous as the females. In certain species in the genus Gomphus the males are equally numerous, whilst in two other species, the females are twice or thrice as numerous as the males. In some European species of Psocus thousands of females may be collected without a single male, whilst with other species of the same genus both sexes are common.404 In England, Mr. MacLachlan has captured hundreds of the female Apatania muliebris, but has never seen the male; and of Boreus hyemalis only four or five males have been here seen.405 With most of these species (excepting, as I have heard, with the Tenthredinæ) there is no reason to suppose that the females are subject to parthenogenesis; and thus we see how ignorant we are on the causes of the apparent discrepancy in the proportional numbers of the two sexes.

In the other Classes of the Articulata I have been able to collect still less information. With Spiders, Mr. Blackwall, who has carefully attended to this class during many years, writes to me that the males from their more erratic habits are more commonly seen, and therefore appear to be the more numerous. This is actually the case with a few species; but he mentions several species in six genera, in which the females appear to be much more numerous than the males.406 The small size of the males in comparison with the females, which is sometimes carried to an extreme degree, and their widely different appearance, may account in some instances for their rarity in collections.407

Some of the lower Crustaceans are able to propagate their kind asexually, and this will account for the extreme rarity of the males. With some other forms (as with Tanais and Cypris) there is reason to believe, as Fritz Müller informs me, that the male is much shorter-lived than the female, which, supposing the two sexes to be at first equal in number, would explain the scarcity of the males. On the other hand this same naturalist has invariably taken, on the shores of Brazil, far more males than females of the Diastylidæ and of Cypridina; thus with a species in the latter genus, 63 specimens caught the same day, included 57 males; but he suggests that this preponderance may be due to some unknown difference in the habits of the two sexes. With one of the higher Brazilian crabs, namely a Gelasimus, Fritz Müller found the males to be more numerous than the females. The reverse seems to be the case, according to the large experience of Mr. C. Spence Bate, with six common British crabs, the names of which he has given me.



On the Power of Natural Selection to regulate the proportional Numbers of the Sexes, and General Fertility.—In some peculiar cases, an excess in the number of one sex over the other might be a great advantage to a species, as with the sterile females of social insects, or with those animals in which more than one male is requisite to fertilise the female, as with certain cirripedes and perhaps certain fishes. An inequality between the sexes in these cases might have been acquired through natural selection, but from their rarity they need not here be further considered. In all ordinary cases an inequality would be no advantage or disadvantage to certain individuals more than to others; and therefore it could hardly have resulted from natural selection. We must attribute the inequality to the direct action of those unknown conditions, which with mankind lead to the males being born in a somewhat larger excess in certain countries than in others, or which cause the proportion between the sexes to differ slightly in legitimate and illegitimate births.

Let us now take the case of a species producing from the unknown causes just alluded to, an excess of one sex—we will say of males—these being superfluous and useless, or nearly useless. Could the sexes be equalised through natural selection? We may feel sure, from all characters being variable, that certain pairs would produce a somewhat less excess of males over females than other pairs. The former, supposing the actual number of the offspring to remain constant, would necessarily produce more females, and would therefore be more productive. On the doctrine of chances a greater number of the offspring of the more productive pairs would survive; and these would inherit a tendency to procreate fewer males and more females. Thus a tendency towards the equalisation of the sexes would be brought about. But our supposed species would by this process be rendered, as just remarked, more productive; and this would in many cases be far from an advantage; for whenever the limit to the numbers which exist, depends, not on destruction by enemies, but on the amount of food, increased fertility will lead to severer competition and to most of the survivors being badly fed. In this case, if the sexes were equalised by an increase in the number of the females, a simultaneous decrease in the total number of the offspring would be beneficial, or even necessary, for the existence of the species; and this, I believe, could be effected through natural selection in the manner hereafter to be described. The same train of reasoning is applicable in the above, as well as in the following case, if we assume that females instead of males are produced in excess, for such females from not uniting with males would be superfluous and useless. So it would be with polygamous species, if we assume the excess of females to be inordinately great.

An excess of either sex, we will again say of the males, could, however, apparently be eliminated through natural selection in another and indirect manner, namely by an actual diminution of the males, without any increase of the females, and consequently without any increase in the productiveness of the species. From the variability of all characters, we may feel assured that some pairs, inhabiting any locality, would produce a rather smaller excess of superfluous males, but an equal number of productive females. When the offspring from the more and the less male-productive parents were all mingled together, none would have any direct advantage over the others; but those that produced few superfluous males would have one great indirect advantage, namely that their ova or embryos would probably be larger and finer, or their young better nurtured in the womb and afterwards. We see this principle illustrated with plants; as those which bear a vast number of seed produce small ones; whilst those which bear comparatively few seeds, often produce large ones well-stocked with nutriment for the use of the seedlings.408 Hence the offspring of the parents which had wasted least force in producing superfluous males would be the most likely to survive, and would inherit the same tendency not to produce superfluous males, whilst retaining their full fertility in the production of females. So it would be with the converse case of the female sex. Any slight excess, however, of either sex could hardly be checked in so indirect a manner. Nor indeed has a considerable inequality between the sexes been always prevented, as we have seen in some of the cases given in the previous discussion. In these cases the unknown causes which determine the sex of the embryo, and which under certain conditions lead to the production of one sex in excess over the other, have not been mastered by the survival of those varieties which were subjected to the least waste of organised matter and force by the production of superfluous individuals of either sex. Nevertheless we may conclude that natural selection will always tend, though sometimes inefficiently, to equalise the relative numbers of the two sexes.

Having said this much on the equalisation of the sexes, it may be well to add a few remarks on the regulation through natural selection of the ordinary fertility of species. Mr. Herbert Spencer has shewn in an able discussion409 that with all organisms a ratio exists between what he calls individuation and genesis; whence it follows that beings which consume much matter or force in their growth, complicated structure or activity, or which produce ova and embryos of large size, or which expend much energy in nurturing their young, cannot be so productive as beings of an opposite nature. Mr. Spencer further shews that minor differences in fertility will be regulated through natural selection. Thus the fertility of each species will tend to increase, from the more fertile pairs producing a larger number of offspring, and these from their mere number will have the best chance of surviving, and will transmit their tendency to greater fertility. The only check to a continued augmentation of fertility in each organism seems to be either the expenditure of more power and the greater risks run by the parents that produce a more numerous progeny, or the contingency of very numerous eggs and young being produced of smaller size, or less vigorous, or subsequently not so well nurtured. To strike a balance in any case between the disadvantages which follow from the production of a numerous progeny, and the advantages (such as the escape of at least some individuals from various dangers) is quite beyond our power of judgment.

When an organism has once been rendered extremely fertile, how its fertility can be reduced through natural selection is not so clear as how this capacity was first acquired. Yet it is obvious that if individuals of a species, from a decrease of their natural enemies, were habitually reared in larger numbers than could be supported, all the members would suffer. Nevertheless the offspring from the less fertile parents would have no direct advantage over the offspring from the more fertile parents, when all were mingled together in the same district. All the individuals would mutually tend to starve each other. The offspring indeed of the less fertile parents would lie under one great disadvantage, for from the simple fact of being produced in smaller numbers, they would be the most liable to extermination. Indirectly, however, they would partake of one great advantage; for under the supposed condition of severe competition, when all were pressed for food, it is extremely probable that those individuals which from some variation in their constitution produced fewer eggs or young, would produce them of greater size or vigour; and the adults reared from such eggs or young would manifestly have the best chance of surviving, and would inherit a tendency towards lessened fertility. The parents, moreover, which had to nourish or provide for fewer offspring would themselves be exposed to a less severe strain in the struggle for existence, and would have a better chance of surviving. By these steps, and by no others as far as I can see, natural selection under the above conditions of severe competition for food, would lead to the formation of a new race less fertile, but better adapted for survival, than the parent-race.



* * *





CHAPTER IX.


Secondary Sexual Characters in the Lower Classes of the Animal Kingdom.





These characters absent in the lowest classes—Brilliant colours—Mollusca—Annelids—Crustacea, secondary sexual characters strongly developed; dimorphism; colour; characters not acquired before maturity—Spiders, sexual colours of; stridulation by the males—Myriapoda.



In the lowest classes the two sexes are not rarely united in the same individual, and therefore secondary sexual characters cannot be developed. In many cases in which the two sexes are separate, both are permanently attached to some support, and the one cannot search or struggle for the other. Moreover it is almost certain that these animals have too imperfect senses and much too low mental powers to feel mutual rivalry, or to appreciate each other’s beauty or other attractions.

Hence in these classes, such as the Protozoa, Cœlenterata, Echinodermata, Scolecida, true secondary sexual characters do not occur; and this fact agrees with the belief that such characters in the higher classes have been acquired through sexual selection, which depends on the will, desires, and choice of either sex. Nevertheless some few apparent exceptions occur; thus, as I hear from Dr. Baird, the males of certain Entozoa, or internal parasitic worms, differ slightly in colour from the females; but we have no reason to suppose that such differences have been augmented through sexual selection.

Many of the lower animals, whether hermaphrodites or with the sexes separate, are ornamented with the most brilliant tints, or are shaded and striped in an elegant manner. This is the case with many corals and sea-anemonies (Actineæ), with some jelly-fish (Medusæ, Porpita, &c.), with some Planariæ, Ascidians, numerous Star-fishes, Echini, &c.; but we may conclude from the reasons already indicated, namely the union of the two sexes in some of these animals, the permanently affixed condition of others, and the low mental powers of all, that such colours do not serve as a sexual attraction, and have not been acquired through sexual selection. With the higher animals the case is very different; for with them when one sex is much more brilliantly or conspicuously coloured than the other, and there is no difference in the habits of the two sexes which will account for this difference, we have reason to believe in the influence of sexual selection; and this belief is strongly confirmed when the more ornamented individuals, which are almost always the males, display their attractions before the other sex. We may also extend this conclusion to both sexes, when coloured alike, if their colours are plainly analogous to those of one sex alone in certain other species of the same group.

How, then, are we to account for the beautiful or even gorgeous colours of many animals in the lowest classes? It appears very doubtful whether such colours usually serve as a protection; but we are extremely liable to err in regard to characters of all kinds in relation to protection, as will be admitted by every one who has read Mr. Wallace’s excellent essay on this subject. It would not, for instance, at first occur to any one that the perfect transparency of the Medusæ, or jelly-fishes, was of the highest service to them as a protection; but when we are reminded by Häckel that not only the medusæ but many floating mollusca, crustaceans, and even small oceanic fishes partake of this same glass-like structure, we can hardly doubt that they thus escape the notice of pelagic birds and other enemies.

Notwithstanding our ignorance how far colour in many cases serves as a protection, the most probable view in regard to the splendid tints of many of the lowest animals seems to be that their colours are the direct result either of the chemical nature or the minute structure of their tissues, independently of any benefit thus derived. Hardly any colour is finer than that of arterial blood; but there is no reason to suppose that the colour of the blood is in itself any advantage; and though it adds to the beauty of the maiden’s cheek, no one will pretend that it has been acquired for this purpose. So again with many animals, especially the lower ones, the bile is richly coloured; thus the extreme beauty of the Eolidæ (naked sea-slugs) is chiefly due, as I am informed by Mr. Hancock, to the biliary glands seen through the translucent integuments; this beauty being probably of no service to these animals. The tints of the decaying leaves in an American forest are described by every one as gorgeous; yet no one supposes that these tints are of the least advantage to the trees. Bearing in mind how many substances closely analogous to natural organic compounds have been recently formed by chemists, and which exhibit the most splendid colours, it would have been a strange fact if substances similarly coloured had not often originated, independently of any useful end being thus gained, in the complex laboratory of living organisms.

The sub-kingdom of the Mollusca.—Throughout this great division (taken in its largest acceptation) of the animal kingdom, secondary sexual characters, such as we are here considering, never, as far as I can discover, occur. Nor could they be expected in the three lowest classes, namely in the Ascidians, Polyzoa, and Brachiopods (constituting the Molluscoida of Huxley), for most of these animals are permanently affixed to a support or have their sexes united in the same individual. In the Lamellibranchiata, or bivalve shells, hermaphroditism is not rare. In the next higher class of the Gasteropoda, or marine univalve shells, the sexes are either united or separate. But in this latter case the males never possess special organs for finding, securing, or charming the females, or for fighting with other males. The sole external difference between the sexes consists, as I am informed by Mr. Gwyn Jeffreys, in the shell sometimes differing a little in form; for instance, the shell of the male periwinkle (Littorina littorea) is narrower and has a more elongated spire than that of the female. But differences of this nature, it may be presumed, are directly connected with the act of reproduction or with the development of the ova.

The Gasteropoda, though capable of locomotion and furnished with imperfect eyes, do not appear to be endowed with sufficient mental powers for the members of the same sex to struggle together in rivalry, and thus to acquire secondary sexual characters. Nevertheless with the pulmoniferous gasteropods, or land-shells, the pairing is preceded by courtship; for these animals, though hermaphrodites, are compelled by their structure to pair together. Agassiz remarks,410 “Quiconque a eu l’occasion d’observer les amours des limaçons, ne saurait mettre en doute la séduction déployée dans les mouvements et les allures qui préparent et accomplissent le double embrassement de ces hermaphrodites.” These animals appear also susceptible of some degree of permanent attachment: an accurate observer, Mr. Lonsdale, informs me that he placed a pair of land-shells (Helix pomatia), one of which was weakly, into a small and ill-provided garden. After a short time the strong and healthy individual disappeared, and was traced by its track of slime over a wall into an adjoining well-stocked garden. Mr. Lonsdale concluded that it had deserted its sickly mate; but after an absence of twenty-four hours it returned, and apparently communicated the result of its successful exploration, for both then started along the same track and disappeared over the wall.

Even in the highest class of the Mollusca, namely the Cephalopoda or cuttle-fishes, in which the sexes are separate, secondary sexual characters of the kind which we are here considering, do not, as far as I can discover, occur. This is a surprising circumstance, as these animals possess highly-developed sense-organs and have considerable mental powers, as will be admitted by every one who has watched their artful endeavours to escape from an enemy.411 Certain Cephalopoda, however, are characterised by one extraordinary sexual character, namely, that the male element collects within one of the arms or tentacles, which is then cast off, and, clinging by its sucking-discs to the female, lives for a time an independent life. So completely does the cast-off arm resemble a separate animal, that it was described by Cuvier as a parasitic worm under the name of Hectocotyle. But this marvellous structure may be classed as a primary rather than as a secondary sexual character.

Although with the Mollusca sexual selection does not seem to have come into play; yet many univalve and bivalve shells, such as volutes, cones, scallops, &c., are beautifully coloured and shaped. The colours do not appear in most cases to be of any use as a protection; they are probably the direct result, as in the lowest classes, of the nature of the tissues; the patterns and the sculpture of the shell depending on its manner of growth. The amount of light seems to a certain extent to be influential; for although, as repeatedly stated by Mr. Gwyn Jeffreys, the shells of some species living at a profound depth are brightly coloured, yet we generally see the lower surfaces and the parts covered by the mantle less highly coloured than the upper and exposed surfaces.412 In some cases, as with shells living amongst corals or brightly-tinted sea-weeds, the bright colours may serve as a protection. But many of the nudibranch mollusca, or sea-slugs, are as beautifully coloured as any shells, as may be seen in Messrs. Alder and Hancock’s magnificent work; and from information kindly given me by Mr. Hancock, it is extremely doubtful whether these colours usually serve as a protection. With some species this may be the case, as with one which lives on the green leaves of algæ, and is itself bright-green. But many brightly-coloured, white or otherwise conspicuous species, do not seek concealment; whilst again some equally conspicuous species, as well as other dull-coloured kinds, live under stones and in dark recesses. So that with these nudibranch molluscs, colour apparently does not stand in any close relation to the nature of the places which they inhabit.

These naked sea-slugs are hermaphrodites, yet they pair together, as do land-snails, many of which have extremely pretty shells. It is conceivable that two hermaphrodites, attracted by each others’ greater beauty, might unite and leave offspring which would inherit their parents’ greater beauty. But with such lowly-organised creatures this is extremely improbable. Nor is it at all obvious how the offspring from the more beautiful pairs of hermaphrodites would have any advantage, so as to increase in numbers, over the offspring of the less beautiful, unless indeed vigour and beauty generally coincided. We have not here a number of males becoming mature before the females, and the more beautiful ones selected by the more vigorous females. If, indeed, brilliant colours were beneficial to an hermaphrodite animal in relation to its general habits of life, the more brightly-tinted individuals would succeed best and would increase in number; but this would be a case of natural and not of sexual selection.

Sub-kingdom of the Vermes or Annulosa: Class, Annelida (or Sea-worms).—In this class, although the sexes (when separate) sometimes differ from each other in characters of such importance that they have been placed under distinct genera or even families, yet the differences do not seem of the kind which can be safely attributed to sexual selection. These animals, like those in the preceding classes, apparently stand too low in the scale, for the individuals of either sex to exert any choice in selecting a partner, or for the individuals of the same sex to struggle together in rivalry.

Sub-kingdom of the Arthropoda: Class, Crustacea.—In this great class we first meet with undoubted secondary sexual characters, often developed in a remarkable manner. Unfortunately the habits of crustaceans are very imperfectly known, and we cannot explain the uses of many structures peculiar to one sex. With the lower parasitic species the males are of small size, and they alone are furnished with perfect swimming-legs, antennæ and sense-organs; the females being destitute of these organs, with their bodies often consisting of a mere distorted mass. But these extraordinary Fig. 3. Labidocera Darwinii,

(from Lubbock).

a. Part of right-hand anterior antenna of male, forming a prehensile organ.

b. Posterior pair of thoracic legs of male.

c. Ditto of female. differences between the two sexes are no doubt related to their widely different habits of life, and consequently do not concern us. In various crustaceans, belonging to distinct families, the anterior antennæ are furnished with peculiar thread-like bodies, which are believed to act as smelling-organs, and these are much more numerous in the males than in the females. As the males, without any unusual development of their olfactory organs, would almost certainly be able sooner or later to find the females, the increased number of the smelling-threads has probably been acquired through sexual selection, by the better provided males having been the most successful in finding partners and in leaving offspring. Fritz Müller has described a remarkable dimorphic species of Tanais, in which the male is represented by two distinct forms, never graduating into each other. In the one form the male is furnished with more numerous smelling-threads, and in the other form with more powerful and more elongated chelæ or pincers which serve to hold the female. Fritz Müller suggests that these differences between the two male forms of the same species must have originated in certain individuals having varied in the number of the smelling-threads, whilst other individuals varied in the shape and size of their chelæ; so that of the former, those which were best able to find the female, and of the latter, those which were best able to hold her when found, have left the greater number of progeny to inherit their respective advantages.413

In some of the lower crustaceans, the right-hand anterior antenna of the male differs greatly in structure from the left-hand one, the latter resembling in its simple tapering joints the antennæ of the female. In the male the modified antenna is either swollen in the middle or angularly bent, or converted (fig. 3) into an elegant, and sometimes wonderfully complex, prehensile organ.414 It serves, as I hear from Sir J. Lubbock, to hold the female, and for this same purpose one of the two posterior legs (b) on the same side of the body is converted into a forceps. In another family the inferior or posterior antennæ are “curiously zigzagged” in the males alone.



Fig. 4. Anterior part of body of Callianassa (from Milne-Edwards), showing the unequal and differently-constructed right and left-hand chelæ of the male.

N.B.—The artist by mistake has reversed the drawing, and made the left-hand chela the largest.





Fig. 5. Fig. 6.

Fig. 5. Second leg of male Orchestia Tucuratinga (from Fritz Müller).

Fig. 6. Ditto of female.

In the higher crustaceans the anterior legs form a pair of chelæ or pincers, and these are generally larger in the male than in the female. In many species the chelæ on the opposite sides of the body are of unequal size, the right-hand one being, as I am informed by Mr. C. Spence Bate, generally, though not invariably, the largest. This inequality is often much greater in the male than in the female. The two chelæ also often differ in structure (figs. 4 and 5), the smaller one resembling those of the female. What advantage is gained by their inequality in size on the opposite sides of the body, and by the inequality being much greater in the male than in the female; and why, when they are of equal size, both are often much larger in the male than in the female, is not known. The chelæ are sometimes of such length and size that they cannot possibly be used, as I hear from Mr. Spence Bate, for carrying food to the mouth. In the males of certain freshwater prawns (Palæmon) the right leg is actually longer than the whole body.415 It is probable that the great size of one leg with its chelæ may aid the male in fighting with his rivals; but this use will not account for their inequality in the female on the opposite sides of the body. In Gelasimus, according to a statement quoted by Milne-Edwards,416 the male and female live in the same burrow, which is worth notice, as shewing that they pair, and the male closes the mouth of the burrow with one of its chelæ, which is enormously developed; so that here it indirectly serves as a means of defence. Their main use, however, probably is to seize and to secure the female, and this in some instances, as with Gammarus, is known to be the case. The sexes, however, of the common shore-crab (Carcinus mænas), as Mr. Spence Bate informs me, unite directly after the female has moulted her hard shell, and when she is so soft that she would be injured if seized by the strong pincers of the male; but as she is caught and carried about by the male previously to the act of moulting, she could then be seized with impunity.

Fritz Müller states that certain species of Melita are distinguished from all other amphipods by the females having “the coxal lamellæ of the penultimate pair of feet produced into hook-like processes, of which the males lay hold with the hands of the first pair.” The development of these hook-like processes probably resulted from those females which were the most securely held during the act of reproduction, having left the largest number of offspring. Another Brazilian amphipod (Orchestia Darwinii, fig. 7) is described by Fritz Müller, as presenting a case of dimorphism, like that of Tanais; for there are two male forms, which differ in the structure of their chelæ.417 As chelæ of either shape would certainly have sufficed to hold the female, for both are now used for this purpose, the two male forms probably originated, by some having varied in one manner and some in another; both forms having derived certain special, but nearly equal advantages, from their differently shaped organs.

It is not known that male crustaceans fight together for the possession of the females, but this is probable; for with most animals when the male is larger than the female, he seems to have acquired his greater size by having conquered during many generations other males. Now Mr. Spence Bate informs me that in most of the crustacean orders, especially in the highest or the Brachyura, the male is larger than the female; the parasitic genera, however, in which the sexes follow different habits of life, and most of the Entomostraca must be excepted. The chelæ of many crustaceans are weapons well adapted for fighting. Thus a Devil-crab (Portunus puber) was seen by a son of Mr. Bate fighting with a Carcinus mænas, and the latter was soon thrown on its back, and had every limb torn from its body. When several males of a Brazilian Gelasimus, a species furnished with immense pincers, were placed together by Fritz Müller in a glass vessel, they mutilated and killed each other. Mr. Bate put a large male Carcinus mænas into a pan of water, inhabited by a female paired with a smaller male; the latter was soon dispossessed, but, as Mr. Bate adds, “if they fought, the victory was a bloodless one, for I saw no wounds.” This same naturalist separated a male sand-skipper (so common on our sea-shores), Gammarus marinus, from its female, both of which were imprisoned in the same vessel with many individuals of the same species. The female being thus divorced joined her comrades. After an interval the male was again put into the same vessel and he then, after swimming about for a time, dashed into the crowd, and without any fighting at once took away his wife. This fact shews that in the Amphipoda, an order low in the scale, the males and females recognise each other, and are mutually attached.

Fig. 7. Orchestia Darwinii (from Fritz Müller), showing the differently-constructed chelæ of the two male forms.

The mental powers of the Crustacea are probably higher than might have been expected. Any one who has tried to catch one of the shore-crabs, so numerous on many tropical coasts, will have perceived how wary and alert they are. There is a large crab (Birgos latro), found on coral islands, which makes at the bottom of a deep burrow a thick bed of the picked fibres of the cocoa-nut. It feeds on the fallen fruit of this tree by tearing off the husk, fibre by fibre; and it always begins at that end where the three eye-like depressions are situated. It then breaks through one of these eyes by hammering with its heavy front pincers, and turning round, extracts the albuminous core with its narrow posterior pincers. But these actions are probably instinctive, so that they would be performed as well by a young as by an old animal. The following case, however, can hardly be so considered: a trustworthy naturalist, Mr. Gardner,418 whilst watching a shore-crab (Gelasimus) making its burrow, threw some shells towards the hole. One rolled in, and three other shells remained within a few inches of the mouth. In about five minutes the crab brought out the shell which had fallen in, and carried it away to the distance of a foot; it then saw the three other shells lying near, and evidently thinking that they might likewise roll in, carried them to the spot where it had laid the first. It would, I think, be difficult to distinguish this act from one performed by man by the aid of reason.

With respect to colour which so often differs in the two sexes of animals belonging to the higher classes, Mr. Spence Bate does not know of any well-marked instances with our British crustaceans. In some cases, however, the male and female differ slightly in tint, but Mr. Bate thinks not more than may be accounted for by their different habits of life, such as by the male wandering more about and being thus more exposed to the light. In a curious Bornean crab, which inhabits sponges, Mr. Bate could always distinguish the sexes by the male not having the epidermis so much rubbed off. Dr. Power tried to distinguish by colour the sexes of the species which inhabit the Mauritius, but always failed, except with one species of Squilla, probably the S. stylifera, the male of which is described as being “of a beautiful blueish-green,” with some of the appendages cherry-red, whilst the female is clouded with brown and grey, “with the red about her much less vivid than in the male.”419 In this case, we may suspect the agency of sexual selection. With Saphirina (an oceanic genus of Entomostraca, and therefore low in the scale) the males are furnished with minute shields or cell-like bodies, which exhibit beautiful changing colours; these being absent in the females, and in the case of one species in both sexes.420 It would, however, be extremely rash to conclude that these curious organs serve merely to attract the females. In the female of a Brazilian species of Gelasimus, the whole body, as I am informed by Fritz Müller, is of a nearly uniform greyish-brown. In the male the posterior part of the cephalo-thorax is pure white, with the anterior part of a rich green, shading into dark brown; and it is remarkable that these colours are liable to change in the course of a few minutes—the white becoming dirty grey or even black, the green “losing much of its brilliancy.” The males apparently are much more numerous than the females. It deserves especial notice that they do not acquire their bright colours until they become mature. They differ also from the females in the larger size of their chelæ. In some species of the genus, probably in all, the sexes pair and inhabit the same burrow. They are also, as we have seen, highly intelligent animals. From these various considerations it seems highly probable that the male in this species has become gaily ornamented in order to attract or excite the female.

It has just been stated that the male Gelasimus does not acquire his conspicuous colours until mature and nearly ready to breed. This seems the general rule in the whole class with the many remarkable differences in structure between the two sexes. We shall hereafter find the same law prevailing throughout the great sub-kingdom of the Vertebrata, and in all cases it is eminently distinctive of characters which have been acquired through sexual selection. Fritz Müller421 gives some striking instances of this law; thus the male sand-hopper (Orchestia) does not acquire his large claspers, which are very differently constructed from those of the female, until nearly full-grown; whilst young his claspers resemble those of the female. Thus, again, the male Brachyscelus possesses, like all other amphipods, a pair of posterior antennæ; the female, and this is a most extraordinary circumstance, is destitute of them, and so is the male as long as he remains immature.

Class, Arachnida (Spiders).—The males are often darker, but sometimes lighter than the females, as may be seen in Mr. Blackwall’s magnificent work.422 In some species the sexes differ conspicuously from each other in colour; thus the female of Sparassus smaragdulus is dullish-green; whilst the adult male has the abdomen of a fine yellow, with three longitudinal stripes of rich red. In some species of Thomisus the two sexes closely resemble each other; in others they differ much; thus in T. citreus the legs and body of the female are pale-yellow or green, whilst the front legs of the male are reddish-brown: in T. floricolens, the legs of the female are pale-green, those of the male being ringed in a conspicuous manner with various tints. Numerous analogous cases could be given in the genera Epeira, Nephila, Philodromus, Theridion, Linyphia, &c. It is often difficult to say which of the two sexes departs most from the ordinary coloration of the genus to which the species belong; but Mr. Blackwall thinks that, as a general rule, it is the male. Both sexes whilst young, as I am informed by the same author, usually resemble each other; and both often undergo great changes in colour during their successive moults before arriving at maturity. In other cases the male alone appears to change colour. Thus the male of the above-mentioned brightly-coloured Sparassus at first resembles the female and acquires his peculiar tints only when nearly adult. Spiders are possessed of acute senses, and exhibit much intelligence. The females often shew, as is well known, the strongest affection for their eggs, which they carry about enveloped in a silken web. On the whole it appears probable that well-marked differences in colour between the sexes have generally resulted from sexual selection, either on the male or female side. But doubts may be entertained on this head from the extreme variability in colour of some species, for instance of Theridion lineatum, the sexes of which differ when adult; this great variability indicates that their colours have not been subjected to any form of selection.

Mr. Blackwall does not remember to have seen the males of any species fighting together for the possession of the female. Nor, judging from analogy, is this probable; for the males are generally much smaller than the females, sometimes to an extraordinary degree.423 Had the males been in the habit of fighting together, they would, it is probable, have gradually acquired greater size and strength. Mr. Blackwall has sometimes seen two or more males on the same web with a single female; but their courtship is too tedious and prolonged an affair to be easily observed. The male is extremely cautious in making his advances, as the female carries her coyness to a dangerous pitch. De Geer saw a male that “in the midst of his preparatory caresses was seized by the object of his attractions, enveloped by her in a web and then devoured, a sight which, as he adds, filled him with horror and indignation.”424

Westring has made the interesting discovery that the males of several species of Theridion425 have the power of making a stridulating sound (like that made by many beetles and other insects, but feebler), whilst the females are quite mute. The apparatus consists of a serrated ridge at the base of the abdomen, against which the hard hinder part of the thorax is rubbed; and of this structure not a trace could be detected in the females. From the analogy of the Orthoptera and Homoptera, to be described in the next chapter, we may feel almost sure that the stridulation serves, as Westring remarks, either to call or to excite the female; and this is the first case in the ascending scale of the animal kingdom, known to me, of sounds emitted for this purpose.

Class, Myriapoda.—In neither of the two orders in this class, including the millipedes and centipedes, can I find any well-marked instances of sexual differences such as more particularly concern us. In Glomeris limbata, however, and perhaps in some few other species, the males differ slightly in colour from the females; but this Glomeris is a highly variable species. In the males of the Diplopoda, the legs belonging to one of the anterior segments of the body, or to the posterior segment, are modified into prehensile hooks which serve to secure the female. In some species of Iulus the tarsi of the male are furnished with membranous suckers for the same purpose. It is a much more unusual circumstance, as we shall see when we treat of Insects, that it is the female in Lithobius which is furnished with prehensile appendages at the extremity of the body for holding the male.426



* * *





CHAPTER X.


Secondary Sexual Characters of Insects.


Diversified structures possessed by the males for seizing the females—Differences between the sexes, of which the meaning is not understood—Difference in size between the sexes—Thysanura—Diptera—Hemiptera—Homoptera, musical powers possessed by the males alone—Orthoptera, musical instruments of the males, much diversified in structure; pugnacity; colours—Neuroptera, sexual differences in colour—Hymenoptera, pugnacity and colours—Coleoptera, colours; furnished with great horns, apparently as an ornament; battles; stridulating organs generally common to both sexes.



In the immense class of insects the sexes sometimes differ in their organs for locomotion, and often in their sense-organs, as in the pectinated and beautifully plumose antennæ of the males of many species. In one of the Ephemeræ, namely Chloëon, the male has great pillared eyes, of which the female is entirely destitute.427 The ocelli are absent in the females of certain other insects, as in the Mutillidæ, which are likewise destitute of wings. But we are chiefly concerned with structures by which one male is enabled to conquer another, either in battle or courtship, through his strength, pugnacity, ornaments, or music. The innumerable contrivances, therefore, by which the male is able to seize the female, may be briefly passed over. Besides the complex structures at the apex of the abdomen, which ought perhaps to be ranked as primary organs,428 “it is astonishing,” as Mr. B. D. Walsh429 has remarked, “how many different organs are worked in by nature, for the seemingly insignificant object of enabling the male to grasp the female firmly.” The mandibles or jaws are sometimes used for this purpose; thus the male Corydalis cornutus (a neuropterous insect in some degree allied to the Dragon-flies, &c.) has immense curved jaws, many times longer than those of the female; and they are smooth instead of being toothed, by which means he is enabled to seize her without injury.430 One of the stag-beetles of North America (Lucanus elaphus) uses his jaws, which are much larger than those of the female, for the same purpose, but probably likewise for fighting. In one of the sand-wasps (Ammophila) the jaws in the two sexes are closely alike, but are used for widely different purposes; the males, as Professor Westwood observes, “are exceedingly ardent, seizing their partners round the neck with their sickle-shaped jaws;”431 whilst the females use these organs for burrowing in sand-banks and making their nests.

The tarsi of the front-legs are dilated in many male beetles, or are furnished with broad cushions of hairs; and in many genera of water-beetles they are armed with a round flat sucker, so that the male may adhere to the slippery body of the female. It is a much more unusual circumstance that the females of some water-beetles Fig. 8. Crabro cribrarius. Upper figure, male: lower figure, female. (Dytiscus) have their elytra deeply grooved, and in Acilius sulcatus thickly set with hairs, as an aid to the male. The females of some other water-beetles (Hydroporus) have their elytra punctured for the same object.432 In the male of Crabro cribrarius (fig. 8.), it is the tibia which is dilated into a broad horny plate, with minute membraneous dots, giving to it a singular appearance like that of a riddle.433 In the male of Penthe (a genus of beetles) a few of the middle joints of the antennæ are dilated and furnished on the inferior surface with cushions of hair, exactly like those on the tarsi of the Carabidæ, “and obviously for the same end.” In male dragon-flys, “the appendages at the tip of the tail are modified in an almost infinite variety of curious patterns to enable them to embrace the neck of the female.” Lastly in the males of many insects, the legs are furnished with peculiar spines, knobs or spurs; or the whole leg is bowed or thickened, but this is by no means invariably a sexual character; Fig. 9. Taphroderes distortus (much enlarged). Upper figure, male; lower figure, female. or one pair, or all three pairs are elongated, sometimes to an extravagant length.434

In all the orders, the sexes of many species present differences, of which the meaning is not understood. One curious case is that of a beetle (fig. 9), the male of which has the left mandible much enlarged; so that the mouth is greatly distorted. In another Carabidous beetle, the Eurygnathus,435 we have the unique case, as far as known to Mr. Wollaston, of the head of the female being much broader and larger, though in a variable degree, than that of the male. Any number of such cases could be given. They abound in the Lepidoptera: one of the most extraordinary is that certain male butterflies have their fore-legs more or less atrophied, with the tibiæ and tarsi reduced to mere rudimentary knobs. The wings, also, in the two sexes often differ in neuration,436 and sometimes considerably in outline, as in the Aricoris epitus, which was shown to me in the British Museum by Mr. A. Butler. The males of certain South American butterflies have tufts of hair on the margins of the wings, and horny excrescences on the discs of the posterior pair.437 In several British butterflies, the males alone, as shewn by Mr. Wonfor, are in parts clothed with peculiar scales.

The purpose of the luminosity in the female glow-worm is likewise not understood; for it is very doubtful whether the primary use of the light is to guide the male to the female. It is no serious objection to this latter belief that the males emit a feeble light; for secondary sexual characters proper to one sex are often developed in a slight degree in the other sex. It is a more valid objection that the larvæ shine, and in some species brilliantly: Fritz Müller informs me that the most luminous insect which he ever beheld in Brazil, was the larva of some beetle. Both sexes of certain luminous species of Elater emit light. Kirby and Spence suspect that the phosphorescence serves to frighten and drive away enemies.

Difference in Size between the Sexes.—With insects of all kinds the males are commonly smaller than the females;438 and this difference can often be detected even in the larval state. So considerable is the difference between the male and female cocoons of the silk-moth (Bombyx mori), that in France they are separated by a particular mode of weighing.439 In the lower classes of the animal kingdom, the greater size of the females seems generally to depend on their developing an enormous number of ova; and this may to a certain extent hold good with insects. But Dr. Wallace has suggested a much more probable explanation. He finds, after carefully attending to the development of the caterpillars of Bombyx cynthia and Yamamai, and especially of some dwarfed caterpillars reared from a second brood on unnatural food, “that in proportion as the individual moth is finer, so is the time required for its metamorphosis longer; and for this reason the female, which is the larger and heavier insect, from having to carry her numerous eggs, will be preceded by the male, which is smaller and has less to mature.”440 Now as most insects are short-lived, and as they are exposed to many dangers, it would manifestly be advantageous to the female to be impregnated as soon as possible. This end would be gained by the males being first matured in large numbers ready for the advent of the females; and this again would naturally follow, as Mr. A. E. Wallace has remarked,441 through natural selection; for the smaller males would be first matured, and thus would procreate a large number of offspring which would inherit the reduced size of their male parents, whilst the larger males from being matured later would leave fewer offspring.

There are, however, exceptions to the rule of male insects being smaller than the females; and some of these exceptions are intelligible. Size and strength would be an advantage to the males, which fight for the possession of the female; and in these cases the males, as with the stag-beetle (Lucanus), are larger than the females. There are, however, other beetles which are not known to fight together, of which the males exceed the females in size; and the meaning of this fact is not known; but in some of these cases, as with the huge Dynastes and Megasoma, we can at least see that there would be no necessity for the males to be smaller than the females, in order to be matured before them, for these beetles are not short-lived, and there would be ample time for the pairing of the sexes. So, again, male dragon-flies (Libellulidæ) are sometimes sensibly larger, and never smaller, than the females;442 and they do not, as Mr. MacLachlan believes, generally pair with the females, until a week or fortnight has elapsed, and until they have assumed their proper masculine colours. But the most curious case, shewing on what complex and easily-overlooked relations, so trifling a character as a difference in size between the sexes may depend, is that of the aculeate Hymenoptera; for Mr. F. Smith informs me that throughout nearly the whole of this large group the males, in accordance with the general rule, are smaller than the females and emerge about a week before them; but amongst the Bees, the males of Apis mellifica, Anthidium manicatum and Anthophora acervorum, and amongst the Fossores, the males of the Methoca ichneumonides, are larger than the females. The explanation of this anomaly is that a marriage-flight is absolutely necessary with these species, and the males require great strength and size in order to carry the females through the air. Increased size has here been acquired in opposition to the usual relation between size and the period of development, for the males, though larger, emerge before the smaller females.

We will now review the several Orders, selecting such facts as more particularly concern us. The Lepidoptera (Butterflies and Moths) will be retained for a separate chapter.

Order, Thysanura.—The members of this Order are lowly organised for their class. They are wingless, dull-coloured, minute insects, with ugly, almost misshapen heads and bodies. The sexes do not differ; but they offer one interesting fact, by showing that the males pay sedulous court to their females even low down in the animal scale. Sir J. Lubbock443 in describing the Smynthurus luteus, says: “it is very amusing to see these little creatures coquetting together. The male, which is much smaller than the female, runs round her, and they butt one another, standing face to face, and moving backward and forward like two playful lambs. Then the female pretends to run away and the male runs after her with a queer appearance of anger, gets in front and stands facing her again; then she turns coyly round, but he, quicker and more active, scuttles round too, and seems to whip her with his antennæ; then for a bit they stand face to face, play with their antennæ, and seem to be all in all to one another.”

Order, Diptera (Flies).—The sexes differ little in colour. The greatest difference, known to Mr. F. Walker, is in the genus Bibio, in which the males are blackish or quite black, and the females obscure brownish-orange. The genus Elaphomyia, discovered by Mr. Wallace444 in New Guinea, is highly remarkable, as the males are furnished with horns, of which the females are quite destitute. The horns spring from beneath the eyes, and curiously resemble those of stags, being either branched or palmated. They equal in length the whole of the body in one of the species. They might be thought to serve for fighting, but as in one species they are of a beautiful pink colour, edged with black, with a pale central stripe, and as these insects have altogether a very elegant appearance, it is perhaps more probable that the horns serve as ornaments. That the males of some Diptera fight together is certain; for Prof. Westwood445 has several times seen this with some species of Tipula or Harry-long-legs. Many observers believe that when gnats (Culicidæ) dance in the air in a body, alternately rising and falling, the males are courting the females. The mental faculties of the Diptera are probably fairly well developed, for their nervous system is more highly developed than in most other Orders of insects.446

Order, Hemiptera (Field-Bugs).—Mr. J. W. Douglas, who has particularly attended to the British species, has kindly given me an account of their sexual differences. The males of some species are furnished with wings, whilst the females are wingless; the sexes differ in the form of the body and elytra; in the second joints of their antennæ and in their tarsi; but as the signification of these differences is quite unknown, they may be here passed over. The females are generally larger and more robust than the males. With British, and, as far as Mr. Douglas knows, with exotic species, the sexes do not commonly differ much in colour; but in about six British species the male is considerably darker than the female, and in about four other species the female is darker than the male. Both sexes of some species are beautifully marked with vermilion and black. It is doubtful whether these colours serve as a protection. If in any species the males had differed from the females in an analogous manner, we might have been justified in attributing such conspicuous colours to sexual selection with transference to both sexes.

Some species of Reduvidæ make a stridulating noise; and, in the case of Pirates stridulus, this is said447 to be effected by the movement of the neck within the pro-thoracic cavity. According to Westring, Reduvius personatus also stridulates. But I have not been able to learn any particulars about these insects; nor have I any reason to suppose that they differ sexually in this respect.

Order, Homoptera.—Every one who has wandered in a tropical forest must have been astonished at the din made by the male Cicadæ. The females are mute; as the Grecian poet Xenarchus says, “Happy the Cicadas live, since they all have voiceless wives.” The noise thus made could be plainly heard on board the “Beagle,” when anchored at a quarter of a mile from the shore of Brazil; and Captain Hancock says it can be heard at the distance of a mile. The Greeks formerly kept, and the Chinese now keep, these insects in cages for the sake of their song, so that it must be pleasing to the ears of some men.448 The Cicadidæ usually sing during the day; whilst the Fulgoridæ appear to be night-songsters. The sound, according to Landois,449 who has recently studied the subject, is produced by the vibration of the lips of the spiracles, which are set into motion by a current of air emitted from the tracheæ. It is increased by a wonderfully complex resounding apparatus, consisting of two cavities covered by scales. Hence the sound may truly be called a voice. In the female the musical apparatus is present, but very much less developed than in the male, and is never used for producing sound.

With respect to the object of the music, Dr. Hartman in speaking of the Cicada septemdecim of the United States, says,450 “the drums are now (June 6th and 7th, 1851) heard in all directions. This I believe to be the marital summons from the males. Standing in thick chestnut sprouts about as high as my head, where hundreds were around me, I observed the females coming around the drumming males.” He adds, “this season (Aug. 1868) a dwarf pear-tree in my garden produced about fifty larvæ of Cic. pruinosa; and I several times noticed the females to alight near a male while he was uttering his clanging notes.” Fritz Müller writes to me from S. Brazil that he has often listened to a musical contest between two or three males of a Cicada, having a particularly loud voice, and seated at a considerable distance from each other. As soon as the first had finished his song, a second immediately began; and after he had concluded, another began, and so on. As there is so much rivalry between the males, it is probable that the females not only discover them by the sounds emitted, but that, like female birds, they are excited or allured by the male with the most attractive voice.

I have not found any well-marked cases of ornamental differences between the sexes of the Homoptera. Mr. Douglas informs me that there are three British species, in which the male is black or marked with black bands, whilst the females are pale-coloured or obscure.

Order, Orthoptera.—The males in the three saltatorial families belonging to this Order are remarkable for their musical powers, namely the Achetidæ or crickets, the Locustidæ for which there is no exact equivalent name in English, and the Acridiidæ or grasshoppers. The stridulation produced by some of the Locustidæ is so loud that it can be heard during the night at the distance of a mile;451 and that made by certain species is not unmusical even to the human ear, so that the Indians on the Amazons keep them in wicker cages. All observers agree that the sounds serve either to call or excite the mute females. But it has been noticed452 that the male migratory locust of Russia (one of the Acridiidæ) whilst coupled with the female, stridulates from anger or jealousy when approached by another male. The house-cricket when surprised at night uses its voice to warn its fellows.453 In North America the Katy-did (Platyphyllum concavum, one of the Locustidæ) is described454 as mounting on the upper branches of a tree, and in the evening beginning “his noisy babble, while rival notes issue from the neighbouring trees, and the groves resound with the call of Katy-did-she-did, the live-long night.” Mr. Bates, in speaking of the European field-cricket (one of the Achetidæ), says, “the male has been observed to place itself in the evening at the entrance of its burrow, and stridulate until a female approaches, when the louder notes are succeeded by a more subdued tone, whilst the successful musician caresses with his antennæ Fig. 10. Gryllus campestris (from Landois).



Right-hand figure, under side of part of the wing-nervure, much magnified, showing the teeth, st.

Left-hand figure, upper surface of wing-cover, with the projecting, smooth nervure, r., across which the teeth (st) are scraped. the mate he has won.”455 Dr. Scudder was able to excite one of these insects to answer him, by rubbing on a file with a quill.456 In both sexes a remarkable auditory apparatus has been discovered by Von Siebold, situated in the front legs.457

In the three Families the sounds are differently produced. In the males Of the Achetidæ both wing-covers have the same structure; and this in the field-cricket (Gryllus campestris, fig. 10) consists, as described by Landois,458 of from 131 to 138 sharp, transverse ridges or teeth (st) on the under side of one of the nervures of the wing-cover. This toothed nervure is rapidly scraped across a projecting, smooth, hard nervure (r) on the upper surface of the opposite wing. First Fig. 11. Teeth of Nervure of Gryllus domesticus (from Landois). one wing is rubbed over the other, and then the movement is reversed. Both wings are raised a little at the same time, so as to increase the resonance. In some species the wing-covers of the males are furnished at the base with a talc-like plate.459 I have here given a drawing (fig. 11) of the teeth on the under side of the nervure of another species of Gryllus, viz. G. domesticus.

In the Locustidæ the opposite wing-covers differ in structure (fig. 12), and cannot, as in the last family, be indifferently used in a reversed manner. The left wing, which acts as the bow of the fiddle, lies over the right wing which serves as the fiddle itself. One of the nervures (a) on the under surface of the former is finely serrated, and is scraped across the prominent nervures on the upper surface of the opposite or right wing. In our British Phasgonura viridissima it appeared to me that the serrated nervure is rubbed against the rounded hind corner of the opposite wing, the edge of which is thickened, coloured brown, and very sharp. In the right wing, but not in the left, there is a little plate, as transparent as talc, surrounded by nervures, and called the speculum. In Ephippiger vitium, a member of this same family, we have a curious subordinate modification; for the wing-covers are greatly reduced in size, but “the posterior part of the pro-thorax is elevated into a kind of dome over the wing-covers, and which has probably the effect of increasing the sound.”460





Fig. 12. Chlorocœlus Tanana (from Bates), a, b. Lobes of opposite wing-covers.



We thus see that the musical apparatus is more differentiated or specialised in the Locustidæ, which includes I believe the most powerful performers in the Order, than in the Achetidæ, in which both wing-covers have the same structure and the same function.461 Landois, however, detected in one of the Locustidæ, namely in Decticus, a short and narrow row of small teeth, mere rudiments, on the inferior surface of the right wing-cover, which underlies the other and is never used as the bow. I observed the same rudimentary structure on the under side of the right wing-cover in Phasgonura viridissima. Hence we may with confidence infer that the Locustidæ are descended from a form, in which, as in the existing Achetidæ, both wing-covers had serrated nervures on the under surface, and could be indifferently used as the bow; but that in the Locustidæ the two wing-covers gradually became differentiated and perfected, on the principle of the division of labour, the one to act exclusively as the bow and the other as the fiddle. By what steps the more simple apparatus in the Achetidæ originated, we do not know, but it is probable that the basal portions of the wing-covers overlapped each other formerly as at present, and that the friction of the nervures produced a grating sound, as I find is now the case with the wing-covers of the females.462 A grating sound thus occasionally and accidentally made by the males, if it served them ever so little as a love-call to the females, might readily have been intensified through sexual selection by fitting variations in the roughness of the nervures having been continually preserved.

In the last and third Family, namely the Acridiidæ or grasshoppers, the stridulation is produced in a very different manner, and is not so shrill, according to Dr. Scudder, as in the preceding Families. The inner surface of the femur (fig. 13, r) is furnished with a longitudinal row of minute, elegant, lancet-shaped, elastic teeth, from 85 to 93 in number;463 and these are scraped across the sharp, projecting nervures on the wing-covers, which, are thus made to vibrate and resound. Harris464 Fig. 13, Hind-leg of Stenobothrus pratorum: r, the stridulating ridge; lower figure, the teeth, forming the ridge, much magnified (from Landois). says that when one of the males begins to play, he first “bends the shank of the hind-leg beneath, the thigh, where it is lodged in a furrow designed to receive it, and then draws the leg briskly up and down. He does not play both fiddles together, but alternately first upon one and then on the other.” In many species, the base of the abdomen is hollowed out into a great cavity which is believed to act as a resounding board. In Pneumora (fig. 14), a S. African genus belonging to this same family, we meet with a new and remarkable modification: in the males a small notched ridge projects obliquely from each side of the abdomen, against which the hind femora are rubbed.465 As the male is furnished with wings, the female being wingless, it is remarkable that the thighs are not rubbed in the usual manner against the wing-covers; but this may perhaps be accounted for by the unusually small size of the hind-legs. I have not been able to examine the inner surface of the thighs, which, judging from analogy, would be finely serrated. The species of Pneumora have been more profoundly modified for the sake of stridulation than any other orthopterous insect; for in the male the whole body has been converted into a musical instrument, being distended with air, like a great pellucid bladder, so as to increase the resonance. Mr. Trimen informs me that at the Cape of Good Hope these insects make a wonderful noise during the night There is one exception to the rule that the females in these three Families are destitute of an efficient musical apparatus; for both sexes of Ephippiger (Locustidæ) are said466 to be thus provided. This case may be compared with that of the reindeer, in which species alone both sexes possess horns. Although the female orthoptera are thus almost invariably mute, yet Landois467 found rudiments of the stridulating organs on the femora of the female Acridiidæ, and similar rudiments on the under surface of the wing-covers of the female Achetidæ; but he failed to find any rudiments in the females of Decticus, one of the Locustidæ. In the Homoptera the mute females of Cicada, have the proper musical apparatus in an undeveloped state; and we shall hereafter meet in other divisions of the animal kingdom with innumerable instances of structures proper to the male being present in a rudimentary condition in the female. Such cases appear at first sight to indicate that both sexes were primordially constructed in the same manner, but that certain organs were subsequently lost by the females. It is, however, a more probable view, as previously explained, that the organs in question were acquired by the males and partially transferred to the females.

Fig. 14. Pneumora (from specimens in the British Museum). Upper figure, male; lower figure, female.



Landois has observed another interesting fact, namely that in the females of the Acridiidæ, the stridulating teeth on the femora remain throughout life in the same condition in which they first appear in both sexes during the larval state. In the males, on the other hand, they become fully developed and acquire their perfect structure at the last moult, when the insect is mature and ready to breed.

From the facts now given, we see that the means by which the males produce their sounds are extremely diversified in the Orthoptera, and are altogether different from those employed by the Homoptera. But throughout the animal kingdom we incessantly find the same object gained by the most diversified means; this being due to the whole organisation undergoing in the course of ages multifarious changes; and as part after part varies, different variations are taken advantage of for the same general purpose. The diversification of the means for producing sound in the three families of the Orthoptera and in the Homoptera, impresses the mind with the high importance of these structures to the males, for the sake of calling or alluring the females. We need feel no surprise at the amount of modification which the Orthoptera have undergone in this respect, as we now know, from Dr. Scudder’s remarkable discovery,468 that there has been more than ample time. This naturalist has lately found a fossil insect in the Devonian formation of New Brunswick, which is furnished with “the well-known tympanum or stridulating apparatus of the male Locustidæ.” This insect, though in most respects related to the Neuroptera, appears to connect, as is so often the case with very ancient forms, the two Orders of the Neuroptera and Orthoptera which are now generally ranked as quite distinct.

I have but little more to say on the Orthoptera. Some of the species are very pugnacious: when two male field-crickets (Gryllus campestris) are confined together, they fight till one kills the other; and the species of Mantis are described as manœuvring with their sword-like front-limbs, like hussars with their sabres. The Chinese keep these insects in little bamboo cages and match them like game-cocks.469 With respect to colour, some exotic locusts are beautifully ornamented; the posterior wings being marked with red, blue, and black; but as throughout the Order the two sexes rarely differ much in colour, it is doubtful whether they owe these bright tints to sexual selection. Conspicuous colours may be of use to these insects as a protection, on the principle to be explained in the next chapter, by giving notice to their enemies that they are unpalatable. Thus it has been observed470 that an Indian brightly-coloured locust was invariably rejected when offered to birds and lizards. Some cases, however, of sexual differences in colour in this Order are known. The male of an American cricket471 is described as being as white as ivory, whilst the female varies from almost white to greenish-yellow or dusky. Mr. Walsh informs me that the adult male of Spectrum femoratum (one of the Phasmidæ) “is of a shining brownish-yellow colour; the adult female being of a dull, opaque, cinereous-brown; the young of both sexes being green.” Lastly, I may mention that the male of one curious kind of cricket472 is furnished with “a long membranous appendage, which falls over the face like a veil;” but whether this serves as an ornament is not known.

Order, Neuroptera.—Little need here be said, except in regard to colour. In the Ephemeridæ the sexes often differ slightly in their obscure tints;473 but it is not probable that the males are thus rendered attractive to the females. The Libellulidæ or dragon-flies are ornamented with splendid green, blue, yellow, and vermilion metallic tints; and the sexes often differ. Thus, the males of some of the Agrionidæ, as Prof. Westwood remarks474 “are of a rich blue with black wings, whilst the females are fine green with colourless wings.” But in Agrion Ramburii these colours are exactly reversed in the two sexes.475 In the extensive N. American genus of Hetærina, the males alone have a beautiful carmine spot at the base of each wing. In Anax junius the basal part of the abdomen in the male is a vivid ultra-marine blue, and in the female grass-green. In the allied genus Gomphus, on the other hand, and in some other genera, the sexes differ but little in colour. Throughout the animal kingdom, similar cases of the sexes of closely-allied forms either differing greatly, or very little, or not at all, are of frequent occurrence. Although with many Libellulidæ there is so wide a difference in colour between the sexes, it is often difficult to say which is the most brilliant; and the ordinary coloration of the two sexes is exactly reversed, as we have just seen, in one species of Agrion. It is not probable that their colours in any case have been gained as a protection. As Mr. MacLachlan, who has closely attended to this family, writes to me, dragon-flies—the tyrants of the insect-world—are the least liable of any insect to be attacked by birds or other enemies. He believes that their bright colours serve as a sexual attraction. It deserves notice, as bearing on this subject, that certain dragon-flies appear to be attracted by particular colours: Mr. Patterson observed476 that the species of Agrionidæ, of which the males are blue, settled in numbers on the blue float of a fishing line; whilst two other species were attracted by shining white colours.

It is an interesting fact, first observed by Schelver, that the males, in several genera belonging to two sub-families, when they first emerge from the pupal state are coloured exactly like the females; but that their bodies in a short time assume a conspicuous milky-blue tint, owing to the exudation of a kind of oil, soluble in ether and alcohol. Mr. MacLachlan believes that in the male of Libellula depressa this change of colour does not occur until nearly a fortnight after the metamorphosis, when the sexes are ready to pair.

Certain species of Neurothemis present, according to Brauer477 a curious case of dimorphism, some of the females having their wings netted in the usual manner; whilst other females have them “very richly netted as in the males of the same species.” Brauer “explains the phenomenon on Darwinian principles by the supposition that the close netting of the veins is a secondary sexual character in the males.” This latter character is generally developed in the males alone, but being, like every other masculine character, latent in the female, is occasionally developed in them. We have here an illustration of the manner in which the two sexes of many animals have probably come to resemble each other, namely by variations first appearing in the males, being preserved in them, and then transmitted to and developed in the females; but in this particular genus a complete transference is occasionally and abruptly effected. Mr. MacLachlan informs me of another case of dimorphism occurring in several species of Agrion in which a certain number of individuals are found of an orange colour, and these are invariably females. This is probably a case of reversion, for in the true Libellulæ, when the sexes differ in colour, the females are always orange or yellow, so that supposing Agrion to be descended from some primordial form having the characteristic sexual colours of the typical Libellulæ, it would not be surprising that a tendency to vary in this manner should occur in the females alone.

Although many dragon-flies are such large, powerful, and fierce insects, the males have not been observed by Mr. MacLachlan to fight together, except, as he believes, in the case of some of the smaller species of Agrion. In another very distinct group in this Order, namely in the Termites or white ants, both sexes at the time of swarming may be seen running about, “the male after the female, sometimes two chasing one female, and contending with great eagerness who shall win the prize.”478

Order, Hymenoptera.—That inimitable observer, M. Fabre,479 in describing the habits of Cerceris, a wasp-like insect, remarks that “fights frequently ensue between the males for the possession of some particular female, who sits an apparently unconcerned beholder of the struggle for supremacy, and when the victory is decided, quietly flies away in company with the conqueror.” Westwood480 says that the males of one of the saw-flies (Tenthredinæ) “have been found fighting together, with their mandibles locked.” As M. Fabre speaks of the males of Cerceris striving to obtain a particular female, it may be well to bear in mind that insects belonging to this Order have the power of recognising each other after long intervals of time, and are deeply attached. For instance, Pierre Huber, whose accuracy no one doubts, separated some ants, and when after an interval of four months they met others which had formerly belonged to the same community, they mutually recognised and caressed each other with their antennæ. Had they been strangers they would have fought together. Again, when two communities engage in a battle, the ants on the same side in the general confusion sometimes attack each other, but they soon perceive their mistake, and the one ant soothes the other.481

In this Order slight differences in colour, according to sex, are common, but conspicuous differences are rare except in the family of Bees; yet both sexes of certain groups are so brilliantly coloured—for instance in Chrysis, in which vermilion and metallic greens prevail—that we are tempted to attribute the result to sexual selection. In the Ichneumonidæ, according to Mr. Walsh,482 the males are almost universally lighter coloured than the females. On the other hand, in the Tenthredinidæ the males are generally darker than the females. In the Siricidæ the sexes frequently differ; thus the male of Sirex juvencus is banded with orange, whilst the female is dark purple; but it is difficult to say which sex is the most ornamented. In Tremex columbæ the female is much brighter coloured than the male. With ants, as I am informed by Mr. F. Smith, the males of several species are black, the females being testaceous. In the family of Bees, especially in the solitary species, as I hear from the same distinguished entomologist, the sexes often differ in colour. The males are generally the brightest, and in Bombus as well as in Apathus, much more variable in colour than the females. In Anthophora retusa the male is of a rich fulvous-brown, whilst the female is quite black: so are the females of several species of Xylocopa, the males being bright yellow. In an Australian bee (Lestis bombylans), the female is of an extremely brilliant steel-blue, sometimes tinted with vivid green; the male being of a bright brassy colour clothed with rich fulvous pubescence. As in this group the females are provided with excellent defensive weapons in their stings, it is not probable that they have come to differ in colour from the males for the sake of protection.

Mutilla Europæa emits a stridulating noise; and according to Goureau483 both sexes have this power. He attributes the sound to the friction of the third and preceding abdominal segments; and I find that these surfaces are marked with very fine concentric ridges, but so is the projecting thoracic collar, on which the head articulates; and this collar, when scratched with the point of a needle, emits the proper sound. It is rather surprising that both sexes should have the power of stridulating, as the male is winged and the female wingless. It is notorious that Bees express certain emotions, as of anger, by the tone of their humming, as do some dipterous insects; but I have not referred to these sounds, as they are not known to be in any way connected with the act of courtship.

Order, Coleoptera (Beetles).—Many beetles are coloured so as to resemble the surfaces which they habitually frequent. Other species are ornamented with gorgeous metallic tints,—for instance, many Carabidæ, which live on the ground and have the power of defending themselves by an intensely acrid secretion,—the splendid diamond-beetles which are protected by an extremely hard covering,—many species of Chrysomela, such as C. cerealis, a large species beautifully striped with various colours, and in Britain confined to the bare summit of Snowdon,—and a host of other species. These splendid colours, which are often arranged in stripes, spots, crosses and other elegant patterns, can hardly be beneficial, as a protection, except in the case of some flower-feeding species; and we cannot believe that they are purposeless. Hence the suspicion arises, that they serve as a sexual attraction; but we have no evidence on this head, for the sexes rarely differ in colour. Blind beetles, which cannot of course behold each other’s beauty, never exhibit, as I hear from Mr. Waterhouse, jun., bright colours, though they often have polished coats: but the explanation of their obscurity may be that blind insects inhabit caves and other obscure stations.

Some Longicorns, however, especially certain Prionidæ, offer an exception to the common rule that the sexes of beetles do not differ in colour. Most of these insects are large and splendidly coloured. The males in the genus Pyrodes,484 as I saw in Mr. Bates’ collection, are generally redder but rather duller than the females, the latter being coloured of a more or less splendid golden green. On the other hand, in one species the male is golden-green, the female being richly tinted with red and purple. In the genus Esmeralda the sexes differ so greatly in colour that they have been ranked as distinct species: in one species both are of a beautiful shining green, but the male has a red thorax. On the whole, as far as I could judge, the females of those Prionidæ, in which the sexes differ, are coloured more richly than the males; and this does not accord with the common rule in regard to colour when acquired through sexual selection.

Fig. 15. Chalcosoma atlas. Upper figure, male (reduced); lower figure, female (nat. size).





Fig. 16. Copris isidis. (Left-hand figures, males.)



Fig. 17. Phanæus faunus.



Fig. 18. Dipelicus cantori.



Fig. 19. Onthophagus rangifer, enlarged.





A most remarkable distinction between the sexes of many beetles is presented by the great horns which rise from the head, thorax, or clypeus of the males; and in some few cases from the under surface of the body. These horns, in the great family of the Lamellicorns, resemble those of various quadrupeds, such as stags, rhinoceroses, &c., and are wonderful both from their size and diversified shapes. Instead of describing them, I have given figures of the males and females of some of the more remarkable forms. (Figs. 15 to 19.) The females generally exhibit rudiments of the horns in the form of small knobs or ridges; but some are destitute of even a rudiment. On the other hand, the horns are nearly as well developed in the female as in the male of Phanæus lancifer; and only a little less well developed in the females of some other species of the same genus and of Copris. In the several subdivisions of the family, the differences in structure of the horns do not run parallel, as I am informed by Mr. Bates, with their more important and characteristic differences; thus within the same natural section of the genus Onthophagus, there are species which have either a single cephalic horn, or two distinct horns.

In almost all cases, the horns are remarkable from their excessive variability; so that a graduated series can be formed, from the most highly developed males to others so degenerate that they can barely be distinguished from the females. Mr. Walsh485 found that in Phanæus carnifex the horns were thrice as long in some males as in others. Mr. Bates, after examining above a hundred males of Onthophagus rangifer (fig. 19), thought that he had at last discovered a species in which the horns did not vary; but further research proved the contrary.

The extraordinary size of the horns, and their widely different structure in closely-allied forms, indicate that they have been formed for some important purpose; but their excessive variability in the males of the same species leads to the inference that this purpose cannot be of a definite nature. The horns do not show marks of friction, as if used for any ordinary work. Some authors suppose486 that as the males wander much more than the females, they require horns as a defence against their enemies; but in many cases the horns do not seem well adapted for defence, as they are not sharp. The most obvious conjecture is that they are used by the males for fighting together; but they have never been observed to fight; nor could Mr. Bates, after a careful examination of numerous species, find any sufficient evidence in their mutilated or broken condition of their having been thus used. If the males had been habitual fighters, their size would probably have been increased through sexual selection, so as to have exceeded that of the female; but Mr. Bates, after comparing the two sexes in above a hundred species of the Copridæ, does not find in well-developed individuals any marked difference in this respect. There is, moreover, one beetle, belonging to the same great division of the Lamellicorns, namely Lethrus, the males of which are known to fight, but they are not provided with horns, though their mandibles are much larger than those of the female.

The conclusion, which best agrees with the fact of the horns having been so immensely yet not fixedly developed,—as shewn by their extreme variability in the same species and by their extreme diversity in closely-allied species—is that they have been acquired as ornaments. This view will at first appear extremely improbable; but we shall hereafter find with many animals, standing much higher in the scale, namely fishes, amphibians, reptiles and birds, that various kinds of crests, knobs, horns and combs have been developed apparently for this sole purpose.

The males of Onitis furcifer (fig. 20) are furnished with singular projections on their anterior femora, and Fig. 20. Onitis furcifer, male, viewed from beneath. with a great fork or pair of horns on the lower surface of the thorax. This situation seems extremely ill adapted for the display of these projections, and they may be of some real service; but no use can at present be assigned to them. It is a highly remarkable fact, that although the males do not exhibit even a trace of horns on the upper surface of the body, yet in the females a rudiment of a single horn on the head (fig. 21, a), and of a crest (b) on the thorax, are plainly visible. That the slight thoracic crest in the female is a rudiment of a projection proper to the male, though entirely absent in the male of this particular species, is clear: for the female of Bubas bison (a form which comes next to Onitis) has a similar slight crest on the thorax, and the male has in the same situation a great projection. So again there can be no doubt that the little point (a) on the head of the female Onitis furcifer, as well of the females of two or three allied species, is a rudimentary representative of the cephalic horn, which is common to the males of so many lamellicorn beetles, as in Phanæus, fig. 17. The males indeed of some unnamed beetles in the British Museum, which are believed actually to belong to the genus Onitis, are furnished with a similar horn. The remarkable nature of this case will be best perceived by an illustration: the Ruminant quadrupeds run parallel with the lamellicorn beetles, in some females possessing horns as large as those of the male, in others having them much smaller, or existing as mere rudiments (though this is as rare with ruminants as it is common with Lamellicorns), or in having none at all. Now if a new species of deer or sheep were discovered with the female bearing distinct rudiments of horns, whilst the head of the male was absolutely smooth, we should have a case like that of Onitis furcifer.



Fig. 21. Left-hand figure, male of Onitis furcifer, viewed laterally. Right-hand figure, female. a. Rudiment of cephalic horn. b. Trace of thoracic horn or crest.

In this case the old belief of rudiments having been created to complete the scheme of nature is so far from holding good, that all ordinary rules are completely broken through. The view which seems the most probable is that some early progenitor of Onitis acquired, like other Lamellicorns, horns on the head and thorax, and then transferred them, in a rudimentary condition, as with so many existing species, to the female, by whom they have ever since been retained. The subsequent loss of the horns by the male may have resulted through the principle of compensation from the development of the projections on the lower surface, whilst the female has not been thus affected, as she is not furnished with these projections, and consequently has retained the rudiments of the horns on the upper surface. Although this view is supported by the case of Bledius immediately to be given, yet the projections on the lower surface differ greatly in structure and development in the males of the several species of Onitis, and are even rudimentary in some; nevertheless the upper surface in all these species is quite destitute of horns. As secondary sexual characters are so eminently variable, it is possible that the projections on the lower surface may have been first acquired by some progenitor of Onitis and produced their effect through compensation, and then have been in certain cases almost completely lost.



Fig. 22. Bledius taurus, magnified. Left-hand figure, male; right-hand figure, female.

All the cases hitherto given refer to the Lamellicorns, but the males of some few other beetles, belonging to two widely distinct groups, namely, the Curculionidæ and Staphylinidæ, are furnished with horns,—in the former on the lower surface of the body,487 in the latter on the upper surface of the head and thorax. In the Staphylinidæ the horns of the males in the same species are extraordinarily variable, just as we have seen with the Lamellicorns. In Siagonium we have a case of dimorphism, for the males can be divided into two sets, differing greatly in the size of their bodies, and in the development of their horns, without any intermediate gradations. In a species of Bledius (fig. 22), also belonging to the Staphylinidæ, male specimens can be found in the same locality, as Professor Westwood states, “in which the central horn of the thorax is very large, but the horns of the head quite rudimental; and others, in which the thoracic horn is much shorter, whilst the protuberances on the head are long.”488 Here, then, we apparently have an instance of compensation of growth, which throws light on the curious case just given of the loss of the upper horns by the males of Onitis furcifer.

Law of Battle.—Some male beetles, which seem ill fitted for fighting, nevertheless engage in conflicts for the possession of the females. Mr. Wallace489 saw two males of Leptorhynchus angustatus, a linear beetle with a much elongated rostrum, “fighting for a female, who stood close by busy at her boring. They pushed at each other with their rostra, and clawed and thumped, apparently in the greatest rage.” The smaller male, however, “soon ran away, acknowledging himself vanquished.” In some few cases the males are well adapted for fighting, by possessing great toothed mandibles, much larger than those of the females. This is the case with the common stag-beetle (Lucanus cervus), the males of which emerge from the pupal state about a week before the other sex, so that several may often be seen pursuing the same female. At this period they engage in fierce conflicts. When Mr. A. H. Davis490 enclosed two males with one female in a box, the larger male severely pinched the smaller one, until he resigned his pretensions. A friend informs me that when a boy he often put the males together to see them fight, and he noticed that they were much bolder and fiercer than the females, as is well known to be the case with the higher animals. The males would seize hold of his finger, if held in front, but not so the females. With many of the Lucanidæ, as well as with the above-mentioned Leptorhynchus, the males are larger and more powerful insects than the females. The two sexes of Lethrus cephalotes (one of the Lamellicorns) inhabit the same burrow; and the male has larger mandibles than the female. If, during the breeding-season, a strange male attempts to enter the burrow, he is attacked; the female does not remain passive, but closes the mouth of the burrow, and encourages her mate by continually pushing him on from behind. The action does not cease until the aggressor is killed or runs away.491 The two sexes of another lamellicorn beetle, the Ateuchus cicatricosus live in pairs, and seem much attached to each other; the male excites the female to roll the balls of dung in which the ova are deposited; and if she is removed, he becomes much agitated. If the male is removed, the female ceases all work, and as M. Brulerie492 believes, would remain on the spot until she died.

The great mandibles of the male Lucanidæ are extremely variable both in size and structure, and in this respect resemble the horns on the head and thorax of many male Lamellicorns and Staphylinidæ. A perfect series can be formed from the best-provided to the worst-provided or degenerate males. Although the mandibles of the common stag-beetle, and probably of many other species, are used as efficient weapons for fighting, it is doubtful whether their great size can Fig. 23. Chiasognathus grantii, reduced. Upper figure, male; lower figure, female. thus be accounted for. We have seen that with the Lucanus elaphus of N. America they are used for seizing the female. As they are so conspicuous and so elegantly branched, the suspicion has sometimes crossed my mind that they may be serviceable to the males as an ornament, in the same manner as the horns on the head and thorax of the various above described species. The male Chiasognathus grantii of S. Chile—a splendid beetle belonging to the same family—has enormously-developed mandibles (fig. 23); he is bold and pugnacious; when threatened on any side he faces round, opening his great jaws, and at the same time stridulating loudly; but the mandibles were not strong enough to pinch my finger so as to cause actual pain.

Sexual selection, which implies the possession of considerable perceptive powers and of strong passions, seems to have been more effective with the Lamellicorns than with any other family of the Coleoptera or beetles. With some species the males are provided with weapons for fighting; some live in pairs and show mutual affection; many have the power of stridulating when excited; many are furnished with the most extraordinary horns, apparently for the sake of ornament; some which are diurnal in their habits are gorgeously coloured; and, lastly, several of the largest beetles in the world belong to this family, which was placed by Linnæus and Fabricius at the head of the Order of the Coleoptera.493

Stridulating organs.—Beetles belonging to many and widely distinct families possess these organs. The sound can sometimes be heard at the distance of several feet or even yards,494 but is not comparable with that produced by the Orthoptera. The part which may be called the rasp generally consists of a narrow slightly-raised surface, crossed by very fine, parallel ribs, sometimes so fine as to cause iridescent colours, and having a very elegant appearance under the microscope. In some cases, for instance, with Typhæus, it could be plainly seen that extremely minute, bristly, scale-like prominences, which cover the whole surrounding surface in approximately parallel lines, give rise to the ribs of the rasp by becoming confluent and straight, and at the same time more prominent and smooth. A hard ridge on any adjoining part of the body, which in some cases is specially modified for the purpose, serves as the scraper for the rasp. The scraper is rapidly moved across the rasp, or conversely the rasp across the scraper.



Fig. 24. Necrophorus (from Landois). r. The two rasps. Left-hand figure, part of the rasp highly magnified.

These organs are situated in widely different positions. In the carrion-beetles (Necrophorus) two parallel rasps (r, fig. 24) stand on the dorsal surface of the fifth abdominal segment, each rasp being crossed, as described by Landois,495 by from 126 to 140 fine ribs. These ribs are scraped by the posterior margins of the elytra, a small portion of which projects beyond the general outline. In many Crioceridæ, and in Clythra 4-punctata (one of the Chrysomelidæ), and in some Tenebrionidæ, &c.,496 the rasp is seated on the dorsal apex of the abdomen, on the pygidium or pro-pygidium, and is scraped as above by the elytra. In Heterocerus, which belongs to another family, the rasps are placed on the sides of the first abdominal segment, and are scraped by ridges on the femora.497 In certain Curculionidæ and Carabidæ,498 the parts are completely reversed in position, for the rasps are seated on the inferior surface of the elytra, near their apices, or along their outer margins, and the edges of the abdominal segments serve as the scrapers. In Pelobius hermanni (one of Dytiscidæ or water-beetles) a strong ridge runs parallel and near to the sutural margin of the elytra, and is crossed by ribs, coarse in the middle part, but becoming gradually finer at both ends, especially at the upper end; when this insect is held under water or in the air, a stridulating noise is produced by scraping the extreme horny margin of the abdomen against the rasp. In a great number of long-horned beetles (Longicornia) the organs are altogether differently situated, the rasp being on the meso-thorax, which is rubbed against the pro-thorax; Landois counted 238 very fine ribs on the rasp of Cerambyx heros.

Many Lamellicorns have the power of stridulating, and the organs differ greatly in position. Some species Fig. 25. Hind-leg of Geotrupes stercorarius (from Landois).



r. Rasp. c. Coxa. f. Femur. t. Tibia. tr. Tarsi. stridulate very loudly, so that when Mr. F. Smith caught a Trox sabulosus, a gamekeeper who stood by thought that he had caught a mouse; but I failed to discover the proper organs in this beetle. In Geotrupes and Typhæus a narrow ridge runs obliquely across (r, fig. 25) the coxa of each hind-leg, having in G. stercorarius 84 ribs, which are scraped by a specially-projecting part of one of the abdominal segments. In the nearly allied Copris lunaris, an excessively narrow fine rasp runs along the sutural margin of the elytra, with another short rasp near the basal outer margin; but in some other Coprini the rasp is seated, according to Leconte,499 on the dorsal surface of the abdomen. In Oryctes it is seated on the pro-pygidium, and in some other Dynastini, according to the same entomologist, on the under surface of the elytra. Lastly, Westring states that in Omaloplia brunnea the rasp is placed on the pro-sternum, and the scraper on the meta-sternum, the parts thus occupying the under surface of the body, instead of the upper surface as in the Longicorns.

We thus see that the stridulating organs in the different coleopterous families are wonderfully diversified in position, but not much in structure. Within the same family some species are provided with these organs, and some are quite destitute of them. This diversity is intelligible, if we suppose that originally various species made a shuffling or hissing noise by the rubbing together of the hard and rough parts of their bodies which were in contact; and that from the noise thus produced being in some way useful, the rough surfaces were gradually developed into regular stridulating organs. Some beetles as they move, now produce, either intentionally or unintentionally, a shuffling noise, without possessing any proper organs for the purpose. Mr. Wallace informs me that the Euchirus longimanus (a Lamellicorn, with the anterior legs wonderfully elongated in the male) “makes, whilst moving, a low hissing sound by the protrusion and contraction of the abdomen; and when seized it produces a grating sound by rubbing its hind-legs against the edges of the elytra.” The hissing sound is clearly due to a narrow rasp running along the sutural margin of each elytron; and I could likewise make the grating sound by rubbing the shagreened surface of the femur against the granulated margin of the corresponding elytron; but I could not here detect any proper rasp; nor is it likely that I could have overlooked it in so large an insect. After examining Cychrus and reading what Westring has written in his two papers about this beetle, it seems very doubtful whether it possesses any true rasp, though it has the power of emitting a sound.

From the analogy of the Orthoptera and Homoptera, I expected to find that the stridulating organs in the Coleoptera differed according to sex; but Landois, who has carefully examined several species, observed no such difference; nor did Westring; nor did Mr. G. R. Crotch in preparing the numerous specimens which he had the kindness to send me for examination. Any slight sexual difference, however, would be difficult to detect, on account of the great variability of these organs. Thus in the first pair of the Necrophorus humator and of the Pelobius which I examined, the rasp was considerably larger in the male than in the female; but not so with succeeding specimens. In Geotrupes stercorarius the rasp appeared to me thicker, opaquer, and more prominent in three males than in the same number of females; consequently my son, Mr. F. Darwin, in order to discover whether the sexes differed in their power of stridulating, collected 57 living specimens, which he separated into two lots, according as they made, when held in the same manner, a greater or lesser noise. He then examined their sexes, but found that the males were very nearly in the same proportion to the females in both lots. Mr. F. Smith has kept alive numerous specimens of Mononychus pseudacori (Curculionidæ), and is satisfied that both sexes stridulate, and apparently in an equal degree.

Nevertheless the power of stridulating is certainly a sexual character in some few Coleoptera. Mr. Crotch has discovered that the males alone of two species of Heliopathes (Tenebrionidæ) possess stridulating organs. I examined five males of H. gibbus, and in all these there was a well-developed rasp, partially divided into two, on the dorsal surface of the terminal abdominal segment; whilst in the same number of females there was not even a rudiment of the rasp, the membrane of this segment being transparent and much thinner than in the male. In H. cribratostriatus the male has a similar rasp, excepting that it is not partially divided into two portions, and the female is completely destitute of this organ; but in addition the male has on the apical margins of the elytra, on each side of the suture, three or four short longitudinal ridges, which are crossed by extremely fine ribs, parallel to and resembling those on the abdominal rasp; whether these ridges serve as an independent rasp, or as a scraper for the abdominal rasp, I could not decide: the female exhibits no trace of this latter structure.

Again, in three species of the Lamellicorn genus Oryctes, we have a nearly parallel case. In the females of O. gryphus and nasicornis the ribs on the rasp of the pro-pygidium are less continuous and less distinct than in the males; but the chief difference is that the whole upper surface of this segment, when held in the proper light, is seen to be clothed with hairs, which are absent or are represented by excessively fine down in the males. It should be noticed that in all Coleoptera the effective part of the rasp is destitute of hairs. In O. senegalensis the difference between the sexes is more strongly marked, and this is best seen when the proper segment is cleaned and viewed as a transparent object. In the female the whole surface is covered with little separate crests, bearing spines; whilst in the male these crests become, in proceeding towards the apex, more and more confluent, regular, and naked; so that three-fourths of the segment is covered with extremely fine parallel ribs, which are quite absent in the female. In the females, however, of all three species of Oryctes, when the abdomen of a softened specimen is pushed backwards and forwards, a slight grating or stridulating sound can be produced.

In the case of the Heliopathes and Oryctes there can hardly be a doubt that the males stridulate in order to call or to excite the females; but with most beetles the stridulation apparently serves both sexes as a mutual call. This view is not rendered improbable from beetles stridulating under various emotions; we know that birds use their voices for many purposes besides singing to their mates. The great Chiasognathus stridulates in anger or defiance; many species do the same from distress or fear, when held so that they cannot escape; Messrs. Wollaston and Crotch were able, by striking the hollow stems of trees in the Canary Islands, to discover the presence of beetles belonging to the genus Acalles by their stridulation. Lastly the male Ateuchus stridulates to encourage the female in her work, and from distress when she is removed.500 Some naturalists believe that beetles make this noise to frighten away their enemies; but I cannot think that the quadrupeds and birds which are able to devour the larger beetles with their extremely hard coats, would be frightened by so slight a grating sound. The belief that the stridulation serves as a sexual call is supported by the fact that death-ticks (Anobium tesselatum) are well known to answer each other’s ticking, or, as I have myself observed, a tapping noise artificially made; and Mr. Doubleday informs me that he has twice or thrice observed a female ticking,501 and in the course of an hour or two has found her united with a male, and on one occasion surrounded by several males. Finally, it seems probable that the two sexes of many kinds of beetles were at first enabled to find each other by the slight shuffling noise produced by the rubbing together of the adjoining parts of their hard bodies; and that as the males or females which made the greatest noise succeeded best in finding partners, the rugosities on various parts of their bodies were gradually developed by means of sexual selection into true stridulating organs.



* * *





CHAPTER XI.


Insects, continued.—Order Lepidoptera.





Courtship of butterflies—Battles—Ticking noise—Colours common to both sexes, or more brilliant in the males—Examples—Not due to the direct action of the conditions of life—Colours adapted for protection—Colours of moths—Display—Perceptive powers of the Lepidoptera—Variability—Causes of the difference in colour between the males and females—Mimickry, female butterflies more brilliantly coloured than the males—Bright colours of caterpillars—Summary and concluding remarks on the secondary sexual characters of insects—Birds and insects compared.



In this great Order the most interesting point for us is the difference in colour between the sexes of the same species, and between the distinct species of the same genus. Nearly the whole of the following chapter will be devoted to this subject; but I will first make a few remarks on one or two other points. Several males may often be seen pursuing and crowding round the same female. Their courtship appears to be a prolonged affair, for I have frequently watched one or more males pirouetting round a female until I became tired, without seeing the end of the courtship. Although butterflies are such weak and fragile creatures, they are pugnacious, and an Emperor butterfly502 has been captured with the tips of its wings broken from a conflict with another male. Mr. Collingwood in speaking of the frequent battles between the butterflies of Borneo says, “They whirl round each other with the greatest rapidity, and appear to be incited by the greatest ferocity.” One case is known of a butterfly, namely the Ageronia feronia, which makes a noise like that produced by a toothed wheel passing under a spring catch, and which could be heard at the distance of several yards. At Rio de Janeiro this sound was noticed by me, only when two were chasing each other in an irregular course, so that it is probably made during the courtship of the sexes; but I neglected to attend to this point.503

Every one has admired the extreme beauty of many butterflies and of some moths; and we are led to ask, how has this beauty been acquired? Have their colours and diversified patterns simply resulted from the direct action of the physical conditions to which these insects have been exposed, without any benefit being thus derived? Or have successive variations been accumulated and determined either as a protection or for some unknown purpose, or that one sex might be rendered attractive to the other? And, again, what is the meaning of the colours being widely different in the males and females of certain species, and alike in the two sexes of other species? Before attempting to answer these questions a body of facts must be given.

With most of our English butterflies, both those which are beautiful, such as the admiral, peacock, and painted lady (Vanessæ), and those which are plain-coloured, such as the meadow-browns (Hipparchiæ), the sexes are alike. This is also the case with the magnificent Heliconidæ and Danaidæ of the tropics. But in certain other tropical groups, and with some of our English butterflies, as the purple emperor, orange-tip, &c. (Apatura Iris and Anthocharis cardamines), the sexes differ either greatly or slightly in colour. No language suffices to describe the splendour of the males of some tropical species. Even within the same genus we often find species presenting an extraordinary difference between the sexes, whilst others have their sexes closely alike. Thus in the South American genus Epicalia, Mr. Bates, to whom I am much indebted for most of the following facts and for looking over this whole discussion, informs me that he knows twelve species, the two sexes of which haunt the same stations (and this is not always the case with butterflies), and therefore cannot have been differently affected by external conditions504. In nine of these species the males rank amongst the most brilliant of all butterflies, and differ so greatly from the comparatively plain females that they were formerly placed in distinct genera. The females of these nine species resemble each other in their general type of coloration, and likewise resemble both sexes in several allied genera, found in various parts of the world. Hence in accordance with the descent-theory we may infer that these nine species, and probably all the others of the genus, are descended from an ancestral form which was coloured in nearly the same manner. In the tenth species the female still retains the same general colouring, but the male resembles her, so that he is coloured in a much less gaudy and contrasted manner than the males of the previous species. In the eleventh and twelfth species, the females depart from the type of colouring which is usual with their sex in this genus, for they are gaily decorated in nearly the same manner as the males, but in a somewhat less degree. Hence in these two species the bright colours of the males seem to have been transferred to the females; whilst the male of the tenth species has either retained or recovered the plain colours of the female as well as of the parent-form of the genus; the two sexes being thus rendered in both cases, though in an opposite manner, nearly alike. In the allied genus Eubagis, both sexes of some of the species are plain-coloured and nearly alike; whilst with the greater number the males are decorated with beautiful metallic tints, in a diversified manner, and differ much from their females. The females throughout the genus retain the same general style of colouring, so that they commonly resemble each other much more closely than they resemble their own proper males.

In the genus Papilio, all the species of the Æneas group are remarkable for their conspicuous and strongly contrasted colours, and they illustrate the frequent tendency to gradation in the amount of difference between the sexes. In a few species, for instance in P. ascanius, the males and females are alike; in others the males are a little or very much more superbly coloured than the females. The genus Junonia allied to our Vanessæ offers a nearly parallel case, for although the sexes of most of the species resemble each other and are destitute of rich colours, yet in certain species, as in J. œnone, the male is rather more brightly coloured than the female, and in a few (for instance J. andremiaja) the male is so different from the female that he might be mistaken for an entirely distinct species.

Another striking case was pointed out to me in the British museum by Mr. A. Butler, namely one of the Tropical American Theclæ, in which both sexes are nearly alike and wonderfully splendid; in another, the male is coloured in a similarly gorgeous manner, whilst the whole upper surface of the female is of a dull uniform brown. Our common little English blue butterflies of the genus Lycæna, illustrate the various differences in colour between the sexes, almost as well, though not in so striking a manner, as the above exotic genera. In Lycæna agestis both sexes have wings of a brown colour, bordered with small ocellated orange spots, and are consequently alike. In L. œgon the wings of the male are of a fine blue, bordered with black; whilst the wings of the female are brown, with a similar border, and closely resemble those of L. agestis. Lastly, in L. arion both sexes are of a blue colour and nearly alike, though in the female the edges of the wings are rather duskier, with the black spots plainer; and in a bright blue Indian species both sexes are still more closely alike.

I have given the foregoing cases in some detail in order to shew, in the first place, that when the sexes of butterflies differ, the male as a general rule is the most beautiful, and departs most from the usual type of colouring of the group to which the species belongs. Hence in most groups the females of the several species resemble each other much more closely than do the males. In some exceptional cases, however, to which I shall hereafter allude, the females are coloured more splendidly than the males. In the second place these cases have been given to bring clearly before the mind that within the same genus, the two sexes frequently present every gradation from no difference in colour to so great a difference that it was long before the two were placed by entomologists in the same genus. In the third place, we have seen that when the sexes nearly resemble each other, this apparently may be due either to the male having transferred his colours to the female, or to the male having retained, or perhaps recovered, the primordial colours of the genus to which the species belongs. It also deserves notice that in those groups in which the sexes present any difference of colour, the females usually resemble the males to a certain extent, so that when the males are beautiful to an extraordinary degree, the females almost invariably exhibit some degree of beauty. From the numerous cases of gradation in the amount of difference between the sexes, and from the prevalence of the same general type of coloration throughout the whole of the same group, we may conclude that the causes, whatever they may be, which have determined the brilliant colouring of the males alone of some species, and of both sexes in a more or less equal degree of other species, have generally been the same.

As so many gorgeous butterflies inhabit the tropics, it has often been supposed that they owe their colours to the great heat and moisture of these zones; but Mr. Bates505 has shewn by the comparison of various closely-allied groups of insects from the temperate and tropical regions, that this view cannot be maintained; and the evidence becomes conclusive when brilliantly-coloured males and plain-coloured females of the same species inhabit the same district, feed on the same food, and follow exactly the same habits of life. Even when the sexes resemble each other, we can hardly believe that their brilliant and beautifully-arranged colours are the purposeless result of the nature of the tissues, and the action of the surrounding conditions.

With animals of all kinds, whenever colour has been modified for some special purpose, this has been, as far as we can judge, either for protection or as an attraction between the sexes. With many species of butterflies the upper surfaces of the wings are obscurely coloured, and this in all probability leads to their escaping observation and danger. But butterflies when at rest would be particularly liable to be attacked by their enemies; and almost all the kinds when resting raise their wings vertically over their backs, so that the lower sides alone are exposed to view. Hence it is this side which in many cases is obviously coloured so as to imitate the surfaces on which these insects commonly rest. Dr. Rössler, I believe, first noticed the similarity of the closed wings of certain Vanessæ and other butterflies to the bark of trees. Many analogous and striking facts could be given. The most interesting one is that recorded by Mr. Wallace506 of a common Indian and Sumatran butterfly (Kallima), which disappears like magic when it settles in a bush; for it hides its head and antennæ between its closed wings, and these in form, colour, and veining cannot be distinguished from a withered leaf together with the footstalk. In some other cases the lower surfaces of the wings are brilliantly coloured, and yet are protective; thus in Thecla rubi the wings when closed are of an emerald green and resemble the young leaves of the bramble, on which this butterfly in the spring may often be seen seated.

Although the obscure tints of the upper or under surface of many butterflies no doubt serve to conceal them, yet we cannot possibly extend this view to the brilliant and conspicuous colours of many kinds, such as our admiral and peacock Vanessæ, our white cabbage-butterflies (Pieris), or the great swallow-tail Papilio which haunts the open fens—for these butterflies are thus rendered visible to every living creature. With these species both sexes are alike; but in the common brimstone butterfly (Gonepteryx rhamni), the male is of an intense yellow, whilst the female is much paler; and in the orange-tip (Anthocharis cardamines) the males alone have the bright orange tips to their wings. In these cases the males and females are equally conspicuous, and it is not credible that their difference in colour stands in any relation to ordinary protection. Nevertheless it is possible that the conspicuous colours of many species may be in an indirect manner beneficial, as will hereafter be explained, by leading their enemies at once to recognise them as unpalatable. Even in this case it does not certainly follow that their bright colours and beautiful patterns were acquired for this special purpose. In some other remarkable cases, beauty has been gained for the sake of protection, through the imitation of other beautiful species, which inhabit the same district and enjoy an immunity from attack by being in some way offensive to their enemies.

The female of our orange-tip butterfly, above referred to, and of an American species (Anth. genutia) probably shew us, as Mr. Walsh has remarked to me, the primordial colours of the parent-species of the genus; for both sexes of four or five widely-distributed species are coloured in nearly the same manner. We may infer here, as in several previous cases, that it is the males of Anth. cardamines and genutia which have departed from the usual type of colouring of their genus. In the Anth. sara from California, the orange-tips have become partially developed in the female; for her wings are tipped with reddish-orange, but paler than in the male, and slightly different in some other respects. In an allied Indian form, the Iphias glaucippe, the orange-tips are fully developed in both sexes. In this Iphias the under surface of the wings marvellously resembles, as pointed out to me by Mr. A. Butler, a pale-coloured leaf; and in our English orange-tip, the under surface resembles the flower-head of the wild parsley, on which it may be seen going to rest at night.507 The same reasoning power which compels us to believe that the lower surfaces have here been coloured for the sake of protection, leads us to deny that the wings have been tipped, especially when this character is confined to the males, with bright orange for the same purpose.

Turning now to Moths: most of these rest motionless with their wings depressed during the whole or greater part of the day; and the upper surfaces of their wings are often shaded and coloured in an admirable manner, as Mr. Wallace has remarked, for escaping detection. With most of the Bombycidæ and Noctuidæ,508 when at rest, the front-wings overlap and conceal the hind-wings; so that the latter might be brightly coloured without much risk; and they are thus coloured in many species of both families. During the act of flight, moths would often be able to escape from their enemies; nevertheless, as the hind-wings are then fully exposed to view, their bright colours must generally have been acquired at the cost of some little risk. But the following fact shews us how cautious we ought to be in drawing conclusions on this head. The common yellow under-wings (Triphaena) often fly about during the day or early evening, and are then conspicuous from the colour of their hind-wings. It would naturally be thought that this would be a source of danger; but Mr. J. Jenner Weir believes that it actually serves them as a means of escape, for birds strike at these brightly coloured and fragile surfaces, instead of at the body. For instance, Mr. Weir turned into his aviary a vigorous specimen of Triphaena pronuba, which was instantly pursued by a robin; but the bird’s attention being caught by the coloured wings, the moth was not captured until after about fifty attempts, and small portions of the wings were repeatedly broken off. He tried the same experiment, in the open air, with a T. fimbria and swallow; but the large size of this moth probably interfered with its capture.509 We are thus reminded of a statement made by Mr. Wallace,510 namely, that in the Brazilian forests and Malayan islands, many common and highly-decorated butterflies are weak flyers, though furnished with a broad expanse of wings; and they “are often captured with pierced and broken wings, as if they had been seized by birds, from which they had escaped: if the wings had been much smaller in proportion to the body, it seems probable that the insect would more frequently have been struck or pierced in a vital part, and thus the increased expanse of the wings may have been indirectly beneficial.”

Display.—The bright colours of butterflies and of some moths are specially arranged for display, whether or not they serve in addition as a protection. Bright colours would not be visible during the night; and there can be no doubt that moths, taken as a body, are much less gaily decorated than butterflies, all of which are diurnal in their habits. But the moths in certain families, such as the Zygænidæ, various Sphingidæ, Uraniidæ, some Arctiidæ and Saturniidæ, fly about during the day or early evening, and many of these are extremely beautiful, being far more brightly coloured than the strictly nocturnal kinds. A few exceptional cases, however, of brightly-coloured nocturnal species have been recorded.511

There is evidence of another kind in regard to display. Butterflies, as before remarked, elevate their wings when at rest, and whilst basking in the sunshine often alternately raise and depress them, thus exposing to full view both surfaces; and although the lower surface is often coloured in an obscure manner as a protection, yet in many species it is as highly coloured as the upper surface, and sometimes in a very different manner. In some tropical species the lower surface is even more brilliantly coloured than the upper.512 In one English fritillary, the Argynnis aglaia, the lower surface alone is ornamented with shining silver discs. Nevertheless, as a general rule, the upper surface, which is probably the most fully exposed, is coloured more brightly and in a more diversified manner than the lower. Hence the lower surface generally affords to entomologists the most useful character for detecting the affinities of the various species.

Now if we turn to the enormous group of moths, which do not habitually expose to full view the under surface of their wings, this side is very rarely, as I hear from Mr. Stainton, coloured more brightly than the upper side, or even with equal brightness. Some exceptions to the rule, either real or apparent, must be noticed, as that of Hypopira, specified by Mr. Wormald.513 Mr. R. Trimen informs me that in Guenée’s great work, three moths are figured, in which the under surface is much the most brilliant. For instance, in the Australian Gastrophora the upper surface of the fore-wing is pale greyish-ochreous, while the lower surface is magnificently ornamented by an ocellus of cobalt-blue, placed in the midst of a black mark, surrounded by orange-yellow, and this by bluish-white. But the habits of these three moths are unknown; so that no explanation can be given of their unusual style of colouring. Mr. Trimen also informs me that the lower surface of the wings in certain other Geometræ514 and quadrifid Noctuæ are either more variegated or more brightly-coloured than the upper surface; but some of these species have the habit of “holding their wings quite erect over their backs, retaining them in this position for a considerable time,” and thus exposing to view the under surface. Other species when settled on the ground or herbage have the habit of now and then suddenly and slightly lifting up their wings. Hence the lower surface of the wings being more brightly-coloured than the upper surface in certain moths is not so anomalous a circumstance as it at first appears. The Saturniidæ include some of the most beautiful of all moths, their wings being decorated, as in our British Emperor moth, with fine ocelli; and Mr. T. W. Wood515 observes that they resemble butterflies in some of their movements; “for instance, in the gentle waving up and down of the wings, as if for display, which is more characteristic of diurnal than of nocturnal Lepidoptera.”

It is a singular fact that no British moths, nor as far as I can discover hardly any foreign species, which are brilliantly coloured, differ much in colour according to sex; though this is the case with many brilliant butterflies. The male, however, of one American moth, the Saturnia Io, is described as having its fore-wings deep yellow, curiously marked with purplish-red spots; whilst the wings of the female are purple-brown, marked with grey lines.516 The British moths which differ sexually in colour are all brown, or various tints of dull yellow, or nearly white. In several species the males are much darker than the females,517 and these belong to groups which generally fly about during the afternoon. On the other hand, in many genera, as Mr. Stainton informs me, the males have the hind-wings whiter than those of the female—of which, fact Agrotis exclamationis offers a good instance. The males are thus rendered more conspicuous than the females, whilst flying about in the dusk. In the Ghost Moth (Hepialus humuli) the difference is more strongly marked; the males being white and the females yellow with darker markings. It is difficult to conjecture what the meaning can be of these differences between the sexes in the shades of darkness or lightness; but we can hardly suppose that they are the result of mere variability with sexually-limited inheritance, independently of any benefit thus derived.

From the foregoing statements it is impossible to admit that the brilliant colours of butterflies and of some few moths, have commonly been acquired for the sake of protection. We have seen that their colours and elegant patterns are arranged and exhibited as if for display. Hence I am led to suppose that the females generally prefer, or are most excited by the more brilliant males; for on any other supposition the males would be ornamented, as far as we can see, for no purpose. We know that ants and certain lamellicorn beetles are capable of feeling an attachment for each other, and that ants recognise their fellows after an interval of several months. Hence there is no abstract improbability in the Lepidoptera, which probably stand nearly or quite as high in the scale as these insects, having sufficient mental capacity to admire bright colours. They certainly discover flowers by colour, and, as I have elsewhere shewn, the plants which are fertilised exclusively by the wind never have a conspicuously-coloured corolla. The Humming-bird Sphinx may often be seen to swoop down from a distance on a bunch of flowers in the midst of green foliage; and I have been assured by a friend, that these moths repeatedly visited flowers painted on the walls of a room in the South of France. The common white butterfly, as I hear from Mr. Doubleday, often flies down to a bit of paper on the ground, no doubt mistaking it for one of its own species. Mr. Collingwood518 in speaking of the difficulty of collecting certain butterflies in the Malay Archipelago, states that “a dead specimen pinned upon a conspicuous twig will often arrest an insect of the same species in its headlong flight, and bring it down within easy reach of the net, especially if it be of the opposite sex.”

The courtship of butterflies is a prolonged affair. The males sometimes fight together in rivalry; and many may be seen pursuing or crowding round the same female. If, then, the females do not prefer one male to another, the pairing must be left to mere chance, and this does not appear to me a probable event. If, on the other hand, the females habitually, or even occasionally, prefer the more beautiful males, the colours of the latter will have been rendered brighter by degrees, and will have been transmitted to both sexes or to one sex, according to which law of inheritance prevailed. The process of sexual selection will have been much facilitated, if the conclusions arrived at from various kinds of evidence in the supplement to the ninth chapter can be trusted; namely that the males of many Lepidoptera, at least in the imago state, greatly exceed in number the females.

Some facts, however, are opposed to the belief that female butterflies prefer the more beautiful males; thus, as I have been assured by several observers, fresh females may frequently be seen paired with battered, faded or dingy males; but this is a circumstance which could hardly fail often to follow from the males emerging from their cocoons earlier than the females. With moths of the family of the Bombycidæ, the sexes pair immediately after assuming the imago state; for they cannot feed, owing to the rudimentary condition of their mouths. The females, as several entomologists have remarked to me, lie in an almost torpid state, and appear not to evince the least choice in regard to their partners, This is the case with the common silk-moth (B. mori), as I have been told by some continental and English breeders. Dr. Wallace, who has had such immense experience in breeding Bombyx cynthia, is convinced that the females evince no choice or preference. He has kept above 300 of these moths living together, and has often found the most vigorous females mated with stunted males. The reverse apparently seldom occurs; for, as he believes, the more vigorous males pass over the weakly females, being attracted by those endowed with most vitality. Although we have been indirectly induced to believe that the females of many species prefer the more beautiful males, I have no reason to suspect, either with moths or butterflies, that the males are attracted by the beauty of the females. If the more beautiful females had been continually preferred, it is almost certain, from the colours of butterflies being so frequently transmitted to one sex alone, that the females would often have been rendered more beautiful than their male partners. But this does not occur except in a few instances; and these can be explained, as we shall presently see, on the principle of mimickry and protection.

As sexual selection primarily depends on variability, a few words must be added on this subject. In respect to colour there is no difficulty, as any number of highly variable Lepidoptera could be named. One good instance will suffice. Mr. Bates shewed me a whole series of specimens of Papilio sesostris and childrenæ; in the latter the males varied much in the extent of the beautifully enamelled green patch on the fore-wings, and in the size of the white mark, as well as of the splendid crimson stripe on the hind-wings; so that there was a great contrast between the most and least gaudy males. The male of Papilio sesostris, though a beautiful insect, is much less so than P. childrenæ. It likewise varies a little in the size of the green patch on the fore-wings, and in the occasional appearance of a small crimson stripe on the hind-wings, borrowed, as it would seem, from its own female; for the females of this and of many other species in the Æneas group possess this crimson stripe. Hence between the brightest specimens of P. sesostris and the least bright of P. childrenæ, there was but a small interval; and it was evident that as far as mere variability is concerned, there would be no difficulty in permanently increasing by means of selection the beauty of either species. The variability is here almost confined to the male sex; but Mr. Wallace and Mr. Bates have shewn519 that the females of some other species are extremely variable, the males being nearly constant. As I have before mentioned the Ghost Moth (Hepialus humuli) as one of the best instances in Britain of a difference in colour between the sexes of moths, it may be worth adding520 that in the Shetland Islands, males are frequently found which closely resemble the females. In a future chapter I shall have occasion to shew that the beautiful eye-like spots or ocelli, so common on the wings of many Lepidoptera, are eminently variable.

On the whole, although many serious objections may be urged, it seems probable that most of the species of Lepidoptera which are brilliantly coloured, owe their colours to sexual selection, excepting in certain cases, presently to be mentioned, in which conspicuous colours are beneficial as a protection. From the ardour of the male throughout the animal kingdom, he is generally willing to accept any female; and it is the female which usually exerts a choice. Hence if sexual selection has here acted, the male, when the sexes differ, ought to be the most brilliantly coloured; and this undoubtedly is the ordinary rule. When the sexes are brilliantly coloured and resemble each other, the characters acquired by the males appear to have been transmitted to both sexes. But will this explanation of the similarity and dissimilarity in colour between the sexes suffice?

The males and females of the same species of butterfly are known521 in several cases to inhabit different stations, the former commonly basking in the sunshine, the latter haunting gloomy forests. It is therefore possible that different conditions of life may have acted directly on the two sexes; but this is not probable,522 as in the adult state they are exposed during a very short period to different conditions; and the larvæ of both are exposed to the same conditions. Mr. Wallace believes that the less brilliant colours of the female have been specially gained in all or almost all cases for the sake of protection. On the contrary it seems to me more probable that the males alone, in the large majority of cases, have acquired their bright colours through sexual selection, the females having been but little modified. Consequently the females of distinct but allied species ought to resemble each other much more closely than do the males of the same species; and this is the general rule. The females thus approximately show us the primordial colouring of the parent-species of the group to which they belong. They have, however, almost always been modified to a certain extent by some of the successive steps of variation, through the accumulation of which the males were rendered beautiful, having been transferred to them. The males and females of allied though distinct species will also generally have been exposed during their prolonged larval state to different conditions, and may have been thus indirectly affected; though with the males any slight change of colour thus caused will often have been completely masked by the brilliant tints gained through sexual selection. When we treat of Birds, I shall have to discuss the whole question whether the differences in colour between the males and females have been in part specially gained by the latter as a protection; so that I will here only give unavoidable details.

In all cases when the more common form of equal inheritance by both sexes has prevailed, the selection of bright-coloured males would tend to make the females bright-coloured; and the selection of dull-coloured females would tend to make the males dull. If both processes were carried on simultaneously, they would tend to neutralise each other. As far as I can see, it would be extremely difficult to change through selection the one form of inheritance into the other. But by the selection of successive variations, which were from the first sexually limited in their transmission, there would not be the slightest difficulty in giving bright colours to the males alone, and at the same time or subsequently, dull colours to the females alone. In this latter manner female butterflies and moths may, as I fully admit, have been rendered inconspicuous for the sake of protection, and widely different from their males.

Mr. Wallace523 has argued with much force in favour of his view that when the sexes differ, the female has been specially modified for the sake of protection; and that this has been effected by one form of inheritance, namely, the transmission of characters to both sexes, having been changed through the agency of natural selection into the other form, namely, transmission to one sex. I was at first strongly inclined to accept this view; but the more I have studied the various classes throughout the animal kingdom, the less probable it has appeared. Mr. Wallace urges that both sexes of the Heliconidæ, Danaidæ, Acroeidæ are equally brilliant because both are protected from the attacks of birds and other enemies, by their offensive odour; but that in other groups, which do not possess this immunity, the females have been rendered inconspicuous, from having more need of protection than the males. This supposed difference in the “need of protection by the two sexes” is rather deceptive, and requires some discussion. It is obvious that brightly-coloured individuals, whether males or females, would equally attract, and obscurely-coloured individuals equally escape, the attention of their enemies. But we are concerned with the effects of the destruction or preservation of certain individuals of either sex, on the character of the race. With insects, after the male has fertilised the female, and after the latter has laid her eggs, the greater or less immunity from danger of either sex could not possibly have any effect on the offspring. Before the sexes have performed their proper functions, if they existed in equal numbers and if they strictly paired (all other circumstances being the same), the preservation of the males and females would be equally important for the existence of the species and for the character of the offspring. But with most animals, as is known to be the case with the domestic silk-moth, the male can fertilise two or three females; so that the destruction of the males would not be so injurious to the species as that of the females. On the other hand, Dr. Wallace believes that with moths the progeny from a second or third fertilisation is apt to be weakly, and therefore would not have so good chance of surviving. When the males exist in much greater numbers than the females, no doubt many males might be destroyed with impunity to the species; but I cannot see that the results of ordinary selection for the sake of protection would be influenced by the sexes existing in unequal numbers; for the same proportion of the more conspicuous individuals, whether males or females, would probably be destroyed. If indeed the males presented a greater range of variation in colour, the result would be different; but we need not here follow out such complex details. On the whole I cannot perceive that an inequality in the numbers of the two sexes would influence in any marked manner the effects of ordinary selection on the character of the offspring.

Female Lepidoptera require, as Mr. Wallace insists, some days to deposit their fertilised ova and to search for a proper place; during this period (whilst the life of the male was of no importance) the brighter-coloured females would be exposed to danger and would be liable to be destroyed. The duller-coloured females on the other hand would survive, and thus would influence, it might be thought, in a marked manner the character of the species,—either of both sexes or of one sex, according to which form of inheritance prevailed. But it must not be forgotten that the males emerge from the cocoon-state some days before the females, and during this period, whilst the unborn females were safe, the brighter-coloured males would be exposed to danger; so that ultimately both sexes would probably be exposed during a nearly equal length of time to danger, and the elimination of conspicuous colours would not be much more effective in the one than the other sex.

It is a more important consideration that female Lepidoptera, as Mr. Wallace remarks, and as is known to every collector, are generally slower flyers than the males. Consequently the latter, if exposed to greater danger from being conspicuously coloured, might be able to escape from their enemies, whilst the similarly-coloured females would be destroyed; and thus the females would have the most influence in modifying the colour of their progeny.

There is one other consideration: bright colours, as far as sexual selection is concerned, are commonly of no service to the females; so that if the latter varied in brightness, and the variations were sexually limited in their transmission, it would depend on mere chance whether the females had their bright colours increased; and this would tend throughout the Order to diminish the number of species with brightly-coloured females in comparison with the species having brightly-coloured males. On the other hand, as bright colours are supposed to be highly serviceable to the males in their love-struggles, the brighter males (as we shall see in the chapter on Birds) although exposed to rather greater danger, would on an average procreate a greater number of offspring than the duller males. In this case, if the variations were limited in their transmission to the male sex, the males alone would be rendered more brilliantly coloured; but if the variations were not thus limited, the preservation and augmentation of such variations would depend on whether more evil was caused to the species by the females being rendered conspicuous, than good to the males by certain individuals being successful over their rivals.

As there can hardly be a doubt that both sexes of many butterflies and moths have been rendered dull-coloured for the sake of protection, so it may have been with the females alone of some species in which successive variations towards dullness first appeared in the female sex and were from the first limited in their transmission to the same sex. If not thus limited, both sexes would become dull-coloured. We shall immediately see, when we treat of mimickry, that the females alone of certain butterflies have been rendered extremely beautiful for the sake of protection, without any of the successive protective variations having been transferred to the male, to whom they could not possibly have been in the least degree injurious, and therefore could not have been eliminated through natural selection. Whether in each particular species, in which the sexes differ in colour, it is the female which has been specially modified for the sake of protection; or whether it is the male which has been specially modified for the sake of sexual attraction, the female having retained her primordial colouring only slightly changed through the agencies before alluded to; or whether again both sexes have been modified, the female for protection and the male for sexual attraction, can only be definitely decided when we know the life-history of each species.

Without distinct evidence, I am unwilling to admit that a double process of selection has long been going on with a multitude of species,—the males having been rendered more brilliant by beating their rivals; and the females more dull-coloured by having escaped from their enemies. We may take as an instance the common brimstone butterfly (Gonepteryx), which appears early in the spring before any other kind. The male of this species is of a far more intense yellow than the female, though she is almost equally conspicuous; and in this case it does not seem probable that she specially acquired her pale tints as a protection, though it is probable that the male acquired his bright colours as a sexual attraction. The female of Anthocharis cardamines does not possess the beautiful orange tips to her wings with which the male is ornamented; consequently she closely resembles the white butterflies (Pieris) so common in our gardens; but we have no evidence that this resemblance is beneficial. On the contrary, as she resembles both sexes of several species of the same genus inhabiting various quarters of the world, it is more probable that she has simply retained to a large extent her primordial colours.

Various facts support the conclusion that with the greater number of brilliantly-coloured Lepidoptera, it is the male which has been modified; the two sexes having come to differ from each other, or to resemble each other, according to which form of inheritance has prevailed. Inheritance is governed by so many unknown laws or conditions, that they seem to us to be most capricious in their action;524 and we can so far understand how it is that with closely-allied species the sexes of some differ to an astonishing degree, whilst the sexes of others are identical in colour. As the successive steps in the process of variation are necessarily all transmitted through the female, a greater or less number of such steps might readily become developed in her; and thus we can understand the frequent gradations from an extreme difference to no difference at all between the sexes of the species within the same group. These cases of gradation are much too common to favour the supposition that we here see females actually undergoing the process of transition and losing their brightness for the sake of protection; for we have every reason to conclude that at any one time the greater number of species are in a fixed condition. With respect to the differences between the females of the species in the same genus or family, we can perceive that they depend, at least in part, on the females partaking of the colours of their respective males. This is well illustrated in those groups in which the males are ornamented to an extraordinary degree; for the females in these groups generally partake to a certain extent of the splendour of their male partners. Lastly, we continually find, as already remarked, that the females of almost all the species in the same genus, or even family, resemble each other much more closely in colour than do the males; and this indicates that the males have undergone a greater amount of modification than the females.

Mimickry.—This principle was first made clear in an admirable paper by Mr. Bates,525 who thus threw a flood of light on many obscure problems. It had previously been observed that certain butterflies in S. America belonging to quite distinct families, resembled the Heliconidæ so closely in every stripe and shade of colour that they could not be distinguished except by an experienced entomologist. As the Heliconidæ are coloured in their usual manner, whilst the others depart from the usual colouring of the groups to which they belong, it is clear that the latter are the imitators, and the Heliconidæ the imitated. Mr. Bates further observed that the imitating species are comparatively rare, whilst the imitated swarm in large numbers; the two sets living mingled together. From the fact of the Heliconidæ being conspicuous and beautiful insects, yet so numerous in individuals and species, he concluded that they must be protected from the attacks of birds by some secretion or odour; and this hypothesis has now been confirmed by a considerable body of curious evidence.526 From these considerations Mr. Bates inferred that the butterflies which imitate the protected species had acquired their present marvellously deceptive appearance, through variation and natural selection, in order to be mistaken for the protected kinds and thus to escape being devoured. No explanation is here attempted of the brilliant colours of the imitated, but only of the imitating butterflies. We must account for the colours of the former in the same general manner, as in the cases previously discussed in this chapter. Since the publication of Mr. Bates’ paper, similar and equally striking facts have been observed by Mr. Wallace527 in the Malayan region, and by Mr. Trimen in South Africa.

As some writers528 have felt much difficulty in understanding how the first steps in the process of mimickry could have been effected through natural selection, it may be well to remark that the process probably has never commenced with forms widely dissimilar in colour. But with two species moderately like each other, the closest resemblance if beneficial to either form could readily be thus gained; and if the imitated form was subsequently and gradually modified through sexual selection or any other means, the imitating form would be led along the same track, and thus be modified to almost any extent, so that it might ultimately assume an appearance or colouring wholly unlike that of the other members of the group to which it belonged. As extremely slight variations in colour would not in many cases suffice to render a species so like another protected species as to lead to its preservation, it should be remembered that many species of Lepidoptera are liable to considerable and abrupt variations in colour. A few instances have been given in this chapter; but under this point of view Mr. Bates’ original paper on mimickry, as well as Mr. Wallace’s papers, should be consulted.

In the foregoing cases both sexes of the imitating species resemble the imitated; but occasionally the female alone mocks a brilliantly-coloured and protected species inhabiting the same district. Consequently the female differs in colour from her own male, and, which is a rare and anomalous circumstance, is the more brightly-coloured of the two. In all the few species of Pieridæ, in which the female is more conspicuously coloured than the male, she imitates, as I am informed by Mr. Wallace, some protected species inhabiting the same region. The female of Diadema anomala is rich purple-brown with almost the whole surface glossed with satiny blue, and she closely imitates the Euplœa midamus, “one of the commonest butterflies of the East;” whilst the male is bronzy or olive-brown, with only a slight blue gloss on the outer parts of the wings.529 Both sexes of this Diadema and of D. bolina follow the same habits of life, so that the differences in colour between the sexes cannot be accounted for by exposure to different conditions;530 even if this explanation were admissible in other instances.531

The above cases of female butterflies which are more brightly-coloured than the males, shew us, firstly, that variations have arisen in a state of nature in the female sex, and have been transmitted exclusively, or almost exclusively, to the same sex; and, secondly, that this form of inheritance has not been determined through natural selection. For if we assume that the females, before they became brightly coloured in imitation of some protected kind, were exposed during each season for a longer period to danger than the males; or if we assume that they could not escape so swiftly from their enemies, we can understand how they alone might originally have acquired through natural selection and sexually-limited inheritance their present protective colours. But except on the principle of these variations having been transmitted exclusively to the female offspring, we cannot understand why the males should have remained dull-coloured; for it would surely not have been in any way injurious to each individual male to have partaken by inheritance of the protective colours of the female, and thus to have had a better chance of escaping destruction. In a group in which brilliant colours are so common as with butterflies, it cannot be supposed that the males have been kept dull-coloured through sexual selection by the females rejecting the individuals which were rendered as beautiful as themselves. We may, therefore, conclude that in these cases inheritance by one sex is not due to the modification through natural selection of a tendency to equal inheritance by both sexes.

It may be well here to give an analogous case in another Order, of characters acquired only by the female, though not in the least injurious, as far as we can judge, to the male. Amongst the Phasmidæ, or spectre-insects, Mr. Wallace states that “it is often the females alone that so strikingly resemble leaves, while the males show only a rude approximation.” Now, whatever may be the habits of these insects, it is highly improbable that it could be disadvantageous to the males to escape detection by resembling leaves.532 Hence we may conclude that the females alone in this latter as in the previous cases originally varied in certain characters; these characters having been preserved and augmented through ordinary selection for the sake of protection and from the first transmitted to the female offspring alone.

Bright Colours of Caterpillars.—Whilst reflecting on the beauty of many butterflies, it occurred to me that some caterpillars were splendidly coloured, and as sexual selection could not possibly have here acted, it appeared rash to attribute the beauty of the mature insect to this agency, unless the bright colours of their larvæ could be in some manner explained. In the first place it may be observed that the colours of caterpillars do not stand in any close correlation with those of the mature insect. Secondly, their bright colours do not serve in any ordinary manner as a protection. As an instance of this, Mr. Bates informs me that the most conspicuous caterpillar which he ever beheld (that of a Sphinx) lived on the large green leaves of a tree on the open llanos of South America; it was about four inches in length, transversely banded with black and yellow, and with its head, legs, and tail of a bright red. Hence it caught the eye of any man who passed by at the distance of many yards, and no doubt of every passing bird.

I then applied to Mr. Wallace, who has an innate genius for solving difficulties. After some consideration he replied: “Most caterpillars require protection, as may be inferred from some kinds being furnished with spines or irritating hairs, and from many being coloured green like the leaves on which they feed, or curiously like the twigs of the trees on which they live.” I may add as another instance of protection, that there is a caterpillar of a moth, as I am informed by Mr. J. Mansel Weale, which lives on the mimosas in South Africa, and fabricates for itself a case, quite undistinguishable from the surrounding thorns. From such considerations Mr. Wallace thought it probable that conspicuously-coloured caterpillars were protected by having a nauseous taste; but as their skin is extremely tender, and as their intestines readily protrude from a wound, a slight peck from the beak of a bird would be as fatal to them as if they had been devoured. Hence, as Mr. Wallace remarks, “distastefulness alone would be insufficient to protect a caterpillar unless some outward sign indicated to its would-be destroyer that its prey was a disgusting morsel.” Under these circumstances it would be highly advantageous to a caterpillar to be instantaneously and certainly recognised as unpalatable by all birds and other animals. Thus the most gaudy colours would be serviceable, and might have been gained by variation and the survival of the most easily-recognised individuals.

This hypothesis appears at first sight very bold; but when it was brought before the Entomological Society533 it was supported by various statements; and Mr. J. Jenner Weir, who keeps a large number of birds in an aviary, has made, as he informs me, numerous trials, and finds no exception to the rule, that all caterpillars of nocturnal and retiring habits with smooth skins, all of a green colour, and all which imitate twigs, are greedily devoured by his birds. The hairy and spinose kinds are invariably rejected, as were four conspicuously-coloured species. When the birds rejected a caterpillar, they plainly shewed, by shaking their heads and cleansing their beaks, that they were disgusted by the taste.534 Three conspicuous kinds of caterpillars and moths were also given by Mr. A. Butler to some lizards and frogs, and were rejected; though other kinds were eagerly eaten. Thus the probable truth of Mr. Wallace’s view is confirmed, namely, that certain caterpillars have been made conspicuous for their own good, so as to be easily recognised by their enemies, on nearly the same principle that certain poisons are coloured by druggists for the good of man. This view will, it is probable, be hereafter extended to many animals, which are coloured in a conspicuous manner.

Summary and Concluding Remarks on Insects.—Looking back to the several Orders, we have seen that the sexes often differ in various characters, the meaning of which is not understood. The sexes, also, often differ in their organs of sense or locomotion, so that the males may quickly discover or reach the females, and still oftener in the males possessing diversified contrivances for retaining the females when found. But we are not here much concerned with sexual differences of these kinds.

In almost all the Orders, the males of some species, even of weak and delicate kinds, are known to be highly pugnacious; and some few are furnished with special weapons for fighting with their rivals. But the law of battle does not prevail nearly so widely with insects as with the higher animals. Hence probably it is that the males have not often been rendered larger and stronger than the females. On the contrary they are usually smaller, in order that they may be developed within a shorter time, so as to be ready in large numbers for the emergence of the females.

In two families of the Homoptera the males alone possess, in an efficient state, organs which may be called vocal; and in three families of the Orthoptera the males alone possess stridulating organs. In both cases these organs are incessantly used during the breeding-season, not only for calling the females, but for charming or exciting them in rivalry with other males. No one who admits the agency of natural selection, will dispute that these musical instruments have been acquired through sexual selection. In four other Orders the members of one sex, or more commonly of both sexes, are provided with organs for producing various sounds, which apparently serve merely as call-notes. Even when both sexes are thus provided, the individuals which were able to make the loudest or most continuous noise would gain partners before those which were less noisy, so that their organs have probably been gained through sexual selection. It is instructive to reflect on the wonderful diversity of the means for producing sound, possessed by the males alone or by both sexes in no less than six Orders, and which were possessed by at least one insect at an extremely remote geological epoch. We thus learn how effectual sexual selection has been in leading to modifications of structure, which sometimes, as with the Homoptera, are of an important nature.

From the reasons assigned in the last chapter, it is probable that the great horns of the males of many lamellicorn, and some other beetles, have been acquired as ornaments. So perhaps it may be with certain other peculiarities confined to the male sex. From the small size of insects, we are apt to undervalue their appearance. If we could imagine a male Chalcosoma (fig. 15) with its polished, bronzed coat of mail, and vast complex horns, magnified to the size of a horse or even of a dog, it would be one of the most imposing animals in the world.

The colouring of insects is a complex and obscure subject. When the male differs slightly from the female, and neither are brilliantly coloured, it is probable that the two sexes have varied in a slightly different manner, with the variations transmitted to the same sex, without any benefit having been thus derived or evil suffered. When the male is brilliantly coloured and differs conspicuously from the female, as with some dragon-flies and many butterflies, it is probable that he alone has been modified, and that he owes his colours to sexual selection; whilst the female has retained a primordial or very ancient type of colouring, slightly modified by the agencies before explained, and has therefore not been rendered obscure, at least in most cases, for the sake of protection. But the female alone has sometimes been coloured brilliantly so as to imitate other protected species inhabiting the same district. When the sexes resemble each other and both are obscurely coloured, there is no doubt that they have been in a multitude of cases coloured for the sake of protection. So it is in some instances when both are brightly coloured, causing them to resemble surrounding objects such as flowers, or other protected species, or indirectly by giving notice to their enemies that they are of an unpalatable nature. In many other cases in which the sexes resemble each other and are brilliantly coloured, especially when the colours are arranged for display, we may conclude that they have been gained by the male sex as an attraction, and have been transferred to both sexes. We are more especially led to this conclusion whenever the same type of coloration prevails throughout a group, and we find that the males of some species differ widely in colour from the females, whilst both sexes of other species are quite alike, with intermediate gradations connecting these extreme states.

In the same manner as bright colours have often been partially transferred from the males to the females, so it has been with the extraordinary horns of many lamellicorn and some other beetles. So, again, the vocal or instrumental organs proper to the males of the Homoptera and Orthoptera have generally been transferred in a rudimentary, or even in a nearly perfect condition to the females; yet not sufficiently perfect to be used for producing sound. It is also an interesting fact, as bearing on sexual selection, that the stridulating organs of certain male Orthoptera are not fully developed until the last moult; and that the colours of certain male dragon-flies are not fully developed until some little time after their emergence from the pupal state, and when they are ready to breed.

Sexual selection implies that the more attractive individuals are preferred by the opposite sex; and as with insects, when the sexes differ, it is the male which, with rare exceptions, is the most ornamented and departs most from the type to which the species belongs;—and as it is the male which searches eagerly for the female, we must suppose that the females habitually or occasionally prefer the more beautiful males, and that these have thus acquired their beauty. That in most or all the orders the females have the power of rejecting any particular male, we may safely infer from the many singular contrivances possessed by the males, such as great jaws, adhesive cushions, spines, elongated legs, &c., for seizing the female; for these contrivances shew that there is some difficulty in the act. In the case of unions between distinct species, of which many instances have been recorded, the female must have been a consenting party. Judging from what we know of the perceptive powers and affections of various insects, there is no antecedent improbability in sexual selection having come largely into action; but we have as yet no direct evidence on this head, and some facts are opposed to the belief. Nevertheless, when we see many males pursuing the same female, we can hardly believe that the pairing is left to blind chance—that the female exerts no choice, and is not influenced by the gorgeous colours or other ornaments, with which the male alone is decorated.

If we admit that the females of the Homoptera and Orthoptera appreciate the musical tones emitted by their male partners, and that the various instruments for this purpose have been perfected through sexual selection, there is little improbability in the females of other insects appreciating beauty in form or colour, and consequently in such characters having been thus gained by the males. But from the circumstance of colour being so variable, and from its having been so often modified for the sake of protection, it is extremely difficult to decide in how large a proportion of cases sexual selection has come into play. This is more especially difficult in those Orders, such as the Orthoptera, Hymenoptera, and Coleoptera, in which the two sexes rarely differ much in colour; for we are thus cut off from our best evidence of some relation between the reproduction of the species and colour. With the Coleoptera, however, as before remarked, it is in the great lamellicorn group, placed by some authors at the head of the Order, and in which we sometimes see a mutual attachment between the sexes, that we find the males of some species possessing weapons for sexual strife, others furnished with wonderful horns, many with stridulating organs, and others ornamented with splendid metallic tints. Hence it seems probable that all these characters have been gained through the same means, namely sexual selection.

When we treat of Birds, we shall see that they present in their secondary sexual characters the closest analogy with insects. Thus, many male birds are highly pugnacious, and some are furnished with special weapons for fighting with their rivals. They possess organs which are used during the breeding-season for producing vocal and instrumental music. They are frequently ornamented with combs, horns, wattles and plumes of the most diversified kinds, and are decorated with beautiful colours, all evidently for the sake of display. We shall find that, as with insects, both sexes, in certain groups, are equally beautiful, and are equally provided with ornaments which are usually confined to the male sex. In other groups both sexes are equally plain-coloured and unornamented. Lastly, in some few anomalous cases, the females are more beautiful than the males. We shall often find, in the same group of birds, every gradation from no difference between the sexes, to an extreme difference. In the latter case we shall see that the females, like female insects, often possess more or less plain traces of the characters which properly belong to the males. The analogy, indeed, in all these respects between birds and insects, is curiously close. Whatever explanation applies to the one class probably applies to the other; and this explanation, as we shall hereafter attempt to shew, is almost certainly sexual selection.





FOOTNOTES:





1 As the works of the first-named authors are so well known, I need not give the titles; but as those of the latter are less well known in England, I will give them:—‘Sechs Vorlesungen über die Darwin’sche Theorie:’ zweite Auflage, 1868, von Dr. L. Büchner; translated into French under the title ‘Conférences sur la Théorie Darwinienne,’ 1869. ‘Der Mensch, im Lichte der Darwin’sche Lehre,’ 1865, von Dr. F. Rolle. I will not attempt to give references to all the authors who have taken the same side of the question. Thus G. Canestrini has published (‘Annuario della Soc. d. Nat.,’ Modena, 1867, p. 81) a very curious paper on rudimentary characters, as bearing on the origin of man. Another work has (1869) been published by Dr. Barrago Francesco, bearing in Italian the title of “Man, made in the image of God, was also made in the image of the ape.”



2 Prof. Häckel is the sole author who, since the publication of the ‘Origin,’ has discussed, in his various works, in a very able manner, the subject of sexual selection, and has seen its full importance.



3 ‘Grosshirnwindungen des Menschen,’ 1868, s. 96.



4 ‘Leç. sur la Phys.’ 1866, p. 890, as quoted by M. Dally, ‘L’Ordre des Primates et le Transformisme,’ 1868, p. 29.



5 ‘Naturgeschichte der Säugethiere von Paraguay,’ 1830, s. 50.



6 Brehm, ‘Thierleben,’ B. i. 1864, s. 75, 86. On the Ateles, s. 105. For other analogous statements, see s. 25, 107.



7 With respect to insects see Dr. Laycock ‘On a General Law of Vital Periodicity,’ British Association, 1842. Dr. Macculloch, ‘Silliman’s North American Journal of Science,’ vol. xvii. p. 305, has seen a dog suffering from tertian ague.



8 I have given the evidence on this head in my ‘Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,’ vol. ii. p. 15.



9 “Mares e diversis generibus Quadrumanorum sine dubio dignoscunt feminas humanas a maribus. Primum, credo, odoratu, postea aspectu. Mr. Youatt, qui diu in Hortis Zoologicis (Bestiariis) medicus animalium erat, vir in rebus observandis cautus et sagax, hoc mihi certissime probavit, et curatores ejusdem loci et alii e ministris confirmaverunt. Sir Andrew Smith et Brehm notabant idem in Cynocephalo. Illustrissimus Cuvier etiam narrat multa de hac re quâ ut opinor nihil turpius potest indicari inter omnia hominibus et Quadrumanis communia. Narrat enim Cynocephalum quendam in furorem incidere aspectu feminarum aliquarum, sed nequaquam accendi tanto furore ab omnibus. Semper eligebat juniores, et dignoscebat in turba, et advocabat voce gestuque.”



10 This remark is made with respect to Cynocephalus and the anthropomorphous apes by Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire and F. Cuvier, ‘Hist. Nat. des Mammifères,’ tom. i. 1824.



11 Huxley, ‘Man’s Place in Nature,’ 1863, p. 34.



12 ‘Man’s Place in Nature,’ 1863, p. 67.



13 The human embryo (upper fig.) is from Ecker, ‘Icones Phys.,’ 1851-1859, tab. xxx. fig. 2. This embryo was ten lines in length, so that the drawing is much magnified. The embryo of the dog is from Bischoff, ‘Entwicklungsgeschichte des Hunde-Eies,’ 1845, tab. xi. fig. 42 B. This drawing is five times magnified, the embryo being 25 days old. The internal viscera have been omitted, and the uterine appendages in both drawings removed. I was directed to these figures by Prof. Huxley, from whose work, ‘Man’s Place in Nature.’ the idea of giving them was taken. Häckel has also given analogous drawings in his ‘Schöpfungsgeschichte.’



14 Prof. Wyman in ‘Proc. of American Acad. of Sciences,’ vol. iv. 1860, p. 17.



15 Owen, ‘Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. i. p. 533.



16 ‘Die Grosshirnwindungen des Menschen,’ 1868, s. 95.



17 ‘Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. ii. p. 553.



18 ‘Proc. Soc. Nat. Hist.’ Boston, 1863, vol. ix. p. 185.



19 ‘Man’s Place in Nature,’ p. 65.



20 I had written a rough copy of this chapter before reading a valuable paper, “Caratteri rudimentali in ordine all’origine del uomo” (‘Annuario della Soc. d. Nat.,’ Modena, 1867, p. 81), by G. Canestrini, to which paper I am considerably indebted. Häckel has given admirable discussions on this whole subject, under the title of Dysteleology, in his ‘Generelle Morphologie’ and ‘Schöpfungsgeschichte.’



21 Some good criticisms on this subject have been given by Messrs. Murie and Mivart, in ‘Transact. Zoolog. Soc.’ 1869, vol. vii. p. 92.



22 ‘Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,’ vol. ii. pp. 317 and 397. See also ‘Origin of Species,’ 5th edit. p. 535.



23 For instance M. Richard (‘Annales des Sciences Nat.’ 3rd series, Zoolog. 1852, tom. xviii. p. 13) describes and figures rudiments of what he calls the “muscle pédieux de la main,” which he says is sometimes “infiniment petit.” Another muscle, called “le tibial postérieur,” is generally quite absent in the hand, but appears from time to time in a more or less rudimentary condition.



24 Prof. W. Turner, ‘Proc. Royal Soc. Edinburgh,’ 1866-67, p. 65.



25 Canestrini quotes Hyrt. (‘Annuario della Soc. dei Naturalisti,’ Modena, 1867, p. 97) to the same effect.



26 ‘The Diseases of the Ear,’ by J. Toynbee, F.R.S., 1860, p. 12.



27 See also some remarks, and the drawings of the ears of the Lemuroidea, in Messrs. Murie and Mivart’s excellent paper in ‘Transact. Zoolog. Soc.’ vol. vii. 1869, pp. 6 and 90.



28 Müller’s ‘Elements of Physiology,’ Eng. translat., 1842, vol. ii. p. 1117. Owen, ‘Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. iii. p. 260; ibid. on the Walrus, ‘Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ November 8th, 1854. See also R. Knox, 'Great Artists and Anatomists,’ p. 106. This rudiment apparently is somewhat larger in Negroes and Australians than in Europeans, see Carl Vogt, ‘Lectures on Man,’ Eng. translat. p. 129.



29 ‘The Physiology and Pathology of Mind,’ 2nd edit. 1868, p. 134.



30 Eschricht, Ueber die Richtung der Haare am menschlichen Körper 'Müllers Archiv für Anat. und Phys.’ 1837, s. 47. I shall often have to refer to this very curious paper.



31 Paget, ‘Lectures on Surgical Pathology,’ 1853, vol. i. p. 71.



32 Eschricht, ibid. s. 40, 47.



33 Dr. Webb, ‘Teeth in Man and the Anthropoid Apes,’ as quoted by Dr. C. Carter Blake in ‘Anthropological Review,’ July, 1867, p. 299.



34 Owen, ‘Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. iii. pp. 320, 321, and 325.



35 ‘On the Primitive Form of the Skull,’ Eng. translat. in ‘Anthropological Review,’ Oct. 1868, p. 426.



36 Owen, ‘Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. iii. pp. 416, 434, 441.



37 ‘Annuario della Soc. d. Nat.’ Modena, 1867, p. 94.



38 M. C. Martins (“De l’Unité Organique,” in ‘Revue des Deux Mondes,’ June 15, 1862, p. 16), and Häckel (‘Generelle Morphologie,’ B. ii. s. 278), have both remarked on the singular fact of this rudiment sometimes causing death.



39 ‘The Lancet,’ Jan. 24, 1863, p. 83. Dr. Knox, ‘Great Artists and Anatomists,’ p. 63. See also an important memoir on this process by Dr. Grube, in the ‘Bulletin de l’Acad. Imp. de St. Pétersbourg,’ tom. xii. 1867, p. 448.



40 “On the Caves of Gibraltar,” ‘Transact. Internat. Congress of Prehist. Arch.’ Third Session, 1869, p. 54.



41 Quatrefages has lately collected the evidence on this subject. 'Revue des Cours Scientifiques,’ 1867-1868, p. 625.



42 Owen, ‘On the Nature of Limbs,’ 1849, p. 114.



43 Leuckart, in Todd’s ‘Cyclop. of Anat.’ 1849-52, vol. iv. p. 1415. In man this organ is only from three to six lines in length, but, like so many other rudimentary parts, it is variable in development as well as in other characters.



44 See, on this subject, Owen, ‘Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. iii. pp. 675, 676, 706.



45 See the evidence on these points, as given by Lubbock, ‘Prehistoric Times,’ p. 354, &c.



46 ‘L’Instinct chez les Insectes.’ ‘Revue des Deux Mondes,’ Feb. 1870, p. 690.



47 ‘The American Beaver and his Works,’ 1868.



48 ‘The Principles of Psychology,’ 2nd edit. 1870, pp. 418-443.



49 ‘Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection,’ 1870, p. 212



50 ‘Recherches sur les Mœurs des Fourmis,’ 1810, p. 173.



51 All the following statements, given on the authority of these two naturalists, are taken from Rengger’s ‘Naturges. der Säugethiere von Paraguay,’ 1830, s. 41-57, and from Brehm’s ‘Thierleben,’ B. i. s. 10-87.



52 ‘Bridgewater Treatise,’ p. 263.



53 W. C. L. Martin, ‘Nat. Hist. of Mammalia,’ 1841, p. 405.



54 Quoted by Vogt, ‘Mémoire sur les Microcéphales,’ 1867, p. 168.



55 ‘The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,’ vol. i. p. 27.



56 ‘Les Mœurs des Fourmis,’ 1810, p. 150.



57 Quoted in Dr. Maudsley’s ‘Physiology and Pathology of Mind,’ 1868, pp. 19, 220.



58 Dr. Jerdon, ‘Birds of India,’ vol. i. 1862, p. xxi.



59 Mr. L. H. Morgan’s work on ‘The American Beaver,’ 1868, offers a good illustration of this remark. I cannot, however, avoid thinking that he goes too far in underrating the power of Instinct.



60 ‘The Moor and the Loch,’ p. 45. Col. Hutchinson on ‘Dog Breaking,’ 1850, p. 46.



61 ‘Personal Narrative,’ Eng. translat., vol. iii. p. 106.



62 Quoted by Sir C. Lyell, ‘Antiquity of Man,’ p. 497.



63 ‘Journal of Researches during the Voyage of the “Beagle,”’ 1845, p. 398. ‘Origin of Species,’ 5th edit. p. 260.



64 ‘Lettres Phil. sur l’Intelligence des Animaux,’ nouvelle edit. 1802, p. 86.



65 See the evidence on this head in chap. i. vol. i. ‘On the Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication.’



66 ‘Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 1864, p. 186.



67 Savage and Wyman in ‘Boston Journal of Nat. Hist.’ vol. iv. 1843-44, p. 383.



68 ‘Säugethiere von Paraguay,’ 1830, s. 51-56.



69 ‘Thierleben,’ B. i. s. 79, 82.



70 ‘The Malay Archipelago,’ vol. i. 1869, p. 87.



71 ‘Primeval Man,’ 1869, pp. 145, 147.



72 ‘Prehistoric Times,’ 1865, p. 473, &c.

