=== CACHE SLICE range_6_v2_1433_1686 ===
=== Source: Darwin, Descent of Man (1871 Appleton), vol2 lines 1433-1686 ===
=== Expected content: Ch XVII-XVIII: SS of mammals ===

CHAPTER XVII.



Secondary Sexual Characters of Mammals.



The law of battle—Special weapons, confined to the males—Cause of absence of weapons in the female—Weapons common to both sexes, yet primarily acquired by the male—Other uses of such weapons—Their high importance—Greater size of the male—Means of defence—On the preference shewn by either sex in the pairing of quadrupeds.

With mammals the male appears to win the female much more through the law of battle than through the display of his charms. The most timid animals, not provided with any special weapons for fighting, engage in desperate conflicts during the season of love. Two male hares have been seen to fight together until one was killed; male moles often fight, and sometimes with fatal results; male squirrels “engage in frequent contests, and often wound each other severely;” as do male beavers, so that “hardly a skin is without scars.”288 I observed the same fact with the hides of the guanacoes in Patagonia; and on one occasion several were so absorbed in fighting that they fearlessly rushed close by me. Livingstone speaks of the males of the many animals in Southern Africa as almost invariably shewing the scars received in former contests.

The law of battle prevails with aquatic as with terrestrial mammals. It is notorious how desperately male seals fight, both with their teeth and claws, during the breeding-season; and their hides are likewise often covered with scars. Male sperm-whales are very jealous at this season; and in their battles “they often lock their jaws together, and turn on their sides and twist about;” so that it is believed by some naturalists that the frequently deformed state of their lower jaws is caused by these struggles.289

All male animals which are furnished with special weapons for fighting, are well known to engage in fierce battles. The courage and the desperate conflicts of stags have often been described; their skeletons have been found in various parts of the world, with the horns inextricably locked together, shewing how miserably the victor and vanquished had perished.290 No animal in the world is so dangerous as an elephant in must. Lord Tankerville has given me a graphic description of the battles between the wild bulls in Chillingham Park, the descendants, degenerated in size but not in courage, of the gigantic Bos primigenius. In 1861 several contended for mastery; and it was observed that two of the younger bulls attacked in concert the old leader of the herd, overthrew and disabled him, so that he was believed by the keepers to be lying mortally wounded in a neighbouring wood. But a few days afterwards one of the young bulls singly approached the wood; and then the “monarch of the chase,” who had been lashing himself up for vengeance, came out and, in a short time killed his antagonist. He then quietly joined the herd, and long held undisputed sway. Admiral Sir B. J. Sulivan informs me that when he resided in the Falkland Islands he imported a young English stallion, which, with eight mares, frequented the hills near Port William. On these hills there were two wild stallions, each with a small troop of mares; “and it is certain that these stallions would never have approached each other without fighting. Both had tried singly to fight the English horse and drive away his mares, but had failed. One day they came in together and attacked him. This was seen by the capitan who had charge of the horses, and who, on riding to the spot, found one of the two stallions engaged with the English horse, whilst the other was driving away the mares, and had already separated four from the rest. The capitan settled the matter by driving the whole party into the corral, for the wild stallions would not leave the mares.”

Male animals already provided with efficient cutting or tearing teeth for the ordinary purposes of life, as in the carnivora, insectivora, and rodents, are seldom furnished with weapons especially adapted for fighting with their rivals. The case is very different with the males of many other animals. We see this in the horns of stags and of certain kinds of antelopes in which the females are hornless. With many animals the canine teeth in the upper or lower jaw, or in both, are much larger in the males than in the females; or are absent in the latter, with the exception sometimes of a hidden rudiment. Certain antelopes, the musk-deer, camel, horse, boar, various apes, seals, and the walrus, offer instances of these several cases. In the females of the walrus the tusks are sometimes quite absent.291 In the male elephant of India and in the male dugong292 the upper incisors form offensive weapons. In the male narwhal one alone of the upper teeth is developed into the well-known, spirally-twisted, so called horn, which is sometimes from nine to ten feet in length. It is believed that the males use these horns for fighting together; for “an unbroken one can rarely be got, and occasionally one may be found with the point of another jammed into the broken place.”293 The tooth on the opposite side of the head in the male consists of a rudiment about ten inches in length, which is embedded in the jaw. It is not, however, very uncommon to find double-horned male narwhals in which both teeth are well developed. In the females both teeth are rudimentary. The male cachalot has a larger head than that of the female, and it no doubt aids these animals in their aquatic battles. Lastly, the adult male ornithorhynchus is provided with a remarkable apparatus, namely a spur on the foreleg, closely resembling the poison-fang of a venomous snake; its use is not known, but we may suspect that it serves as a weapon of offence.294 It is represented by a mere rudiment in the female.

When the males are provided with weapons which the females do not possess, there can hardly be a doubt that they are used for fighting with other males, and that they have been acquired through sexual selection.



It is not probable, at least in most cases, that the females have actually been saved from acquiring such weapons, owing to their being useless and superfluous, or in some way injurious. On the contrary, as they are often used by the males of many animals for various purposes, more especially as a defence against their enemies, it is a surprising fact that they are so poorly developed or quite absent in the females. No doubt with female deer the development during each recurrent season of great branching horns, and with female elephants the development of immense tusks, would have been a great waste of vital power, on the admission that they were of no use to the females. Consequently variations in the size of these organs, leading to their suppression, would have come under the control of natural selection, and if limited in their transmission to the female offspring would not have interfered with their development through sexual selection in the males. But how on this view can we explain the presence of horns in the females of certain antelopes, and of tusks in the females of many animals, which are only of slightly less size than in the males? The explanation in almost all cases must, I believe, be sought in the laws of transmission.

As the reindeer is the single species in the whole family of Deer in which the female is furnished with horns, though somewhat smaller, thinner, and less branched than in the male, it might naturally be thought that they must be of some special use to her. There is, however, some evidence opposed to this view. The female retains her horns from the time when they are fully developed, namely in September, throughout the winter, until May, when she brings forth her young; whilst the male casts his horns much earlier, towards the end of November. As both sexes have the same requirements and follow the same habits of life, and as the male sheds his horns during the winter, it is very improbable that they can be of any special service to the female at this season, which includes the larger proportion of the time during which she bears horns. Nor is it probable that she can have inherited horns from some ancient progenitor of the whole family of deer, for, from the fact of the males alone of so many species in all quarters of the globe possessing horns, we may conclude that this was the primordial character of the group. Hence it appears that horns must have been transferred from the male to the female at a period subsequent to the divergence of the various species from a common stock; but that this was not effected for the sake of giving her any special advantage.295

We know that the horns are developed at a most unusually early age in the reindeer; but what the cause of this may have been is not known. The effect, however, has apparently been the transference of the horns to both sexes. It is intelligible on the hypothesis of pangenesis, that a very slight change in the constitution of the male, either in the tissues of the forehead or in the gemmules of the horns, might lead to their early development; and as the young of both sexes have nearly the same constitution before the period of reproduction, the horns, if developed at an early age in the male, would tend to be developed equally in both sexes. In support of this view, we should bear in mind that the horns are always transmitted through the female, and that she has a latent capacity for their development, as we see in old or diseased females.296 Moreover the females of some other species of deer either normally or occasionally exhibit rudiments of horns; thus the female of Cervulus moschatus has “bristly tufts, ending in a knob, instead of a horn;” and “in most specimens of the female Wapiti (Cervus Canadensis) there is a sharp bony protuberance in the place of the horn.”297 From these several considerations we may conclude that the possession of fairly well-developed horns by the female reindeer, is due to the males having first acquired them as weapons for fighting with other males; and secondarily to their development from some unknown cause at an unusually early age in the males, and their consequent transmission to both sexes.

Turning to the sheath-horned ruminants: with antelopes a graduated series can be formed, beginning with the species, the females of which are completely destitute of horns—passing to those which have horns so small as to be almost rudimentary, as in Antilocapra Americana—to those which have fairly well-developed horns, but manifestly smaller and thinner than in the male, and sometimes of a different shape,298 and ending with those in which both sexes have horns of equal size. As with the reindeer, so with antelopes there exists a relation between the period of the development of the horns and their transmission to one or both sexes; it is therefore probable that their presence or absence in the females of some species, and their more or less perfect condition in the females of other species, depend, not on their being of some special use, but simply on the form of inheritance which has prevailed. It accords with this view that even in the same restricted genus both sexes of some species, and the males alone of other species, are thus provided. It is a remarkable fact that, although the females of Antilope bezoartica are normally destitute of horns, Mr. Blyth has seen no less than three females thus furnished; and there was no reason to suppose that they were old or diseased. The males of this species have long straight spirated horns, nearly parallel to each other, and directed backwards. Those of the female, when present, are very different in shape, for they are not spirated, and spreading widely bend round, so that their points are directed forwards. It is a still more remarkable fact that in the castrated male, as Mr. Blyth informs me, the horns are of the same peculiar shape as in the female, but longer and thicker. In all cases the differences between the horns of the males and females, and of castrated and entire males, probably depend on various causes,—on the more or less complete transference of male characters to the females,—on the former state of the progenitors of the species,—and partly perhaps on the horns being differently nourished, in nearly the same manner as the spurs of the domestic cock, when inserted into the comb or other parts of the body, assume various abnormal forms from being differently nourished.

In all the wild species of goats and sheep the horns are larger in the male than in the female, and are sometimes quite absent in the latter.299 In several domestic breeds of the sheep and goat, the males alone are furnished with horns; and it is a significant fact, that in one such breed of sheep on the Guinea coast, the horns are not developed, as Mr. Winwood Reade informs me, in the castrated male; so that they are affected in this respect like the horns of stags. In some breeds, as in that of N. Wales, in which both sexes are properly horned, the ewes are very liable to be hornless. In these same sheep, as I have been informed by a trustworthy witness who purposely inspected a flock during the lambing-season, the horns at birth are generally more fully developed in the male than in the female. With the adult musk-ox (Ovibos moschatus) the horns of the male are larger than those of the female, and in the latter the bases do not touch.300 In regard to ordinary cattle Mr. Blyth remarks: “In most of the wild bovine animals the horns are both longer and thicker in the bull than in the cow, and in the cow-banteng (Bos sondaicus) the horns are remarkably small, and inclined much backwards. In the domestic races of cattle, both of the humped and humpless types, the horns are short and thick in the bull, longer and more slender in the cow and ox; and in the Indian buffalo, they are shorter and thicker in the bull, longer and more slender in the cow. In the wild gaour (B. gaurus) the horns are mostly both longer and thicker in the bull than in the cow.”301 Hence with most sheath-horned ruminants the horns of the male are either longer or stronger than those of the female. With the Rhinoceros simus, as I may here add, the horns of the female are generally longer but less powerful than in the male; and in some other species of rhinoceros they are said to be shorter in the female.302 From these various facts we may conclude that horns of all kinds, even when they are equally developed in both sexes, were primarily acquired by the males in order to conquer other males, and have been transferred more or less completely to the female, in relation to the force of the equal form of inheritance.

The tusks of the elephant, in the different species or races, differ according to sex, in nearly the same manner as the horns of ruminants. In India and Malacca the males alone are provided with well-developed tusks. The elephant of Ceylon is considered by most naturalists as a distinct race, but by some as a distinct species, and here “not one in a hundred is found with tusks, the few that possess them being exclusively males.”303 The African elephant is undoubtedly distinct, and the female has large, well-developed tusks, though not so large as those of the male. These differences in the tusks of the several races and species of elephants—the great variability of the horns of deer, as notably in the wild reindeer—the occasional presence of horns in the female Antilope bezoartica—the presence of two tusks in some few male narwhals—the complete absence of tusks in some female walruses;—are all instances of the extreme variability of secondary sexual characters, and of their extreme liability to differ in closely-allied forms.

Although tusks and horns appear in all cases to have been primarily developed as sexual weapons, they often serve for other purposes. The elephant uses his tusks in attacking the tiger; according to Bruce, he scores the trunks of trees until they can be easily thrown down, and he likewise thus extracts the farinaceous cores of palms; in Africa he often uses one tusk, this being always the same, to probe the ground and thus to ascertain whether it will bear his weight. The common bull defends the herd with his horns; and the elk in Sweden has been known, according to Lloyd, to strike a wolf dead with a single blow of his great horns. Many similar facts could be given. One of the most curious secondary uses to which the horns of any animal are occasionally put, is that observed by Captain Hutton304 with the wild goat (Capra ægagrus) of the Himalayas, and as it is said with the ibex, namely, that when the male accidentally falls from a height he bends inwards his head, and, by alighting on his massive horns, breaks the shock. The female cannot thus use her horns, which are smaller, but from her more quiet disposition she does not so much need this strange kind of shield.

Each male animal uses his weapons in his own peculiar fashion. The common ram makes a charge and butts with such force with the bases of his horns, that I have seen a powerful man knocked over as easily as a child. Goats and certain species of sheep, for instance the Ovis cycloceros of Afghanistan,305 rear on their hind legs, and then not only butt, but “make a cut down and a jerk up, with the ribbed front of their scimitar-shaped horn, as with a sabre. When the O. cycloceros attacked a large domestic ram, who was a noted bruiser, he conquered him by the sheer novelty of his mode of fighting, always closing at once with his adversary, and catching him across the face and nose with a sharp drawing jerk of his head, and then bounding out of the way before the blow could be returned.” In Pembrokeshire a male goat, the master of a flock which during several generations had run wild, was known to have killed several other males in single combat; this goat possessed enormous horns, measuring 39 inches in a straight line from tip to tip. The common bull, as every one knows, gores and tosses his opponent; but the Italian buffalo is said never to use his horns, he gives a tremendous blow with his convex forehead, and then tramples on his fallen enemy with his knees—an instinct which the common bull does not possess.306 Hence a dog who pins a buffalo by the nose is immediately crushed. We must, however, remember that the Italian buffalo has long been domesticated, and it is by no means certain that the wild parent-form had similarly shaped horns. Mr. Bartlett informs me that when a female Cape buffalo (Bubalus caffer) was turned into an enclosure with a bull of the same species, she attacked him, and he in return pushed her about with great violence. But it was manifest to Mr. Bartlett that had not the bull shewn dignified forbearance, he could easily have killed her by a single lateral thrust with his immense horns. The giraffe uses his short hair-covered horns, which are rather longer in the male than in the female, in a curious manner; for with his long neck he swings his head to either side, almost upside down, with such force, that I have seen a hard plank deeply indented by a single blow.



Fig. 61. Oryx leucoryx, male (from the Knowsley Menagerie).

With antelopes it is sometimes difficult to imagine how they can possibly use their curiously-shaped horns; thus the spring-boc (Ant. euchore) has rather short upright horns, with the sharp points bent inwards almost at a right angle, so as to face each other; Mr. Bartlett does not know how they are used, but suggests that they would inflict a fearful wound down each side of the face of an antagonist. The slightly-curved horns of the Oryx leucoryx (fig. 61) are directed backwards, and are of such length that their points reach beyond the middle of the back, over which they stand in an almost parallel line. Thus they seem singularly ill-fitted for fighting; but Mr. Bartlett informs me that when two of these animals prepare for battle, they kneel down, with their heads between their front legs, and in this attitude the horns stand nearly parallel and close to the ground, with the points directed forwards and a little upwards. The combatants then gradually approach each other and endeavour to get the upturned points under each other’s bodies; if one succeeds in doing this, he suddenly springs up, throwing up his head at the same time, and can thus wound or perhaps even transfix his antagonist. Both animals always kneel down so as to guard as far as possible against this manœuvre. It has been recorded that one of these antelopes has used his horns with effect even against a lion; yet from being forced to place his head between the forelegs in order to bring the points of the horns forward, he would generally be under a great disadvantage when attacked by any other animal. It is, therefore, not probable that the horns have been modified into their present great length and peculiar position, as a protection against beasts of prey. We can, however, see that as soon as some ancient male progenitor of the Oryx acquired moderately long horns, directed a little backwards, he would be compelled in his battles with rival males to bend his head somewhat inwards or downwards, as is now done by certain stags; and it is not improbable that he might have acquired the habit of at first occasionally and afterwards of regularly kneeling down. In this case it is almost certain that the males which possessed the longest horns would have had a great advantage over others with shorter horns; and then the horns would gradually have been rendered longer and longer, through sexual selection, until they acquired their present extraordinary length and position.

With stags of many kinds the branching of the horns offers a curious case of difficulty; for certainly a single straight point would inflict a much more serious wound than several diverging points. In Sir Philip Egerton’s museum there is a horn of the red-deer (Cervus elaphus) thirty inches in length, with “not fewer than fifteen snags or branches;” and at Moritzburg there is still preserved a pair of antlers of a red-deer, shot in 1699 by Frederick I., each of which bears the astonishing number of thirty-three branches. Richardson figures a pair of antlers of the wild reindeer with twenty-nine points.307 From the manner in which the horns are branched, and more especially from deer being known occasionally to fight together by kicking with their fore-feet,308 M. Bailly actually came to the conclusion that their horns were more injurious than useful to them! But this author overlooks the pitched battles between rival males. As I felt much perplexed about the use or advantage of the branches, I applied to Mr. McNeill of Colinsay, who has long and carefully observed the habits of red-deer, and he informs me that he has never seen some of the branches brought into action, but that the brow-antlers, from inclining downwards, are a great protection to the forehead, and their points are likewise used in attack. Sir Philip Egerton also informs me in regard both to red-deer and fallow-deer, that when they fight they suddenly dash together, and getting their horns fixed against each other’s bodies a desperate struggle ensues. When one is at last forced to yield and turn round, the victor endeavours to plunge his brow-antlers into his defeated foe. It thus appears that the upper branches are used chiefly or exclusively for pushing and fencing. Nevertheless with some species the upper branches are used as weapons of offence; when a man was attacked by a Wapiti deer (Cervus Canadensis) in Judge Caton’s park in Ottawa, and several men tried to rescue him, the stag “never raised his head from the ground; in fact he kept his face almost flat on the ground, with his nose nearly between his fore-feet, except when he rolled his head to one side to take a new observation preparatory to a plunge.” In this position the terminal points of the horns were directed against his adversaries. “In rolling his head he necessarily raised it somewhat, because his antlers were so long that he could not roll his head without raising them on one side, while on the other side they touched the ground.” The stag by this procedure gradually drove the party of rescuers backwards, to a distance of 150 or 200 feet; and the attacked man was killed.309

Although the horns of stags are efficient weapons, there can, I think, be no doubt that a single point would have been much more dangerous than a branched antler; and Judge Caton, who has had large experience with deer, fully concurs in this conclusion. Nor do the branching horns, though highly important as a means of defence against rival stags, appear perfectly well adapted for this purpose, as they are liable to become interlocked. The suspicion has therefore crossed my mind that they may serve partly as ornaments. That the branched antlers of stags, as well as the elegant lyrated horns of certain antelopes, with their graceful double curvature, (fig. 62), are ornamental in our eyes, no one will dispute. If, then, the horns, like the splendid accoutrements of the knights of old, add to the noble appearance of stags and antelopes, they may have been partly modified for this purpose, though mainly for actual service in battle; but I have no evidence in favour of this belief.



Fig. 62. Strepsiceros Kudu (from Andrew Smith’s ‘Zoology of South Africa’).

An interesting case has lately been published, from which it appears that the horns of a deer in one district in the United States are now being modified through sexual and natural selection. A writer in an excellent American Journal310 says, that he has hunted for the last twenty-one years in the Adirondacks, where the Cervus Virginianus abounds. About fourteen years ago he first heard of spike-horn bucks. These became from year to year more common; about five years ago he shot one, and subsequently another, and now they are frequently killed. “The spike-horn differs greatly from the common antler of the C. Virginianus. It consists of a single spike, more slender than the antler, and scarcely half so long, projecting forward from the brow, and terminating in a very sharp point. It gives a considerable advantage to its possessor over the common buck. Besides enabling him to run more swiftly through the thick woods and underbrush (every hunter knows that does and yearling bucks run much more rapidly than the large bucks when armed with their cumbrous antlers), the spike-horn is a more effective weapon than the common antler. With this advantage the spike-horn bucks are gaining upon the common bucks, and may, in time, entirely supersede them in the Adirondacks. Undoubtedly the first spike-horn buck was merely an accidental freak of nature. But his spike-horns gave him an advantage, and enabled him to propagate his peculiarity. His descendants, having a like advantage, have propagated the peculiarity in a constantly increasing ratio, till they are slowly crowding the antlered deer from the region they inhabit.”

Male quadrupeds which are furnished with tusks use them in various ways, as in the case of horns. The boar strikes laterally and upwards; the musk-deer with serious effect downwards.311 The walrus, though having so short a neck and so unwieldy a body, “can strike either upwards, or downwards, or sideways, with equal dexterity.”312 The Indian elephant fights, as I was informed by the late Dr. Falconer, in a different manner according to the position and curvature of his tusks. When they are directed forwards and upwards he is able to fling a tiger to a great distance—it is said to even thirty feet; when they are short and turned downwards he endeavours suddenly to pin the tiger to the ground, and in consequence is dangerous to the rider, who is liable to be jerked off the hoodah.313

Very few male quadrupeds possess weapons of two distinct kinds specially adapted for fighting with rival males. The male muntjac-deer (Cervulus), however, offers an exception, as he is provided with horns and exserted canine teeth. But one form of weapon, has often been replaced in the course of ages by another form, as we may infer from what follows. With ruminants the development of horns generally stands in an inverse relation with that of even moderately well-developed canine teeth. Thus camels, guanacoes, chevrotains and musk-deer, are hornless, and they have efficient canines; these teeth being “always of smaller size in the females than in the males.” The Camelidæ have in their upper jaws, in addition to their true canines, a pair of canine-shaped incisors.314 Male deer and antelopes, on the other hand, possess horns, and they rarely have canine teeth; and these when present are always of small size, so that it is doubtful whether they are of any service in their battles. With Antilope montana they exist only as rudiments in the young male, disappearing as he grows old; and they are absent in the female at all ages; but the females of certain other antelopes and deer have been known occasionally to exhibit rudiments of these teeth.315 Stallions have small canine teeth, which are either quite absent or rudimentary in the mare; but they do not appear to be used in fighting, for stallions bite with their incisors, and do not open their mouths widely like camels and guanacoes. Whenever the adult male possesses canines now in an inefficient state, whilst the female has either none or mere rudiments, we may conclude that the early male progenitor of the species was provided with efficient canines, which had been partially transferred to the females. The reduction of these teeth in the males seems to have followed from some change in their manner of fighting, often caused (but not in the case of the horse) by the development of new weapons.

Tusks and horns are manifestly of high importance to their possessors, for their development consumes much organised matter. A single tusk of the Asiatic elephant,—one of the extinct woolly species,—and of the African elephant, have been known to weigh respectively 150, 160, and 180 pounds; and even greater weights have been assigned by some authors.316 With deer, in which the horns are periodically renewed, the drain on the constitution must be greater; the horns, for instance, of the moose weigh from fifty to sixty pounds, and those of the extinct Irish elk from sixty to seventy pounds,—the skull of the latter weighing on an average only five and a quarter pounds. With sheep, although the horns are not periodically renewed, yet their development, in the opinion of many agriculturists, entails a sensible loss to the breeder. Stags, moreover, in escaping from beasts of prey are loaded with an additional weight for the race, and are greatly retarded in passing through a woody country. The moose, for instance, with horns extending five and a half feet from tip to tip, although so skilful in their use that he will not touch or break a dead twig when walking quietly, cannot act so dexterously whilst rushing away from a pack of wolves. “During his progress he holds his nose up, so as to lay the horns horizontally back; and in this attitude cannot see the ground distinctly.”317 The tips of the horns of the great Irish elk were actually eight feet apart! Whilst the horns are covered with velvet, which lasts with the red-deer for about twelve weeks, they are extremely sensitive to a blow; so that in Germany the stags at this time change their habits to a certain extent, and avoid dense forests, frequenting young woods and low thickets.318 These facts remind us, that male birds have acquired ornamental plumes at the cost of retarded flight, and other ornaments at the cost of some loss of power in their battles with rival males.



With quadrupeds, when, as is often the case, the sexes differ in size, the males are, I believe, always larger and stronger. This holds good in a marked manner, as I am informed by Mr. Gould, with the marsupials of Australia, the males of which appear to continue growing until an unusually late age. But the most extraordinary case is that of one of the seals (Callorhinus ursinus), a full-grown female weighing less than one-sixth of a full-grown male.319 The greater strength of the male is invariably displayed, as Hunter long ago remarked,320 in those parts of the body which are brought into action in fighting with rival males,—for instance, in the massive neck of the bull. Male quadrupeds are also more courageous and pugnacious than the females. There can be little doubt that these characters have been gained, partly through sexual selection, owing to a long series of victories by the stronger and more courageous males over the weaker, and partly through the inherited effects of use. It is probable that the successive variations in strength, size, and courage, whether due to so-called spontaneous variability or to the effects of use, by the accumulation of which male quadrupeds have acquired these characteristic qualities, occurred rather late in life, and were consequently to a large extent limited in their transmission to the same sex.

Under this point of view I was anxious to obtain information in regard to the Scotch deerhound, the sexes of which differ more in size than those of any other breed (though blood-hounds differ considerably), or than in any wild canine species known to me.



Accordingly, I applied to Mr. Cupples, a well-known breeder of these dogs, who has weighed and measured many of his own dogs, and who, with great kindness, has collected for me the following facts from various sources. Superior male dogs, measured at the shoulder, range from twenty-eight inches, which is low, to thirty-three, or even thirty-four inches in height; and in weight from eighty pounds, which is low, to 120, or even more pounds. The females range in height from twenty-three to twenty-seven, or even to twenty-eight inches; and in weight from fifty to seventy, or even eighty pounds.321 Mr. Cupples concludes that from ninety-five to one hundred pounds for the male, and seventy for the female, would be a safe average; but there is reason to believe that formerly both sexes attained a greater weight. Mr. Cupples has weighed puppies when a fortnight old; in one litter the average weight of four males exceeded that of two females by six and a half ounces; in another litter the average weight of four males exceeded that of one female by less than one ounce; the same males, when three weeks old, exceeded the female by seven and a half ounces, and at the age of six weeks by nearly fourteen ounces. Mr. Wright of Yeldersley House, in a letter to Mr. Cupples, says: “I have taken notes on the sizes and weights of puppies of many litters, and as far as my experience goes, dog-puppies as a rule differ very little from bitches till they arrive at about five or six months old; and then the dogs begin to increase, gaining upon the bitches both in weight and size. At birth, and for several weeks afterwards, a bitch-puppy will occasionally be larger than any of the dogs, but they are invariably beaten by them later.” Mr. McNeill, of Colinsay, concludes that “the males do not attain their full growth till over two years old, though the females attain it sooner.” According to Mr. Cupples’ experience, male dogs go on growing in stature till they are from twelve to eighteen months old, and in weight till from eighteen to twenty-four months old; whilst the females cease increasing in stature at the age of from nine to fourteen or fifteen months, and in weight at the age of from twelve to fifteen months. From these various statements it is clear that the full difference in size between the male and female Scotch deerhound is not acquired until rather late in life. The males are almost exclusively used for coursing, for, as Mr. McNeill informs me, the females have not sufficient strength and weight to pull down a full-grown deer. From the names used in old legends, it appears, as I hear from Mr. Cupples, that at a very ancient period the males were the most celebrated, the females being mentioned only as the mothers of famous dogs. Hence during many generations, it is the male which has been chiefly tested for strength, size, speed, and courage, and the best will have been bred from. As, however, the males do not attain their full dimensions until a rather late period in life, they will have tended, in accordance with the law often indicated, to transmit their characters to their male offspring alone; and thus the great inequality in size between the sexes of the Scotch deerhound may probably be accounted for.

The males of some few quadrupeds possess organs or parts developed solely as a means of defence against the attacks of other males. Some kinds of deer use, as we have seen, the upper branches of their horns chiefly or exclusively for defending themselves; and the Oryx antelope, as I am informed by Mr. Bartlett, fences most skilfully with his long, gently curved horns; but these are likewise used as organs of offence. Rhinoceroses, as the same observer remarks, in fighting parry each other’s sidelong blows with their horns, which loudly clatter together, as do the tusks of boars. Although wild boars fight desperately together, they seldom, according to Brehm, receive fatal blows, as these fall on each other’s tusks, or on the layer of gristly skin covering the shoulder, which the German hunters call the shield; and here we have a part specially modified for defence. With boars in the prime Fig. 63. Head of common wild boar, in prime of life (from Brehm). of life (see fig. 63) the tusks in the lower jaw are used for fighting but they become in old age, as Brehm states, so much curved inwards and upwards, over the snout, that they can no longer be thus used. They may, however, still continue to serve, and even in a still more effective manner, as a means of defence. In compensation for the loss of the lower tusks as weapons of offence, those in the upper jaw, which always project a little laterally, increase so much in length during old age, and curve so much upwards, that they can be used as a means of attack. Nevertheless an old boar is not so dangerous to man as one at the age of six or seven years.322



Fig. 64. Skull of the Babirusa Pig (from Wallace’s ‘Malay Archipelago’).

In the full-grown male Babirusa pig of Celebes (fig. 64), the lower tusks are formidable weapons, like those of the European boar in the prime of life, whilst the upper tusks are so long and have their points so much curled inwards, sometimes even touching the forehead, that they are utterly useless as weapons of attack. They more nearly resemble horns than teeth, and are so manifestly useless as teeth that the animal was formerly supposed to rest his head by hooking them on to a branch. Their convex surfaces would, however, if the head were held a little laterally, serve as an excellent guard; and hence, perhaps it is that in old animals they “are generally broken off, as if by fighting.”323 Here, then, we have the curious case of the upper tusks of the Babirusa regularly assuming during the prime of life, a structure which apparently renders them fitted only for defence; whilst in the European boar the lower and opposite tusks assume in a less degree and only during old age nearly the same form, and then serve in like manner solely for defence.



Fig. 65. Head of Æthiopian Wart-hog, from ‘Proc. Zool. Soc.’ 1869. (I now find that this drawing represents the head of a female, but it serves to shew, on a reduced scale, the characters of the male.)

In the wart-hog (Phacochœrus æthiopicus, fig. 65) the tusks in the upper jaw of the male curve upwards during the prime of life, and from being pointed, serve as formidable weapons. The tusks in the lower jaw are sharper than those in the upper, but from their shortness it seems hardly possible that they can be used as weapons of attack. They must, however, greatly strengthen those in the upper jaw, from being ground so as to fit closely against their bases. Neither the upper nor the lower tusks appear to have been specially modified to act as guards, though, no doubt, they are thus used to a certain extent. But the wart-hog is not destitute of other special means of protection, for there exists, on each side of the face, beneath the eyes, a rather stiff, yet flexible, cartilaginous, oblong pad (fig. 65), which projects two or three inches outwards; and it appeared to Mr. Bartlett and myself, when viewing the living animal, that these pads, when struck from beneath by the tusks of an opponent, would be turned upwards, and would thus protect in an admirable manner the somewhat prominent eyes. These boars, as I may add on the authority of Mr. Bartlett, when fighting together, stand directly face to face.

Lastly, the African river-hog (Potamochoerus penicillatus) has a hard cartilaginous knob on each side of the face beneath the eyes, which answers to the flexible pad of the wart-hog; it has also two bony prominences on the upper jaw above the nostrils. A boar of this species in the Zoological Gardens recently broke into the cage of the wart-hog. They fought all night-long, and were found in the morning much exhausted, but not seriously wounded. It is a significant fact, as shewing the purpose of the above-described projections and excrescences, that these were covered with blood, and were scored and abraded in an extraordinary manner.

The mane of the lion forms a good defence against the one danger to which he is liable, namely the attacks of rival lions: for the males, as Sir. A. Smith informs me, engage in terrible battles, and a young lion dares not approach an old one. In 1857 a tiger at Bromwich broke into the cage of a lion, and a fearful scene ensued; “the lion’s mane saved his neck and head from being much injured, but the tiger at last succeeded in ripping up his belly, and in a few minutes he was dead.”324 The broad ruff round the throat and chin of the Canadian lynx (Felis Canadensis) is much longer in the male than in the female; but whether it serves as a defence I do not know. Male seals are well known to fight desperately together, and the males of certain kinds (Otaria jubata)325 have great manes, whilst the females have small ones or none. The male baboon of the Cape of Good Hope (Cynocephalus porcarius) has a much longer mane and larger canine teeth than the female; and the mane probably serves as a protection, for on asking the keepers in the Zoological Gardens, without giving them any clue to my object, whether any of the monkeys especially attacked each other by the nape of the neck, I was answered that this was not the case, excepting with the above baboon. In the Hamadryas baboon, Ehrenberg compares the mane of the adult male to that of a young lion, whilst in the young of both sexes and in the female the mane is almost absent.

It appeared to me probable that the immense woolly mane of the male American bison, which reaches almost to the ground, and is much more developed in the males than in the females, served as a protection to them in their terrible battles; but an experienced hunter told Judge Caton that he had never observed anything which favoured this belief. The stallion has a thicker and fuller mane than the mare; and I have made particular inquiries of two great trainers and breeders who have had charge of many entire horses, and am assured that they “invariably endeavour to seize one another by the neck.” It does not, however, follow from the foregoing statements, that when the hair on the neck serves as a defence, that it was originally developed for this purpose, though this is probable in some cases, as in that of the lion. I am informed by Mr. McNeill that the long hairs on the throat of the stag (Cervus elephas) serve as a great protection to him when hunted, for the dogs generally endeavour to seize him by the throat; but it is not probable that these hairs were specially developed for this purpose; otherwise the young and the females would, as we may feel assured, have been equally protected.

On Preference or Choice in Pairing, as shewn by either sex of Quadrupeds.—Before describing, in the next chapter, the differences between the sexes in voice, odour emitted, and ornamentation, it will be convenient here to consider whether the sexes exert any choice in their unions. Does the female prefer any particular male, either before or after the males may have fought together for supremacy; or does the male, when not a polygamist, select any particular female? The general impression amongst breeders seems to be that the male accepts any female; and this, owing to his eagerness, is, in most cases, probably the truth. Whether the female as a general rule indifferently accepts any male is much more doubtful. In the fourteenth chapter, on Birds, a considerable body of direct and indirect evidence was advanced, shewing that the female selects her partner; and it would be a strange anomaly if female quadrupeds, which stand higher in the scale of organisation and have higher mental powers, did not generally, or at least often, exert some choice. The female could in most cases escape, if wooed by a male that did not please or excite her; and when pursued, as so incessantly occurs, by several males, she would often have the opportunity, whilst they were fighting together, of escaping with, or at least of temporarily pairing with, some one male. This latter contingency has often been observed in Scotland with female red-deer, as I have been informed by Sir Philip Egerton.326

It is scarcely possible that much should be known about female quadrupeds exerting in a state of nature any choice in their marriage unions. The following very curious details on the courtship of one of the eared seals, Callorhinus ursinus, are given327 on the authority of Capt. Bryant, who had ample opportunities for observation. He says, “Many of the females on their arrival at the island where they breed appear desirous of returning to some particular male, and frequently climb the outlying rocks to overlook the rookeries, calling out and listening as if for a familiar voice. Then changing to another place they do the same again.... As soon as a female reaches the shore, the nearest male goes down to meet her, making meanwhile a noise like the clucking of a hen to her chickens. He bows to her and coaxes her until he gets between her and the water so that she cannot escape him. Then his manner changes, and with a harsh growl he drives her to a place in his harem. This continues until the lower row of harems is nearly full. Then the males higher up select the time when their more fortunate neighbours are off their guard to steal their wives. This they do by taking them in their mouths and lifting them over the heads of the other females, and carefully placing them in their own harem, carrying them as cats do their kittens. Those still higher up pursue the same method until the whole space is occupied. Frequently a struggle ensues between two males for the possession of the same female, and both seizing her at once pull her in two or terribly lacerate her with their teeth. When the space is all filled, the old male walks around complacently reviewing his family, scolding those who crowd or disturb the others, and fiercely driving off all intruders. This surveillance always keeps him actively occupied.”

As so little is known about the courtship of animals in a state of nature, I have endeavoured to discover how far our domesticated quadrupeds evince any choice in their unions. Dogs offer the best opportunity for observation, as they are carefully attended to and well understood. Many breeders have expressed a strong opinion on this head. Thus Mr. Mayhew remarks, “The females are able to bestow their affections; and tender recollections are as potent over them as they are known to be in other cases, where higher animals are concerned. Bitches are not always prudent in their loves, but are apt to fling themselves away on curs of low degree. If reared with a companion of vulgar appearance, there often springs up between the pair a devotion which no time can afterwards subdue. The passion, for such it really is, becomes of a more than romantic endurance.” Mr. Mayhew, who attended chiefly to the smaller breeds, is convinced that the females are strongly attracted by males of large size.328 The well-known veterinary Blaine states329 that his own female pug became so attached to a spaniel, and a female setter to a cur, that in neither case would they pair with a dog of their own breed until several weeks had elapsed. Two similar and trustworthy accounts have been given me in regard to a female retriever and a spaniel, both of which became enamoured with terrier-dogs.

Mr. Cupples informs me that he can personally vouch for the accuracy of the following more remarkable case, in which a valuable and wonderfully-intelligent female terrier loved a retriever, belonging to a neighbour, to such a degree that she had often to be dragged away from him. After their permanent separation, although repeatedly shewing milk in her teats, she would never acknowledge the courtship of any other dog, and to the regret of her owner, never bore puppies. Mr. Cupples also states that a female deerhound now (1868) in his kennel has thrice produced puppies, and on each occasion shewed a marked preference for one of the largest and handsomest, but not the most eager, of four deerhounds living with her, all in the prime of life. Mr. Cupples has observed that the female generally favours a dog whom she has associated with and knows; her shyness and timidity at first incline her against a strange dog. The male, on the contrary, seems rather inclined towards strange females. It appears to be rare when the male refuses any particular female, but Mr. Wright, of Yeldersley House, a great breeder of dogs, informs me that he has known some instances; he cites the case of one of his own deerhounds, who would not take any notice of a particular female mastiff, so that another deerhound had to be employed. It would be superfluous to give other cases, and I will only add that Mr. Barr, who has carefully bred many blood-hounds, states that in almost every instance particular individuals of the opposite sex shew a decided preference for each other. Finally Mr. Cupples, after attending to this subject for another year, has recently written to me, “I have had full confirmation of my former statement, that dogs in breeding form decided preferences for each other, being often influenced by size, bright colour, and individual character, as well as by the degree of their previous familiarity.”

In regard to horses, Mr. Blenkiron, the greatest breeder of race-horses in the world, informs me that stallions are so frequently capricious in their choice, rejecting one mare and without any apparent cause taking to another, that various artifices have to be habitually used. The famous Monarque, for instance, would never consciously look at the dam of Gladiateur, and a trick had to be practised. We can partly see the reason why valuable race-horse stallions, which are in such demand, should be so particular in their choice. Mr. Blenkiron has never known a mare to reject a horse; but this has occurred in Mr. Wright’s stable, so that the mare had to be cheated. Prosper Lucas330 quotes various statements from French authorities, and remarks, “On voit des étalons qui s’éprennent d’une jument, et négligent toutes les autres.” He gives, on the authority of Baëlen, similar facts in regard to bulls. Hoffberg, in describing the domesticated reindeer of Lapland, says, “Fœmina majores et fortiores mares præ cæteris admittunt, ad eos confugiunt, a junioribus agitatæ, qui hos in fugam conjiciunt.”331 A clergy-man, who has bred many pigs, assures me that sows often reject one boar and immediately accept another.

From these facts there can be no doubt that with most of our domesticated quadrupeds strong individual antipathies and preferences are frequently exhibited, and much more commonly by the female than by the male. This being the case, it is improbable that the unions of quadrupeds in a state of nature should be left to mere chance. It is much more probable that the females are allured or excited by particular males, who possess certain characters in a higher degree than other males; but what these characters are, we can seldom or never discover with certainty.





CHAPTER XVIII.



Secondary Sexual Characters of Mammals

—

continued

.



Voice—Remarkable sexual peculiarities in seals—Odour—Development of the hair—Colour of the hair and skin—Anomalous case of the female being more ornamented than the male—Colour and ornaments due to sexual selection—Colour acquired for the sake of protection—Colour, though common to both sexes, often due to sexual selection—On the disappearance of spots and stripes in adult quadrupeds—On the colours and ornaments of the Quadrumana—Summary.

Quadrupeds use their voices for various purposes, as a signal of danger, as a call from one member of a troop to another, or from the mother to her lost offspring, or from the latter for protection to their mother; but such uses need not here be considered. We are concerned only with the difference between the voices of the two sexes, for instance between that of the lion and lioness, or of the bull and cow. Almost all male animals use their voices much more during the rutting-season than at any other time; and some, as the giraffe and porcupine,332 are said to be completely mute excepting at this season. As the throats (i.e. the larynx and thyroid bodies333) of stags become periodically enlarged at the commencement of the breeding-season, it might be thought that their powerful voices must be then in some way of high importance to them; but this is very doubtful. From information given to me by two experienced observers, Mr. McNeill and Sir P. Egerton, it seems that young stags under three years old do not roar or bellow; and that the old ones begin bellowing at the commencement of the breeding-season, at first only occasionally and moderately, whilst they restlessly wander about in search of the females. Their battles are prefaced by loud and prolonged bellowing, but during the actual conflict they are silent. Animals of all kinds which habitually use their voices, utter various noises under any strong emotion, as when enraged and preparing to fight; but this may merely be the result of their nervous excitement, which leads to the spasmodic contraction of almost all the muscles of the body, as when a man grinds his teeth and clenches his hands in rage or agony. No doubt stags challenge each other to mortal combat by bellowing; but it is not likely that this habit could have led through sexual selection, that is by the loudest-voiced males having been the most successful in their conflicts, to the periodical enlargement of the vocal organs; for the stags with the most powerful voices, unless at the same time the strongest, best-armed, and most courageous, would not have gained any advantage over their rivals with weaker voices. The stags, moreover, which had weaker voices, though not so well able to challenge other stags, would have been drawn to the place of combat as certainly as those with stronger voices.

It is possible that the roaring of the lion may be of some actual service to him in striking terror into his adversary; for when enraged he likewise erects his mane and thus instinctively tries to make himself appear as terrible as possible. But it can hardly be supposed that the bellowing of the stag, even if it be of any service to him in this way, can have been important enough to have led to the periodical enlargement of the throat. Some writers suggest that the bellowing serves as a call to the female; but the experienced observers above quoted inform me that female deer do not search for the male, though the males search eagerly for the females, as indeed might be expected from what we know of the habits of other male quadrupeds. The voice of the female, on the other hand, quickly brings to her one or more stags,334 as is well known to the hunters who in wild countries imitate her cry. If we could believe that the male had the power to excite or allure the female by his voice, the periodical enlargement of his vocal organs would be intelligible on the principle of sexual selection, together with inheritance limited to the same sex and season of the year; but we have no evidence in favour of this view. As the case stands, the loud voice of the stag during the breeding season does not seem to be of any special service to him, either during his courtship or battles, or in any other way. But may we not believe that the frequent use of the voice, under the strong excitement of love, jealousy, and rage, continued during many generations, may at last have produced an inherited effect on the vocal organs of the stag, as well as of other male animals? This appears to me, with our present state of knowledge, the most probable view.

The male gorilla has a tremendous voice, and when adult is furnished with a laryngeal sack, as is likewise the adult male orang.335 The gibbons rank amongst the noisiest of monkeys, and the Sumatra species (Hylobates syndactylus) is also furnished with a laryngeal sack; but Mr. Blyth, who has had opportunities for observation, does not believe that the male is more noisy than the female. Hence, these latter monkeys probably use their voices as a mutual call; and this is certainly the case with some quadrupeds, for instance with the beaver.336 Another gibbon, the H. agilis, is highly remarkable, from having the power of emitting a complete and correct octave of musical notes,337 which we may reasonably suspect serves as a sexual charm; but I shall have to recur to this subject in the next chapter. The vocal organs of the American Mycetes caraya are one-third larger in the male than in the female, and are wonderfully powerful. These monkeys, when the weather is warm, make the forests resound during the morning and evening with their overwhelming voices. The males begin the dreadful concert, in which the females, with their less powerful voices, sometimes join, and which is often continued during many hours. An excellent observer, Rengger,338 could not perceive that they were excited to begin their concert by any special cause; he thinks that like many birds, they delight in their own music, and try to excel each other. Whether most of the foregoing monkeys have acquired their powerful voices in order to beat their rivals and to charm the females—or whether the vocal organs have been strengthened and enlarged through the inherited effects of long-continued use without any particular good being gained—I will not pretend to say; but the former view, at least in the case of the Hylobates agilis, seems the most probable.

I may here mention two very curious sexual peculiarities occurring in seals, because they have been supposed by some writers to affect the voice. The nose of the male sea-elephant (Macrorhinus proboscideus), when about three years old, is greatly elongated during the breeding-season, and can then be erected. In this state it is sometimes a foot in length. The female at no period of life is thus provided, and her voice is different. That of the male consists of a wild, hoarse, gurgling noise, which is audible at a great distance, and is believed to be strengthened by the proboscis. Lesson compares the erection of the proboscis, to the swelling of the wattles of male gallinaceous birds, whilst they court the females. In another allied kind of seal, namely, the bladder-nose (Cystophora cristata), the head is covered by a great hood or bladder. This is internally supported by the septum of the nose, which is produced far backwards and rises into a crest seven inches in height. The hood is clothed with short hair, and is muscular; it can be inflated until it more than equals the whole head in size! The males when rutting fight furiously on the ice, and their roaring “is said to be sometimes so loud as to be heard four miles off.” When attacked by man they likewise roar or bellow; and whenever irritated the bladder is inflated. Some naturalists believe that the voice is thus strengthened, but various other uses have been assigned to this extraordinary structure. Mr. R. Brown thinks that it serves as a protection against accidents of all kinds. This latter view is not probable, if what the sealers have long maintained is correct, namely, that the hood or bladder is very poorly developed in the females and in the males whilst young.339

Odour.—With some animals, as with the notorious skunk of America, the overwhelming odour which they emit appears to serve exclusively as a means of defence. With shrew-mice (Sorex) both sexes possess abdominal scent-glands, and there can be little doubt, from the manner in which their bodies are rejected by birds and beasts of prey, that their odour is protective; nevertheless the glands become enlarged in the males during the breeding-season. In many quadrupeds the glands are of the same size in both sexes;340 but their use is not known. In other species the glands are confined to the males, or are more developed in them than in the females; and they almost always become more active during the rutting-season. At this period the glands on the sides of the face of the male elephant enlarge and emit a secretion having a strong musky odour.

The rank effluvium of the male goat is well known, and that of certain male deer is wonderfully strong and persistent. On the banks of the Plata I have perceived the whole air tainted with the odour of the male Cervus campestris, at the distance of half a mile to leeward of a herd; and a silk handkerchief, in which I carried home a skin, though repeatedly used and washed, retained, when first unfolded, traces of the odour for one year and seven months. This animal does not emit its strong odour until more than a year old, and if castrated whilst young never emits it.341 Besides the general odour, with which the whole body of certain ruminants seems to be permeated during the breeding-season, many deer, antelopes, sheep, and goats, possess odoriferous glands in various situations, more especially on their faces. The so-called tear-sacks or suborbital pits come under this head. These glands secrete a semi-fluid fetid matter, which is sometimes so copious as to stain the whole face, as I have seen in the case of an antelope. They are “usually larger in the male than in the female, and their development is checked by castration.”342 According to Desmarest they are altogether absent in the female of Antilope subgutturosa. Hence, there can be no doubt that they stand in some close relation with the reproductive functions. They are also sometimes present, and sometimes absent, in nearly-allied forms. In the adult male musk-deer (Moschus moschiferus), a naked space round the tail is bedewed with an odoriferous fluid, whilst in the adult female, and in the male, until two years old, this space is covered with hair and is not odoriferous. The proper musk-sack, from its position, is necessarily confined to the male, and forms an additional scent-organ. It is a singular fact that the matter secreted by this latter gland does not, according to Pallas, change in consistence, or increase in quantity, during the rutting-season; nevertheless this naturalist admits that its presence is in some way connected with the act of reproduction. He gives, however, only a conjectural and unsatisfactory explanation of its use.343

In most cases, when during the breeding-season the male alone emits a strong odour, this probably serves to excite or allure the female. We must not judge on this head by our own taste, for it is well known that rats are enticed by certain essential oils, and cats by valerian, substances which are far from agreeable to us; and that dogs, though they will not eat carrion, sniff and roll in it. From the reasons given when discussing the voice of the stag, we may reject the idea that the odour serves to bring the females from a distance to the males. Active and long-continued use cannot here have come into play, as in the case of the vocal organs. The odour emitted must be of considerable importance to the male, inasmuch as large and complex glands, furnished with muscles for everting the sack, and for closing or opening the orifice, have in some cases been developed. The development of these organs is intelligible through sexual selection, if the more odoriferous males are the most successful in winning the females, and in leaving offspring to inherit their gradually-perfected glands and odours.

Development of the Hair.—We have seen that male quadrupeds often have the hair on their necks and shoulders much more developed than in the females; and many additional instances could be given. This sometimes serves as a defence to the male during his battles; but whether the hair in most cases has been specially developed for this purpose is very doubtful. We may feel almost certain that this is not the case, when a thin and narrow crest runs along the whole length of the back; for a crest of this kind would afford scarcely any protection, and the ridge of the back is not a likely place to be injured; nevertheless such crests are sometimes confined to the males, or are much more developed in them than in the females. Two antelopes, the Tragelaphus scriptus344 (see fig. 68, p. 300) and Portax picta, may be given as instances. The crests of certain stags and of the male wild goat stand erect, when these animals are enraged or terrified;345 but it can hardly be supposed that they have been acquired for the sake of exciting fear in their enemies. One of the above-named antelopes, the Portax picta, has a large well-defined brush of black hair on the throat, and this is much larger in the male than in the female. In the Ammotragus tragelaphus of North Africa, a member of the sheep-family, the front-legs are almost concealed by an extraordinary growth of hair, which descends from the neck and upper halves of the legs; but Mr. Bartlett does not believe that this mantle is of the least use to the male, in whom it is much more developed than in the female.

Male quadrupeds of many kinds differ from the females in having more hair, or hair of a different character, on certain parts of their faces. The bull alone has curled hair on the forehead.346 In three closely-allied sub-genera of the goat family, the males alone possess beards, sometimes of large size; in two other sub-genera both sexes have a beard, but this disappears in some of the domestic breeds of the common goat; and neither sex of the Hemitragus has a beard. In the ibex the beard is not developed during the summer, and is so small at other seasons that it may be called rudimentary.347 With some monkeys the beard is confined to the male, as in the Orang, or is much larger in the male than in the female, as in the Mycetes caraya and Pithecia satanas (fig. 66). So it is with the whiskers of some species of Macacus,348 and, as we have seen, with the manes of some species of baboons. But with most kinds of monkeys the various tufts of hair about the face and head are alike in both sexes.



Fig. 66. Pithecia Satanas, male (from Brehm).



The males of various members of the Ox family (Bovidæ), and of certain antelopes, are furnished with a dewlap, or great fold of skin on the neck, which is much less developed in the female.

Now, what must we conclude with respect to such sexual differences as these? No one will pretend that the beards of certain male-goats, or the dewlap of the bull, or the crests of hair along the backs of certain male antelopes, are of any direct or ordinary use to them. It is possible that the immense beard of the male Pithecia, and the large beard of the male Orang, may protect their throats when fighting; for the keepers in the Zoological Gardens inform me that many monkeys attack each other by the throat: but it is not probable that the beard has been developed for a distinct purpose from that which the whiskers, moustache, and other tufts of hair on the face serve; and no one will suppose that these are useful as a protection. Must we attribute to mere purposeless variability in the male all these appendages of hair or skin? It cannot be denied that this is possible; for with many domesticated quadrupeds, certain characters, apparently not derived through reversion from any wild parent-form, have appeared in, and are confined to, the males, or are more largely developed in them than in the females,—for instance the hump in the male zebu-cattle of India, the tail in fat-tailed rams, the arched outline of the forehead in the males of several breeds of sheep, the mane in the ram of an African breed, and, lastly, the mane, long hairs on the hinder legs, and the dewlap in the male alone of the Berbura goat.349 The mane which occurs in the rams alone of the above-mentioned African breed of sheep, is a true secondary sexual character, for it is not developed, as I hear from Mr. Winwood Reade, if the animal be castrated. Although we ought to be extremely cautious, as shewn in my work on ‘Variation under Domestication,’ in concluding that any character, even with animals kept by semi-civilised people, has not been subjected to selection by man, and thus augmented; yet in the cases just specified this is improbable, more especially as the characters are confined to the males, or are more strongly developed in them than in the females. If it were positively known that the African ram with a mane was descended from the same primitive stock with the other breeds of sheep, or the Berbura male-goat with his mane, dewlap, &c., from the same stock with other goats; and if selection has not been applied to these characters, then they must be due to simple variability, together with sexually-limited inheritance.

t would appear reasonable to extend the same view to the many analogous characters occurring in animals under a state of nature. Nevertheless I cannot persuade myself that this view is applicable in many cases, as in that of the extraordinary development of hair on the throat and forelegs of the male Ammotragus, or of the immense beard of the male Pithecia. With those antelopes in which the male when adult is more strongly-coloured than the female, and with those monkeys in which this is likewise the case, and in which the hair on the face is of a different colour from that on the rest of the head, being arranged in the most diversified and elegant manner, it seems probable that the crests and tufts of hair have been acquired as ornaments; and this I know is the opinion of some naturalists. If this view be correct, there can be little doubt that they have been acquired, or at least modified, through sexual selection.

Colour of the Hair and of the Naked Skin.—I will first give briefly all the cases known to me, of male quadrupeds differing in colour from the females. With Marsupials, as I am informed by Mr. Gould, the sexes rarely differ in this respect; but the great red kangaroo offers a striking exception, “delicate blue being the prevailing tint in those parts of the female, which in the male are red.”350 In the Didelphis opossum of Cayenne the female is said to be a little more red than the male. With Rodents Dr. Gray remarks: “African squirrels, especially those found in the tropical regions, have the fur much brighter and more vivid at some seasons of the year than at others, and the fur of the male is generally brighter than that of the female.”351 Dr. Gray informs me that he specified the African squirrels, because, from their unusually bright colours, they best exhibit this difference. The female of the Mus minutus of Russia is of a paler and dirtier tint than the male. In some few bats the fur of the male is lighter and brighter than in the female.352

The terrestrial Carnivora and Insectivora rarely exhibit sexual differences of any kind, and their colours are almost always exactly the same in both sexes. The ocelot (Felis pardalis), however, offers an exception, for the colours of the female, compared with those of the male, are “moins apparentes, le fauve étant plus terne, le blanc moins pur, les raies ayant moins de largeur et les taches moins de diamètre.”353 The sexes of the allied Felis mitis also differ, but even in a less degree, the general hues of the female being rather paler than in the male, with the spots less black. The marine Carnivora or Seals, on the other hand, sometimes differ considerably in colour, and they present, as we have already seen, other remarkable sexual differences. Thus the male of the Otaria nigrescens of the southern hemisphere is of a rich brown shade above; whilst the female, who acquires her adult tints earlier in life than the male, is dark-grey above, the young of both sexes being of a very deep chocolate colour. The male of the northern Phoca groenlandica is tawny grey, with a curious saddle-shaped dark mark on the back; the female is much smaller, and has a very different appearance, being “dull white or yellowish straw-colour, with a tawny hue on the back;” the young at first are pure white, and can “hardly be distinguished among the icy hummocks and snow, their colour thus acting as a protection.”354

With Ruminants sexual differences of colour occur more commonly than in any other order. A difference of this kind is general with the Strepsicerene antelopes; thus the male nilghau (Portax picta) is bluish-grey and much darker than the female, with the square white patch on the throat, the white marks on the fetlocks, and the black spots on the ears, all much more distinct. We have seen that in this species the crests and tufts of hair are likewise more developed in the male than in the hornless female. The male, as I am informed by Mr. Blyth, without shedding his hair, periodically becomes darker during the breeding-season. Young males cannot be distinguished from young females until above twelve months old; and if the male is emasculated before this period, he never, according to the same authority, changes colour. The importance of this latter fact, as distinctive of sexual colouring, becomes obvious, when we hear355 that neither the red summer-coat nor the blue winter-coat of the Virginian deer is at all affected by emasculation. With most or all of the highly-ornamented species of Tragelaphus the males are darker than the hornless females, and their crests of hair are more fully developed. In the male of that magnificent antelope, the Derbyan Eland, the body is redder, the whole neck much blacker, and the white band which separates these colours, broader, than in the female. In the Cape Eland also, the male is slightly darker than the female.356

In the Indian Black-buck (A. bezoartica), which belongs to another tribe of antelopes, the male is very dark, almost black; whilst the hornless female is fawn-coloured. We have in this species, as Mr. Blyth informs me, an exactly parallel series of facts, as with the Portax picta, namely in the male periodically changing colour during the breeding season, in the effects of emasculation on this change, and in the young of both sexes being undistinguishable from each other. In the Antilope niger the male is black, the female as well as the young being brown; in A. sing-sing the male is much brighter coloured than the hornless female, and his chest and belly are blacker; in the male A. caama, the marks and lines which occur on various parts of the body are black instead of as in the female brown; in the brindled gnu (A. gorgon) “the colours of the male are nearly the same as those of the female, only deeper and of a brighter hue.”357 Other analogous cases could be added.

The Banteng bull (Bos sondaicus) of the Malayan archipelago is almost black, with white legs and buttocks; the cow is of a bright dun, as are the young males until about the age of three years, when they rapidly change colour. The emasculated bull reverts to the colour of the female. The female Kemas goat is paler, and the female Capra ægagrus is said to be more uniformly tinted than their respective males. Deer rarely present any sexual differences in colour. Judge Caton, however, informs me that with the males of the Wapiti deer (Cervus Canadensis) the neck, belly, and legs are much darker than the same parts in the female; but during the winter the darker tints gradually fade away and disappear. I may here mention that Judge Caton has in his park three races of the Virginian deer, which differ slightly in colour, but the differences are almost exclusively confined to the blue winter or breeding coat; so that this case may be compared with those given in a previous chapter of closely-allied or representative species of birds which differ from each other only in their nuptial plumage.358 The females of Cervus paludosus of S. America, as well as the young of both sexes, do not possess the black stripes on the nose, and the blackish-brown line on the breast which characterise the adult males.359 Lastly, the mature male of the beautifully coloured and spotted Axis deer is considerably darker, as I am informed by Mr. Blyth, than the female; and this hue the castrated male never acquires.

The last Order which we have to consider—for I am not aware that sexual differences in colour occur in the other mammalian groups—is that of the Primates. The male of the Lemur macaco is coal-black, whilst the female is reddish-yellow, but highly variable in colour.360 Of the Quadrumana of the New World, the females and young of Mycetes caraya are greyish-yellow and alike; in the second year the young male becomes reddish-brown, in the third year black, excepting the stomach, which, however, becomes quite black in the fourth or fifth year. There is also a strongly-marked difference in colour between the sexes in Mycetes seniculus and Cebus capucinus; the young of the former and I believe of the latter species resembling the females. With Pithecia leucocephala the young likewise resemble the females, which are brownish-black above and light rusty-red beneath, the adult males being black. The ruff of hair round the face of Ateles marginatus is tinted yellow in the male and white in the female. Turning to the Old World, the males of Hylobates hoolock are always black, with the exception of a white band over the brows; the females vary from whity-brown to a dark tint mixed with black, but are never wholly black.361 In the beautiful Cercopithecus diana the head of the adult male is of an intense black, whilst that of the female is dark grey; in the former the fur between the thighs is of an elegant fawn-colour, in the latter it is paler. In the equally beautiful and curious moustache monkey (Cercopithecus cephus) the only difference between the sexes is that the tail of the male is chesnut and that of the female grey; but Mr. Bartlett informs me that all the hues become more strongly pronounced in the male when adult, whilst in the female they remain as they were during youth. According to the coloured figures given by Solomon Müller, the male of Semnopithecus chrysomelas is nearly black, the female being pale brown. In the Cercopithecus cynosurus and griseo-viridis one part of the body which is confined to the male sex is of the most brilliant blue or green, and contrasts strikingly with the naked skin on the hinder part of the body, which is vivid red.



Fig. 67. Head of male Mandrill (from Gervais, ‘Hist. Nat des Mammifères’).

Lastly, in the Baboon family, the adult male of Cynocephalus hamadryas differs from the female not only by his immense mane, but slightly in the colour of the hair and of the naked callosities. In the drill (Cynocephalus leucophœus) the females and young are much paler-coloured, with less green, than the adult males. No other member of the whole class of mammals is coloured in so extraordinary a manner as the adult male mandrill (Cynocephalus mormon). The face at this age becomes of a fine blue, with the ridge and tip of the nose of the most brilliant red. According to some authors the face is also marked with whitish stripes, and is shaded in parts with black, but the colours appear to be variable. On the forehead there is a crest of hair, and on the chin a yellow beard. “Toutes les parties supérieures de leurs cuisses et le grand espace nu de leurs fesses sont également colorés du rouge le plus vif, avec un mélange de bleu qui ne manque réellement pas d’élégance.”362 When the animal is excited all the naked parts become much more vividly tinted. Several authors have used the strongest expressions in describing these resplendent colours, which they compare with those of the most brilliant birds. Another most remarkable peculiarity is that when the great canine teeth are fully developed, immense protuberances of bone are formed on each cheek, which are deeply furrowed longitudinally, and the naked skin over them is brilliantly-coloured, as just described. (Fig. 67.) In the adult females and in the young of both sexes these protuberances are scarcely perceptible; and the naked parts are much less brightly coloured, the face being almost black, tinged with blue. In the adult female, however, the nose at certain regular intervals of time becomes tinted with red.

In all the cases hitherto given the male is more strongly or brightly coloured than the female, and differs in a greater degree from the young of both sexes. But as a reversed style of colouring is characteristic of the two sexes with some few birds, so with the Rhesus monkey (Macacus rhesus) the female has a large surface of naked skin round the tail, of a brilliant carmine red, which periodically becomes, as I was assured by the keepers in the Zoological Gardens, even more vivid, and her face is also pale red. On the other hand with the adult male and with the young of both sexes, as I saw in the Gardens, neither the naked skin at the posterior end of the body, nor the face, shew a trace of red. It appears, however, from some published accounts, that the male does occasionally, or during certain seasons, exhibit some traces of the red. Although he is thus less ornamented than the female, yet in the larger size of his body, larger canine teeth, more developed whiskers, more prominent superciliary ridges, he follows the common rule of the male excelling the female.

I have now given all the cases known to me of a difference in colour between the sexes of mammals. The colours of the female either do not differ in a sufficient degree from those of the male, or are not of a suitable nature, to afford her protection, and therefore cannot be explained on this principle. In some, perhaps in many cases, the differences may be the result of variations confined to one sex and transmitted to the same sex, without any good having been thus gained, and therefore without the aid of selection. We have instances of this kind with our domesticated animals, as in the males of certain cats being rusty-red, whilst the females are tortoise-shell coloured. Analogous cases occur under nature; Mr. Bartlett has seen many black varieties of the jaguar, leopard, vulpine phalanger and wombat; and he is certain that all, or nearly all, were males. On the other hand, both sexes of wolves, foxes, and apparently of American squirrels, are occasionally born black. Hence it is quite possible that with some mammals the blackness of the males, especially when this colour is congenital, may simply be the result, without the aid of selection, of one or more variations having occurred, which from the first were sexually limited in their transmission. Nevertheless it can hardly be admitted that the diversified, vivid, and contrasted colours of certain quadrupeds, for instance of the above-mentioned monkeys and antelopes, can thus be accounted for. We should bear in mind that these colours do not appear in the male at birth, as in the case of most ordinary variations, but only at or near maturity; and that unlike ordinary variations, if the male be emasculated, they never appear or subsequently disappear. It is on the whole a much more probable conclusion that the strongly-marked colours and other ornamental characters of male quadrupeds are beneficial to them in their rivalry with other males, and have consequently been acquired through sexual selection. The probability of this view is strengthened by the differences in colour between the sexes occurring almost exclusively, as may be observed by going through the previous details, in those groups and subgroups of mammals, which present other and distinct secondary sexual characters; these being likewise due to the action of sexual selection.

Quadrupeds manifestly take notice of colour. Sir S. Baker repeatedly observed that the African elephant and rhinoceros attacked with special fury white or grey horses. I have elsewhere shewn363 that half-wild horses apparently prefer pairing with those of the same colour, and that herds of fallow-deer of a different colour, though living together, have long kept distinct. It is a more significant fact that a female zebra would not admit the addresses of a male ass until he was painted so as to resemble a zebra, and then, as John Hunter remarks, “she received him very readily. In this curious fact, we have instinct excited by mere colour, which had so strong an effect as to get the better of everything else. But the male did not require this, the female being an animal somewhat similar to himself, was sufficient to rouse him.”364

In an early chapter we have seen that the mental powers of the higher animals do not differ in kind, though so greatly in degree, from the corresponding powers of man, especially of the lower and barbarous races; and it would appear that even their taste for the beautiful is not widely different from that of the Quadrumana. As the negro of Africa raises the flesh on his face into parallel ridges “or cicatrices, high above the natural surface, which unsightly deformities, are considered great personal attractions;”365—as negroes, as well as savages in many parts of the world, paint their faces with red, blue, white, or black bars,—so the male mandrill of Africa appears to have acquired his deeply-furrowed and gaudily-coloured face from having been thus rendered attractive to the female. No doubt it is to us a most grotesque notion that the posterior end of the body should have been coloured for the sake of ornament even more brilliantly than the face; but this is really not more strange than that the tails of many birds should have been especially decorated.

e do not at present possess any evidence that the males take pains to display their charms before the female; and the elaborate manner in which this is performed by male birds, is the strongest argument in favour of the belief that the females admire, or are excited by, the ornaments and colours displayed before them. There is, however, a striking parallelism between mammals and birds in all their secondary sexual characters, namely in their weapons for fighting with rival males, in their ornamental appendages, and in their colours. In both classes, when the male differs from the female, the young of both sexes almost always resemble each other, and in a large majority of cases resemble the adult female. In both classes the male assumes the characters proper to his sex shortly before the age for reproduction; if emasculated he either never acquires such characters or subsequently loses them. In both classes the change of colour is sometimes seasonal, and the tints of the naked parts sometimes become more vivid during the act of courtship. In both classes the male is almost always more vividly or strongly coloured than the female, and is ornamented with larger crests either of hair or feathers, or other appendages. In a few exceptional cases the female in both classes is more highly ornamented than the male. With many mammals, and at least in the case of one bird, the male is more odoriferous than the female. In both classes the voice of the male is more powerful than that of the female. Considering this parallelism there can be little doubt that the same cause, whatever it may be, has acted on mammals and birds; and the result, as far as ornamental characters are concerned, may safely be attributed, as it appears to me, to the long-continued preference of the individuals of one sex for certain individuals of the opposite sex, combined with their success in leaving a larger number of offspring to inherit their superior attractions.

Equal transmission of ornamental characters to both sexes.—With many birds, ornaments, which analogy leads us to believe were primarily acquired by the males, have been transmitted equally, or almost equally, to both sexes; and we may now enquire how far this view may be extended to mammals. With a considerable number of species, especially the smaller kinds, both sexes have been coloured, independently of sexual selection, for the sake of protection; but not, as far as I can judge, in so many cases, nor in nearly so striking a manner as in most of the lower classes. Audubon remarks that he often mistook the musk-rat,366 whilst sitting on the banks of a muddy stream, for a clod of earth, so complete was the resemblance. The hare on her form is a familiar instance of concealment through colour; yet this principle partly fails in a closely-allied species, namely the rabbit, for as this animal runs to its burrow, it is made conspicuous to the sportsman and no doubt to all beasts of prey, by its upturned pure-white tail. No one has ever doubted that the quadrupeds which inhabit snow-clad regions, have been rendered white to protect them from their enemies, or to favour their stealing on their prey. In regions where snow never lies long on the ground a white coat would be injurious; consequently species thus coloured are extremely rare in the hotter parts of the world. It deserves notice that many quadrupeds, inhabiting moderately cold regions, although they do not assume a white winter dress, become paler during this season; and this apparently is the direct result of the conditions to which they have long been exposed. Pallas367 states that in Siberia a change of this nature occurs with the wolf, two species of Mustela, the domestic horse, the Equus hemionus, the domestic cow, two species of antelopes, the musk-deer, the roe, the elk, and reindeer. The roe, for instance, has a red summer and a greyish-white winter coat; and the latter may perhaps serve as a protection to the animal whilst wandering through the leafless thickets, sprinkled with snow and hoar-frost. If the above named animals were gradually to extend their range into regions perpetually covered with snow, their pale winter-coats would probably be rendered, through natural selection, whiter and whiter by degrees, until they became as white as snow.



Fig. 68. Tragelaphus scriptus, male (from the Knowsley Menagerie).



Fig. 69. Damalis pygarga, male (from the Knowsley Menagerie).

Although we must admit that many quadrupeds have received their present tints as a protection, yet with a host of species, the colours are far too conspicuous and too singularly arranged to allow us to suppose that they serve for this purpose. We may take as an illustration certain antelopes: when we see that the square white patch on the throat, the white marks on the fetlocks, and the round black spots on the ears, are all more distinct in the male of the Portax picta, than in the female;—when we see that the colours are more vivid, that the narrow white lines on the flank and the broad white bar on the shoulder are more distinct in the male Oreas derbyanus than in the female;—when we see a similar difference between the sexes of the curiously-ornamented Tragelaphus scriptus (fig. 68),—we may conclude that these colours and various marks have been at least intensified through sexual selection. It is inconceivable that such colours and marks can be of any direct or ordinary service to these animals; and as they have almost certainly been intensified through sexual selection, it is probable that they were originally gained through this same process, and then partially transferred to the females. If this view be admitted, there can be little doubt that the equally singular colours and marks of many other antelopes, though common to both sexes, have been gained and transmitted in a like manner. Both sexes, for instance, of the Koodoo (Strepsiceros Kudu, fig. 62) have narrow white vertical lines on their hinder flanks, and an elegant angular white mark on their foreheads. Both sexes in the genus Damalis are very oddly coloured; in D. pygarga the back and neck are purplish-red, shading on the flanks into black, and abruptly separated from the white belly and a large white space on the buttocks; the head is still more oddly coloured, a large oblong white mask, narrowly-edged with black, covers the face up to the eyes (fig. 69); there are three white stripes on the forehead, and the ears are marked with white. The fawns of this species are of a uniform pale yellowish-brown. In Damalis albifrons the colouring of the head differs from that in the last species in a single white stripe replacing the three stripes, and in the ears being almost wholly white.368 After having studied to the best of my ability the sexual differences of animals belonging to all classes, I cannot avoid the conclusion that the curiously-arranged colours of many antelopes, though common to both sexes, are the result of sexual selection primarily applied to the male.

The same conclusion may perhaps be extended to the tiger, one of the most beautiful animals in the world, the sexes of which cannot be distinguished by colour, even by the dealers in wild beasts. Mr. Wallace believes369 that the striped coat of the tiger “so assimilates with the vertical stems of the bamboo, as to assist greatly in concealing him from his approaching prey.” But this view does not appear to me satisfactory. We have some slight evidence that his beauty may be due to sexual selection, for in two species of Felis analogous marks and colours are rather brighter in the male than in the female. The zebra is conspicuously striped, and stripes on the open plains of South Africa cannot afford any protection. Burchell370 in describing a herd says, “their sleek ribs glistened in the sun, and the brightness and regularity of their striped coats presented a picture of extraordinary beauty, in which probably they are not surpassed by any other quadruped.” Here we have no evidence of sexual selection, as throughout the whole group of the Equidæ the sexes are identical in colour. Nevertheless he who attributes the white and dark vertical stripes on the flanks of various antelopes to sexual selection, will probably extend the same view to the Royal Tiger and beautiful Zebra.

We have seen in a former chapter that when young animals belonging to any class follow nearly the same habits of life with their parents, and yet are coloured in a different manner, it may be inferred that they have retained the colouring of some ancient and extinct progenitor. In the family of pigs, and in the genus Tapir, the young are marked with longitudinal stripes, and thus differ from every existing adult species in these two groups. With many kinds of deer the young are marked with elegant white spots, of which their parents exhibit not a trace. A graduated series can be followed from the Axis deer, both sexes of which at all ages and during all seasons are beautifully spotted (the male being rather more strongly coloured than the female)—to species in which neither the old nor the young are spotted. I will specify some of the steps in this series. The Mantchurian deer (Cervus Mantchuricus) is spotted during the whole year, but the spots are much plainer, as I have seen in the Zoological Gardens, during the summer, when the general colour of the coat is lighter, than during the winter, when the general colour is darker and the horns are fully developed. In the hog-deer (Hyelaphus porcinus) the spots are extremely conspicuous during the summer when the coat is reddish-brown, but quite disappear during the winter when the coat is brown.371 In both these species the young are spotted. In the Virginian deer the young are likewise spotted, and about five per cent. of the adult animals living in Judge Caton’s park, as I am informed by him, temporarily exhibit at the period when the red summer coat is being replaced by the bluish winter coat, a row of spots on each flank, which are always the same in number, though very variable in distinctness. From this condition there is but a very small step to the complete absence of spots at all seasons in the adults; and lastly, to their absence at all ages, as occurs with certain species. From the existence of this perfect series, and more especially from the fawns of so many species being spotted, we may conclude that the now living members of the deer family are the descendants of some ancient species which, like the Axis deer, was spotted at all ages and seasons. A still more ancient progenitor probably resembled to a certain extent the Hyomoschus aquaticus—for this animal is spotted, and the hornless males have large exserted canine teeth, of which some few true deer still retain rudiments. It offers, also, one of those interesting cases of a form linking together two groups, as it is intermediate in certain osteological characters between the pachyderms and ruminants, which were formerly thought to be quite distinct.372

A curious difficulty here arises. If we admit that coloured spots and stripes have been acquired as ornaments, how comes it that so many existing deer, the descendants of an aboriginally spotted animal, and all the species of pigs and tapirs, the descendants of an aboriginally striped animal, have lost in their adult state their former ornaments? I cannot satisfactorily answer this question. We may feel nearly sure that the spots and stripes disappeared in the progenitors of our existing species at or near maturity, so that they were retained by the young and, owing to the law of inheritance at corresponding ages, by the young of all succeeding generations. It may have been a great advantage to the lion and puma from the open nature of the localities which they commonly haunt, to have lost their stripes, and to have been thus rendered less conspicuous to their prey; and if the successive variations, by which this end was gained, occurred rather late in life, the young would have retained their stripes, as we know to be the case. In regard to deer, pigs, and tapirs, Fritz Müller has suggested to me that these animals by the removal through natural selection of their spots or stripes would have been less easily seen by their enemies; and they would have especially required this protection, as soon as the carnivora increased in size and number during the Tertiary periods. This may be the true explanation, but it is rather strange that the young should not have been equally well protected, and still more strange that with some species the adults should have retained their spots, either partially or completely, during part of the year. We know, though we cannot explain the cause, that when the domestic ass varies and becomes reddish-brown, grey or black, the stripes on the shoulders and even on the spine frequently disappear. Very few horses, except dun-coloured kinds, exhibit stripes on any part of their bodies, yet we have good reason to believe that the aboriginal horse was striped on the legs and spine, and probably on the shoulders.373 Hence the disappearance of the spots and stripes in our adult existing deer, pigs, and tapirs, may be due to a change in the general colour of their coats; but whether this change was effected through sexual or natural selection, or was due to the direct action of the conditions of life, or some other unknown cause, it is impossible to decide. An observation made by Mr. Sclater well illustrates our ignorance of the laws which regulate the appearance and disappearance of stripes; the species of Asinus which inhabit the Asiatic continent are destitute of stripes, not having even the cross shoulder-stripe, whilst those which inhabit Africa are conspicuously striped, with the partial exception of A. tæniopus, which has only the cross shoulder-stripe and generally some faint bars on the legs; and this species inhabits the almost intermediate region of Upper Egypt and Abyssinia.374





Fig. 70. Head of Semnopithecus rubicundus. This and the following figures (from Prof. Gervais) are given to shew the odd arrangement and development of the hair on the head.





Fig. 71. Head of Semnopithecus comatus.



Fig. 72. Head of Cebus capucinus.





Fig. 73. Head of Ateles marginatus.



Fig. 74. Head of Cebus vellerosus.



Quadrumana.—Before we conclude, it will be advisable to add a few remarks to those already given on the ornamental characters of monkeys. In most of the species the sexes resemble each other in colour, but in some, as we have seen, the males differ from the females, especially in the colour of the naked parts of the skin, in the development of the beard, whiskers, and mane. Many species are coloured either in so extraordinary or beautiful a manner, and are furnished with such curious and elegant crests of hair, that we can hardly avoid looking at these characters as having been gained for the sake of ornament. The accompanying figures (figs. 70 to 74) serve to shew the arrangement of the hair on the face and head in several species. It is scarcely conceivable that these crests of hair and the strongly-contrasted colours of the fur and skin can be the result of mere variability without the aid of selection; and it is inconceivable that they can be of any ordinary use to these animals. If so, they have probably been gained through sexual selection, though transmitted equally, or almost equally, to both sexes. With many of the Quadrumana, we have additional evidence of the action of sexual selection in the greater size and strength of the males, and in the greater development of their canine teeth, in comparison with the females.

With respect to the strange manner in which both sexes of some species are coloured, and of the beauty of others, a few instances will suffice. The face of the Cercopithecus petaurista (fig. 75) is black, the whiskers and beard being white, with a defined, round, white spot on the nose, covered with short white hair, which gives to the animal an almost ludicrous aspect. The Semnopithecus frontatus likewise, has a blackish face with a long black beard, and a large naked spot on the forehead of a bluish-white colour. The face of Macacus lasiotus is dirty flesh-coloured, with a defined red spot on each cheek. The appearance of Cercocebus æthiops is grotesque, with its black face, white whiskers and collar, chesnut head, and a large naked white spot over each eyelid. In very many species, the beard, whiskers, and crests of hair round the face are of a different colour from the rest of the head, and when different, are always of a lighter tint,375 being often pure white, sometimes bright yellow, or reddish. The whole face of the South American Brachyurus calvus is of a “glowing scarlet hue;” but this colour does not appear until the animal is nearly mature.376 The naked skin of the face differs wonderfully in colour in the various species. It is often brown or flesh-colour, with parts perfectly white, and often as black as that of the most sooty negro. In the Brachyurus the scarlet tint is brighter than that of the most blushing Caucasian damsel. It is sometimes more distinctly orange than in any Mongolian, and in several species it is blue, passing into violet or grey. In all the species known to Mr. Bartlett, in which the adults of both sexes have strongly-coloured faces, the colours are dull or absent during early youth. This likewise holds good with the Mandrill and Rhesus, in which the face and the posterior parts of the body are brilliantly coloured in one sex alone. In these latter cases we have every reason to believe that the colours were acquired through sexual selection; and we are naturally led to extend the same view to the foregoing species, though both sexes when adult have their faces coloured in the same manner.



Fig. 75. Cercopithecus petaurista (from Brehm)

Although, according to our taste, many kinds of monkeys are far from beautiful, other species are universally admired for their elegant appearance and bright colours. The Semnopithecus nemæus, though peculiarly coloured, is described as extremely pretty; the orange-tinted face is surrounded by long whiskers of glossy whiteness, with a line of chesnut-red over the eyebrows; the fur on the back is of a delicate grey, with a square patch on the loins, the tail and the fore-arms all of a pure white; a gorget of chesnut surmounts the chest; the hind thighs are black, with the legs chesnut-red. I will mention only two other monkeys on account of their beauty; and I have selected these as they present slight sexual differences in colour, which renders it in some degree probable that both sexes owe their elegant appearance to sexual selection. In the moustache-monkey (Cercopithecus cephus) the general colour of the fur is mottled-greenish, with the throat white; in the male the end of the tail is chesnut; but the face is the most ornamented part, the skin being chiefly bluish-grey, shading into a blackish tint beneath the eyes, with the upper lip of a delicate blue, clothed on the lower edge with a thin black moustache; the whiskers are orange-coloured, with the upper part black, forming a band which extends backwards to the ears, the latter being clothed with whitish hairs. In the Zoological Society’s Gardens I have often overheard visitors admiring the beauty of another monkey, deservedly called Cercopithecus Diana (fig. 76); the general colour of the fur is grey; the chest and inner surface of the forelegs are white; a large triangular defined space on the hinder part of the back is rich chesnut; in the male the inner sides of the thighs and the abdomen are delicate fawn-coloured, and the top of the head is black; the face and ears are intensely black, finely contrasted with a white transverse crest over the eyebrows and with a long white peaked beard, of which the basal portion is black.377



Fig. 76. Cercopithecus Diana (from Brehm).

In these and many other monkeys, the beauty and singular arrangement of their colours, and still more the diversified and elegant arrangement of the crests and tufts of hair on their heads, force the conviction on my mind that these characters have been acquired through sexual selection exclusively as ornaments.

Summary.—The law of battle for the possession of the female appears to prevail throughout the whole great class of mammals. Most naturalists will admit that the greater size, strength, courage, and pugnacity of the male, his special weapons of offence, as well as his special means of defence, have all been acquired or modified through that form of selection which I have called sexual selection. This does not depend on any superiority in the general struggle for life, but on certain individuals of one sex, generally the male sex, having been successful in conquering other males, and on their having left a larger number of offspring to inherit their superiority, than the less successful males.

There is another and more peaceful kind of contest, in which the males endeavour to excite or allure the females by various charms. This may be effected by the powerful odours emitted by the males during the breeding-season; the odoriferous glands having been acquired through sexual selection. Whether the same view can be extended to the voice is doubtful, for the vocal organs of the males may have been strengthened by use during maturity, under the powerful excitements of love, jealousy, or rage, and transmitted to the same sex. Various crests, tufts, and mantles of hair, which are either confined to the male, or are more developed in this sex than in the females, seem in most cases to be merely ornamental, though they sometimes serve as a defence against rival males. There is even reason to suspect that the branching horns of stags, and the elegant horns of certain antelopes, though properly serving as weapons of offence or of defence, have been partly modified for the sake of ornament.

When the male differs in colour from the female he generally exhibits darker and more strongly-contrasted tints. We do not in this class meet with the splendid red, blue, yellow, and green colours, so common with male birds and many other animals. The naked parts, however, of certain Quadrumana must be excepted; for such parts, often oddly situated, are coloured in some species in the most brilliant manner. The colours of the male in other cases may be due to simple variation, without the aid of selection. But when the colours are diversified and strongly pronounced, when they are not developed until near maturity, and when they are lost after emasculation, we can hardly avoid the conclusion that they have been acquired through sexual selection for the sake of ornament, and have been transmitted exclusively, or almost exclusively, to the same sex. When both sexes are coloured in the same manner, and the colours are conspicuous or curiously arranged, without being of the least apparent use as a protection, and especially when they are associated with various other ornamental appendages, we are led by analogy to the same conclusion, namely, that they have been acquired through sexual selection, although transmitted to both sexes. That conspicuous and diversified colours, whether confined to the males or common to both sexes, are as a general rule associated in the same groups and subgroups with other secondary sexual characters, serving for war or for ornament, will be found to hold good if we look back to the various cases given in this and the last chapter.

The law of the equal transmission of characters to both sexes, as far as colour and other ornaments are concerned, has prevailed far more extensively with mammals than with birds; but in regard to weapons, such as horns and tusks, these have often been transmitted either exclusively, or in a much higher degree to the males than to the females. This is a surprising circumstance, for as the males generally use their weapons as a defence against enemies of all kinds, these weapons would have been of service to the female. Their absence in this sex can be accounted for, as far as we can see, only by the form of inheritance which has prevailed. Finally with quadrupeds the contest between the individuals of the same sex, whether peaceful or bloody, has with the rarest exceptions been confined to the males; so that these have been modified through sexual selection, either for fighting with each other or for alluring the opposite sex, far more commonly than the females.





