 2 AE. xxviii, p. 76, fig. VII: found,     4 Twenty such axes with four North
 according    to Domonkos,        in the   Hungarian maces and a single-bladed
 cemetery where most of the graves         axe of Agathyrsian type were included
 were medieval (ibid., p. 61).             in the hoard of Domahida (Szatmar,
 3 Hampel,     pls. cCxxu,     CC; CCVI,   Hampel, pl. ccxxu11).
            380      THE END       OF THE HUNGARIAN              BRONZE      AGE
          infusion of the invaders themselves there is no evidence; group
          II preserves native traditions in contradistinction to group I.
          On the other hand, one may suspect here a substratum of folk
          who had been long settled on the western slopes of the Transyl-
          vanian mountains. In the pottery we have noted reminiscences
          of local neolithic forms. Moreover, in Northern Transylvania
          some remarkable cremation graves have been discovered that
          may disclose the prototypes of some Puszta Szt. Janos motifs.
Gernyes- The cemetery at Gernyeszeg produced a multitude of vases
      zeg adorned with scrolls, plant motifs, and other patterns in high
          relief as if carved (Figs. 215, 216).1 The only guide to the date
          of the graves is a flat celt of copper. Pending a full publication,
          we can only suggest that they may illustrate the survival in
          Western Transylvania of the neolithic spiral patterns that
          reappear in Puszta Szt. Janos and Berettyé Ujfalu.
 Chrono-     The life of group II cannot yet be accurately delimited. It
     logy begins already in Period VI as the finds of characteristic pottery
          in Tészeg D attest, but no lower limit is available. Round
          Grosswerdein there are one or two graves containing objects of
          a Hallstatt character that may denote an incursion of horsemen
          from beyond the Danube, and there are also intrusive Scythian
          barrows as far south as Békés. At the same time it must be re-
          membered that much of East Hungary would have become
          almost uninhabitable by reason of inundations when the wet
           Subatlantic epoch set in, while the area would decline in im-
          portance with the intensive exploitation of the inner Transyl-
          vanian deposits of gold that began about this time. So we may
           suppose that the change 1n the weather, combined with the de-
           predations of nomads, would have put an end to the culture of
           group II before 600 B.c.; the thinness of the deposit at Tdszeg
           implies an even shorter life for the D settlement there.
                                           Ill.   GROUP    III
Continu-    South of the Maros the Pécska-Vattina culture continues. The
 ity with   evidence of the pottery from Pécska leaves no doubt as to the
Period V    continuity of culture, and the stratification there allows of
            the recognition of at least two phases. At the same time the
            occurrence of fluted ware and even some Lausitz forms shows
            that the northern invaders, if they did not settle in the Banat,
            at least affected the course of cultural development. Moreover,
             « The vase here shown is said to come from Tiszafiired, but is quite in the style
            of Gernyeszeg.
         Fic. 212.                      Bronze bucket from Szennyespuszta.
                                               o oO o>5 oO ° oO P   oe




       sacirngmnes carey senemuccner” alll

                                   *




Fic. 214.       Pottery from Bronze Age settlement at Berettyé Ujfalu
                     AND   THE    SCYTHS                   381
the domain of the Vattina culture was extended. Pure Pécska Extension
D types characterize the urnfield of Kiskérés* and reappear westward
in bulk beyond the Danube at Gerjen. This extension may
mark a new trade route controlled from the Banat, replacing




                Fic. 215. Cups from Gernyeszeg.   §

the old 1-4-3 route of Period V that had been disorganized by
the invasion.
   Southward the Vattina culture absorbs the allied Klicevac Extension
group and, in the later phase (E) at least, plentiful Pécska E to Serbia
types are found also at Suréin in Syrmia and even as far west and
as Vukovar—perhaps they indicate a reoccupation from the Syrmia
                        t AE, xxxii, p. 281.
          382      THE END        OF THE      HUNGARIAN         BRONZE       AGE
             Banat of an area wasted by raids at the beginning of Period VI.
             Northward the occurrence of similar types at Szelevény * may
             denote an advance up the Tisza into the territory of group II.
    Burial      In the character of the settlements and the burial rites no
       rites change can be discerned since. Period VI, save that at Vattina
             the later graves contain fewer bronzes and more pots. Still,
             according to Wosinski,? the graves of this phase at Gerjen
             contained extended skeletons. For the definition of the culture
             of this epoch and its distinction from earlier phases we must
             rely on the pottery.
   Pottery      The pot forms from the D levels at Pécska and the poorer -
   metallic cemeteries at Vattina3 are intensely metallic (Figs. 217-19).
     forms None the less the commonest shapes are clearly enough de-
             scended from the Perjamos jug; they are cups and jars with one
             or two handles rising above the rim; already the mouth 1s
             often constricted where the handles are attached.t At the
             junction5 of handle and rim there is regularly a V-shaped de-
             pression (a sort of ansa lunata) or, alternatively, the clay is
             pinched up to formalittle pillar (a sort of ansa cylindroretta).
             Notable is the break in the curve of the high-swung handles at
             Vattina.
‘Metallic’      The texture of the pottery is fine, its surface, black and
  patterns polished, is no less metallic than the forms and even the
             ornament has been influenced by the art of the smith. At
             Vattina and Omoljica a favourite motive is a little A, a pattern
             that recurs on the gold disks from Ottlaka, on the bracelets
             from Bellye (Fig. 224, f.), and on Hallstatt girdle plates,° but
             appeared already on Klicevac ware and axes of type Az.’
             A more widely distributed motive is the rosette consisting of a
             dimple surrounded with a ring of dots.2 The same motive was
             very popular in transitional deposits in Italy,? but in East
             Central Europe marks the developed phase of the Early Iron
             Age.” Inthe Banat it seemsa natural development of the earlier
         t Hampel, pl. LXxxvIlI, 1-2.                motive is seen on a figure of apparently
         2 Ink. Ker., pp. 51 and 64.                 Middle Bronze Age type from Temes
         3 Milleker, Vattina, p. 61 and plates       Kubin.
         XIV, 5-6: XVI, I-4.                         9 Pianello, BP. xxxix, pl.11, 7; Allu-
         4 Dolgozatok,. fig. 45; cf. Wosinski,       miere, Maclver, Villanovans, pl. 18,
         TT., pl. cv, 4 (and also pl. ctv, 1-3).     13, 18.
         5 Perjamos, Vattina, Omoljica, Gerjen.      10 e.g. in Silesian urnfields of Seger’s
         6 AuhV. v.; cf. also SV. viii, pl. Iv. 4.   phase D (SV. viii, pl. 1v, 11), and
         7 Starinar, 1906, fig. 5.                   in Hallstatt C barrows (AuhV. v,
         8 Vattina, pl.xvitl, 2; Gerjen, TT., pl.    p. 403, fig. 2). Cf. the gold plaques
         Cv,5. Szelevény, Hampel, pl. Lxxxviti,      from Chauchitsa in Macedonia, Cas-
         1-2 (Aszod, tbid.); but cf. Wosinski,       son, Macedonia, fig. 53.
         Ink. Ker., pl. xctt, where the same
Fic. 218.   Urns and covering dishes from Dubovac.
                      M. VrSac
                                            AND            THE     SCYTHS                                                                                   383
concentric circles. Besides these patterns we find a very
metallic-looking ribbed ware, perhaps influenced by the Lau-
sitz intrusion, and a specialized wart ornament in which the
warts are grooved, giving them a wrinkled look.*
   To turn now to the urns, we find that at Vattina jugs* were Villanova
sometimes used as ossuaries.                                     From this site, from Dubovac, urns
from Suréin and elsewhere,3 come further several big black
urns of ‘Villanova’ shape decorated with oblique shoulder
                                                                                                                                                7




                                                                              vo,
                                                                                                                                                ¢
                                                                                                                                    af




                                                                                       Ni
                                                                                                                               Sh     BONN
                                                                                                                           v        ay SSNs
               | Tai                       h                                                                     =<            o
                                                                                                                                                    ESN
                                                                                                                               “uN                   x ON
               ur                                nh                                                                        ¢

               Ags    ifLN tL        TAU i ay
                                            ed MUBy                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                                    t


                                                                                               il                ie He
                                                                                       i           AME           y NNNVI           w!                 c!

                                                                       \\,        FZ
                                                                           ‘NG; Ye                   ]i           N
                                                                                               4                      WSN
                                                                                                                                   i        .       iy!




                     f\         mf a ;                                                 SO
                          a     HI                 LAN),           yy AL                   )             f
                                           > Af ‘li‘                         ty         )

                                           Chine
                                            Gj jy.

                                               »                  KW         \“

                                                                              YY
                                                             YZZ SS \
                                                                     XC
                                                                 ——
                                                                  WN
                                                                 SS
                                Fic. 219.                  Pottery from Vattina.                             4

flutings and warts (Fig. 218). At Dubovac the later urns are
relatively small and often approximate to Villanovan shapes.
But nothing prevents either type being regarded as descended
from the native VrSac and Klicevac forms.
   In the E levels of Pécska a certain decline is observable. Pécska E
The leading type is a descendant of the old Perjamos jug that ~4res
now has a constricted mouth. Precise parallels are lacking
at Vattina, but several identical jugs have been found in Syrmia
(Fig.221). Some of the ‘Villanova’ urnsfrom Dubovac that can-
not be matched at Vattina may belong to the same late phase.
1 Vattina, pl. xv1,2; Gerjen,TT.,pl.                                 ? Vattina, pl. XVIII, 2.
civ, I; Dubovac, Wosinski, Ink. Ker.,                                3 Ibid., p. 34.
pl. xcvil, 3 and 5.
           384        THE END          OF THE HUNGARIAN          BRONZE       AGE
    Axes      The late bronze industry of the Banat is not well known.
           Moulds found zm situ in Pécska D and even in E* show that
           flat chisels and shaft-hole axes were still being manufactured
           here even after the end of Period VI. Socketed celts are found
           stray or in hoards,’ and a mould for their local manufacture
           was picked up at Kurvin Grad in North Serbia.3 On the other
           hand, even in Pécska D, men were casting spear-heads with
           rhomboid blades as at Aranyos.4 In the late hoards we find




                           Fic. 220.    Engraved bone cylinders and pommel
                                             from Vattina. 2

         further a curious knife-dagger with leaf-shaped blade to
         which the best parallels come from South Russia.’ In the
         whole area there is not a single sword of series B-C.6
            It is quite likely that horn, bone, and even stone were still used
Engraved for tools. Among the bone products some disks and pommels
 pommels deserve special mention. On one we see the same ‘pulley’
         motive that we meet at Tészeg D, on North Hungarian bronze
         swords and in the Shaft Graves of Mycenae. Another (Fig.
         220) is engraved with a pattern resembling that on the gold
           bracelet from Pipea’ to be mentioned below.
           * Dolgozatok, iii, figs. 55,56, and 67.   4 Dolgozatok, iii, fig. 57.
           ? Hampel, pl. cxxvi, 1; Milleker,         5 Tallgren, Pontide, fig. 109, 11.
           Delmagyarorszag, 1891, pp. 10-12.         6 Hampel, iii, pp. 82, 102.
           3 Starinar, 1910, pl. 11, 12.             7 Parvan, Getica, fig. 231, 4.
                    Fic. 221.   Amphorae from Surtin.   M. Zagreb




Fic. 222.   Large urn (graphited) from         Fic. 223. Urn from Scythian grave,
            Pécska. M. Arad                      Maros Gombos. M. Clausenburg
a   ne   ane
                           _ AND THE SCYTHS                                    385
   As far as the Banat is concerned, no safety pins nor other Absenceof
types of the Western Iron Age—Villanova and Hallstatt—have Hallstatt
been found. On the other hand, certain types of gold object, forms
well represented in our area, are elsewhere associated with ob-
jects demonstrably belonging to Period VII. At Féregyhaza a
hoard of gold bracelets’ was discovered. Some agree in shape Gold
with the Middle Bronze Age type D1,while others end in a pair ornaments
of spirals like Fig. 224d (Dia). Now a bracelet of the latter Bracelets




  Fic. 224.   Gold ornaments of the late Bronze Age: a-d Fokoru, e Szilagy-
                           Somlyé, f Beliye, g Acsad

type was found in a hoard at Fokort in North Hungary asso-
ciated with a fibula and other gold objects that must belong to
Period VII and not its earliest phase (Fig. 224, b-d). On the
strength of this find Marton,’ followed by Parvan3 and most
other authorities, assigns the Féregyhaza hoard to the Hallstatt
period; Ebert,‘ on the contrary, insisting on Middle Bronze
Age parallels, dates it much earlier. We think that the hoard
in question may well belong to Period VI. In the double-ended
bracelet Dra wesee the prototype of the forms shown in Fig. 224,
e, f, and g. The first of these types, represented by two or
three specimens in the area of group II,’ has parallels in Scan-
t AE. xxvii, p. 59.                          5 The Féregyhaza types are also repre-
2 AE. xxvii, l.c.                            sented in this area by a hoard from
3 Getica, p. 325.                            Ofehérté in Szabolcs County, AE. xl,
4 Fahresh. O. a. Inst., 1908, p. 274.        Pp. 244.
  3443                                  3D
        386       THE END      OF THE HUNGARIAN            BRONZE      AGE
         dinavia that may belong to the border between Periods VI and
         VII. Type g is Transylvanian in origin, where intermediate
         forms are also found,? and belongs to the end of the Hallstatt
         period 3                                                     :
   Disks    The same difficulties impede the dating of the gold disks
         from Ottlaka‘ just on the border between groups IJ and III.
         The patterns of loops and spirals and the delicate punctured
         work are reminiscent of the finest Bijelo brdo ware, but carry
         on a tradition, going back to Mochlos and Troy, that had been
         implanted in Hungary in Period IV. On the other hand, the
         hunting scene, Fig. 225, reminds us of Odenburg and Hallstatt
         C bronzes; Hoernes indeed calls it a barbarized Venetic style.°
         Another disk from the same hoard depicts four distinctive
         Hallstatt birds.© The assignment of the disks to Period VII
         therefore seems inevitable, though the date implied by Hoernes’
         dictum is perhaps unnecessarily late.
Chrono-     The dating of the civilization just described reopens in an
    logy acute form the problem broached on p. 291.        Does the later
         Pécska and Vattina material fill in the period 800-400 B.c., or
         should it be dated three hundred years early and a partial
         evacuation of the Banat after 700 B.c. postulated? In the
         Subatlantic epoch the Banat would have been ill adapted for
         intensive settlement; and by the sixth century the estab-
         lishment of a new short route to the Black Sea and the Aegean,
         controlled by the Scyths,’? would have robbed the Banat settle-
        ments of their raison d’étre.          An abandonment          of the sites,
        therefore, is a priori quite likely. The absence from the Banat
        of Italian and Illyrian types of Period VII, when Illyrian cul-
        ture had already advanced to the mouth of the Drave,® would
        seem to imply such an exodus, especially as the types in ques-
        tion are found on the Maros. And the striking correspondence
        between late Vattina wares and the pottery of the barbarian
        squatters in Troy VIIa? may indicate whither the Banat’s in-
        habitants retreated. So the proposition that the later Vattina
        culture (Pécska D) lasts from 1100 to 800 B.c. and Pécska E
        from 800 to 500B.C., the Banat being then almost deserted,”
        is not indefensable. The so-called Villanovan types would then
        * Cf. Montelius, Minnen, 1134-5.        8 p. 407 below.
        2 Parvan, Getica, p. 326. -             9 Cf. p. 392, below.
        35Ch Reinecke, Germania, 1925,p. 53.    ' Historical parallels are not lacking;
        4 AE. xxix (1909), pp. 405 f.           the intensive colonization of the
        5 Urgeschichte, p. 550.                 Banat is a modern event beginning
        6 AL: xxix, Agia:                       with the expulsion of the Turks.
        7 p. 397, below.
                        AND THE SCYTHS                             387
be derived, not from Italy, but from the assumed proto-
Villanovan culture of Bijelo brdo.
 _ But can such a gap really be admitted? It implies a con-
siderable telescoping in the upper strata at Vina. And in the
Banat itself, if Hallstatt forms are absent, Scythian and even
La Tene objects do occur, albeit in minimal quantity. More-
over, there are wheel-made vases from South Hungary, pre-
sumably belonging to the La Téne period' that undoubtedly




                                       Sasiuth—


           Fic 225.   Gold disk from Ottlaka, County Arad.     3


carry on the Vattina tradition! So a more consistent record
would be obtained by adopting the lower dates advocated by
Milleker for the Vattina culture: its later phase (Pécska D-E)
would last from 700 to 400, and the age of the earlier phase—
and with it Bijelo brdo and all the Hungarian urnfields—would
be correspondingly reduced. We therefore only adopt the
higher dating provisionally tll excavations at other stratified
sites—of which there are plenty—have settled the issue.
                            IV.   GROUP     IV
On the Upper Maros, where connected remains assignable to
the Middle Bronze Age are lacking, there are traces of urn-
fields belonging to Period VI-VII. These may denote an ex-
              1 In the University Museum,         Cambridge.
         388         THE END       OF THE HUNGARIAN              BRONZE       AGE
           tension eastward of the Vattina culture, though an admixture
           with aboriginal and eastern elements is likely.
  Urnfield    At Marosvasarhely one large urn of ‘early Villanovan’
  elements shape, adorned with horizontal flutings, was found.*’    And from
 in Tran- a disturbed urnfield at Mezéband come rough cups with one or
 sylvania two high swung handles and triple vases that recall Vattina
           types.” To the same native culture may belong a settlement
           near Schassberg. The only object from the site yet published
           is a clay hearth magnificently decorated with elaborate spirals.3
           Parvan‘ compares the design to the famous sculptured spirals
           from Nesactium in Istria,‘ but in view of the long tradition of
           spiral decoration in ‘Transylvania the appeal to influence from
           the Adriatic seems superfluous.
  Illyrian    Nevertheless the urnfield folk were not the only ethnic
  barrows element of western affinities in Transylvania. Under a barrow
           at Maros Csapo a knight’s grave was discovered furnished with
           an iron bit® identical withthosefrom Dalya, Kiskészeg,and Som-
           ly6 on the other side of the Danube (Fig. 227), and other horse-
           trappings of a Hallstatt character as well as with pottery said? to
           resemble that from Somlyé on the one hand, from local
           Scythian graves on the other.’ This grave certainly denotes an
           incursion of people from the South Ilyrian Hallstatt province
           up the Maros valley in pre-Scythian times. Perhaps it was they
           who introduced the Villanovan and South Illyrian forms found
           in the urnfields.
              Besides the few closed finds just enumerated, a number
           of bronze and gold objects found stray or in hoards in Transyl-
           vania may be mentioned at this point; for they seem in fact
           to belong to Period VII and the end of Period VI. The majority
           are the products of a highly specialized local industry.
Agathyr-      The socketed celt seems to have been early adopted and
  sian axe developed locally to a specialized type with a peaked rim. But
           the perforated axe served as the principal weapon, if not as a
           tool. Indeed a specialized variant was evolved on the Upper
           Alt and on the Upper Maros; G. Nagy terms it the Agathyrsian
           axe. The most celebrated representatives of the type are the
           gold specimens unearthed at Cséfalva in the Upper Alt basin.
         * Dolgozatok, vi (1915), p. 260.        ently horse and rider had been interred
         * Ibid. iv (1913), pp. 270, 392; cf.    together.
         Parvan, Getica, figs. 287-9.            TLC      5 107s
         3 Parvan, Getica, pl. xx, 1.            8 Real. viii, p. 49.
         4OD. cit. Da' 787:                      9 Childe, Aryans, fig. 24, 2; Parvan,
         5 Hoernes ‘, Urgeschichte, p. 473.      fig. 265; AE. xxxiii, p. 310, figs. 34-40.
         ° AE. xxix, p. 166, figs. 3-5. Appar-                        a                ee
                          AND THE SCYTHS                                389
They are certainly descended from the series represented at
Hajdu Samson (Fig. 147, 5); but, in view of the elaboration of
the back, should not be confused with the latter as they are by
Nagy and Parvan. We assume that the type was introduced
(or rather reintroduced) from the Lower Maros, and then de-
veloped locally. The elaborate form is confined to the Alt and
the Upper Maros,’ and grows into a still more developed type
with elongated back that is found also in Bukovina’? and in
Slovakia.3 These axes are often ornamented with a delicately
engraved ‘sickle pattern’, reminiscent of that on the axes of
type Az from Hajdu Samson. It is, in fact, almost certainly a Relation
degenerate form of the latter, but the frequent confusion‘ be- to type
tween these degraded ‘sickle patterns’ and the glorious scroll Cr
work of Hajdu Samson, Mezéberény or Gaura can only be
due to very superficial examination. The late date of our type
is given by its association with hammer-axes of type A3 at
Domahida, with late spear-heads at Abauj Szantd, and with
socketed celts, late spear-heads and axes like at Drajna-de-Jos
north of Ploesti in Rumania.°
  In the area where these axes are concentrated, hammer-axes Axes of
of series A are very rare and are represented mainly by late type A
                                                             rare
types.°
   Swords, confined to type C3, are represented principally Swords
by broken specimens from large founders’ hoards.’ These lay rare
mainly on the frontiers of the province, but two enormous
rapiers® have been found stray in the heart of Transylvania.
Both have marked midribs and three rivet-holes in the triangu-
lar, tangless butts, and exceed go cm. in length. They agree
exactly with the ‘Shardana’ sword from Palestine in the British
Museum.9 Our rapiers may, therefore, be much older than Rapiers
the period under discussion and be connected with Aegean
trade during the Middle Bronze Age. On the other hand,
they have a certain likeness to a huge iron rapier found at
Aldoboly on the Upper Alt. It was 113-5 cm. long; the hilt
had once been plated with silver. The guards are fashioned to
represent lions, and the pommel, of the antennae type, de-
t AE. xxxiv (1914), p. 55 (Varfalva).   7 Ispanlaka    (Alsé Féher) Hampel,
                                        pl. CXLIV, cf. pls. CLXXI,    CLXXX;
2 At Sereth, Much, Kunsthist. Atlas,
DIEOXXIV, 14..."                        Dacia, ii, pp. 351-6.
3 Hampel, pl. xxxIl, 4.                 8 Magyarés (Udvarhely, M. Sepsi Sz.
4 Even in Reinecke, AE., 1899, and      Gyérgy) and Saromberké (Kolozsvar,
still more in Parvan.                   cf. Hampel, pl. xx, 5).
5 Dacia, ii, p. 363, pl. 1.             9 BMBronze, fig. 179.
6 Cf, Hampel, pl. cxtim; Dacia, ii,     © EMU. 1895, p. 19, fig. 22.
p. 363.
         390       THE END        OF THE HUNGARIAN               BRONZE       AGE
          picts birds’ beaks. This object must be an oriental import
          dating possibly from the first half of the 1st millennium.’
          It is not certain that the bronze or copper rapiers are much
          older.
  Sickles    Another implement, typical of Transylvania, is the sickle
          with looped tang. The type, ultimately derived from the very
          ancient Mesopotamian form, recurs in South Russia and the
          Caucasus. Only a few specimens found their way from Tran-
          sylvania westward as far as Velem Szt. Vid.
    Gold     Transylvania is rich in gold, so that it is natural that many
    Vases objects of the precious metal should be found there.      Besides
          the axes from Csdfalva, we may mention the gold vases from
          Bénye 3 and those found on the borders in County Bihar.’ And
          it would be there that the simpler bracelet with wiry double-
          spiral ends (Fig. 224, d) developed into the form with fan-
          shaped ends (Fig. 224,f); for the intermediate stages with flat,
          arc-shaped fans and wiry bodies are best illustrated in Transyl-
          vania.5 In the same complex as the later bracelets oriental
          elements appear in the form of zoomorphic ornaments best
          illustrated in the celebrated treasure found at Michalkow in
          East Galicia.© The animals are not here treated in Scythian
          style ; their nearest relatives are found in Caucasian graves of
          the Koban period and are pre-Scythian; but the remaining
          motives are purely western.
 Imports     The wealth of the land in gold naturally attracted foreign
    from objects to Transylvania;        from North Hungary came the
   North compound spiral fibulae (associated at Suseni with a Bavarian
Hungary bracelet of type E3),’ the smooth bronze cups and_ perhaps
          the T-handled cauldrons mentioned on p. 375 above. East
          Hungary supplied late battle-axes with long spiked butts.
  Illyria Moreover, along the Maros Hallstatt (Illyrian) and Villanovan
      and types, that are lacking altogether in the Banat, are found
    Italy sporadically.    We may mention spectacle brooches from
          Ordéngés Fiizes,® possibly a fibula a navicella? from Portus and
          another from Déva, and a Certosa fibula from Gyulafehérvar.”
          Parvan would also class as Italic the bronze chariot wheels and
         * Cf. Minns, fig. 179 (Ananjino).           to the same general context as the
         ? Asur-nasir-pal (c. 880 B.c.) appears      finds from Dalj, Fokoru, Bénye, &c.
         to be girt with a sword having a            7 Dacia, i, pp. 350 ff., figs. 44, 76.
         similar hilt, cf. de Morgan, Mission au     8 Hampel, pl. ccxtx, cf. AE. xv, p. 199.
         Caucase, fig. 33, and Perse, iv, fig. 56.   9 Parvan, Getica, p. 383; but Marton,
         3 Parvan, Getica, pl. xiv.                  AE. xxxiii, p.199, denies that it is to be
         4 Hampel, pl. ccxtvt.                       thus described.
         5 Parvan, op. cit., figs. 228-9.            10 AE. xxxiii, p. 332, fig. 119.
         ° Hoernes, op. cit., p. 29. It belongs
                          AND    THE    SCYTHS                          391
many of the horse-trappings found stray in Transylvania."
Some of these western objects would not be just imports, con-
nected with the trade in gold, but would be the result of the
incursions from beyond the Danube marked by the barrow at
Maros Csapo.
   It will be noted that all the datable imports belong to the Chrono-
last half of Period VI or a still later date; the fact is most signi- logical
ficant. It means that the serious exploitation of the gold on the inferences
inner slopes of the Transylvanian ring only began in the Late
Bronze Age. Previously the main supplies must have been
drawn from washings in the Kérés, the Lower Maros, and the
Banat streams along whose banks Early and Middle Bronze
Age types of foreign origin do occur. Moreover, on the Upper
Maros the appearance of Late Bronze and Early Iron Age types
that are missing in the area of the Vattina culture proper is an
argument for the higher dating of the last-named culture. It
is further significant that the western objects are exclusively of
Early and Middle Hallstatt (Benacci II) types. The brilliant
late phase, characterized by the Venetic situla style, is unrepre-
sented along the Maros: the next Italic objects after the Benacci
II fibulae, &c., are Certosa brooches: the reason is, as Parvan °
has pointed out, that by the seventh century the oriental
Scythian influence was strong enough to exclude western ele-
ments altogether. The floruit of the Transylvanian Bronze Age
accordingly lasted from 1000 or later to about 550: bronze was
then ousted by iron introduced by the Scyths from South
Russia.
   The Transylvanian civilization just described seems then sion  Conclu-

on the whole to be based upon an extension of the urnfield   cul-
tures of the Hungarian plain—an extension actuated and
eventually itself overlaid by a push from the west and the north.
A native substratum may be assumed, but its extent cannot be
gauged till further excavations be undertaken; as far as the
stray bronzes tell us anything, Transylvania might have been
totally evacuated during the second millennium. One suspects,
                                                              ar-
in fact, that it was still in the hands of the nomads who had
rived in Period III and formed an outpost of the South Russian
steppe culture all through the height of the Subboreal epoch.
That would explain the close analogies between its civilization
and that of the Ukraine, when the onset of a moister climate
made a return to settled agriculture desirable.
                                                                   2.
         : Hampel, pls. L1x, Lx, 5 (bit of Benacci I shape), LXII,
         2 Getica, p. 770.
                                               $92
                     V.   FOREIGN      RELATIONS       IN PERIOD      VI
           Groups 2, 3, and 4 constituted a closed province separated
           by a sharp frontier along the Danube from the Pannonian
           region. In its Late Bronze Age this province fulfilled a very
The West   different role from what it had in the past. Westward its
           wealth in gold and copper and its lack of tin involved a certain
           amount of external relation with the area beyond the Danube,
           and so we find Transylvanian bracelets as far as Bellye in 'Tolna
           County on the way to the antimony mine of Velem; but in-
           fluence from East Hungary beyond the Danube was minimal.
           On the contrary, as we have seen, Italian influences, mediated
         by Pannonia, and even raiding bands of horsemen from the
         latter area, made their way up the Maros. In its relations with
         the west East Hungary was now passive.
     The    The reversal in the mutual positions of East Hungary and
  Aegean the Aegean was even more complete. If not without reactions
         in the opposite direction, we have seen how Aegean influence
         had constantly flowed up the Danube and the Tisza; the
         settlements on the river banks and in the Banat had been the
         great intermediaries in its transmission. A last reminiscence
         of those Aegean connexions is seen in the Mycenaean ‘pulley-
         motive’ on the Vattina pommels that was adopted in North
         Hungary during Period VI. But any relations subsisting be-
         tween the Aegean and the Danube basin were now in fact in
         the contrary direction. Actual evidence of these inverted rela-
         tions comes from the Troad. As already noted, the pottery
Troy VII from Troy VIIa agrees remarkably both in the curvature of its
         handles and the wrinkled warts with which it was ornamented
         with the later Vattina wares. From the same barbarian village
         come moulds for a socketed celt! and for a shaft-hole axe?
         of a type that was still current at Pécska in Periods VI-VII,
         though perhaps more closely related to the Transylvanian
         form. All this suggests that a wave of invaders from East
         Hungary had reached the Troad by the ninth century. We
         have already indicated that at least one stream of invasion had
         passed along the Morava-Vardar valley into Macedonia from
         the Middle Danube basin a couple of centuries earlier. The
         inversion of the roles of the Aegean and the Danubian land was
         complete. Southern influence was not destined to pass up the
         Danubian corridor again till the Macedonian era.
               ™ SS., No. 6768.
              ? SS., No. 6769; Gétze’s reconstruction is not altogether convincing.
            THE   END   OF THE     HUNGARIAN               BRONZE       AGE         393
   Hungary had once been a channel by which Oriental in-
fluences reached Central Europe across the Russian steppes.
At the beginning of the first millennium, however, the relations
of the two areas were again reversed. We have already seen how
Hungarian types of the Middle Bronze Age! were reaching the
Dniepr in the latter half of the second millennium. The late
native Bronze Age of the Ukraine is founded almost entirely The
on Hungarian types and represents, as indicated below,’ Ukraine
an extension of a variety of East Hungarian civilization. culture
Among numerous imports there from beyond the Carpathians, spreads
let us note the smooth bronze cup from Pavlovka,3 a whole from
series of socketed celts, certain types of pin,’ and wheel Hungary
pendants® and tanged swords from Podolia.? ‘Tallgren®
rightly declares that such agreements can only be explained
by a migration of peoples, though, in view of the nomadic
elements we have postulated in Transylvania and North-east
Hungary itself, this need not mean a very large displacement
of population. A slight reaction from this eastward movement
may be detected in the zoomorphism of Michalkow and the
curious axe of East Russian type from Felsé Balog (Gém6r).?
By the eighth century Hungarian culture had advanced to the
Dniepr. Was that its maximum limit?
   As is well known, a whole series of Hungarian and Central Koban
European types reappear in the Iron Age cemetery of Koban
round about 1000 B.c. It has been a pet theory of certain
English ® and French” archaeologists that these types and the
knowledge of iron were introduced into Europe from Koban
across Hungary. That idea may be at once dismissed. Hungary
and the Ukraine in the Hallstatt period constituted a back-
water where bronze was still used—indeed a buffer between the
Iron Age Caucasus and the iron culture of the Alps. Iron first
reached Hungary from the west, not from the east.”
t Battle-axes B3, bracelets D1, Cz, pins        need not be a reflex of fresh eastern
like B4, &c., pp. 272 ff.                       influence, since a small implement
2 p. 398.                 -                     from Bilcze Ziota (Man, xxiv, 64, fig.’7)
3 'Tallgren, Pontide, fig. 91.                  suggests that the Mesopotamian type
4 Ibid., pp. 185, 186; 216.                     had already reached the country west
5 Ibid., fig. 110, 1-2; cf. Hampel, pl.         of the Dniepr about 2000 B.c.
Lily 4.                                         10 Peake, Bronze Age, pp. 121 f.
6 Tbid., fig. 87; cf. Hampel, pl. cxeiv,        11 de Morgan, Prehistoric Man.
2-4.                                            12 Note further that the bronze bits
7 Lbid., gs 112, 1.                             from the Caucasus are quite unlike
8 Jbid., pp. 216 f.                             those from Hungary, cf. Chantre,
9 Hampel, pl. xciv, 8, obviously con-           Caucase, pl. xxxt bis, and Lx1, and AE.
nected with the trade in antimony               xxix, p. 166,figs. 4-5; xxv, p. 190, &c.
bronze.     The Transylvanian sickle            The horn bits are really similar.
   3443                                    3E
         394        THE    END      OF THE    HUNGARIAN         BRONZE      AGE
 Invasion   On the other hand, the author’ has suggested a migration
     from from Hungary to the Caucasus to explain the appearance there
Hungary? of Hungarian types of the Middle Bronze Age—raquet pins,’
         spiral finger-rings,} earrings with flattened ends,‘ arm cylinders
         with spiral ends,’ ribbed bracelets® like type B1 and other
         like C3,7 and horn cheek-pieces for bits. Sucha movement
         is still possible and would help to explain the seeming reduction
         in the population of Hungary in Period VI. But the ground is
         being cut away beneath it as more and more of the common
         types—the spiral earrings, the raquet pins—are coming to light _
         much earlier in Mesopotamia. ‘The Caucasus, Hungary, and
         the Alps appear with growing clarity as reflexions of the mighty
         civilization of the Tigris and Euphrates that need have no
         direct connexion with one another. That is the only possible
         explanation of the agreements between Koban and Hallstatt,
         since the common types of the Iron Age are totally missing
         between the Volga and the Danube; it may equally hold good
         in the Bronze Age.
            Hence no material contribution to culture—least of all the
         use of iron—was transmitted during Period VI across the
         Russian steppes to Central Europe through Hungary or by any
         other route. At the beginning of the first millennium the move-
        ment of culture was from west to east and from north to south.

                              VI.   THE     SCYTHS    IN HUNGARY

              A restoration of the old east to west relationship did, how-
           ever, take place about 500 B.c. The Scyths made raids into
           East Central Europe, and in Hungary made a profound im-
           pression.
       The    The Scythian incursions followed two roads:9 one, across
 northern Galicia, brought them to the Upper Oder; the other led across
  route— Moldavia      to North Hungary and Transylvania. The first
   Silesia route was responsible for Vettersfeld;
                                                     but this well-known
           treasure and the Scythian arrow-heads from the Lausitz®
           denote at most an extensive raid.           :
              In Hungary the ‘Scythians’—the term must not be inter-
         1 Aryans, p. 122.                           7 Ibid., pl. xLrx, 2.
         ? Chantre, op. cit., pl. XIX, 1.            8 [bid., pl. xx bis.
         3 Ibid., pl. xvi, 7.                        9 Parvan, Getica, p. 728. He adds
         4 Ibid., pl. xix, 1.                        a third route up the Danube that
         5 Ibid., pl. xvut, 3.                       seems unattested.
         6 Ibid., pl. xv, 11.                        © Reinecke in ZfE. xxviii (1896), p. 9.
                            AND THE SCYTHS                        |             395
preted too narrowly—made a much deeper impression. ‘The Hungary:
regular use of iron was introduced from the east, though the zo  |
earliest iron objects had come from the opposite quarter. Scythian
But it would be wrong to speak of a Scythian immigration or of ¢o/ontza-
“compact bodies of Scythians dwelling in Hungary’.t Such tion
expressions would only hold good of Transylvania, and even
there only with qualifications.
  In the Danube-Tisza plain a considerable number of stray Spread of
finds and a few graves mark the course of Scythian raids. The Scythian
invaders seem to have entered by the passes into Subcarpathian 4ects
Ruthenia, and then spread (a) westward across the sandy




                                                             Cc             d

Fic. 226. Scythian sword, axe (‘sagaris’), and pole-tops, all of iron, from graves
                                in Hungary. +


country of North Hungary and (b) southward along the plains
beyond the Tisza towards the Banat. The distinctive objects
may be briefly enumerated.’
1. Typical iron daggers with heart-shaped guards: Hat Moun-
   tains (Bereg), Bercel (Szabolcs)3, then (a) Gyéngyés, Pilin,
   and other sites round the Matra and (bd) VrSac‘ in the Banat.
2. ‘Pole-tops’ surmounted with animals: (a) Gydngyés, (2)
   Szomhid (Arad).
3. Cauldrons: Oszény (Komarom)>.
t Rostovtzeff, Iranians and Greeks,        3 AE. xxxv (1915), p. 135-
   A2s                                     4 Parvan takes this as evidence of an
2 Unless otherwise stated, based on
                                           incursion up the Danube through
Reinecke, ZfE. xxviii, pp. 10 f.; xxxi,    Wallachia.
                                           5 Those from Regdly and KGrés,
p.(526); Hampel, EMU., 1895,pp.1f.;
                                           figured by Hampel, EMU., p. 10, are
Marton, AE, xxviii (1908), pp. 37 f.,
                                           Hunnish or Avar.
and Fettich, Arch. Hung. iii.
            396      THE END       OF THE HUNGARIAN            BRONZE       AGE
            4. A gold ‘shield boss’ in the form of a deer, Tapid Szent
               Marton, and several gold objects from Zéldhalompuszta
               near Miskolc.*
            5. Triangular bronze arrow-heads are very common, especially
               in counties Szabolcs and Hajdu, but extend as far as Velem
               and Bosnia.
            6. Certain iron axes—in form very like the copper axe-adzes—
               are found with Scythian objects at Bercel, Gyéngyés, and
               in Transylvania. Nagy calls them sagareis.
            7. Though not Scythian, an archaic Greek hydria of bronze,’
               dug up at Bene (Bereg), must have been brought by the
              same current.
             Among the connected deposits we can only mention the
          group of objects from Bercel, the cemetery of Gyéngyés on
          the way to the Matra Mountains by the northern route, and the
          barrow of Gyoma in Békés on the southern route.
Cemetery     The burials at Gyéngyés3 deviate considerably from the
of Gyén- rites current on the steppes. Nomound survived, and the bones
     gyos had apparently been burned. All the graves scientifically
          excavated were very poor (one contained a good sword), but
          workmen had previously discovered what must have been a
          chariot burial.
 Not pure    The furniture of the graves was equally irregular. The pole-
 Scythian tops, bells, sword, and ladle were purely Scythian. Other finds
            —a trunnion celt, two bits, and a lance head—all of iron—might
         just as well have come from the west, and there was a bracelet
 La Tene with N decoration quite in La Ténestyle.s Finally, the pottery
parallelsincluded fragments of a big black urn ornamented with warts
         in the old Hungarian mode, and a bowl recalling local La Téne
         shapes. Gyéngyéds was not the cemetery of a community of
         Scyths, but it contained Scythian elements and one grave, per-
         haps the remains of a Scythian chief.
  Barrow _ At Gyoma on the KGrés® the interment had taken place
of Gyoma in a wooden chamber under a large barrow, and so corresponds
         better to the ritual observed farther east. Perhaps among the
         many barrows beyond the Tisza others will yield Scythian
         remains on excavation.
             * Arch. Hung. iii, Fettich considers    4 This of course recalls the Celtic
             both groups were derived from graves.   culture of the Marne, but is well
             2 Parvan, Getica, pl. xvut.             attested in Scythia too.
             3 AE. xxviii, pp. 37f. Thebulkofthe     5 l.c., fig. 1, 8, and p. 44. The lance-
            finds were dug up by peasants, but       head also has Celtic parallels.
             Dr. Marton hurried to the scene and     6 AF. xxv (1905), p. 236.
             excavated eleven graves. Cp. n. 1
                            AND    THE     SCYTHS                           397
   The foregoing survey shows how fantastic it would be to
speak of a Scythian conquest of Hungary. Many of the stray
finds, clustered about the centres of metallurgy, are quite
obviously merely trade goods. The graves are minimal in
number and far from typical (for instance the horse hecatombs
are absent). But there certainly were ‘Scythian’ raids, and they
may have sufficed to ruin the Egyek culture on the Upper Tisza.
   The anticipations of La Tene seen at Gyéngyés and also at Lateness
Bercel’ are a warning against too high a dating of these events. of Scy-
Only the deer from Zéldhalompuszta might be sixth century; thian
oo         influence scarcely reached its maximum before the raids
  ch
   In Transylvania the position is different. Scythian objects’ Transyl-
are quite numerous, and some must be early. Moreover, there vania
are several regular cemeteries? in which Scythian influence Ceme-
may be recognized. These are significantly located along the teres
Maros, i.e. on the direct route from the goldfields to the Pontic
region.
   But the burials are in no strict sense Scythian. There was no Divergent
barrow, the corpses were sometimes contracted, in some cases burial
they had even been cremated, though inhumation in the ex-                           rites
tended posture was the general rule. The only absolutely
Scythian grave-goods were triangular arrow-heads‘ and penan-
nular bronze ear-rings with conical knobs at the ends.°#5 Aniron
bipennis is also probably Scythian—the sagaris of the Greeks.
   The    other remains        include     rather formless       iron knives,       Fibulae
a sickle perhaps of oriental type, fibulae with simple arc,’ with
widened catch plate, as in Blinkenberg’s type III, 3c* and an
odd fragment reminiscént of Certosa,? beads of amber
(allegedly Baltic) glass paste and shell, and cowrie shells. The
commoner pots were large pithoi that look like elongated
Villanova urns (Fig. 222), small jars of a still more Villanovan
shape, and shallow cups with a thumb-grip handle.
   The culture revealed in these cemeteries along the Maros is
t In the knife, AE. xxxv, fig. 2.          Alt basin belong here, since they con-
2 PArvan gives a complete list of finds    tained similar pottery with thumb-
in Getica; note a very fine pole-top       grip handles.
from Gernyeszeg, and mirrors from          4 Nagyenyed, Nagy, Skythak, pp. 54f.
Pékafalva (Alsé Féher), Zsdkod (Kis-       5 Marosvasarhely.
Kukiillé), and Fejerd near Cluj.           6 Marosgombos.
3 Kisekemezé, Piski, Gerepen, Nagy         7 Kisekemezé, AE. xxxiii, p. 145,
Enyed, Maros Gombos, Marosvasar-           fig. 32.
hely (Dolgozatok, vi, 1915, Pp- 277 f.).   8 Marosvasarhely, Dolgozatok, vi.
 Probably the graves with contracted       9 Piski, AE., l.c., fig. 45.
 skeletons found at Bartholoma in the
398      THE    END    OF THE      HUNGARIAN          BRONZE       AGE
obviously hybrid. While the metal work is mainly Pontic
(Greek or Scythian), the burial rites and pottery belong to a
native culture still very vague. The Villanovan types and the
cremations may be due to that extension of the Hungarian urn-
field cultures indicated aboye. It would also be perfectly
natural to derive the thumb-grip handles from the late Vattina’
type, and Parvan actually does this.
   But the correspondence between the Transylvanian handles
and those from Bosnia,” and Macedonia; on the one hand and
from the Ukraine‘ on the other is more exact. ‘The last analogy
is easily explained; for the vases in question come from graves
and gorodishche ‘of the VIIth—IVth cent.’ that are distinguished
by Rostovtzeff from Scythian, and accordingly must belong to
the Ukrainian outpost of Hungarian culture identified on p. 393.
As for the Illyrian parallels, they can have but one explanation;
we shall see in the final chapter that material from Macedonia
and Bulgaria discloses a regular migration from the West
Illyrian regions at the very beginning of Period VII that carried
eastward fibulae and other types, evolved nearer the Adriatic.
We have already met some of these very types along the Maros,
and we shall find them much more common in Hungary west
of the Danube. Since the barrow at Maroscsapé contained,
together with Illyrian or Pannonian types of metal work,
vases with thumb-grip handles, the latter were probably
brought to ‘Transylvania by that westward movement of which
Maroscsap6 is a conspicuous monument. The pottery, like
the bronzes already discussed, is evidence of a movement
from Illyria, parallel to that which affected Macedonia soon
after 1000 B.c. And it shows that the ethnic substratum and
cultural background upon which Scythian influence ultimately
impinged was essentially Occidental.
   Scythian influence in Central Europe was late and by no
means intense. Only in a small region did it herald the Iron
Age, a belated Iron Age in what had become a backwater.
For the beginning of the Continental iron industry, we must
look westwards across Pannonia to the slopes of the Alps.
* Cf. Man, xxvi, pl. K (from which       3 Chauchitsa, Casson, op. cit., fig. 47.
cemetery?).                              + Rostovtzeff, op. cit., pp. gt f., fig. 9;
2 Cungar, Ripat, Donja Dolina, Debelo    cf. Tallgren, Pontide, fig. 112, 7 Oe
brdo, Glasinac; Casson, Mac., Pp. 301.   xxxv, pp. 66f., figs. 2, 16, 19.
                                   XX
         FROM       THE ALPS TO THE BALKANS
B* the Late Bronze Age the hilly area south of the East
     Alpine chain between the Danube and the Adriatic had
been affected by at least two intrusive movements from the
north whose repercussions perhaps reached Greece. But the
area is unfortunately for the most part badly explored, and
practically nothing has been published. We are generally forced
to rely on inferences based upon the Bosnian material.
   The parts of Western Hungary lying beyond the frontiers Distribu-
of group 1 of the Hungarian urnfields, together with Lower tions of
Styria and Croatia, have yielded a not inconsiderable number winged
of winged celts of type B3 that may indicate an occupation celts
of the region during Period V. And it is from the same area
or from immediately adjoining territories that the majority of
swords of type Ao(Keszthely) have been found.’ Similar swords Swords
occur as imports also in North Germany” as in Upper Italy,'
and something similar was found in a barrow at Kokotsko near
Plzen. In the same part of Western Hungary rapiers like A1
and Az are occasionally found.
   These bronzes are either, like the sword of type Ao, native,
or connected with Bavarian and Italian industries. ‘They are
found in the area of the Pannonian urnfields only north of the
Bakony and as far south as Pest, and then principally west of
a line along the Kapos. In South Hungary, Slavonia, and
Bosnia they are totally lacking, and are exceeding rare in Croatia
and Styria. Then in Period VI the area of occupation extends
westward up to and across the Alpine and Illyrian ranges
bordering the Adriatic.‘
   The late winged celts Bs, as in Italy and the North Alpine Late
zone, are very common even far up the Mur, the Drave, the Bronze
                                                               Age
Save, and occur in North-West Bosnia. East of the Kapos line celts and
they are still exceptional. In the same area swords of type C3 swords
and C4 are very common indeed; perhaps nowhere else are
there so many. They extend southward to the Save, but pene-
trate into Bosnia only rarely along the Una and the Drina.
: Keszthely, Danube near Pressburg      7? Splie   pl. 1,
                                                     th,  9b.
and near Pest (Hampel, iii, p. 81)       3 Montelius, VCI., pls. 3, 6 and vil,
Leobersdorf, LowerAustria(Menghin,       3; Peake, Bronze Age, p. 92.
Niederosterreich, pl. vu, 3), Styria,    4 Cf. Reinecke’s list, MAGW. xxx
(M. Graz).                               (1900), pp. 44 f.
          400             FROM    THE ALPS TO THE           BALKANS
          But some spread down stream as far as Kiskészeg, Syrmia,’
          and North-West Serbia.
             Hungarian types of sword are correspondingly rare; but
          there are mace-heads of North Hungarian type from the head
          waters of the Kapos and from Carniola*—perhaps due to
          trade.
 Fibulae     The fibulae serve still better to define the western province.
          The early type Ata is found in its extreme north-east at Haide-
          hof puszta in Mosony. A3, too, is common to the northern
          part of West Hungary} and North Hungary. But from this
          point the evolution takes different directions on either side of
    Harp the Danube. In the valleys of the Raab and Upper Drave the
   fibula harp fibula A’3 develops out of Ar by an enlargement of the
          catch-plate and an extravagant prolongation of the spring. A
          genuine transitional form, A’2, with a spring about twice as
          long as in A2, is seen in a grave at Maria Rast in Styria,4 where
          the normal form also occurs. The latter appears in Lower
          Austria within the limits of Period VI,5 and survives to charac-
           terize the Hallstatt culture in East Central Europe.
    Bow       A second series developed farther west on both sides of the
   fibulae ranges bordering the Adriatic. It presupposes a phase of the
           simple bow fibula that is not certainly represented in the Danube
           basin.® ‘The modification which we may term Dalmatian con-
           sists in introducing a second loop just above the catch-plate
           A’4. It appears already in Period VI at Maria Rast.? The
           development of this series in Bosnia and south of the Bakony
           is complicated by the influence of the Submycenaean type
           with widened catch-plate A’’2 that appears in Bosnia perhaps
           as an import. The series develops along the Save to elaborate
           types like Fig. 224b. It characterizes the South Alpine and
           Illyrian Hallstatt culture, especially south of the Bakony, and
           spreads in Period VII as far as the Danube, with the urnfield
           culture of Dalya and Kiskészeg, and perhaps even up the
           Maros.*
Spectacle     The third series is purely native. At Maria Rast? we have a
   fibulae spectacle brooch in which the two spiral disks are connected

          * Cf. Hampel, iii, p. 82.                of the Alps, but where they occur in a
          2 p. 372, above.                         specific context they are demonstrably
          3 p. 372, above.                         late.
          4 Much, Aélas,
                           pl. x, 4; Man, xxviii   7 Much, l. Carplexiaee
          (1928), 140, fig. 3.                     8 AE. xxxiii, pp. 145 f.
          5 At Stillfried and Hadersdorf.          9 Much, Atlas, pl. xL, 5; Man, xxviii
          ° There are of course quite a number     140, fig. 1.
          of simple bow fibulae on both sides
               FROM THE ALPS TO THE BALKANS                    401
by a short coil precisely as in the breast ornament of Fig. 183.
This discloses the origin of the celebrated brooch that charac-
terizes the Geometric period in Greece and the Hallstatt period
of continental Europe. It is just the Lausitz-Illyrian breast
ornament? with a pin added. The specimen from Maria Rast
belongs to Period VI and is thus the oldest known example
both typologically and by its context. But since we find in
South Bosnia and in Macedonia in Period VII a quite primitive
variant with no figure 8 twist between the spirals,” the inven-
tion of the type might have taken place alittle farther south.
The normal form is of course everywhere characteristic of the
Hallstatt culture proper.
    Finally, in Period VII we have a few foreign forms. Various Italian
 Italian types—a navicella, &c., are quite common west of the imports
 Bakony.3 On the other hand, in the Kapos valley and at Velem
 St. Vid we find clusters of North Hungarian fibulae.t. Whether
 these, taken in conjunction with the maces, mean an extension
 of North Hungarian culture up the Kapos is not clear. In one
 case at Kurd they were found with Italian buckets, so they
 probably mean just ‘trade’. That is certainly the explanation
 of their appearance at Velem, where the pottery is quite distinct
 from the Pilin-Egyek wares.
    The metal types, indicating complicated ethnic and com-
 mercial relations, may be divided between two main cultural
 groups—one allied to the Tumulus Bronze Age of Bavaria, the
 other to the urnfield cultures.

           I. THE     SOUTH   ALPINE    TUMULUS         CULTURE

Remains of the tumulus culture assignable to Period V are Barrows
very rare. At Hévej in County Soprony® a tumulus covered
                                                                    at Hove

an inhumed body accompanied by winged celts         of type  B3,  a
socketed chisel, and a much corroded short-sword; higher up
was a late Hallstatt interment. Obviously the Bronze Age Keszthely
burial need not be older than Period VI. The celebrated
warrior’s grave at Keszthely® is certainly older. Here thecorpse
lay extended in a sort of chamber of dry-masonry accompanied
by a sword of type Ao and some atypical ornaments. Then, Late
definitely belonging to Period VI, we find a few barrows as- Age    Bronze

signed by Reinecke? to his phase A of the Hallstatt     period,  in
                                                                    barrows
 1 p. 327, above.                       5 Hampel, pls. cx—CxI.
                                        6 Hampel,   pl. cxxxiv;   AfA.   xv
 2 4 ey below.
 3 AE. xxxiii, pp. 197 ff.              (1917), p. 260, pl. VI.
 4 p. 374, above.                       1 MAGW. xxx, p. 45.
   3443                            3F
             402               FROM   THE ALPS TO THE          BALKANS
          the midst of others that are definitely later. Reinecke cites
   Styria barrow    17 in the Hallstatt necropolis near Wies in Styria’
          that contained a bronze sword of type C3 with cremated re-
          mains, a barrow at Klein Klein’ containing an antennae sword,
          and a winged celt of type B3, and another from Gomil Pod-
Carniola semel in Carniola} containing an antennae sword anda cruci-
          form ornament with cremated remains. Reinecke leaves us to
          assume that similar early barrows will be found in many of
          the big cemeteries of the Hallstatt period in the Illyrian Alps,
          and the Bosnian evidence favours that view.
             The affinities of the foregoing groups lie clearly enough in
          the west, and especially in Upper Bavaria. The data available
          do not suffice to decide whether the South Alpine barrows
Parallel- were built by descendants of some neolithic stock—perhaps
 ism with the Laibach-Mondsee folk—or by invaders intruding during
 Bavaria the Bronze Age from Upper Bavaria and Upper Austria. On
          the first assumption the affinities with Upper Bavaria would
          be explained by common elements in the neolithic substratum
          —Laibach-Mondsee-Altheim, and the parallel action of Italian
          and Hungarian metallurgy on both groups. In any case the
          influence of the urnfield folk in Styria and Carniola can scarcely
          be denied. The transformation of the Bronze Age culture of
          the region into an Iron Age one would be due to the proximity
          of Italy and the fact that the trade routes leading to the copper
          mines of North Hungary and the amber deposits of East
          Prussia traversed its territory. As we have seen, typical North
          Hungarian forms spread westward from the Danube to Car-
             niola, and the later barrows of Period VII are rich in amber.
Hallstatt    During the latter period we have besides the well-known
  barrows necropoleis of County Sopron, of Styria, Carniola, and Croatia
        mnremains of a nomadic stock of horsemen on the West Hun-
Pannonia  garian léss lands who were interred with their horses in wooden
          chambers under barrows.‘ It was these who made raids across
          the Danube and up the Maros towards the Transylvanian gold
          mines as described in the last chapter.
 Bronze      To find a second group comparable to the foregoing we
     Age must go southwards up the Drina to the plateau of Glasinac
 barrows so famous for its Iron Age cemeteries. It
                                                       is a highland zone
       in
  Bosnia     1 MAGW. xv (1885), p. 120.              period. The urn seems similar to
             ? Mitt. Hist. Vereines f. Steiermark    Maria Rast types.
             (Graz), vii, p. 186.                    4 AF. xxxiv (1914), pp. 388 ff. and
             3 MAGW.     xxx, p. 45, figs. 1-3;       fig.,p.398 (Somlyd, Czurgé, Szalacska,
             Hoernes, WPZ. ii, p. 120, assigns the   Erd-Batta), cf. Arch. Kozl. xxii.
             same burial to the later Hallstatt
                FROM THE ALPS TO THE BALKANS                                   403
most accessible on the east from the Drina valley. In several
of the groups of barrows scattered over this area and round
ViSegrad is a nucleus of inhumations accompanied by a pure
Bronze Age furniture: bracelets of types B1,' C2,? C3,3 and
A4,* tutuli A2,5 breast ornaments like Fig. 183,° and a few
fibulae of type A17 and A’’3.5 At least in one of these early
barrows? amber beads were found, but it is not clear whether
they belonged to the primary interment.
   Possibly contracted skeletons found in cist graves without Cist
other furniture in Hercegovina” are as old or even older. And graves in
to the same period might be assigned some of the very mixed Hercego-
material from Debelo brdo near Sarajevo. This hill fort has vina
yielded, as we saw, excised ware reminiscent of the Slavonian as
well as rough ware with thumb-grip handles of Iron Age type.
As a caution against a too high dating of even its earliest
pottery, we should note that stone battle-axes, like those
from the fort, have been found in the Glasinac barrows ap-
parently associated with iron objects.
   At Debelo brdo a small hoard of late bronzes, including Weapons
socketed celts, a curious axe reminiscent of Caucasian types,
a spear-head with leaf-shaped blade and a dagger with flanged
tang pierced for rivets, was discovered.” ‘The mould for a
similar dagger was unearthed in the fort at the Rama springs
near Prozor.3 These weapons certainly resemble swords of
type C3 or even Cr, but do not suffice to connect the swords
of type C3 with the Glasinac culture of the Bronze Age, since
no swords of that type have been found south of a line drawn
from Ripaé to Zvornik on the Drina.
    The Bronze Age barrows evidently denote a comparatively Affinities
 early settlement of tumulus-builders, clearly allied to those
 dwelling north of the Alps. Again, it is impossible to decide
 whether the northern affinities should be explained by a
 common ‘neolithic’ substratum—the Slavonian folk who had
 settled at Debelo brdo were allied to the Mondsee-Altheim
: Glasinac, MAGW. xix, p. 145, fig.         °© MAGW. xix, p. 145; WMBH. i,
203.                                        p. 150.
2 Strbci VIII, WMBH. vi, p. 60.             7 Strbci I, &c.
3 Guéevo IV, WMBH. v, p. 7.                 8 Sokolac III, WMBH. xi, p. 58.
4 Strbci I (WMBH.           vi,  p.    54); 9   Gutevo IV, Vrlazije IV, 2 (ibid., iv,
PleSevica I (ibid. v, p. 7); the ends of _ p. 6).         :
these bracelets were not, however,           * WMBH. iv, pp. 31, 177. |
twisted together,but openasatWabern          1%! Kovatev dé VI (WMBH.1, p. 129);
in Switzerland (AsA.,       1918,   p.  73,  Vrlazije IV, i (ibid. iv, p. 6).
fig. 1).                                     ™ WMBH. iv, pp. 58 fToiChaps LO7
5 Han Osovo I, (WMBH. vi, p. 21).            3 WMBH. viii, p. 49.
           404              FROM     THE ALPS TO THE             BALKANS
          groups—and subsequent parallel relations with Hungary and
          Italy, or by an ethnic movement from the north during the
          Bronze Age.
Relations    To the development of the Late Bronze Age culture Hun-
     with gary, Italy, and Greece contributed. From the former area'
Hungary sickles and socketed celts which are found in a line of hoards
     and   were imported.         On the other hand, the fibulae, at least A333
  Greece   most probably came direct from the south of the peninsula.’
           Reminiscences of intercourse with the Mycenaean world may
           be seen in the spirals on the bronze collar from Mlagj, barrow
           XXIX,3 which is still ‘Bronze Age’, and in the use of the ewer
           as a pendant in the Iron Age. Presumably contact was affected
           by way of the Narenta and the Adriatic. And the first iron
           objects might have been introduced by the same channel, just
           as greaves‘ and helmets of Corinthian type, Greek fibulae,°
           vases of bronze and clay and other products® of Hellenic
           industry were later on.
Relation      Casson,’ who has overlooked the Bronze Age barrows alto-
        to gether, finds it necessary to assume an immigration from the
Iron Age north to explain the rise of the iron-using culture in Bosnia.
  culture Connexion with the north is certainly attested by such foreign
           substances as amber. And the adoption of slashing swords as
           weapons and spectacle brooches for fastening the cloak denotes
           aconsiderable change in the people’s habits. On the other hand,
           the safety pins and also the prototype of the spectacle brooch
           were used in the ‘Bronze Age’, and the Glasinac form of brooch
           differs materially from the normal type current farther north
           in the absence of the figure 8 loop between the spirals. Again,
           though no specimens have been found as far south as Glasinac,
           bronze swords like type C3, from which the Glasinac and Hall-
           statt forms are derived, are found some way up the Drina
           valley.? If the Hallstatt culture had been brought ready made
           to Glasinac these peculiarities would be hard to understand.
           Other Glasinac types do in fact go back to the Bronze Age
           group. So the favourite fibula A’’4 is a natural outgrowth of
           A"2 that we do find in Bosnia. A’’4 is in fact common to Istria,
           * Curtic in WMBH.         xi, p. 94; cf.    century type, WMBH. vi, p. 51.
           Casson, Macedonia, p. 297.                  7 Macedonia, pp. 305 ff.
           2 The gold fibula from Attica, Blinken-     8 The normal type is never found at
           burg, type II, 23, is a good parallel.      Glasinac, though common          farther
           3 WMBH. i, p. 153, fig. 61.                 north and west, WMBH. xi, p. 97.
           4 WMBH. iii, p. 13, fig. 23; Casson,        9 Radaljska ada, WMBH. i, p. 318;
           Ops Clb.. Peagioe                           Peringrad, near the confluence of the
           5 Ch gfAciivpp tie                          Drinaéa (ibid. iv, p. 181), cf. WMBH.
           ® e.g. the silver boar of sixth to fifth-   Vi) Pe 525%
               FROM     THE ALPS TO THE BALKANS                        405
Bosnia, and even Arcadia." Its home might just as well be
located in Bosnia or even farther south as in Istria or Styria.
   On the whole a fresh invasion is not absolutely necessary to
explain the Glasinac culture. It may have arisen locally out of
the Late Bronze Age civilization, though new ethnic elements
were certainly dwelling quite near, e.g. at Jezerine.
   A link with the tumulus culture farther north is perhaps North
provided by a single barrow excavated near Jo8eva in North- Serbian
                                                                              barrow
Western Serbia.?       It, however, covered cremated remains ac-
companied by a short sword of type C3 (30 cm. long), asso-
ciated with a small amphora with vertical ribs on the body,
compared by Reinecke to vases from VrSac, Gerjen, and Pilin.
This barrow may mark an advance of the tumulus culture
eastward. The swords of the type C3 from Kiskészeg,?
Slavonia,‘ and the Drina valley,’ might be connected with the
same push. Perhaps it will explain the apparent evacuation of
Syrmia during the greater part of Period VI.
      Il. THE     INVASION      FROM      EAST   CENTRAL      EUROPE

  Urnfield folk from farther north inundated the Middle
Danube basin in two waves. The first described in the last
chapter brought the Late Lausitz culture from Moravia into
Hungary across the Slovakian mountains and round them
along the Danube; its primary aim was the copper of North
Hungary; the second would have spread more to the south-
west across Lower Austria and perhaps up the Raab to Styria,
Bosnia, and the Adriatic coast. The intention was presumably
to seize the lead and iron mines of Styria, the antimony of
Velem, and the trade routes to the Adriatic.             But the details of
these movements cannot at the moment be recovered. We
only see certain results, and them none too plainly;we cannot
even distinguish the two waves very sharply; for a long time
Western Hungary was very closely related to the adjacent
territory north of the Danube, as the bronzes have shown. the
   Three monuments enlighten us as to the position after
                                                             of
migrations: the settlement of Velem St. Vid, the cemetery .
Maria Rast, and perhaps the lake-dwelling of Donja Dolinawas Foundry
   Velem near Készeg (Giins) on the new Austrian border
                                                         mably at
a great industrial village. It owed its importance presu     to Velem St.
to a deposit of antimony, that element having been used         Vid
 : Blinkenburg, type III, 3 ¢, fig. 69,   3 N. H. Museum, Vienna.
 &c.                                      4 Cf, Hampel, iii, p. 82.
 2 MAGW. xxx, p. 51, fig. 47.             5 WMBH. i, 1893, p. 318.
           406             FROM     THE ALPS TO THE BALKANS
           harden bronze in Hungary, East Prussia, and the Caucasus.”
         How old the settlement is we shall only know when the site
         has been carefully excavated and the material fully published.
         The character of the village is shown by the number of moulds,
         blast pipes, and other appurtenances of the smith’s workshop
         that have been brought to light.
 Lausitz    The earliest pottery represented in any quantity belongs
     and for the most part to the North Alpine group of Period VI: to
   North this class belong urns with cylindrical necks like Fig. 189,’
  Alpine jugs like Fig. 196 from the Tyrol,3 bilobate mugs as at Alpen-
pot forms quai,‘ and other forms.          The fluted ornament, turban dishes,’
          and amphorae® are more reminiscent of the Lausitz series.
          The bizarre shapes that characterized the Hungarian urnfields
          at all times are absent.
 Bronzes     The bronzes that were made locally or imported for re-
          smelting include a curious medley of types. Relations with
   North North Hungary were particularly close, showing that Velem’s
 Hunga- antimony bronze was appreciated by the smiths of Pilin and
     rian Aszod; from that direction came various pendants’ and fibulae
  Italian of the Hungarian series and eventually Scythian forms. Italy
          supplied a multitude of types, beginning with Benacci I razors,’
          and developing particularly later when fibulae with prolonged
Northern feet were imported in vast numbers. ‘The north sent, together
           with amber,’ characteristic tutuli; Bavaria and Switzerland
           vase-headed pins like D11,’ and knives of type 14.”
              The factories of Velem continued to flourish till Roman
           times, and the later Hallstatt and La Téne periods are even
           better represented than Periods VI-VII.
  Maria     The real character of the South Alpine urnfield culture is
    Rast best seen in the great cemeteries along the Upper Drave in
         Styria. Unfortunately Maria Rast was excavated over forty
         years ago and badly published,” while Pettau has never been
         published at all. The burial rite did not diverge from that
         usual in urnfields.
 Pottery    The pottery is all dark-faced, slipped, and polished, but
           * Cf. von Miské, Velem, pp. 26-34;         9 Antimony bronzes are particularly
           cf. MAGW. xxx, p. (32).                    common in West Prussia and Silesia.
           ? Von Miské, Velem, Ixvi, 8.               70 Plexi, 24
           3 Ibid., pl. Lx, 7.                        ™ Pl. xvul, 23 ff. Note that antimony
           4 Ibid., pl. Lx, 10.                       bronzes are found in Switzerland too,
           5 Ibid., pl. txiv.                         p. 26.
           © Thid., pl Ex, 3.                         2 AfA.188; Much, Atlas, pl.xi. The
           7 Velem, pl. Lim, 16; ibid. xxxvil, 54.    figures are very misleading as far as
            8 Unpublished: the form is that of        the pottery is concerned.
            Randall-MaclIver, Villanovans, fig. 11.
                FROM     THE ALPS TO THE BALKANS                     407
very rarely graphited. The large urns, often 60 cm. high, are
generally piriform with the widest part at the bottom. A plas-
tic rope ornament with three or four lugs projecting down-
wards from it run round below the widest point. ‘Villanovan’
forms such as we have at Hadersdorf are exceedingly rare.
Small urns in the shape of a wide shallow jug with a short
conical neck and a handle rising above the rim are still more com-
mon than the piriform type. The coversare either turban dishes
with inturned rims or similar dishes with vertically-pierced lug
handles.     For decoration we find, besides fluting, imitation cord
impressions as in the Tyrol, and, on one vase, stamped Ws
ae circles encrusted with white paste in thoroughly Pannonian
style.
   Metal objects were rare, as is usual in urnfields. The most Iron
important is a knife with an iron handle and scolloped back'—
probably the earliest iron object found in Central Europe. In
addition we have the fibulae already noted—harp-fibulae in-
cluding the prototype, an early version of A’’4, and the original
spectacle brooch.
   The knife fortunately leaves no doubt whence the first iron Affinities
reached Central Europe: for it is a well-known Benacci I?
form. The prototypes for the fibulae may also have come up
the Adriatic. The diagnosis of the pottery is not so easy. The
plump urns with their encircling plastic ribs might be con-
nected with a Lovasberény type; the vase with stamped and
encrusted ornament proves conclusively some relation to the
Pannonian group of Middle Bronze Age urnfields. The only
Lausitz elements that one can see are the flutings and the
turbaned dish. Perhaps it would be more correct to assign
the Styrian culture to Hungarian folk pushed aside westward
rather than to the Lausitz intruders themselves. Such a west-
ward retreat would be parallel to the assumed movement of
Bijelo brdo people towards Este and the Po valley.
   The spread of the urnfield cultures was in Period VI mainly
westward. Its results are seen in Este II and the numerous
 cemeteries of Istria, Dalmatia, and Bosnia. Then in Period VII East-
 a reaction set in: at Dalya and Kiskészeg3 we find extensive spread
                                                               ward

 cremation necropoleis furnished with pottery and bronzes that in
 bear no relation to the native types once found at Kiskészeg, Period
 nor to those still in use in the Banat and eastern Syrmia.    VII
    The urn in these cemeteries is a Villanovan form with a
 * Much, Adlas, pl. x1, 6.           3 AE. xxv, p. 190;   WPZ. iv, p. 38,
 2 Montelius, VCI., pl. 6, 1.        figs. 8-9.
      408             FROM    THE ALPS TO THE BALKANS
Dalya globular body, a singlehandleon theshoulder,andaconical neck,
      just such as is found at Jezarine,’ Parenzo,? Nesactium,3 Sta
      Lucia, and in Central Italy. The metal types belong equally
      to the Southern Hallstatt culture—iron trunnion celts,' bow
      fibulae with double twist and, enlarged catch-plate, zoomorphic




      fibulae, bits with three parallel holes in each cheek-piece®
      (Fig. 227), and other Hallstatt forms. Lengyel was occupied
      again about the same time,’ and rather later we have an urn-
      field with Styrian types of bronzes at Tamasi in 'Tolna county.®
                                                             \

       « WMBH. iii, p. 85, fig. 91.             Somly6 (with a trunnion celt), and then
       2 Hoernes, Urgeschichte, p. 465.         in Transylvania at Maroscsapo.
       3 Ibid., p. 469, 2 and 7.                7 We assign to this phase the pit-
       4 e.g. Randall-Maclver, Villanovans,     dwellings, the fire-dogs of Kalender-
       pliers                                   berg type, the fluted ware like TT., pl.
       5 As in Lower Austria, Styria, Bosnia,   LXXXVI, and fibulae and celts like those
       and Italy.                               from Kiskészeg.
       6 Besides Kiskészeg and Dalj, this       8 Wosinski, TT., pls. cxtx and cxx.
       type of bit occurs in the barrow at
               FROM    THE ALPS TO THE BALKANS                                409
The gold fibula of Fokora and some of the ornaments from
Michalkow in Galicia’ belong to this Pannonian group.
   The celebrated pile-dwellings in the Save bed at Donja Bosnian
Dolina,* like those at Ripa¢ on the Una,} belong for the most pile-
part to an advanced phase of the Iron Age. They can claim dwellings
a place here for two reasons only. Firstly, they were built on the Log-
log-cabin principle like the Lausitz houses of Buch and the lake- cabins
dwellings and moor-villages of Period VI in Wurtemberg and
Switzerland.
   Secondly, there are indications that the foundation of the
settlements goes back to Period VI or even to the Middle
Bronze Age. At Donja Dolina a short sword like AA4 (with
bronze hilt) and a slashing sword of type C3 were found.‘ Swords
And the pottery includes vases with ansa cornuta’ identical
with those from the Italian terremare as well as a few vases
with wart ornament® reminiscent of Tdészeg C. If the terre-
mare in the Po valley had been due to a migration of some
Tészeg-Gerjen people from Hungary, the settlement of a branch
of the same stock on the Save would be readily intelligible.
   The bulk of the pile-dwelling pottery, however, with its
fluted ornament, like the style of architecture, suggests contact
with the Lausitz folk. The ‘Villanovan’ urns and high handles,
however, might be survivals from the Middle Bronze Age of
Hungarian group III, as might the common imitation cord
ornament. ‘Che metal ornaments are all typical Illyrian Hall-
statt (and La Tene) forms.

                          III.   CONCLUSION

It is clear that before the end of Period VI ethnic relations Relations
between the Alps and the Balkans were very mixed indeed. Hallstatt  to

Many of the distinguishing forms of the later    Hallstatt culture
                                                                    culture
were certainly created here, especially on the fringe of moun-
tains where Italian influence was first felt. It  looks as if there of
                                                                    Austria
was a real ethnic movement from this neighbou      rhood,  parallel
to that eastward up the Maros, with which burials with early
iron swords, horse-trappings, spectacle brooches, &c., from
1 p. 390, above; cf. Reinecke, Ger-         Buzija district of Petrovac (WMBH.
mania, 1925, P- 53-                         vi, p. 142) may be connected with
2» WMBH. ix (1904), pp. 3-170; xi           Ripa¢, as the site is not very remote.
(1908), pp. 1 ff.                           5 WMBH. ix, pl. xxv, 4, 7; XXXVIII,
3 WMBH. v, pp. 38 f.; xii, pp. 1 ff.        17, &c.
4 WMBH. ix, p. 68. The sword from           6 WMBH.     ix, fig. 23.
   3443                                3G
           410             FROM     THE ALPS TO THE           BALKANS
           Moravia, Bohemia,’ Silesia, and South Germany would have
          to be connected. The Hallstatt period falls outside the scope
          of this work, so that an elaboration of the point is excluded;
          but we may conclude by attempting an appreciation of the
          role of the Middle Danube over against the Aegean and the
          Adriatic.
Relations    We have seen in Chapter XIX that by Period VI Aegean
     with influence transmitted down the Morava had entirely ceased to
  Greece   affect North Serbia and the Banat.             Naturally, therefore, none
           reached West Hungary or Croatia from this quarter. On the
           other hand, relations with the Adriatic, and hence directly or
           indirectly with Greece, are clear both in Bosnia and farther
           north. They are sufficiently attested by the Bosnian and West
           Hungarian fibulae of types A3 and A’’4 respectively. It would,
           then, be natural to assume that the use of iron was learned
           from the same quarter. The knife from Maria Rast confirms
           that inference. We have already seen that the facts from East
           Hungary exclude the idea that the new metal was introduced
           from the east into the lands west of the Danube. Hence by
           Period VI the Danube had ceased to be a channel for the
           diffusion of southern or eastern inspiration; that spread on the
           contrary to the Danube down the Raab, the Drave, and the
           Save.
              But the historians of the Dark Ages of Hellas and Italy
           expect us to produce out of a vaguely conceived and limitless
           ‘Hungary’ Achaeans, Dorians, Latins, Umbrians, Veneti, and
           perhaps even Etruscans! Can we oblige them?
Achaeans      The insignia of the Achaeans would be the slashing swords
       and of types C3 and C4, perhaps also fibulae of type A1. As the
  slashing swords in question only arrive late east of the Danube, and
   swords never got even as far south as the Maros on that side, East
           Hungary may be excluded, though a route across ‘Transylvania
           is not inconceivable.” On the other hand, there are plenty of
           such weapons, as we saw, along the Alpine foot-hills, and a
           trail of them along the Save and Drave to the mouth of the
           Drina. But the absence of the swords from South Bosnia, the
           southern and eastern parts of Serbia,3 Macedonia, and even
           * Note for instance the appearance of     2 Leading from the Upper Tisza by
           Illyrian thumb-grip handles in the        the route marked by the Roumanian
           Hallstatt barrows of Bohemia; Sb.         hoard of Drajna de Jés, the passes
           Pizen, viii (1923), p.9; MAGW.xxxv.       behind Kronstadt.
           pl. 11. For anthropological evidence in   3 Serbia is of course scarcely explored ;
           the same direction see Schliz, AfA.       there is one such sword in Bulgaria,
           1%, D2 2452                               Casson, Macedonia, p. 171.
               FROM    THE ALPS TO THE BALKANS                              41
Thessaly is frankly discouraging. The position with regard to Fibulae
fibulae is even worse. The early types, Az, Aza, A’1, that
appear in Greece with the first swords like C3, are missing in
the whole Middle Danubian plain except for one specimen of
A’t from Vinéa and another with leaf-shaped bow from the
same site; the latter, being Mycenaean, like the one from Var-
dino’ in Macedonia, must have come from the Aegean down
the Morava, not vice versa. But of course the safety pin early
became popular in Bosnia.
   Still there is clear evidence of one invasion of Macedonia by The in-
people using fluted ware very like the Lausitz B ware of Silesia vasion of
and Moravia.2 The same folk affected Thessaly, and it may Macedo-
be that the concentric semicircle motive so common in the nia
proto-Geometric pottery of Hellas was a reminiscence of the
concentric fluted arcs, seen for instance on Fig. 182. This
movement was the end of that incursion from the north that
created the North Hungarian culture of Period VI. Those
who participated had used swords of type C3, but they only
reached Macedonia by the eleventh century—i.e. considerably
after the first Continental swords had reached Greece and
Egypt.
   The barrows at Halos in Phthia3 are in general very like Halos and
the Central European Bronze Age tumuli, and cover inter alia Glasinac
swords of type C3.4 But these swords have already been trans-
lated into iron—a material that was never used for such early
swords north of the Balkans.            If these barrows indicate, as
seems likely, an extension to North Greece of the Tumulus
Bronze culture, their builders must have been resident in the
South Balkans long enough to have their bronze weapons trans-
lated into iron. The burials do not denote a southward advance
of the Iron Age culture of Glasinac, but might perfectly well
belong to one branch of the people, another branch of whom,
turning aside from the Drina~Morava-V ardar corridor, had
settled on that plateau.                                       Invasion
   An expansion of iron-using peoples from Illyria eastward from
along two lines can scarcely be denied. It brought to Mace- Illyria
donias and Bulgaria® antennae swords, spectacle brooches,
t LAAA. xii (1925), pl. XIX, 12.        Sanskimost, WMBH. i, p. 318; iv, p.
2 Ant. F. vii (1927), p- 48.            181; Vi, p. 1433 Vi, P- 52531, p- 182.
3 BSA. xviii, p. 26.                    5 Casson, Macedonia, pp. 141 ff., figs.
4 They are found on the Drina at        50, 51, 52, and 47; PZ. ix, p. 66.
Radaljska ada and Peringrad; in the     © Izv. Bulg. Arch. Druz. iii, pp. 291 f.;
Una basin at Buzija; there are anoma-   Izv. Bulg. Arch. Inst. 1921-2, pp. 31 f.;
lous forms near Donja Tuzla and         pp. 76 f.; 1924, pp. 105 ff.
           412             FROM    THE ALPS TO THE BALKANS
        of bow safety-pins of type A’’4, pottery with thumb-grip handles,
 Macedo- and other bronze and ceramic types’ that seem at home in
       nia Carniola and Bosnia. Just the same types, save for the an-
    andof tennae sword, were carried across Hungary and up the Maros.
                                    i                                    2


 Transyl- Both groups of migrants inhumed their dead. ‘This movement
   vania   must be later than the ‘Lausitz’ invasion of Macedonia; but, if it
           form part of the general shift that brought the spectacle brooch
   Date of to Greece, may go back to the tenth century. It begins in a
    Period phase of culture intermediate between that of Podsemel and the
       VII full Iron Age as seen at Glasinac,‘ and thus fixes the end of
           Period VI at about goo B.c.                    '
 Parallel-    Yet those who want earlier migrations or infiltrations need
   ism be- not be altogether discouraged. At the beginning of the Bronze
     tween Age we saw that both sides of the West Balkans enjoyed a
    Greece parallel culture with many elements in common.         While the
and South southern part was absorbing Mycenaean culture, the civiliza-
 Hungary tions of Kliéevac and Bijelo brdo were blossoming farther
           north. There a ceramic style, presupposing and copying the
           art of the goldsmith and the bronze-engraver, was developing,
           that, inspired by a horror vacui, was covering the vase surface
           with stars, swastikas, concentric circles, maeanders, and other
          patterns. The geometric art of Greece has much the same
          aims and presuppositions as that of Kli¢evac,and makes use
          of the same motifs in a different medium. And in both areas
          plastic animals were manufactured. And just as Geometric
          Hellas is thus linked with the Kligevac province, so its neigh-
          bour Bijelo brdo is allied with Villanovan Italy that is strictly
          parallel to Geometric Greece.
Hungary      We have rather more to offer the Italian prehistorian who
     and wishes to fill up gaps in the local record with drafts on
  Italici unknown ‘Hungary’. Structures
                                                                         an
                                            a little like terremare have
           actually been identified—on the Tisza—and the industry in
           them has in some cases truly relevant parallels on the Po.
           Other sites or other levels at the same site even yielded pottery
           of true terremare type. But, if it be thus not impossible to bring
           the Italici out of the Middle Danube basin, undiscovered inter-
           mediate stations have to be interpolated west of the Danube.
           The swords of Keszthely type, Ao, found in Italy do denote an
           incursion from West Hungary but, as they accompany unburnt
           * The shield bosses, ewer-pendants,      seems to have reached the Maros at
           stamped circles on gold leaf, &c., all   a much later date.
           have Illyrian analogies.                 + Since no Glasinac swords are found
           2 Supra, p. 388.                         in Macedonia.
           3 The parallel movement eastward
            FROM   THE ALPS TO THE      BALKANS             413
bodies, can hardly belong to terramaricoli. The terremare
bronzes have far closer links with the North Alpine zone.
   We have again in Slavonia ceramic forms that, in structure     Villano-
and decoration, seem native, but yet agree closely with the vans
Villanovan types of Este 1 and Benacci 1. For the Villanovan
bronze industry, however, this part of the Danube basin offers
no actual prototypes. In North Hungary, as we saw, Benacci
types of metal vessel have actually been found in abundance
and must in part be local products, but North Hungary is not
Slavonia. Yet even the Bijelo brdo pottery presupposes an
extensive use of metal vases. From the Slovakian mountains
to the North Balkans Hungary really constituted a unitary
province; the products from its several parts were continually
being interchanged; even Bijelo brdo ceramic types are found
as far north as County Pest. In the confusion induced by the
Lausitz invasion in Period VI, some of the common traditions
of the region might well have been carried into North Italy as
into Hellas by those pushed aside by the northern intruders, to
be fertilized in the peninsula by new models brought from the
East Mediterranean coasts.
   We should be loath to mislead the investigator with illusory Cautions
hopes. The difficulties of according a priority to any Hun-
garian industry have been sufficiently emphasized. By raising
the dates of the Bijelo brdo culture as required by the above
hypothesis we are left with a terrifying gap. And if we admit
an east to west movement out of Hungary at the beginning of
Period VI we are obliged to recognize a strong current in the
contrary direction at the end of that period; the diffusion of
 Italian and Illyrian types found in abundance along the western
 ranges, more sparsely in West Hungary, and just sporadically
 up the Maros, is the result of an irreversible process.
    But this book is not a treatise on prehistoric nationalities.
 Its aim has been to study the function of the Danube in the
 creation of European culture. We have seen that for over two
 thousand years it formed the channel by which the influence
 of the higher civilization of the East Mediterranean basin,
 including Anatolia and Syria, was transmitted to the barbarian
 north and even distant Britain. By the first millennium it no
 longer fulfilled this role. On the contrary, barbarian destroyers
 were travelling down stream towards Troy and Macedonia.
                                    EPILOGUE
    Danu-        HE Danube valley received the first elements of ‘neo-
        bian     lithic’ civilization from the south-east, becoming a part of
  civiliza-a great cultural province that embraced the Aegean and Western
           Asia Minor. The slow spread of Danubian peasants eventually
         tion
     rootedcarried this primitive neolithic culture to Galicia, Eastern and
      in the
           Central Germany, and down the Rhine to Belgium and North
south-east
           France. But owing to the survival of epipalaeolithic elements,
           rooted in Pfedmost, Danubian culture possessed from the
           first an individuality of its own, and it soon began to react
           upon the world south of the Balkans.
Reactions     Even during the first half of the third millennium B.c. there
        on are indications of an infiltration from the Danube basin both
   Greece into Macedonia and into Central Greece.           But that only ce-
           mented the links with the Aegean without arresting the north-
           ward spread of cultural elements. In our second period the
           idea of polychrome decoration—perhaps painted vases too—
           and pintaderas were borrowed from Thessaly I, while Mediter-
           ranean and even Red Sea shells, copper trinkets, and metal
           vases (known only through clay imitations) were imported up
           the Danube. The Danubian II culture that thus arose in
           Hungary again spread northwards to Eastern and Central
           Germany, and reached the highland zone round the headwaters
           of the Danube. Parallel movements farther south were affect-
           ing both the Illyrian highlands and Transylvania.
 Cultural     That provoked a further reaction on the south. At the end
  unity of of Period II, crusted ware and other ‘Danubian’ elements were
       theintroduced into Thessaly at a date still well within the limits
  Balkans of the third millennium. For a long time the northern and
          southern slopes of the Balkans were united ina single cultural
          province. At the same time the influence of the south-east
          was intensified as Troy II grew in wealth and power. And so
          Period III witnessed the multiplication of Trojan, Cypriote,
Penetra- and Syrian imports, marked by ear-rings,.pins, and daggers,
tion from and the settlement on the Tisza and the Middle Danube of
     Troy people manufacturing pottery of a definitely Anatolian charac-
          ter (Perjamos, 'Tészeg, and Gerjen) or at least decorating their
          vases with Cypriote motives (Slavonia). And the imported
          bronzes and the pot-forms are correlated by their distribu-
          tion not only with gold-washings in rivers flowing from Tran-
          sylvania, but with copper deposits in the Alps and Slovakia
                          EPILOGUE                            415
and hypothetical tin-washings in Bohemia. They would mark
the advent of oriental metallurgists who first used the grooved
hammers found in ancient mines and workshops of a rather
later date.
 _ But during Period III the Danube was suffering from incur- Nordic
sions from outside, or at least reactions from epipalaeolithic incursions
hunters dwelling on its borders. The Nordic cultures, impreg-
nated though they be with native Danubian elements, never-
theless mark the advent of new peoples. Whether these came
in the last resort from Scandinavia or South Russia, they
introduced a more pastoral manner of life, suited to the dry
conditions then ruling, the sheep dog and perhaps the oriental
horse, a whole series of new weapons, notably the battle-axe
of stone or copper, and the custom of building a mound over
the grave. The Michelsburg and pile-dwelling cultures that
arise simultaneously on the western frontier borrowed nearly
all their cultural equipment from the Danubians, though cer-
tain Western traits may be suspected. And then came the
Beaker-folk who established trade connexions between Danish
amber, Bohemian tin, and the Adriatic and, under impulsion
from Nordic barrow-builders, first linked Great Britain to
Central Europe.
   Just at this time, the end of Period III, Troy II was sacked. Junction
                                                                   with
The metallurgists who were collecting gold in Hungarian rivers, Britain
mining copper in Slovakia, or washing tin in Bohemia,       must
produce for home consumption, since their original market had Results of
been destroyed. In the native Bronze Age culture that thus the fail
arose on an Anatolian foundation Aegean inspiration was still of Troy II
effective. But during Period IV it was not transmitted up the
Danube but across the Brenner in connexion with the amber
trade. The clearest proof of it was the imitation of a Vapheio
cup belonging to the sixteenth century.
   With the resurrection of Troy about 1600 B.c. Aegean influ- Revival    of
ence begins to affect the Middle Danube once more         and   is Aegean
                                                                   trade
reflected in the adoption of the sacred ivy-leaf pendant, the
introduction and local imitation of North Syrian and    Cyprio te
types of battle-axe (B2 and B3), perhaps also of rapiers and
the Early Mycenaean pulley pattern that was later used to
                                                            of
decorate sword hilts. At the same time, the barrow-builders
the western mountain ranges, now in possession of bronze,
were receiving as an incident of the amber trade translucent
glass beads and, soon, Mycenaean raplers of L.M. III form
(Co).
             416                       EPILOGUE
Reactions     But in Period V reactions towards the Mediterranean were
    on the again beginning. The foundation of the ¢erremare in the Po
   Medi-   valley is attributed to one migration from the Middle Danube
terranean basin at the beginning of the period.     The similarity between
           the pre-Mycenaean pottery from Macedonia and contemporary
           wares of North Serbia and the Banat may also indicate more
           than a mere parallelism.
The great     Then with Period VI great migratory movements from East
   migra- Central Europe, directed towards the mining regions of Slo-
     tions vakia and the Alps, set in motion ethnic groups, and their reper-
           cussions affected the Mediterranean profoundly. We cannot
           yet connect them except inferentially with the appearance of
           slashing swords in Greece and Egypt during the thirteenth
           century; but the later barrows of Halos seem to imply an
           extension of the Continental Tumulus culture to the South
             Balkans somewhere about that time, and the break in culture
             in North Serbia might reflect the passage of migratory hordes. ~
             By the eleventh century in any case, a band of people using
             pottery akin to the later Lausitz ware of East Central Europe
             had descended the Vardar into Macedonia. We detect the
             motives they brought in the proto-Geometric pottery of North
             Greece, while in the earliest Dipylon style we discover a kin-
             ship to North Serbian art of Period V. By goo B.c. Macedonia
             was again invaded, this time from Illyria, and little, if at all,
          later migrants from East Hungary settled in Troy VII. We
          suggested further that one of the first southward pushes would
          have driven the ancestors of the Villanovans from Eastern
          Slavonia into Venetia and the Po valley. The parallelism be-
          tween Villanovan Italy and Geometric Greece would reflect
          the kinship between the Middle Bronze Age cultures of Slavonia
          and of North Serbia.
 Iron in-    Thus as far as the Middle Danube was concerned its tra-
troduced ditional relations with the Aegean were inverted completely
   up the in Period VI. Nevertheless south-eastern influence continued
Adriatic to reach Central Europe this
                                          time through Italy and Bosnia.
          Paste beads, fibulae like A3, &c., the first iron objects, must
          have come from this quarter, and a whole series of designs
          (e.g. the Hallstatt birds), techniques (open-work decoration),
          came from that corner of the Mediterranean where the secrets
          of the new metal were first discovered and at first jealously
          guarded. Before the end of Period VI, when the Benacci I
          civilization was already flourishing in Italy, the influence of
          the south was stronger than ever before, particularly in the
                             EPILOGUE                           417
 North Alpine zone. And hence it was transmitted in an attenu-
 ated form down the Rhine to Britain.
     The pattern of our canvas is not, however, logically imposed Assump-
 by the facts themselves. On the contrary it is a subjective tions
 construction, only obtained by the adoption of a certain as- used
 sumption. We have assumed the priority of the south-east, and
 interpreted our data accordingly as long as it was possible to do
 so without doing obvious violence to the facts. ‘The assumption
 is reasonable enough and needs no defence here. But its use
 has brought us into conflict with highly qualified authorities.
     We have had to assign a higher antiquity to the culture of Vinea I
 Vinéa I than even Stocky is prepared to admit. Menghin and perhaps
  most German scholars would locate the original focus of Danu- dated too
  bian I culture still farther north. Similarly, Frankfort calls high
  ‘Danubian’ elements in Greece and the Aegean that ,we treat
_as the ancestors of analogues north of the Balkans. We have Reserva-
  equally attributed a much greater relative antiquity to Danu- tions on
  bian culture as compared with the Scandinavian Nordic than Scandina-
  would be generally accepted. This leaves in doubt the relation v1ian-
                                                                   Danubian
  between Nordic and Danubian cultures during Period III, synchron-
  especially in Central Germany; the relation on the Oder is isms
  given stratigraphically.
     Similarly, we have given Tészeg A a priority over Marsch- Relations
  witz and proto-Aunjetitz. But once again this relation could of  and
                                                                       Toszeg
                                                                        Aun-
  be inverted. Seger holds that the Marschwitz culture arose in jetitz
  Silesia, and the proto-Aunjetitz might well grow out of it with reversible
  the addition of Bernberg and Bell-beaker elements. Quite a
  number of Tészeg A types might just as well be derived from
  this Bohemian-Moravian complex, as vice versa. Similarly, Tds-
  zeg B and Gata might be due to an extension southward of the
  Aunjetitz province, such as Kossinna suggested. And then the
  dating of the Hungarian urnfields could be reduced to bring
  them into line with the Lausitz and North Alpine groups of
  Period VI. By this means the puzzling gaps in South Hungary
  would be closed up.-
     Conversely, we have only assigned Bijelo brdo a temporal Ambigu-
                                                                   ous
  priority over Villanova in response to the clamours of Italian Aegean
  archaeologists, and our treatment of fibulae and slashing swords relations
  has been designed to meet the needs of Aegean prehistorians.
  While the two incursions into Macedonia and the invasion of
  the Troad are certain and irreversible, the similarities between
  Kligevac and the Diplyon may well be due to parallelism in
 time; that indeed is Vassits’ view.
    3443                         3H
       418                       EPILOGUE
Reader     We hope that in the foregoing pages we have set out clearly
  must the facts that the reader may himself interpret. We have tried
 judge to say what was found, where and with which associates, and
    the to consign to a separate paragraph any interpretation of these
  facts data. And thus.we hope.that our account will be of use,
        however wrong and perverse our conclusions may be.
                           Plate 1. DAGGERS
Series A.
Az. Round-heeled dagger of Aunjetitz type, see Fig. 133, d, Period IV.
Az. Bronze-hilted dagger of Italian type, hilt and blade cast separately,
   Period IV.
A3. Local imitations of Az, hilt and butt in one piece, see Fig. 143, Neuen-
   heiligen, Periods IV and V, phase B. -
A4. Bronze-hilted short-sword, derived from A3, see Fig. 147, 1, Hajdu
   Samson, Period V.
As. Bronze-hilted dagger, derived from A3, Tumulus Bronze Culture, barrow
   of Béttingen, Wurt., Period V.
A6. Short-sword derived from dagger A1, Swiss type, Broc, Period V.

Series B.
Br. Ogival dagger with broad butt, four rivets and midrib, barrow 3, Muhltal,
   Upper Bavaria, Period V, phase B.
Bz. Ogival dagger with two rivets, barrow 1, Leibersberg, Upper Bavaria,
   phase C-D.
B3. Flat dagger with two rivets, Tachlovice, Bohemia, Period V, phase C2,
   with sword B3.
B4. Dagger with flanged tang, derived from Mycenaean type, barrow at
   Riegsee, Upper Bavaria, Period VI, phase D.




420
PLATE   I




            421
                   Plate 11.   SWORDS    AND   RAPIERS
Series A.
Ao. Sword, slightly swelling near butt of blade, related to dagger A6,
   Keszthely, West Hungary, Period V.
Ax. Rapier with broad base and six rivets, Upper Bavaria, Period V, phase B.
Az. Rapier with four rivets, barrow at Velka Dobra near Prague, Period V,
   phase B or C.
A3. Rapier with tapering butt, hoard of aieernnee N. Hungary, Period VI.
A4. Rapier with prolonged tang, bent over, Period VI (not figured, see Déche-
   lette, ii, Fig. 61)

Series B.
Br. Sword with solid grip, barrow at Haid, Wurtemberg, Period V, phase C1.
Bz. Sword with straight-sided grip, Rima-Szombat, type of phase C2.
B3. Sword with octagonal grip, Tachlovice, transition from phase Cz to
   phase D.
B4. Sword with pointed oval grip, hoard of Aranyos, North Hungary,
   phase D.
Bs. North Hungarian sword, Zsujta, Period VI, phase E.
B6. Ronzano sword, Switzerland, Period VI, phase E.
B7. Antennae sword, Switzerland, Period VI, phase E.

Series C.   SWORDS   WITH      FLANGED     GRIP.
Co. Rapier of Mycenaean type, Hammer near Niirnberg, phase Cr.
Cr. Rapier with concave grip, barrow at Smolenice, Slovakia, phase Cr.
Cz. Sword of Kossinna’s Germanic type, Dahmsdorf near Breslau, Period V.
C3. Slashing sword, Aranyos, phase D with B4.
C4. Slashing sword with leaf-shaped blade, cremation grave at Wollmesheim,
   Rhenish Palatinate, phase E.




422
                                                                                                     423
                                                      (fs
         —————————SSSS
            Pree
                                                                 SSS
                                                                 SSS
                                                                 SSNS
                                                                 SSS
                                                                  SNS
                                                                  ESS
                                                                  SNS
                                                                  SNS
        xs
                                                                                         12 Inches
                                               STE              ITETTL LEEE Le eT   eo
                                                                                         10
                      MUNN NON HNN   CNN NSE     SS
                EEE
         WITT   TOs
II
PLATE
                                      —<—<~ iB
                                        :                   \
                             Plate II.   CELTS
Series A. FLANGED CELTS
At. Italian type with indent in the butt, not figured.
Az. Aunjetitz type with pointed butt, Neuenheiligen, see Fig. 143, Period IV.

Series B. WINGED CELTS                :
Br. Swabian flanged celt, Krafts ‘grave type’, barrow at Miagerkingen
   Period V, phases B-C.
Bz. Celt with medial wings, barrow at Magerkingen, phases B—C with Br.
B3. Celt with wings above the centre, barrow at Kbely, Bohemia, phase C.
B4. Celt with terminal wings, late Italian type, barrow at Eglfing-Tauting,
   phase E.
Bs. Celt with terminal wings and ear, Period VI, Alpenquai Zurich, see Fig. 203
   bottom left.
Bsa. Celt with terminal wings and transverse blade, &c., winged adze, barrow at
   Mihlanger, Oberpfalz, Period VI.

Series C.   CONSTRICTED       CELTS
Cra & Crb, Celts with constrictive wings from a hoard at Reitnau, Switzerland,
   Period V, phase B.
Cz. Celt with conjoined wings, barrow 3, Muhltal, Upper Bavaria, phase B.
C3. Bohemian palstav, barrow at Pivon, Period V (phases ? B-C).
C4. Socketed celt with imitative ornament, Aranyos, Period VI with swords
  B4 and C3.




424
                     PLATE   III




                                   a

                                   Ee




                                   tt
             ——



             i

             _—_—-




                                    B3




       Cla




3443                    31               vai
                             Plate 1V.   CELTS
Series D.   PALSTAVS
Di.   Celt of type A2 with rudimentary stop-ridge between flanges.
D2.   Palstav, barrow near Haguenau, Period V.

Series E.   SOCKETED     CELTS
Er.   North German flanged celt, barrow at Schimmelwitz, Period V, phase B.
E2:   Danish celt, Period V, phase B.
E3.   Celt with bronze collar, Denmark, phase B.
F4.   Socketed celt with saeptum still in place, Silesia (stray).
Es.   Danish socketed celt, phase C.
E6.   Socketed celt with imitation wing ornament, Aranyos, Period VI with C4.




426
        QWs
        Bo SS   S
                    a3   SSS   SSS
IV
PLATE
                       Plate V.   RAZORS

      Series A.   UPPER    DANUBIAN        FORMS
         All are double-bladed.
      Ai.    Flat grave at Netovice, Bohemia, phase ? C2.
      Az.    Barrow at Labersricht, Oberpfalz, phase D.
      A3.    Barrow at Zbésice, Bohemia, phase ? D.
      A4.    Swiss lake-dwellings, Period VI, phase E.

      Series B.   ITALIAN     FORMS
      Bri.   Pilin, Hungary.
      B2.    Hoard at Prestavlk, Moravia, Period VI.




428
PLATE   V
                  Plate VI.   SINGLE-BLADED         KNIVES

No reliable typology exists;dating by associated finds when any.
     Graves at Apati-puszta, Hungary, ? Period V.
     Barrow 8, Riegsee, Period VI, phase D.
     Barrow 26 at Unter-Eberfing, Upper Bavaria, phase D.
     Barrow at Labersricht, Oberpfalz, phase D (with razor Az).
     Barrow at Novy Dvur, Bohemia.
     Barrow at Schutzendorf, Middle Franconia, ? phase C.
     Barrow at Novy Dvir.
 ARAY
 SI
 Yo  Barrow at Velka Dobra.
 9. Cremation grave at Heidesheim near Mainz, phase E (with fibula B3).
10, 13, and 14. Swiss lake-dwellings, phase E.
fi: Rovio, Canton Ticino, with girdle clasp, 3, phase E.
i: Stadecken near Mainz,? phase D.
Tse Barrow 32 at Riegsee, Period VI, phase E.




430
PLATE       VI




   Inches

                 431
                            Plate VII. FIBULAE

Series A. ONE-MEMBER FIBULAE
Ao. Prototype, grave at Gemeinlebarn, Lower Austria, Period V, phase ? B.
   Branch A Hungarian series.
Ai. Violin bow fibula with spiral catch-plate, Mosony-Szolnok, Hungary,
   Period V-VI.                    :
A2. Bodrogkeresztur, N. Hungary, type of Period VI.
A3. Gyér: Aga is distinguished by a second spiral disk to replace the vertical
   coiled spring, Period VI.
A4. Aszod.
As. Composite brooch, the small side spirals are separate pieces of wire fitting
  into the cross-pieces, Aszéd, Period VII.
A6.    Type influenced by B3, North Hungary, Period ? VI (or VII).
Branch A’.
A’t.   Switzerland.
A’2. Az with the spring coil lengthened to be about equal to the diameter of the
   catch-plate, Maria Rast, not figured. Period VI, phase E.
A’3. Harp-fibula, Statzendorf, Periods VI-VII.
Branch A”
A’1, Simple violin-bow fibula, giant version, barrow at Strbci, South Bosnia.
A’2. Simple arc fibula, not figured.
A”’2a. North Italian ribbed variant: Swiss lake-dwellings, Period VI.
A’’3. Bow fibula with widened catch-plate, Drenovi dé, Bosnia, Period VI.
A’4. Bow with a second twist behind the catch-plate; Fig.224b shows a
   specially elaborate version of this type.

Series B. TWO-MEMBER FIBULAE
Bi. Scandinavian types, Period V, phase C.
Bz. Scandinavian-North German types, phases C-D.
B3. Heidesheim, with knife 9, Period VI, phase E.
B3a is distinguished from B3 by the interpolation of a figure-8 twist at either
  end of the leaf-shaped bow, not figured.
B4. Burladingen, Hohenzollern, phase E.




432
       PLATE       VII




          Inches


3443       3K            433
                         Plate VIII.    BRACELETS

Ax.   Ingot-torque (see Fig. 128), Period IV.    ABr,   similarly shaped   but of
  quadrangular wire that is twisted, not figured; but cf. G2.
Az. Manchette armlets, smooth (see Fig. 134), Aunjetitz culture, Period IV.
Aza. Manchette armlet, ribbed (see Fig. 134).                              ;
A3. Massive penannular bracelets, like Aza, only smooth, not figured. Period
   IV (Aunjetitz culture).           :
Aza. Gold bracelet, Leubingen, Period IV.
A4. Wire, end twisted, Opatovice, Moravia, Period IV.

HORIZONTALLY RIBBED PENANNULAR BRACELETS
Br. Horizontally ribbed with rounded ends, Raékos-Palota, Hungary, Period V
   (with bracelets, C1 and D1, pin Bs, pendants A2 and A3).
Bz. With widened ends, Hungarian-South-West German form, barrow 2, 1,
   Huglfing-Uffing, Upper Bavarian, Period V-VI.
B3. Silesian variant, Lahserwitz, Period V.

PENANNULAR        BRACELETS         WITH    THICKENED       ENDS     (END-
  STOLLEN)                                                                 ;
Cx. Rakos-Palota (with bracelet C1), massive, Period V.
C2. Hollow, rounded on outside, barrow 6, Fischen, Upper Bavaria, Period V.
C3. Hollow, triangular cross-section, barrow near Amstetten, ? Period V.

BRACELETS AND ANKLETS WITH SPIRAL ENDS
D1. Rakos-Palota, with bracelet B1, &c. This type was worn on the upper arm
  or on the ankles.
Dia. Body as in D1, but two spirals at each end (see Fig. 224d), Fokoru,
  Period VI-VII.
Dz. Ribbon body, horizontally ribbed, Upper Bavarian, Period V.
D3. Ribbon body, engraved, Oberpfalz, phase C or D.

LATE PENANNULAR BRACELETS WITH THICKENED                          ENDS (END-
  STOLLEN)
Ex. Wojdal, Poland, Period V, with pin E3.
Ez. Ribbed ornament in an oval frame, barrow 8, Riegsee, with E3, Period VI,
   phase D.
E3. Vertically ribbed all over, barrow 8, Riegsee, Period VI, with knife 2,
   bracelet E2, pin Dio, &c.

PENANNULAR         BRACELETS       WITH     TAPERING       ENDS
Fi. Round section, Unter-Eberfing, barrow 14; this specimen belongs to
   Period VI, but bracelets with the same section, but unornamented, are
   typical of Period V, phase B.
F2. Rectangular cross-section, Magerkingen barrow, phase C.
F3. Twisted, barrow 2, Oderding, Period V1.

Miscellaneous.
Gi. Barrow at Haid, ribbon, phase E.
G2. Composite armlet or collar made by uniting three armlets of form Ar by
   a pin through the loops, Heidesheim, with fibula B3, phase E.

ANKLETS. Barrows of Haguenau (Fig. 170).
1. Period V, phases B-C.
2. Phases C-D.
3. Phases D-E.

434
PLATE       VIII




   Inches


                   435
                      Plate TX.    PINS

      Group A.   AUNJETITZ        PINS
      Al. Knot-headed pin.
      Az. Typical Aunjetitz pin.
      A3. Racquet pin with oval head.
      A4. Bulb-headed pin, the bulb is pierced vertically.
      As. Racquet pin.
      Aé. Ornamented racquet pin.
      AG. Trilobate pin.
      A8. Crutch-headed pin. All from Aunjetitz graves of
        Period IV in order of antiquity.




436
         PLATE   IX




Inches




                      437
                               Plate X.   PINS


 Group B. PINS FROM HUNGARIAN URNFIELDS
 Bre   Gemeinlebarn, Aunjetitz grave, Period V, phase B.
 B2-B4. Urnfield of Lovasberény, Hungary.
 BR Rakos-Palota, with bracelet B1, &c. The head is vertically pierced.
 Bé. Type of Bohemian tumuli, barrow of Hladomerf, phase ? C.
 B7. Urnfield. of Zagyvapalfalva, North Hungary, Period VI.
 B8. Hoard from Szeged-Részke, ? Period V.
 Bo. Barrow near Amstetten, Lower Austria.
 Bro. Barrow at Repeé, Bohemia, Period ? VI.
 Birr. Urnfield at VrSac, Banat, Period ? V—-VI.




438
PLATE   X




            439
                              Plate XI.    PINS


Group C. SOUTH-WEST         GERMAN         PINS
Cr.  Adlerberg near Worms, Period IV.
C2   Barrow near Haguenau, Period IV.
C3;  Barrow at Hundersingen, Period V, phase B. The form is typical of
      Wurtemberg.                   .
C4. Baierseich, barrow 25, 4, phase B.
Cx: Wheel-headed pin, Haid, phase C (or D).
Csa. Elaborate wheel-headed pin, barrow at Pfronstetten, Wurtemberg.
Co: Swiss type, Period V, Broc.
C7; Alsatian type, phase B, barrow near Haguenau.
C8. Branik, Bohemia, phase D.
Co. Barrow at Kbely, phase ? C.
Cro. Barrow at Plavo, Bohemia, phase C-D.
Cit. Barrow at Zeleny, Bohemia, phase C.

PINS   OF THE    LATE    TUMULUS          BRONZE   CULTURE
Dr.  Barrow at Chlum near Oparany.
D2.  Barrow at Hundersingen, Wurtemberg.
D3. Barrow near Urach, Wurtemberg.
D4. Barrow at Wirtingen, Wurtemberg.
Ds. Barrow near Haguenau.
D6. Bruck a/Amper.
D7, Bavaria.
D8. Riegsee, barrow 26, phase D.
Do. Unter-Eberfing, barrow 14.
Dio. Riegsee, barrow 8, with knife 2, &c.
Dit. Barrow at St. Andra, Upper Bavaria.
Diz. Barrow at Milaveté, Bohemia, with sword like B4, &c.
       PLATE    XI




3443       3L        44 I
                                 Plate XII    PINS

 Group E. SILESIAN AND POLISH TYPES.                 TYPES OF LAUSITZ AND
   NORTH ALPINE URNFIELDS.
 Er.   Grave at Namslau, Period V.
 E2.   Gross Tschanz, Period V
 E3.   Grave at Wojdal, Period V, with bracelet Er.
E4.    Silesian eyelet pin, Heidersdorf, Period V (the projecting spur is vertically
   pierced).
Es. Transitional type, phase C2.
E6. Lausitz urnfield of Kunetice, Bohemia, Period V (or VI).
E7. Mostkovice, Moravia, later Lausitz, Period VI.
E8. Knoviz grave at PremySleni, Period VI.
Eg. Poppy-headed pin, cremation grave at Egg near Zurich, phase D.
Ero. Globe-headed pin, cremation grave, Weinheim, phase E.
E11. Swiss lake-dwelling type, phase E.
E12. Barrow at Altdorf, Middle Franconia.
E13. Pile-dwelling on L. Starnberg, Period VI, phase E.




442
PLATE   XII




              443
  ——   =-              (oeee           a
                                           | oe
            Plate XIII. GIRD
       -    aS veils     Mas »   eee




GIRDLE          CLASPS:                           ‘
1. Barrow at Eglingen, Wurtemberg, Period V.
2. Barrow at Wilsingen, Wurtemberg, Period V.
3. Urn grave at Rovio, Period VI, with knife 11.
                                                                                                                                     445
           IIo




                                                                       ;   fe
SO               Ge ee                         Taex
                              eee
                         NU
                    «©
                                    °             'o                    ‘
                                                                       x:
                                                                           @
                               s                                  Leos
                                                                           Ss
                 Se                                   eer s 2 8568 ems
                                                           ae
eS               PETAL        iDa       tL   ee PLT      LLL
                                                          CHE                    eee
                                                                                 e250?
                                                             a\                 oes
                                                        % e oe   e32
                                                                  otse Yo
                                                                   oS
                              os 0e s                                      s
     QOS
 X
                                  0S
 >
                                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                         <ssss SSSSE TO HSSSSS pS SOS SUS OOTY
                  Plate XIV.     PENDANTS           AND    TUTULI

PENDANTS        AND      TUTULI
Ao.    Hollow   disk    perforated   for   sewing   on    girdle   (button-sheath),   see
  Fig. 149, 12.
At. Wire helix, Straubing, Lower Bavaria, Period IV.
Az. Spiked tutulus disk with cast ridges and spike, Rakos-Palota, Period V.
A3. Hollow tutulus, Rakos-Palota, Period V.
A4. Disk with omphalos, flat rim perforated for sewing on belt, barrow 5,
   Mihltal, Period V.
Asa. Wheel pendant, Riegsee, barrow 35, Period VI.
Asb. Unter-Séchering, barrow 1,Period VI.

DERIVATIVES            OF THE   SACRED        IVY LEAF
Br. See Fig. 149, 18, Nagy Hangos.
Bra. See Fig. 151.
Bz. Barrow of Novy Dvir, Bohemia, Period V.
B3 and B4. Urnfield of Zagyvapalfalva, Period VI.
Bs. See Fig. 149, 26.
Bsa. See Fig. 149, 20.
B6. See Fig. 149, 16-17.
B7. See Fig. 149, 4.

LATE BRONZE AGE TYPES
Co. Flat disk with a loop on the back (button), not figured.
C1. Urnfield of Griinwald near Munich, phase D.
C2. Leaf pendant, Lazapatak, Hungary, ? Period VI.
C3. Bohemia, Period ? VII.
C4. Shield pendant, see Fig. 209, centre, Rima-Szombat, phase E.

EAR-RINGS AND LOCK-RINGS
Do. Wire ‘ basket ’ type, not figured.
D1-Ds are all found in Aunjetitz graves.

FINGER-RINGS
1. Wire with twisted ends, Aunjetitz grave near Opatovice, Moravia, Period IV.
2. Ribbon-body and opposed spiral ends, characteristic of the Tumulus
   Bronze Culture, Period V, barrow at Repeé.
2a. Ends as in 2, but the body is wire and consists of two or more turns; not
   figured, characteristic of the Eastern urnfields in Period VI.
2 Gold wire ring, barrow at Hladomef, Bohemia, Period ? V.
4. Horizontally ribbed ring from Haid, Period V-VI.
5. With a signet expansion, Period VI.




 446
PLATE   XIV




              447
3443




                .                                  ty    c£    :               Pot
                            aN                  litKy   oO              peeHA
                                                                           rite
 3M             Lene                            ik      2               etaLt        PLATE
       Inches   3fiah Se        hig         T                      {2     ZZ
                            ;         Ryi                     LL.
                       AY                                               LON
                    SEIN                                                             XV
                           a




449
                         BIBLIOGRAPHY
                               PERIODICALS

Abh. Niirn. Abhandlungen der naturhistorischen Gesellschaft zu Niirnberg.
AE.         Archaeologiai Ertesité (A Magyar 'Tudomanyos Akadémia)
               Buda-Pest, 1881 ff. (the old series is not cited).
AfA.        Archiv fiir Anthropologie, Brunswick, references to the old
               series by years only.
Altschles. Altschlesien, Mitteilungen des schlesischen Altertumsver-
            ‘eins, Breslau, 1922 ff.
L’Anthr. _L’ Anthropologie, Paris.
Anthr. Anz. Anthropologischer Anzeiger, Stuttgart, 1924 ff.
 Anthropos. Anthropos (St. Gabriel’s), Médling near Vienna.
 Antiquity.  Antiquity, Southampton, 1927 f.
 Ant.        Antiquaries Journal (Society of Antiquaries), London,
                1921 ff.
 AntTids.   |Antikvarisk Tidskrift for Sverige, Stockholm.
Arch.        Archaeologia (Society of Antiquaries), London.
 Arch. Kézl. Archaeologiai Kézlemények (A Magyar Tudomanyos
                Akademia), Buda-Pest, 1859 ff.
 ASA.        Anzeiger fiir schweizerische Altertumskunde, Zurich.
 AsAg.       Archives suisses d’ Anthropologie générale, Geneva.
  BAUB.      Beitrége zur Anthropologie und Urgeschichte Bayerns
                 (Munich).
  BF.         Bonner Jahrbiicher (Jahrbiicher des Vereins von Alter-
                 tumsfreunden im Rheinlande), Bonn.
  BP.         Bullettino di Paletnologia italiana, Parma.
  BRGK.       Berichte der rémisch-germanischen Kommission, Frankfurt
                  a/Main.
BSA.           Annual of the British School at Athens.
BSABrux. Bulletin de la Société @ Anthropologie de Bruxelles.
BSPF.          Bulletin de la Société préhistorique frangaise, Paris.
 BUF.          Bayerische Vorgeschichtsfreund, Der, Munich, 1921 ff.
                                                                    des Sciences
 Bull. int. Acad. Crac. Bulletin international de l Académie
                  de Cracovie (Krakow).
                                                              Cluj, Kolozsvar,
 Bull. Soc. Sci. Cluj. Bulletin de la Société des Sciences de
                   1924 ff.
                                                                              pré-
 CPI.           Congrés international d’anthropologie et d’archéologie
                  historiques, Compt es   rendus .
                                                                          1927).
Dacia.          Dacia, Bucarest, 1924 f. (actually published in May
                                                      um,  érem-é s  régisé gtara-
 Dolgozatok. Dolgozatok az Erdélyi nemzeti Miize
                   bol, Kolozsvar, 1910-18.
                   Dolgozatok a M. kir. Ferencz Jozsef tudomanyegyetem
                   archaeologiai intézetebél, Szeged, 1921 ff.
 EMU.           Ethno logische Mitteilungen aus Ungarn, Budapest.
452                        BIBLIOGRAPHY
"Ed. "Apy. °Apxatodoyurr) *Ednuepis, Athens.
FbSchw.      Fundberichte aus Schwaben, Stuttgart.
Frankenland. Frankenland, Illustrierte Monatschrift, Dettelbacha/Main.
Fuldéer Schr.    Schriften (Veréffentlichungen) des Fuldder Geschichts-
                vereines, Fulda.
Fo,         Fornvdnnen (K. Vitterhets, Historie och Antikvitets Aka-
               demien), Stockholm.
Germania.   Germania (Rémisch-germanische Kommission, Frankfort
               a/Main), 1917 ff.
Glas. Zem. Muz. BH.       Glasnik Zemalsk. Muzea, Serajevo.
ITA.        Institut internationale d Anthropologie, Comptes rendus of
               congresses.
ILN.         Illustrated London News, London.
 sv. Bulg.    Isvestia bulgarskoto arch. Druszhestvo, afterwards, Institut,
                Sophia.
Felentés a MNMuz. Felentés a Magyar Nemzeti Muzeum . . évt
                dllapotarcl, Budapest (évi= year).
¥elentés Debrecen. Felentés Debrecen sx. kir. Varos Muzeuma . . évt
                miikédésérél és allapotarol.
GLA.         Jahrbuch fiir Altertumskunde (k. k. Zentral Kommission fiir
                Kunst u. Hist. Denkmiler . . .) Wien, 1907 ff.
FRAIL,       Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great
                Britain, London.
FSGU.        Sahresbericht    der schweizerischen   Gesellschaft fiir Urge-
                schichte, Aarau.
Jol.         Jahresschrift fiir die Vorgeschichte der sachsisch-thiiringischen
                Lander, Halle.
JZK.       Jahrbuch der k. k. Zentralkommission fiir Erforschung .. .,
              Vienna, 1903-6.
Kol. Anthr. Korrespondensblatt der d. Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie,
              Ethnologie und Urgeschichte, Brunswick.
LAAA.       Liverpool Annals of Archaeology and Anthropology.
MAGW. = Mitteilungen der anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien.
               The Verhandlungen are separately paginated with
               numbers enclosed in brackets.
MAGZ.       Mitteilungen der antiquarischen Gesellschaft in Ziirich.
Man.        Man (Royal Anthropological Institute), London.
Mannus.     Mannus (Gesellschaft fiir Deutsche           Vorgeschichte),
               Leipzig, rgto ff. There are also five Erganzungsbander,
                separately paginated.                 c
Mit. Prov. Mus. Halle.       Mitteilungen aus dem Provinzial-Museum der
                Provinz Sachsen, Halle, 1891-9.
 Mitt. Hist. Cee         Mitteilungen des historischen Vereins der Pfalz,
                 peyer.
 MPK.        Mitteilungen der prahistorischen Kommission der k. k. Aka-
               demie der Wissenschaften, Vienna.
 MSAN. — Mémoires de la Société des Antiquaires du Nord, Copenhagen.
                             BIBLIOGRAPHY                                 453
MZ.           Mainzer Zeitschrift.
MZK.          Mitteilungen der k.k. Zentralkommission fiir Erforschung .. »
                Vienna.
 Nol. d. V2t. Nachrichtenblatt fiir deutsche Vorzeit, Beiblatt zum Mannus,
                 Berlin (Leipzig), 1925 f.
Obzor.        Obzor Praehistoricky, Prague.
 OudhMeded.       Oudheidkundige Mededeelingen uit’s Rijksmuseum van
                 Oudheden te Leiden.
 PA.          Pamdatky archeologické a mistopisné (Spol. Prague).
PBI.          Prahistorische Blatter, Munich.
Pravék.      Pravék, Kojetin.
PrzegA.      Przeglad Archeologiczny, Poznan, 1919 ff.
 PZ.         Prahistorische Zeitschrift (D. Gesellschaft fiir Anthropo-
                logie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte) Berlin.
 RA.         Revue archéologique, Paris.
 Rev. Anthr. Revue anthropologique, Paris.
 RGKBI. _—_—Rémisch-germanisches Korrespondenzblatt (Rémisch-german-
                ische Kommission) Frankfort a/Main.
 SbPlzen.    Sbornik méstského historického musea v Plznt.
 Starinar.   CtapuHap, Belgrade, 1906-11; 1922 ff.
 SV.         Schlesiens Vorzeit in Bild und Schrift (Schlesisches Museum
                fiir Kunstgewerbe und Altertiimer, Breslau, 1900 ff.
                (There is also an old series cited by year-numbers only.)
 Swiatowit.   Warsaw.
 Syria.       Syria, Paris.
 Verh. OP.    Verhandlungen der naturhistorischen Gesellschaft der Ober-
                pfalz, Regensburg (Ratisbon).
 VjesHAD.     Vyesnik hrvatskoga arkeologitkoga drugtva, Zagreb, 1898 ff.
                 The older series is not cited.
 Volker und Rasse.    Vélk und Rasse, Munich.
 Volkerkunde.    WV6lkerkunde, Vienna.
WA.           Wiadomosci archeologiczne, Warsaw.                        !
 WDZ.         Westdeutsche Zeitschrift fiir Geschichte und Kunst, Trier
                 (Tréves).
 WMBH.         Wissenschaftliche Mitteilungen aus Bosnien und der Herzego-
                 vina, Sarajevo (Vienna).
 WPZ.         Wiener Prahistorische Zeitschrift, Vienna.
 ZfE.         Zeitschrift-fiir Ethnologie, Berlin. ‘The Verhandlungen are
                 separately paginated with numbers enclosed in brackets.

               COLLECTIVE       OR ANONYMOUS           WORKS

 AuhV.        Lindenschmidt, Altertiimer unserer heidnischen Vorzeitt,
                 Rémisch-germanisches Museum, Mainz.
 Bastian Festschr.   Festschrift fiir Adolf Bastian zu seinem 70. Geburtstage,
                 Berlin, 1896.
 BMBronze.      Guide to the Bronze Age Antiquities, British Museum, 1924.
454                        BIBLIOGRAPHY
BMtIron.       Guide to Early Iron Age Antiquities, British Museum, 1925.
Butmir.       Fiala, Hoernes and Radiminsky, Die neolithische Station
                von Butmir in Bosnien, Vienna, 1895 f.
Evans Festschr. Essays in Aegean Archaeology presented to Sir Arthur
                Evans, Oxford, 1927.
Gétze-Festschr. Studien zur ‘vorgeschichtlichen Archdologie Alfred
                Gétze .. . dargebracht, Leipzig, 1925.
Hamburg Festschr. Festschrift zur Feier des 50-jahrigen Bestehens des
                Hamburgischen Museums fiir V 6lkerkunde (= Mitteilungen
                aus dem Museum fiir Vélkerkunde in Hamburg xut) 1928.
Heilbronn Festschr. Festschrift zur 42. Versammlung der Deutschen
                Anthropologischen Gesellschaft, vom historischen Verein,
                Heilbronn, 1911.
MainzerFestschr. 1927. Festschrift zur Feier des 57-jahrigen Bestehens
                des rémisch-germanischen Central-Museums zu Mainz,
               1927.
Nied. Sbor. Niederliv Sbornik (= Obzor, 1925), Prague, 1925.
OAM.         Opuscula archaeologica O.Montelio dicata, Stockholm, 1913.
OKT.         Osterreichische Kunsttopographie (k. k. Zentral Kommission
               fiir Erforschung . . . ),Vienna.
Real.        Reallexikon der Vorgeschichte, edited by Max Ebert.
 SS.        Heinrich Schliemann’s Sammlung trojanischer Altertiimer
                beschrieben von Hubert Schmidt, Konigliche Museen zu
                Berlin, 1902.
VAPS.        Die vorgeschichtliche Altertiimer des Provinz Sdachsens.
VAT.         Gétze, Hofer, und Zschiesche, Die vor- und friihgeschicht-
                liche Altertiimer Thiiringens, Wiirzburg, 1909.
WormserFestschr. Festschrift zur 34. Versammlung der Deutschen
                anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Worms, 1903.


                                 BOOKS
Abercromby, John, A Study of the Bronze Age Pottery of Great Britain
 4     and Ireland, Oxford, 1912.
Aberg, Nils, Das nordische Kulturgebiet in Mitteleuropa, Uppsala, 1918
        (= Nordic).
     La civilisation énéolithique dans la péninsule ibérique, Uppsala,
        1921 (=Iberic).
     Studier 6fver den yngre Stendldern i Norden och Vésteuropa, Norr-
        képing, 1912 (= Western).
     Die Steinzeit in den Niederlanden, Uppsala, 1916 (= Niederlanden).
Andree, Bergbau in der Vorzeit, Leipzig, 1922.
 Antonius, O., Grundziige einer Stammesgeschichte der Haustiere, Jena,
        1922.
 Behrens, Bronzezeit Siiddeutschlands, Catalog des romisch-germanischen
        Centralmuseums, Mainz, 1916.
                           BIBLIOGRAPHY                                455
Beltz, Robert, Die vorgeschichtliche Altertiimer    des Grossherzogtums.
       Mecklenburg-Schwerin, Schwerin, 1910.
Bierbaum, ‘Vorgeschichtliche Wanderungen’ reprint from Nordsdch-
       sisches Wanderbuch, Dresden, 1925.
Birkner, Der diluviale Mensch in Europa, Munich, 1925.
Blinkenberg, Fibules grecques et orientales (Lindiaca, v), Copenhagen,
        1926.
Brggger, Den arktiske stendlder 1 Norge.
Brooks, The Evolution of Climate, London, 1925.
Casson, S., Macedonia, Thrace and Illyria, Oxford, 1926.      ;
Castillo, A. del, La Cultura del Vaso campaniforme, Barcelona, 1927.
  ervinka, Moravské Starositnosti, Kojetin, 1908 (= MS.)
Chantre, E. Recherches anthropologiques dans le Caucase, Paris,
       1885-7.
Childe, V. G. The Dawn of European Civilization, London, 1925.
     The Aryans, London, 1926.
Childe, V. G., The Most Ancient East, London, 1928.
Coffey, The Bronze Age in Ireland, Dublin, 1913.
Dechelette, J., Manuel d’archéologie préhistorique, celtique, et gallo-
       romaine, Paris, 1908-14.
Dérpfeld and others, Alt-Ithaka, Munich, 1927.
Ebert, Max, Reallexikon der Vorgeschichte.
Evans, Arthur, The Palace of Minos at Knossos, Oxford, 1921-8.
Evans, John, The Ancient Stone Implements of Great Britain, London,
       1897.
Fiala, Hoernes, and Radiminsky, Die neolithische Station von Butmir in
        Bosnien, Vienna.
Fimmen, D., Die kretisch-mykenische Kultur, Berlin, 1921.
Forrer, R., ‘Nouvelles Découvertes et acquisitions du Musée prehis-
       torique et Gallo-romain de Strasbourg’, Strasbourg, 1924.
Forsdyke, E. J., Catalogue of the Greek and Etruscan Vases in the British
       Museum, vol. i, London, 1925.
Frankfort, H., Studies in the Early Pottery of the Near East (Royal Anthro-
       pological Institute Occasional Papers 6 and 8), London, 1925,
        1927.
Franz, Peaha        and Mitscha-Marheim,       H., ‘ Die urgeschichtliche
        Forschung in Osterreich seit 1900’, reprinted from BRGK. Xvi,
         1925-6.         3
 Franz,L.andWeninger, J. Die Funde ausden prahistorischen Pfahlbauten
          im Mondsee (=Materialien zur Urgeschichte Osterreichs, iii),
         Vienna, 1927.
 Gams, H., and Nordhagen, R., Postglaziale Klimadnderungen und
        Erdkriistenbewegung in Mitteleuropa, Munich (Geogr. Gesell.
         Mitt. XVI), 1923.
 Giffen, A. van, Bouwstoffen voor de Groningsche Oergeschiedenis, Verslag
         van het Museum van Oudheden te Groningen, 1928.
 Gjerstad, Einar, Studies on Prehistoric Cyprus, Uppsala, 1926.
456                         BIBLIOGRAPHY
Gétze, A., Die Gefassformen und ornamente der neolithischen schnurver-
       gterten Keramik, Jena, 1891.
Gotze, A., Hoffer, P., und Zschiesche, P., Die vor- und frithgeschichtlichen
       Altertiimer Thiiringens, Wirzburg, 1909.
Gottwald, Ant., Pravéka Sidlisté a Pohrebisté na Prostéjovsku, Prostéjov
       (Prossnitz), 1924 (=PSPP.).
Gross, V., Les Protohelvétes, Berlin, 1883.
Gumpert, Carl, Frankisches Mesolithikum         (Mannus     Bibliothek,   40),
       Leipzig, 1927.
Hall, H. R., The Civilization of Greece in the Bronze Age, London,
       1928.
Hampel, J., A Bronzkor emléket Magyarhonban, Budapest, 1886-96.
       (Three vols.: the first vol. has appeared also in French as an ap-
       pendix to CIA, Budapest, 1877, and in German as Altertiimer
       der Bronzezeit in Ungarn.)
Heierli, J., Urgeschichte der Schweiz, Zurich, 1902.
Hoernes, M., Urgeschichte der bildenden Kunst in Europa, Vienna, 1924.
Holwerda, J. H., Nederland’s vroegste beschaving, Leiden, 1907.
Ischer, Th., ‘Die Chronologie des Neolithikums der Pfahlbauten der
        Schweiz,’ reprinted from AsA., 1919.
Keith, Arthur, The Antiquity of Man, London, 1925 (2nd edit.).
Keller, F., Lake-Dwellings, London, 1878.
     The Lake-Dwellings of Switzerland and other parts of Europe (2nd
       edit.).
Keller-Tarnuzza and Reinerth, Urgeschichte des Thurgaus, Frauenfeld,
       1925.
Kec        andbuch der germanischen Altertumskunde, 1836.
Kossinna, Gustav, Dze deutsche Vorgeschichte, eine hervorragend
       nationale Wissenschaft, 3rd Edit., Mannus-Bibliothek.
    Die Indogermanen, Mannus-Bibliothek, Wiirzburg, 1921.
Koztowski, Leon, Epoka kamienia na wydmach wschodniej czesci wy2yny
       Matopolskiej, Warsaw, 1923 (=Archiwum nauk antropolo-
       gicznych, li, 3) (= Matopolskiej).
     Starsza epoka kamienia w Potsce, Poznan (Towarystwo przyjaciol
       nauk, prace komisji archeologicznej, i, 1), 1922 (= Starsza).
     Mtodsza epoka kamienia w Polsce, Lwéw (Archiwum towarzystwa
        naukowego, II, ii, 2), 1924 (= Mfodsza).
     Epoka bronzu w Polsce (Archiwum towarzystwa naukowego, I, v, 3)
        Lwow, 1928.
Kruse, F., Deutsche Altertiimer, Halle, 1824-8.
Laszl6, Ferencz, ‘Stations de l’époque prémycénienne dans le Comitat
       de Haromszek,’ in Dolgozatok, 1911.
    ‘La station primitive de Erdésd’ in Dolgozatok, 1914.
    “Les Types de vases peints d’Ariusd (Erésd),’ Dacia, i
Mahr, A., Das vorgeschichtliche Hallstatt, Vienna, 1925.
* This article, written to appear in    in May1g927.   Ifirst saw it in October
1924, was published posthumously        1927.
                               BIBLIOGRAPHY                            457
Marcel de Puydt, ‘Les fonds de cabanes néolithiques de la Hesbaye,’
       reprinted from Annales de la Fédération archéologique et historique
       de Belgique, xxi, Congres de Liége, 1904.
Matz, Die friihkretischen Siegel, Berlin, 1928.
Menghin, O., Appendix to Hoernes, Urgeschichte der bildenden Kunst,
       q.v. (= Urgeschichte).
     Urgeschichte Niederdsterreichs, Vienna (Heimatkunde von Nieder-
       Osterreich, 7), 1921.
     Einfiihrung in die Urgeschichte Béhmens und Mahrens, Reichenberg
        (Anstalt fiir Sudetendeutsche Heimatforschung), 1926.
     Urgeschichte der Nahrung, reprinted from the Lexikon der Ernah-
        rungskunde, Vienna, 1926.
Milleker, Bodog, A Vattinai éstelep, 'Temesvar, 1905.
     Fiihrer durch die Altertumssamlung des stédtischen Museums, Vriac,
        1923.
Miské, Kalman von, Die prahistorische Ansiedelung von Velem St. Vid, 1.
Miller, A., Fiihrer durch die vorgeschichtliche Abteilung des stadtischen
        Museums zu Weimar, 1918.
Montelius, O., La civilisation primitive en Italie, Stockholm,     1895 ff.
        (CPI).
     Die vorklassische Chronologie Italiens, 1912, Stockholm, 1912 (VCI).
     Minnen fran var Forntid, Stockholm, 1917.
     ‘Die Chronologie der altesten Bronzezeit in Nord-Deutschland und
        Skandinavien,’ from AfA., 1899-1900.
 Much, M. Kunsthistorischer Atlas (published by the k. k. Zentral-
        kommission fiir Erforschung . . .), Vienna.
      Die Kupferzeit in Europa, Jena.
 Miiller, Sophus, Ordning af Danemarkes Oldsager, Copenhagen.
       Oldtidens Kunst i Danmark, Copenhagen (Stenalderens Kunst,
          1918; Bronzealderens Kunst, 1921).
 Munro, R., The Lake-Dwellings of Europe, London, 1890.
       Palaeolithic Man and Terramara Settlements in Europe, Edinburgh,
          IgI2.
Nabe, FE.Die steinzeitliche Besiedlung der Leipziger Gegend (Veroffentl.
          stidtischen Museums fiir Vélkerkunde, Leipzig, vol. 3), 1908.
 Nagy, G.         ‘Budapest és videke az éskorban’ in Budapest Régiséget,
          Budapest, 1904.
                                                                Stuttgart,
 Naue, Julius, Die Hiigelgraber zwischen Ammer und Staffelsee,
          1887.
      Die DB  ensoui in Oberbayern, Munich, 1894 (OB).
       Die vorrémischen Schwerter, Munich, 1903.
                                                               Steinzeit in
 Palliardi, Jaroslav, ‘Die relative Chronologie der jiingeren
          Mahren,’ from WPZ. i.
                                                              1912.
 Papavisileios, [Tepi r&v <v EBola dpxaiwy tadfwv, Athens,
 Paret, O., Urgeschichte Wiirttembergs, Stuttgart, 1921.
 Parvan, V., Getica, Bucarest, 1924.
                                                     London, 1922.
 Peake, Harold, The Bronze Age and the Celtic World,
    3443                         3N
458                           BIBLIOGRAPHY
Peake, Harold, and Fleure, H. J., Hunters and Artists, Oxford, 1927.
Peet, T. E., The Stone and Bronze Ages in Italy and Sicily, Oxford,
          1912.
Petrie, W. M. Flinders, Tools and Weapons, London, 1917.
       The Formation of the Alphabet, London, 1912.
      Researches in Sinai, London; 1906.
      Prehistoric Egypt, London, 1920.
 Pié, Cechy predhistorické, Prague, 1899 ff.; the third volume is translated
         into German as Die Urnengrdber Béhmens, Leipzig, 1907; it is
        nevertheless cited as Pié, iii.
 Pleyte, W., Nederlandsche Oudheden van de vroegste Tyden tot op Karel
         den Groote, Leiden, 1877-1901 (each volume, devoted to a single
         province, is separately paginated).
 Pulszky, F., Die Kupferzeit in Ungarn, Budapest, 1877.
 Randall-Maclver, D., Villanovans and Early Etruscans, Oxford, 1924.
      The Iron Age in Italy, Oxford, 1927.
 Reinerth, Hans. Die Chronologie der jiingeren Steinzeit in Siiddeutschland,
         Augsburg, 1924 (Chron.).
      Die jiingere Steinzeit der Schweiz, Augsburg, 1926 (Schwezz).
      Der Wohnbau der Pfahlbaukultur (Museumsgesellschaft im Winter-
         thur) Winterthur, 1924 (Wohnbau).
 Reinerth, Hans,and Keller-Tarnuzzer, K., Urgeschichte des Thurgaus,
        Frauenfeld, 1925.
 Rey, Léon, Observations sur les premiers habitats de la Macédoine, Paris,
         1921 (=Bull. Cor. Hellén. xli—xliii).
 Richly, Die Bronzezeit in Bohmen.
 Richter,     Jilustrierter Fiihrer durch die prahistorische Abteilung, Stad-
        tisches Museum f. Vélkerkunde, Leipzig, 1922.
 Richthofen, B. von, Die dltere Bronzezeit in Schlesien (Vorgeschichtliche
        Forschungen, i, 3), Berlin, 1926.
 Roska, Marton, ‘Fouilles aux remparts de Perjamos’ in Féldrajzi Kézle-
         ményeR, XXxix.
 Schaeffer, F. A., Les Tertres funéraires préhistoriques dans la Forét
         de Haguenau, i, Haguenau, 1926.
 Scheidt, Walter, Rassen der jiingeren Steinzeit in Europa, Munich, 1924.
 Schenk, A., La Suisse préhistorique, Lausanne, 1912.
 Schliz, A., Das steinzeitliche Dorf Grossgartach, Stuttgart, 1901.
 Schmidt, R. R., Schliz, A., Dze diluviale Vorzeit Deutschlands, Stuttgart,
            IgI2.
 Schranil, J., Studie o vzniku cultury bronzové v Cechdch, Prague, 1921.
        Die Vorgeschichte Béhmens und Mahrens, Berlin, 1927-8.
 Schuchhardt, C., Alteuropa, Berlin, 1919.
  Schumacher, K., Siedlungs- und Kulturgeschichte der Rheinlande, Mainz,
        1921-5,
  Schumann, Hugo, Die Steinzeitgrdber der Uckermark, Prenzlau, 1904.
  Splieth, W., Inventar der Bronzealterfunde aus Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel,
          1900.
                           BIBLIOGRAPHY                                459
Sprockhoff, Ernst, Die Kulturen der jiingeren Steinzeit in der Mark
       Brandenburg (Vorgeschichtliche Forschungen, i, 4), Berlin, 1926.
Stocky, Albin, ‘Studie o éeském neolithu,’ in PA. 1919 and 1920.
     Boheme a l’dge de la pierre, Prague, 1924 (=BAP).
     Praha pravéka, i, Prague (Narodni Museum), 1925 (= PP).
     Pravék zemé ceské, i, Prague, 1926 (A French edition is in prepara-
        tion) (= PZC).
     ‘Chronologie de l’4ge néolithique en Bohéme’ (reprinted from ITA,
        Prague, 1924) (=Chron.).
-    Bohéme a Vage du bronze, Prague, 1928 (= BAB).
Szombathy, J., Prahistorische Flachgraber bet Gemeinlebarn in Niederéster-
      reich (Rémisch-Germanische Forschungen 3), Berlin, 1929.
Tallgren, A. M., La Pontide préscythique (Eurasia Septentrionalis Anti-
        qua, ii), Helsingfors, 1926.
Theuer, Urgeschichte Oberésterreichs, Linz, 1925.
Tsountas,   C. H., Aé mpotoropixat dxpomddets      Auwiov    Kat Léoxdov,
       Athens, 1908 (4-2).
Wace, A. J. B., and Thompson, M., Prehistoric Thessaly, Cambridge,
        1912, cited W. and T.
Wahle, Ernst, Ostdeutschland in jungneolithischer Zeit (Mannus-Biblio-
        thek, 15), Wiirzburg, 1918.
Wosinsky, M., Das prahistorische Schanzwerk von Lengyel, Budapest,
         1883-96.
      eee              Térténete, Budapest, 1896 (=TT).
      Die inkrustierte Keramik der Stein- und Bronzezeit.
                                                              by J. P.
 Xanthudides, S., The Vaulted Tombs of the Mesard, translated
        Droop, Liverpool, 1924.
        I. INDEX             OF SUBJECTS                AND        OBJECTS
Absolute chronology, see chronology.             apples cultivated, 127, 164.
Achaeans, 410.                                   apron, 70, 93.
Acheulean remains, 10.                           apsidal houses, see houses.
Adriatic, routes to, 3.                          arcaded mouldings, 85, 119, 126, 167,
adzes: flint, 21.                                      179.
   horn: perforated, 21, 23.                     arc-motive, 323, 368, 411.
   stone, IOI, 104.                              Arctic rodents in Central Europe, 16.
   see also axe-adze, celts, picks.              armlets, hollow, 292, 362.
Aegean, connexions with, 32, 73, 91-3,              see bracelets, cylinders, manchette
     108, 150, 159, 172, 203, 205, 211,                armlets.
     214, 221, 251, 269, 278, 287, 289,          arrow-heads: flint: transverse, 49, 53,
     294, 353, 377, 392, 410.                             ROM., 1OL, £14, 131,135, 139;
   routes to, 2.                                          L7OM 72
Agathyrsian axe, 383.                                  triangular, 18, 53, IOI, 122, 135,
altars, clay, triangular, 28, 70.                         147, 170-1.
amber, deposits, 6.                                    barbed, 114, 122, 126, 129, 174,
   ornaments, 113, 116, 123, 130, 135,                   179, 191, 193, 316, 322, 327.
     140,   147,   154,   179,   191-2,   196,        tanged, 73, 135, 171, 209.
      198, 229, 233, 235, 243, 260-1,               bone: 224, 288, 327.
      283, 289, 291, 297, 301, 304, 307,            bronze: 70, 285, 307, 312-13, 316,
      309, 311, 317, 328, 333, 338, 347,                 322, 327, 333, 337, 347, 360-1,
      356, 362, 376, 397, 403, 416.                       369.
   trade, 233, 236, 305, 311, 313, 356,             Scythian, 394, 396.
     402.                                        art, 13, 17, 22, 96, 100, 276, 386, 396.
 amphorae, 101, 213, 217, 234, 280.              ashes in graves, 150, 174.
   Nordic, 113, 117, 130.                        Assur, parallels from, see Mesopo-
   Corded, 145 ff., 199, 266, 285, 287,                tamia.
     aut.                                        astronomical significance of coloured
   Lausitz, 319, 322, 323, 345, 347;                   stones in cist, 149.
       360-1, 369, 406.                           Atlantic (climatic) epoch, 5, 113.
   see also Globular Amphorae.                    Aunjetitz culture, 139 ff., 226, 283,
 amputation of limbs, 89.                              302, 311, 314, 317, 329, 349.
 amulets, axe-shaped, 30.                         Aurignacian remains, 12, I5.
    see also beads, cranian, pendants.            awls: bone, 40, IoI, 218.
 Anatolia, see Aegean, Troy, Yortan.                 copper and bronze, 82, 102,       104,
 anchor ornaments, 191.                                123, 126, 133, 144, 179, 190, 223,
 Ancylus phase of Baltic, 4, 22, 24, 64.               235.
 animals, domestic, 66, 131.                      axes: palaeolithic, 13, 21.
    see also cattle, dogs, goats, horses,           copper, 76, 87, 213, 273.
       sheep, swine.                                horn:   perforated, 23, 79, 96, 101,
                                                          126, 158, 170, 213, 224.
 animals, models of, see models.
 animal-head ornament on pots, 28, 37,              stone, 73, 78-9, 86
                                                    bronze: Hungarian        type A 266,
      48, 65.
                                                          272, 285-6, 288, 300, 316, 326,
 anklets, 305, 306, 308, 310, 346-7,
       360-1.                                               379, 382, 389.
                                                       B 229, 272, 288, 415.
 ansa lunata, 81, 90, 118, 120, 140, 153,
      155, 260, 266, 290, 323, 382, 409.               c 260, 272, 384, 388, 392, 415.
 anthropomorphic lids, 28, 35, 69.
                                                       D see mace-heads, Hungarian.
   ornament on vases, 39, 65, 75, 86,
                                                    iron, 396-7.
       105.                                            painted on tomb-walls, 149.
                                                       see also battle-axes, beads, celts,
 antimony, deposits, 6, 392, 405.
 antimony-bronze, 406.                                    double-axes, hand-axes,models.
 anvils, 326.                                     axe-adzes, 76, 92, 101, 129, 203-8.
462                INDEX      OF SUBJECTS         AND     OBJECTS
axe-hammers, stone (rougher type of            bears’ claws used as ornaments, 135.
    perforated axe), 40, 49, 69, 167,          bells, 396.
      171, 174, 179, 205, 242, 288, 313,       Bell-beakers, 156, 191-6, 207-8, 223,
      333, 364, 403.                                240, 245, 280-1, 305, 308, 415,
Azilian culture, 17, 171, 172.                      417.
                                               Bernburg culture, 119, 134-9, 225,
Baking plates, 179.                  :              Bo2naluz
banded flint, 140.                             biconical vases, 84.
barley, 66, 73, 90, 127, 164, 180.             biconical ossuaries, Lausitz type, 303,
barrows, 113, 115, 129, 136, 143, 149,              322, 336, 345, 347, 350, 361, 369.
      176, 183, 192, 197, 206-7, 223,          bilobate handles, 72, 353n., 355, 406.
      242, 244-6, 259, 263, 296-9, 312-        bipartite bowls, 80, 82, 211.
      13, 315, 320-1, 335, 354, 360, 363,      birds, modelled, 372, 375, 377, 416.
      380, 391, 396, 401, 403, 405, 411,       birds’ heads ornament, 338, 344, 375—
     Anis                                            6
barter, see trade.                             bits: horn cheek-pieces from, 263, 288,
basketry, prototypes for pots, 114, 134,            325, 330, 339, 356, 375, 393.
         139.                                    bronze,356, 374, 388, 393.
     imitated in ceramic decorations,            iron, 393,
                                                          396, 408.
        53, 56.                                ‘black-topped’ ware, 28, 32, 105.
baskets, actual, 170.                          blast-pipes, 356, 368, 406.
bast, 180.                                     boars’ tusk ornaments, 30, 53, 103,
baton de commandement, 17.                           140) 170,172, 174, 219.2508
battle, vestiges of, 127.                         see also helmets.
battle-axes: stone: double-bladed, see         boats, model, 81, 85.
         double-axes—stone.                    bone points, double-ended, 123, 135,
      facetted, 146, 151 ff., 208.                   170, 172, 179.
      East European, 146, 153, 224.            bone-work, 12, 21, 23.
      polygonal, 113, 121, 124, 126,           boomerangs, 164, 171.
        129, 133, 176, 179, 210, 213,          Boreal climatic epoch, 4.
          218.                                 borers, flint, 122.
       round-butted, 146, 155, 175, 198.       Bos, see cattle.
   bronze, 229.                                boss decoration (use of flat clay pro-
   copper, 76, 146, 157, 177.                        tuberances) on pottery, 77, 85,
   see also axes, axe-hammers, axe-                  LOO, I 7eeras
          adzes,    Agathyrsian        axes,   bottle: Danubian, 37, 57, 61, 65, 77.
          double-axes, hammer-axes.                  long-necked, 84.
beads: copper, 30, 87, 102, &c.                      flattened, 84.
   amber, see amber ornaments.                    see also amphorae, flasks.
   shell, 30, 41, 65, 70,204.                  Bottom Graves, 115.
   stone, 78, 97, 103.                         bowls: round-bottomed, 37, 60, 65.
   horn, 103.                                        broad-rimmed, 190, 211.
   wood, 209.                                     see also peaked rims, turban-dishes,
   ivory, see ivory.                                 polypod      vessels,  pedestalled
   glass, see glass.                                 bowls, cross-footed, &c.
   gold, see gold.                             bows, actual specimens, 164, 179.
   teeth, 103, see necklaces.                  Bracelets: shell, 30, 41, 65, 70, 210n.
beads: axe-shaped, 114, 135, 138, 140.            stone, 30, 53, 55, 70.
     . segmented, 210, 229.                       copper, 87, 102, 210.
       six-spiked, 30, 70.                        bronze, A 230, 242, 263, 308, 316,
       star, 30n., 106, 283, 291, 292,372.            328, 332, 403.
       with V boring, see buttons.                 B 282, 2881304,     306,353      Ngan
   see also amulets,         centre-pieces,           332, 370, 394, 403.
          necklaces, pendants, whorls.              C 274, 282, 285, 289, 300, 302-4,
beakers, 31, ror, 218.                                 316, 370, 394, 403.
   see also Bell-, corded, funnel-                  D274, 289, 301, 304, 307, 313,
       necked, Zoned, ledge-handled.                   316, 370, 385, 390.
                    INDEX           OF SUBJECTS             AND     OBJECTS                  463
bracelets, bronze—continued                              Cardium shells used for decorating
    F twisted,
        305, 317, 332, 341, 343,                              pots, 114, 139.
       347-                                                imitated in copper, 229.
                                                         carinated vessels, 28, 57, 77, 169, 180,
     Gig07, 320.
  see also anklets, armlets, ingot-                           2II-12, 217, 231, 2601, 304.
        torques, manchette, torques.                     Cassis saburon (Mediterranean shell),
brachycephaly, see craniology.
breast-ornaments, spiral (like Fig.                      catacomb graves, 150, 159.
     183), 327, 401, 403.                                cattle, domestic, 127, 210.
Brenner Pass, traffic over, 2, 195, 233,                    Bos brachyceros, 46, 62, 73, 89, 125,
     305, 341.                                                 163, 180.
bridles, see bits.                                          Bos primigenius, 46, 62, 73, 78, 89,
Britain, connexions             with,     200,    242,          125, 170, 180.
  _ 244, 316, 362, 365, 415.                             cauldrons: with T-handles, 375, 390.
Brittany, connexions with, 193, 241.                        Scythian, 395.
Buckelkeramik, see wart ornament.                        causeways in fortifications, 181.
buckets (bronze), 338, 375, 378.                         ‘cave-culture’, 73, 94, 172, 210.
   cordoned, 374, 401.                                   caves used as dwellings (post-palaeo-
Bukk culture, 60-3, 75, 85, 97, 106,                           lithic), 42, 50, 60, 71, 298, 368.
      Zoe                                                celts: stone, 72, 146, 285, 288, 304,
bulls, copper, 241.                                              310N., 322, 326, 337, 360, 379.
burials: collective, 14, 113, 135, 141,                       with pointed butts, 77, 86, 151,
