 not hold good altogether for the Rhineland. With these reser-
 vations Danubian la may be treated as a whole. The material
 may be summarized as follows:
    Danubian Ia pottery, save in the case of large jars, is made Pottery
 of fine well-levigated clay. The surface is smooth but never
covered with a slip of finer clay nor burnished, though vases
 from two sites™ in Moravia have been rubbed over with gra-
 phite. The finest specimens are slate grey in colour, but
 muddy tones are not uncommon results of uneven firing.
    Only two main shapes were in vogue: the hemispherical Forms
 bowl and the bottle with short neck (Fig. 18). In Moravia and
 Bohemia deep dishes with a flat base and shaped like an in-
 verted truncated cone are occasionally encountered. ‘The rims
 receive no special treatment. True handles are unknown, but
 all types of vessel are equipped with lugs, generally three or a
 multiple of three in number.” On bottles the lugs may grow
 into small grips horizontally or vertically pierced. In Southern
 Moravia, on the other hand, they are developed into animal
heads (Fig. 19 B) or fashioned to suggest afist (Fig. 20). A bowl
 from Steigra in Thuringia ™ is equipped with a narrow tubular
t JIA. (Prague), ii, p. 338.               7 Reinerth, Chron., p. 82.
2 Franz, Osterreich, p. 6; Mahr in         8 Paret, Wurt., pp. 34 f.
Vélkerkunde, 1926, p. 23.                  § PZ. Vi, pp. 301.
3 Pravék, 1904, p. 19 (map); Cer-          10 OAM      ,
                                                      p. 40.                     .
vinka, MS (1908), pp. 55-69; Gott-         11 P¥edmost and BoskovStyn, Real. ii,
wald, PS., 9-14.                               OL>
                                           ee) Stocky, Chronol., p. 5.
                                            2
4 Koztowski, Mlodsa, pp. 44f. and
map.                                       3 e.g. Gottwald, op. cit., p. 10 (Mora-
5 Map in Wahle, Ostdeutschland.            via); Hoernes, Urges., p. 297, 3 (Thu-
© PZ. v, p. 2803 ix, p. 118; ii, p. 3435   ringia); Forrer, pl. 1b (Alsace).
Real. viii, p. 237.                        14 VAT., p. 85, pl. Ul, 30.
            38                              DANUBIAN I
                                                                         the
          spout just below the rim. In addition to such small vasesMain
          settlement at Pflaumheim      (near  Odern burg)   on  the
          yielded a huge pithos over a metre high! It must be late.
 Decora-     The decoration consists of rather shallow continuous lines
     tion incised in the soft clay. The lines generally go in parallel pairs
          forming a ribbon. In a later phase small dimples, touching
          the lines, are added, producing the effect of a stave of music,
            or the ribbon, as at Vinéa, is filled in with dots. The ‘music
            note’ and ‘punctured ribbon’ ornaments are later than the ©
          simple ribbon in the part of Moravia explored by Palliardi.
          Besides incisions, applied plastic ridges are used. _
  Spirals    The patterns formed by the incised or plastic ribbons fall
      and into two categories. On the majority of vases a ‘free’ style
maeanders
                                                                OTT




                 Fic. 20. Fist-shaped lugs, Mor-           Fic. 21.    Palm on a Danu-
                  avia, from a sketch, M. Brno             bian I sherd, from Heilbronn,
                                                                     after Schliz


            reigns.’ The prevailing motives in this series are the spiral and
            the angular spiral or maeander, often forming a continuous
            belt but sometimes restricted to closed horizontal S figures.
            The motives are executed most tastefully and perfectly in the
            earliest vases and in the central regions. On late vessels and in
            remote districts like Hesbaye the spirals are degenerate and
            distorted: among the products of disintegration are various
            arcs, Z figures, and what Forrer’ regards as a representation of
            the vulva.
    Skeuo-     Other vases, however, exhibit distinctly skeuomorphic pat-
   morphic terns—generally chevrons below a horizontal ribbon—repre-
    designs senting a sort of sling in which the round-bottomed prototype
            must have been hung.3 To this class belong bowls ornamented
             * Frankfort, Studies, ii, p. 25, rightly     * Nouvelles acquis., p. 14.
             remarks that the arrangement             is  3 This origin is most obvious where
             tectonic in so far as the field isenclosed _ the pattern is in relief, as Stocky, BAP
             by a line parallel to the rim.                IV, 2. Cf. Sophus Miller in MSAN.
                               DANUBIAN I                                     39
on the base with concentric squares, the corners being united
by incised diagonals. Crosses? occur among the degeneration
products.
   Schliz3 considers the skeuomorphic patterns the older as
they were used also on ‘stroke-ornamented’ ware. Menghin‘
regards the maeander at least as an original element and the
spiral as an early derivative. ‘The former viewis the more likely.
   In late vases the free style prevails, but shows the influence of Natu-
the skeuomorphic patterns. We also encounter quasi-natura- ralistic
listic figures—palms 5 (Fig.21) or ‘frogs’ ;° the last-named figures motives
are in fact more probably representations of a human figure
with upraised arms such as that shown in relief on Fig. 12.
A sherd from Selce, close to Prague, looks as if it were
inscribed, but the ‘signs’ may be purely decorative.’ A vase,
now at Stuttgart, shows apparently a plastic representation of
the human face. In addition to incisions and plastic strips,
knobs were already used decoratively in this period in Moravia
(Fig. 18 a).
    Finally, in several areas a sort of painting with unfixed ‘Painting’
colours, applied after the firing of the vessel, has been observed.
In Bohemia® the paint in a sort of pitchy flux was applied to
vases that had already been decorated by incisions both in
Danubian Ia and Danubian Ib styles. Vases from Ettersburg
 near Weimar had been coloured red.’ Schliz found some
 earth colours on spiral-maeander sherds near Heilbronn,” and
 Forrer " has observed a red crusting at Stutzheim in Alsace.
Instances of coloured ornamentation are confined to late vases;
they are probably due to influence from the Danubian II
culture further east.
   It was not apparently only vases that the Danubians moulded Figurines
out of clay. A very rough head was found in a hut foundation
with the oldest linear ware at Boskov8tyn.” A fragment of a
second comes from Nosswitz in Silesia.3 Heads are modelled
fo20-5, p. 237. Dr. Jenny, in his         5 PZ. ii, p. 137 (Heilbronn).
interesting analysis of Danubian art      6 Mannus, ix, p. 55 (Bohemia) ; Stocky,
(MAGW-. Wviii, pp. 1 ff.), has entirely   PZG    pl. Vil, 5.
missed the skeuomorphic origin of         7 Mannus, xi-xii, p. 379.
this series. For precisely parallel re-   8 The actual colours are lost and only
sults in Nubia see Junker, El kubanieh-   the flux survives. Mannus, iii, pp.
Nord, pls. 5 and 6 (Nubian C-group).      225 ff.; Schranil, Bohmen, p. 42.
t Moravia, Lower Bavaria (Museums         9 VAT., p. 263.
at Brno and Regensburg).                  10 PZ, ii, p. 138, and pl. 29.
2 Stocky, PZC., pl. xxvil, 11.            11 Op. cit., p. 14.
3 PZ. ii, p. 131; cf. p.51 below.         12 Schranil, Bohmen, p. 43.
  ‘Hoernes, Urges., p. 774-               13 SV. vii, fig. 52 and p. 18.
         x                                 DANUBIAN I
                                                                   Germany
       on the late linear sherds from Bohemia.’ In Central
       a slightly steatopygous figurine from Lomm     atsc h   in  the State
                                                  Ib.   In  the   Rhine land
       of Saxony? may belong to Danubian                                  are
       figurines and even naturalistic plastic   model lings   on  vases
        otally lacking.                 |
 Celts    The Ae al stone implement of the Danubian I culture
       is the polished adze or hoe, flat on one face and arched on the
       other, such as we have already met at Vin¢a. It may be termed
       a ‘shoe-last’ celt, though strictly that name should be confined
Bored to the narrow chisel-like specimens (Fig.
                                                       22b). A variety of
                                                      .




 celts




                                                  Inches

                                      Fic. 22. Shoe-last celts

       shoe-last celt is perforated for hafting with the blade either
       at right angles or parallel to the shaft. On the Rhine the hori-
       zontally perforated celt has been transformed into a regular
       axe-hammer (Fig. 22 d), a type which in Moravia would only
       be found in Period II. Long perforated celts like Fig. 22 f have -
       been interpreted as plough-shares. A few stray shoe-last adzes
       from Bohemia have been mounted in a handle made from a
       hollowed deer’s tine. Hard volcanic stones were rarely used;
       softer materials such as schist were always preferred for the
       manufacture of all implements.
 Disk-    The only weapon of Danubian Ia is a disk-shaped mace-
shaped head of polished stone.
 mace
             + Stocky, PZC., p. 56, and pl. xiv, 6.       FST. xii, pp. 74-9.
             ? PZ. i (1909), p. 401. Niklassen            3 Palliardi, op. cit., fig. 10a;   PZ. Vv;
             illustrates some other specimens in           p. 392 (Wetterau).
                              DANUBIAN              I                            4I
  The flint work is poor and atypical, but is said in some cases                        Flint,
to show reminiscences of the “T'ardenoisian retouch’. Arrow- obsidian
heads are not found except in the late Rhenish group. In
Lower Austria and Eastern Moravia obsidian from Hungary
was already coming into use during the currency of spiral-
maeander ware.”
  Nor is the bone-work in any way distinctive when taken as a Bone
whole. Butat Statenice in Bohemia} very neat bone spoons were spoons
unearthed in a Danubian I a hut, and a fragmentary bone object
from Dukovany, now at Brno, is decorated with a spiral ribbon
bordered by fine dots quite in Danubian I style. In addition
awls were manufactured from the radii and cubiti of domestic
animals, and once         or twice chisels of bone have                  come     to
light.
   Spindle whorls are nowhere encountered, and there is no No
evidence for the art of weaving.                                  weaving
   The most striking   ornaments,   worn  by  the  Danubian    la Orna-
people, were beads and   bracelets made  from  the shell of Spon- ments

dylus gaederopus. Such shell ornaments have been found in Imported
Lower      Austria,t Moravia,’ Bohemia,’                Saxo-Thuringia,’        and shells
the Rhineland. The mussel in question does not live north
of the Mediterranean, but fossil Spondylus shells lie at no
great depth in the soil, near Mainz. Forrer? contends that the
Danubians used the fossil shells, but while his view may be
correct for Alsace, the weight of opinion seems to be that the
material usually worn was imported from the Mediterranean.”
   Moreover, in late graves of the same culture at Worms,” Dr. Ivory
Koehl found small pins of ‘ivory’ which must likewise rank as
imports from the south-east.
   In addition to foreign substances, shells of Dentakum (fossil),
 Unio, and Neritina were used as ornaments in Moravia.’                      Shells
of Margarita sinuosa have been found in the settlement of
Sarmsheim in Hessen. Apparently the mussel lived in the
Rhine and its tributaries in those days.”
                                             7 VAT., pp. xix and 80;       PZ. iv, p.
x Gumpert, op. cit., p. 113; Stocky,
PZC., p. 60.                                 376.
                                             8 WDZ. 1900, p. 223.
2 Cervinka, MS., pp. 568-9 (42), (50),
 and (64). ‘The same material has been       9 Op. cit., pp. 12 and 34; cf. Anz. A.A.,
                                             1916, pp. 715 f.
 found in a very few deposits in Bohe-
 mia, PA. xxxiy (1925), P- 457-              10 PZ. ix(1917), p.54; Rev. Ec. Anthr.
 3 Stotky, PZC., p. 60.                      1901, p. 294.
 4 MAGW. li, p. 46.                          1 Wormser Festgabe, p. 27.
 5 Real. ii, p. 60 (Krumlov-Kromau).         12 Zabrdovice near Krumlov, Real. ii,
                                             p. 60.                   3 PZ. 1X) p» 40.
 6 Praha-Bubenic; Schranil, Boéhmen,
 p- 43.                                  G
    3443
        42                                DANUBIAN        I
 Houses      The great mass of the Danubian Ia material is derived from
          settlements. In a few cases, as in the Vypustek and Kostelek
          caverns near Brno,! caves were used by the Danubians as habi-
          tations, though that never happened in Bavaria. The regular
          dwelling-places were groups of huts on the léss, always in
          the vicinity of streams. No plans of a complete village are
          available, save in the case of the late settlement at Grossgartach
         ‘near Heilbronn. Here the huts containing spiral-maeander
          ware formed small irregular groups, in fact rather isolated
          clusters of farm buildings than an organized village.’
    Pit-     Of the huts themselves only an irregular oval depression,
dwellings filled with ashes and refuse, survives as a rule.                   The hollow
         would normally represent the actual base of the pit-dwelling
         excavated in the léss. A deeper hole full of cinders would have
         served as a hearth.3 Sometimes two such hollows are linked
         together, or we have a whole complex of inter-connected
         hollows. A rather different structure might be inferred from
         the fragmentary model from Boskovstyn in Moravia.5 It shows
         an apsidal building with a flat roof, but the walls are hopelessly
    Post broken. A third type of house is illustrated at Nosswitz in
  houses Silesia;° the plan of the building was roughly rectangular, its
         area being 4 x 3:5 m.?_ The walls and roof were supported by
         stout posts, and a fire-place of stone stood on one side. Another
         house at Nosswitz measured 2:8 x 7-50m.? A similar rectangular
         type of house was in use in Bavaria.’
Porched     At Sarmsheim near Kreuznach® in Rhenish Prussia a more
  houses elaborate structure was in use. The main room was almost
         square, the rear and side walls being each supported by three
         stout posts. But a porch had been added on in front by ex-
         tending one side wall. The opposite wall of the porch was
         supported by a pair of posts in a line with the middle post of
         the rear wall and a pillar that stood in the centre of the main
         room. In this case the roof may have been gabled as at Tordos.
         Perhaps the whole should be reconstructed like the Erésd
         megaron shown in Fig. 58. In plan the Sarmsheim house corre-
         sponds to one containing spiral-maeander pottery at Gross-
         gartach.?. The latter was, however, excavated in the soil to a
         depth of 0-75 m., and post-holes were not observed. The
        1 JZK. 1905, ; p. 78 5                      5 Real. v
                                                           TVsDl    as: PZ
                                                                        o7xii passer
        Piha                   fig. 23; Heilbronn   © SV. vii, p. 13.         oe
         Festschrift,   fig.   6.                                  i              z
        3 Palliardi, MPK. i, 1897, p. 237;            ie. ee                           ae
        Schranil, Bohmen, pl. 3.                    8 PZ, xi, p. 71, fig. 3
        4 Mannus, xvi, p. 236.                      IeeA lie P1130)
                                 DANUBIAN     I                             43
entry lay through a porch on one side, as at Sarmsheim, but
within the main structure, 6 x 3:5 m.” in area, were two ‘com-
partments’ lying about 30 cm. above the floor of the living-
room.
   In a further variant, as at Lissdorf* in Thuringia, the space Pile
between the walls, marked by the post-holes, is broken up dwellings
into a complex of hollows (Fig. 23). This space can hardly
have been the actual floor; there must have been some wooden

                          oe) og ES
                                          8
                                                     =ak




                        Metres

                      Fic. 23. Danubian I huts, Lissdorf


 platform raised over         it.   Niklassen,” indeed, is inclined to
                                                   lled hut-founda-
  generalize this inference and to regard the so-cacellars or cooking
  tions excavated in the earth as in reality mere latter would have
- places under the living rooms proper: TheStructures, such as
  been raised above the ground on piles.            in use, but some
  Niklassen imagines, may actually have been
 of the ‘pit-dwellings’ must be regarded lifeas genuine habitations.
                                                 which they would
 Despite the cramped and insanitary and easily constructed.
 impose, the pit-dwellings were warm            , since it is possible
 They were suited above all to the liss areas
 to dig a stable vertical wall in that soil.
                                                   2 Mannus, xvi, p. 238.
     t PZ. vi, p. 293; Real. v, p- 178.
           44                        DANUBIAN      I
  Graves       In comparison with the numerous hut-foundations, graves
            are very rare except in the Rhineland. Only one—probably
            part of a cemetery—has been studied in Lower Austria," and
            two in Moravia.? In Bohemia} and Saxo-Thuringia interments
            are commoner. In nearly every case the body was interred
            with the legs gently flexed. In the graves near Worms and at
            Krumlov in Moravia lumps of red ochre were placed beside
            the corpse. The remaining grave goods would include orna-
            ments, particularly Spondylus bracelets or beads, stone imple-
Trepana- ments,andavase           In one such grave at Cannstadt near Stutt-
       tion gart the skull had been trepanned—the earliest case of the
            operation in Central Europe.                              ;
   Infants     In  some  hut   foundations  on  the Neckar   and   elsewhere‘
 buried in infants’ skeletons had been buried within the house walls.
    houses     Inhumation was not, however, the only rite among the
  Crema- Danubians. In south-west Germany, most particularly on the
       tion Wetterau, well attested cases of cremation are becoming quite
            common. Near Hanau5 the ashes were laid in the bare earth
            in a hole, dug sometimes in the floor of the hut, sometimes
            outside, and once in the corner of a regular trench grave that
            would have held a complete skeleton. Very few grave goods
            accompanied the ashes, but a regular funeral gift was a necklace
            of rectangular, triangular, and oval schist plaques engraved
            with linear and punctured designs such as might appear on
            contemporary vases. Similar plaques have been found further
            east at Diemarden, near Gottingen. A burial of cremated re-
            mains in a spiral-maeander pot has been reported from the
            State of Saxony. More cremation burials have been detected
            under the floors of huts in Bavaria.? Such burials are naturally
            easily overlooked, and it is quite possible that they will prove
            to be more widely distributed. The rarity of Danubian Ia
            interments in Moravia, Austria, and Silesia is certainly sus-
            picious.
  Cranio-      The rarity of graves in what seems to be the original centre of
      logy Danubian I culture leaves us in some
                                                    doubt as. to the physical
           characters   of its authors.   Schliz   has, however,      described
           skulls of this period® from graves at Krumlov in Moravia,
           Vohoné in Bohemia, Erfurt in Thuringia, and Cannstatt in
           Wurtemberg. These are dolichocephalic or justmesaticephalic
           * MAGW. li, p. 46.                5 PZ. ili, pp. 1-40 (Wolff).
           2. Real. on), p. 60.              ° Mannus, xviii (1926), p. 86.
           3 Stocky, PLGA p03.               7 BUF. iv, Germania, 1924, p. 83.
              PZ AU; Dito:                   8 AfA. ix, pp. 206 ff. vii, Da2sze
                               DANUBIAN        I                           45
with indices ranging from 71-2 (Cannstatt) to 74:87 (Erfurt)
and 75-3 (Vohonc). The skull from Henkenfeld on the Persch-
ling in Lower Austria had an index between 74 and 75 and
belonged to a female a little over 1-60 m. high. Forrer describes
the Alsatian skulls of the same group as mesaticephalic.
   Sergit claims the skulls from the cemeteries round Worms Races
as Mediterranean. Schliz* admits resemblance to the Medi-
terranean form, but emphasizes differences in the general con-
tour of the cranium, the eyebrow ridges, and the eye-sockets.
He would accordingly regard the Danubians as a branch of the
same stock that produced the Nordic race. Scheidt3 divides
the Danubian skulls, considered in his survey, between three
of his nine groups, namely, the ‘Nordic dolichoid transitional
form’ (Erfurt), the ‘East German long-headed form’ (Lingols-
heim), and the “East German brachoid form’ (Vohon¢).
   As a matter of fact the remains from the late graves available
probably belong to no ‘pure race’. Czekanowski would admit
a ‘Mediterranean’ element, and inclines to connect the Danu-
bians with his short, rather dark ‘pre-Slav’ or B-race. Boelich’s 4
proposal to see in these the relatives of Christian’s ‘Pre-Malays’
and the original adherents of the belief in vampirism is an
interesting speculation.
   The Danubians were undoubtedly agriculturalists. Saddle- Agricul-
querns are regularly found in the settlements, and the typical ture
shoe-last celt was above all designed to serve as the blade of a
hoe. In general the implements and the character of the houses
accord best with the economic stage termed “Hackbau’ or
garden culture—implying cultivation by hoeing without rota-
tion of crops or systematic manuring. However, in some
Danubian settlements very large perforated shoe-last celts have
turned up that almost might be ploughshares. So perhaps the
Danubians in course of time invented or acquired some sort of
plough.’ Menghin suggests that the device could have been
introduced by the stream of ‘vorderasiatischer Einfluss’ that is
so notable in Period II.
   The principal grain cultivated in Central Germany, Bohe- Grains
mia, and Poland was the little wheat, T7viticum monococcum.
But remains of emmer have been found in late Danubian I
I                                         Europa, p. 69.
           vieDarbian akulle de-          + Altschl. | (1926), p. 163.
scribed by Reche probably belong to       5 Schumacher in Germania, ii (1918),
the people of the Danubian II (Jor-       p. 2; Menghin, Nahrung, p.1039. Cf.
dansmiihl) culture.             tna pes   Zf{E, vil, p. 2736
3 Rassen der jiingeren Steinzeit m
        46                               DANUBIAN I
        hut foundations in the Rhine Valley (Baden) ' and in Belgium.’
        At Ojcéw in Galicia Miss Koztowska3 detected the ears of
        Triticum compactum, several varieties of Triticum vulgare and
        Triticum spelta (spelt), in addition to the usual Triticum mono-
        coccum; rye (Secale cereale) was also identified.            Sa
Animals    Besides cultivating wheat   the Danubi ans  kept  domest ic  an1-
        mals, though, judging from the comparat     ive   rarity of  animal
        bones in their hearths, they lived mainly upon a vegetarian
        diet. The animals identified were:
              Swine,‘5® Sus scrofa(?) pal.
             Cattle      Bos brachyceros‘ and a tame Bos primigentus.°
              Sheep‘5° Ovis aries palustris.
              Goats‘5® Capra hircus.
             Horse bones have been noted in Poland and on the Rhine,
         but the domestication of the animal is uncertain. Bones of
         game are very scarce in the huts.
Spreadof    The first Danubians are revealed as an essentially agricul-
   Danu- tural population inhabiting the open léss lands. But they were
   bians not really sedentary.        The number of ‘settlements’ is almost
        infinitely large, but in no site is there any evidence for really
        prolonged occupation; there is no accumulation of debris such
        as we have encountered at Vinéa. Permanent settlement im-
        plies an advanced agricultural science—systematic fallowing of
        crops and regular manuring of the fields. The Danubians had
        not apparently mastered these mysteries. But without them,
        even on the virgin léss, fresh land must be continually brought
        into cultivation. And so the Danubian peasants kept moving
        on. Indeed there was nothing to tie them to the soil; for the
        land available was almost unlimited, and pit-dwellings could
        easily be dug. In fact it would be intolerable to live in the
        same half-subterranean hut for many years on end. The great
        expansion of the Danubians was thus inevitable. But it was a
        slow and gradual process. Men would hesitate before facing
        the rough journey across wooded ranges, necessitated in the
        colonization of the Elbe valley and then of the Rhineland.
        Allowance must, therefore, be made for a substantial retarda-
         tion in dealing with Danubian I a in Bohemia, Saxo-Thuringia,
         and the Rhine valley. At the same time the culture would
         1 BRGK. xii, p. 73.                       4 Bohemia, PA. xxvii, p. 195.
         2 Marcel de Puydt, op. cit., p. 36.       5 Poland, Koztowski, loc. cit.
         3 Bull. internat. Acad. Sci., Cracovie,   ® Rhineland,   BRGK.      xii,   Doss
         1920, I-IOB, pp. 7 ff.; Koztowski,        L’Anthr. x, 1899, p. 689.
         Mlodsa, p. 52.
                                 DANUBIAN         I                                47
reach those regions already ‘filtered’ by passage through tracts
of forest and upland. An instance of such impoverishment is
supplied by the disappearance of clay plastic on the Rhine.
Finally, the results of contact with possible epipalaeolithic
tribes in Central         and    South     Germany       must     be taken into
account.
   The Danubians spread then, as we said above, from Moravia
to Belgium, Brandenburg, and Lower Silesia, retaining every-
where the essential features of their culture—pottery, stone
implements, and ornaments—unchanged. But differences in
the date of their occupation of the several regions are implied
in the very manner of their expansion. We may recapitulate
the main traits of Danubian civilization as follows.
   The basis of life is primitive agriculture, involving repeated Summary
extensions of cultivated territory. Domestic animals are kept,
but the diet is mainly vegetarian. Hunting plays no role in
daily life. Trade is limited to some sort of barter’ for objects
of mystic value (Spondylus shells.)
   There is no evidence for either war or chieftainship.
   A mother goddess is worshipped and depicted in the form
of clay figurines, but this practice was not deeply rooted and
soon lost. On the disposal of the dead evidence is conflicting.
Interment in the flexed attitude and cremation are both at-
tested, but we cannot be sure which, if either, was the original
rite.
   The spiral and maeander are used for free decoration of the
pottery, but only in competition with skeuomorphic patterns.
   Neither the potters’ wheel nor the slip nor kiln-burning are
known. Stone can be bored. Weaving is not attested. The
original house would seem to be a pit-dwelling with an oval
superstructure, but this type existed side by side with rect-
angular houses with gabled roofs, supported by posts.
   The distinctive archaeological traits are round-bottomed
pots without slip or incrustation, the shoe-last celt, the disk-
shaped mace, and Spondylus shell ornaments.
t However, at least on the northern          even into Holstein and Sweden, Real.
borders of the province, hoards of shoe-___V ,  Pp. 51. Cf. PZ. vi, p. 40 (Bagemiihl,
last celts are occasionally dug up,          near Potsdam).
Altschl. i (1924), p. 67. Such extend
                                                   48

                                      II. DANUBIAN            Is
 Pottery       In Moravia linear pottery is succeeded by a new style to
            which the name ‘Stroke-ornamented ware’ (Stichbandkeramik)
            has been given. The culture it represents may be designated
            Danubian Ib. In texture the new fabric does not differ mate-
            rially from linear ware save that a slip was now sometimes
            employed. The shapes on the other hand are more angular
            and more sophisticated (Fig. 19a). The pear-shaped bottle
            disappears almost completely.‘ The trinity of lugs favoured in
            the older fabric is abandoned, and pairs become the order of
            the day. Sometimes the lugs are enlarged to form little loop
            handles, not indeed suitable for holding in the hand, but well
            adapted to carry stout cords of a sling.
 Decora-       Curvilinear motives disappear. The decoration is now strictly
     tion   skeuomorphic, and reveals its origin in a string cradle most
            patently; the very lines imitate strings. Instead of continuous
            lines the patterns are made up of groups of intermittent lines.
            The whole looks like a dotted ribbon. The individual lines
            consist of a series of shallow oval points engraved in the soft
            clay with a pointed implement.
               In addition to this peculiar incised decoration, cases of false
            painting with unfixed earth colours, applied after the firing of
            the vase, are recorded from Moravia,? Bohemia,3 and Lower
         Bavaria.* In each the paint was applied over incised designs.
            Finally, plastic decoration was used as in Danubian Ila. In
         Bohemia’ and on the Neckar® the lug handles have in two
         cases been worked up into animals’ heads.
   Later    This simpler type of vase and decoration occurs in Moravia,
  phases Galicia, Silesia, Bohemia, Saxo-Thuringia, and on the Middle
            Rhine. But Danubian Ib pottery shows much greater plas-
            ticity than its precursor. In Silesia the pedestalled bowl of
            Danubian II was taken over and decorated in the stroke-orna-
            mented style.? The same shape recurs in the Rhenish ceme-
            teries, but in a very much simpler form. At the same time the
            ornament was elaborated in a purely decorative manner to
            form maeanders or chequer patterns that reveal little of the
            skeuomorphic originals.
‘Beakers’      In Bohemia we find a variety of shapes—approximately
            * There is one from Kovanice, PA,           4 Near Regensburg unpublished.
            XXVill, Pp. 29. 0                           5 Stocky, BAP. x. 2.
            2 Hédnitz, Palliardi, op. cit., p. 6        6 Schliz, Grossgartach, fig. 19.
            3 Mannus, iii, pp. 225 f.                   7 SV. vii, fig. 71.
                                    Cc

Fic. 24.    Late Danubian Ib pottery. a, 6, Cernyval, 2. c, Kralupy, 4.
                       Narodni Museum, Prague




                                          Narodni Museum, Prague.   4at
 Fic. 25.    Réssen vases, Praha-Troja.
                            DANUBIAN              I                        49
square vases," bell-shaped beakers (Fig. 24c) and huge bell-
shaped pithoi with plastic rope ornament below the rim, quite
in the style of Michelsberg jars.’
   The decoration too in Bohemia loses its first rigidity. On Zoned
the beakers horizontal ribbons, chequer patterns, and zigzags ornament
are common (Fig. 24), and the design sometimes invades the
base of the vessel in the form of radial ribbons in which the
skeuomorphic origin is still perceptible. Hand in hand with
these modifications in pattern goes a change in technique: the
strokes become ever deeper, sometimes wedge-shaped, and
are frequently filled with a white incrustation. Zigzag bands
of finger-nail impressions are interesting for their Sicilian
analogues.
    On the Rhine typical stroke-ornamented ware occurs at the Hinkel-
Rheingewann cemetery near Worms and a few other sites.3 stein
But here it is associated with a different fabric termed Hinkel- ware:
 stein ware after another large neolithic necropolis near Worms.
Among the distinctive forms of this pottery we note globular
 pots with slightly out-turned rims and footed beakers like
 large egg-cups. Instead of the intermittent line, ribbons of
 very fine continuous incised lines running parallel to one
 another are common (Fig. 31 d is a good example). Though
 curvilinear motives are exceptional, curious patterns which may
 have a naturalistic origin appear. Finally, there is a perceptible
 tendency towards a reserved decoration, i.e. the real ornament
 is a zigzag ribbon left blank between standing and hanging
 triangles.
    No peculiar implements, weapons, or ornaments can be con- Imple-            ments
nected with the dotted ribbon ware as a whole, but in Bohemia
and on the Rhine the shoe-last celts and chisels of phase Ib
are narrower than before and exhibit an elliptical section. In
addition an almost symmetrical wedge-shaped axe-hammer Arrow-
appears in the Rhenish cemeteries. Disk-shaped mace-heads heads
are not associated with this culture. In the Rhineland at least
Danubian Ib folk had taken to the use of the bow. At Hinkel-
stein the transverse arrow alone was employed.‘
   The Hinkelstein graves contained no Spondylus shells, and beads
                                                                 Shell
                                                             Pe-
red ochre very seldom. Instead of Spondylus, fossil Unio, In
ctunculus and Cerithium shells     were used for neckla ces.
Bohemia, however, Spondylus ornaments were still worn.’
t Stocky, BAP. xii, 17.                   gabe.
2 Ibid. xv. 38.                           4 Wormser Festgabe, p. 12.
3 For these see Kohl, Wormser Fest-       5 Stocky, PZC., p. 73 (Kadan).
   3443                               H
          50                             DANUBIAN I
 Graves       In burial rites some changes are associated with stroke-
           ornamented ware. In Bohemia‘ and the State of Saxony’ it
           accompanied cremated bones, the ashes being preserved in pots,
           though inhumation was still regularly practised even in
           Bohemia. At Hinkelstein the skeletons lay on their backs with
           the legs extended.       They belonged to a taller and more
           dolichocephalic folk than those interred in Danubian La graves
           in the same area. The corpses were strictly orientated with the
           heads to the north-west.
Distribu-     Danubian Ib has a more restricted distribution, particularly
      tion in the south and on the Rhine, than spiral-maeander pottery.
           In Moravia it is in fact comparatively rare, and Austria was
           scarcely touched by it. On the other hand, it is found in
           Bavaria in caves whither Danubian Ia never penetrated.3 In
           Silesia its distribution covers only the southern part of the
           province. No stroke-ornamented ware was found at Nosswitz
           in the north. Still a quite typical vase turned up at Klein Rietz
           in Pomerania, apparently accompanied by Spondylus shells.‘
           And one isolated pot found its way as far as West Prussia.‘
 Chrono-      Chronologically no sharp division can be drawn between
      logy Danubian Ia and Ib.       In Moravia’ the latter fabric is found
           together with the later styles of spiral-maeander ware in some
           hut-foundations. In others it is associated with Danubian
           wares of Period II. Its intermediate position is thus assured.
              In Silesia in the great settlement at Jordansmiihl Danubian
           Ib was associated with Danubian II ware in five huts. Danu-
           bian Ia and Danubian II occurred together in seven other
           huts.’
              A mixture of the two styles is very common in Bohemia,
           Thuringia, and Bavaria. In the first-named country a partial
           synchronism between the two is placed beyond doubt by the
           fact that vases showing each class of incised decoration were
           painted over in precisely the same manner with spiral patterns.
          Still, cases have been observed in which hut-foundations con-
          taining spiral-maeander ware have been disturbed by later
          dwellings fitted with stroke-ornamented ware.’ Conversely, the
          later fabric is sometimes associated with Danubian II painted
          wares.) But in Saxo-Thuringia Danubian Ib is said to be
          the older fabric.
          * Schranil, Bohmen, p. 46.             6 Palliardi, WPZ. i, l.c., p. 7.
          4 Mannus, xviii, p. 86.                TSIVAivaleopen2s
          3 Mannus, xv, p. 211; BUF, iv, p.11.   8 Stocky, Chron., p. 15.
          4 Mannus i, p. 234.                    9 Stocky, PZC, p. 76 (Cerny Val).
          5 Lemke-Festschrift, fig. 28.
                                   DANUBIAN I                              &
    In Bavaria, too, a priority of spiral-maeander over ‘Hinkel-
 stein’ ware has been stratigraphically demonstrated at three or
 more sites."
   On the Middle Rhine near Worms Dr. Koehl? inferred
from the intersection of pit-dwellings that the Hinkelstein ware
was older than the spiral-maeander—a complete inversion of
the Moravian relationship. At other South German sites? the
sequence of cultures was rather different.
   In economics Danubian Ib agrees with Danubian Ia save, Summary
perhaps, for a greater prominence of hunting. In religion,
figurines and, in art, the spiral motives have been abandoned.
In technique the only advance is the pottery slip. The bow
replaces the mace as a weapon, and for ornaments Spondylus
tends to give place to shells of local species.
  According to Schliz,* stroke-ornamented ware preserves a Relation
skeuomorphic decoration which had been common to all Danu- ioe
bian I fabrics, but in linear ware was abandoned for a more                    Danubian
purely ornamental system. At Hinkelstein we should see the                     la
second branch in a relatively young phase of its evolution.
The assumed primacy of the skeuomorphic or zigzag system
is accepted also by Matz,5 and thus Schliz’s account is perhaps
not far from the truth. The pozntillé element in the late
linear ware of Moravia and Bohemia, as well as in that of
Vinéa I, would yield the patterns characteristic of stroke-
ornamented ware by the mere elimination of the continuous
linear borders. The peculiar feature of stroke-ornamented
ware is that it developed original and purely ceramic forms.
The     late spiral-maeander           pottery, on the other hand, that
co-existed with it and often mixed with it, preserved its original
repertoire of primitive shapes without a sign of improve-
ment.     The use of the bow, if universal, is another significant
 distinction.
    Thus the makers of the Ib ware were distinguished by
-creativeness or at least receptivity. Perhaps such greater adapt-
 ability and originality may be explained by the absorption in
 the original Danubian stock of some new ethnic element. This
 might well be derived from epipalaeolithic survivors occupying
 the highland regions which the peasants had to cross. ‘These
 survivors did possess the bow and did use arrows armed with
 transverse heads. And contact between the Danubians of the
t Reinerth, Chron., p. 59.                  Age”
2 Mannus, iv, pp. 60 ff.                    4 PZ. li, p. 143.
3 Cf. e.g. PZ. iii, p. 32; Real. vii, pp.   5 Friihkret. Siegel, p. 233.
            52                            DANUBIAN I
            plain and the Tardenoisian hunters of the hills has actually
            been demonstrated in Franconia.’ At the same time the hoards
            have shown that the Danubians were in touch with the peoples
            of the Nordic province. Still the complex typified by stroke-
            ornamented ware remains essentially Danubian in character.
                                  III.   THE   ROSSEN    CULTURE
             We have seen that in Danubian I b ware the incisions were
          steadily becoming more emphatic, and white incrustation was
          used. "Through a further accentuation of those tendencies
          arose the pottery termed Réssen ware that characterizes a
          rather specialized culture. The name is an unhappy one; for
          the cemetery at Réssen near Merseburg was excavated many
          years ago, and it is now known? that almost all the manifold
          neolithic groups of Central Germany occupied the site in turn.
          The culture first recognized at Réssen has, however, now been
          found at many other sites, where its attributes are more easily
          disentangled from chance adhesions.
  Pottery    The Réssen pottery in technique conforms to Danubian I
          tradition, though a slip is more regularly employed and the
   Forms surface is sometimes burnished. The most distinctive form is
          a deep hemispherical bowl of Danubian pattern, the wall of
          which has been extended upwards to form a neck while the
          rim has been carefully splayed out. In the most characteristic
          examples, as they occur in Saxo-Thuringia and Bohemia, a
          low ring-foot is added for the vessel to stand on (Fig. 25).
          In South-west Germany this element is rare. Deep dishes, in
          Central Germany standing on a ring-foot, are equally charac-
            teristic. Handles were not used, but the bowls have the usual
           lugs, generally on the shoulder.
    Orna-     The technique,} used for the decoration, may be termed
mentation  ‘furrowing’: when a line was wanted, it was made by a pro-
 Furrow-   gressive series of jabs with a sharp implement held slanting, so
       ing that a continuous furrow with an uneven bottom resulted. At
           other times the stylus, or more often two bound together, was
           jabbed into the damp clay so as to produce a series of discrete
           impressions. In both cases the incisions were filled with white
           matter. Indeed the very object of the peculiar methods of
           incising was to make the inlay hold.
 Patterns     Horizontal and zigzag bands still run round the vessel, but
            * Gumpert, l.c., p. 1 PSs ey           4 Probably chalk; cf. analyses given in
            a Niklassen, Mannus, xi-xii, ‘Neuere   PZ. v, p. 395, of the paste from
            Ausgrabung’ usw.                       Eberstadt vases.
            3 Gétze, ZfE. xxxii, p. (247).
                            DANUBIAN      I                                53
the surface is often broken up vertically—a practice fore-
shadowed by the vertical fillets hanging from the neck in quite
early Danubian Ib vases. Moreover, incisions often cover so
much of the surface that the real pattern is the reserved space
as on some Hinkelstein vases. Schuchhardt! is doubtless right
in regarding the decoration of the Réssen vases as imitated
from basketry; plaited work has replaced the cords or simple
straws of the cradle we have pursued so long.
   The stone implements found in graves and settlements of Jmple-
the Réssen type in South Germany are all purely Danubian, ments
with the addition of triangular flint arrow-heads. Even from Arrow-
Réssen come various shoe-last celts, some very long and per- heads
forated, and disk-shaped mace-heads. On the other hand, the
Museum fiir Vélkerkunde in Berlin possesses triangular and
transverse arrow-heads from the same site, though it is not
clear whether they come from ‘Rossen’ graves.
   Bracelets? and buttons of marble were undoubtedly worn Marble
by the corpses buried at Réssen and in some graves in North bracelets
Bohemia.3 Bracelets of stags’ antler and Spondylus shell, neck-
laces of stags’ teeth and imitations of the same in marble,
buttons carved out of boars’ tusks,+ and a copper ring from
Rossen probably belong to the same context. ‘The marble may
have come from the Fichtelgebirge; Gotze thought it more
probably Aegean,’ but the Bihar mountains are really a more
likely source.
   Réssen pottery is often dug up in pit-dwellings of the familiar Houses
oval type. On the Goldberg ® in Wurtemberg the houses were
partly excavated in the earth. The pits, rectangular in plan,
measured from 4-2 x 3-2 m7”. to 5-2 x 4:9 m”., but post-holes out-
side them suggested a sort of apsidal superstructure. Some
huts are said to have been provided with regular covered cel-
lars. At Grossgartach near Heilbronn Schliz found Réssen
ware in rectangular, half-subterranean huts with rooms at dif-
ferent levels and a central hearth in the lowest room.
   The Goldberg? was a fortified settlement, and some authori-
ties hold that the fortifications there and at Monsheim near
Worms were built by the Réssen folk.                    5
   The regular method of burial at the    eponymo  us  site and in Graves
tT PZ 1(1900), Pp. 47-               5 Zh. XXXi, p. (239).
IZA. pls Vi, 82.                     6 Real. v, p. 172.            a
3 At Zatec and Prosmiky near Saaz    7 RGK-Bi.li (1903),   p. 99; lii, p. 348;
(Real. ii, p. 63) and Praha-Troja_   lvi, p. 45; lix, p. 401. Schumacher,
(Stocky, PZC., p. 73).               Rheinlande, i, p. 45.
4 ZfE. xxx, p. (606).
            54                           DANUBIAN I
          Bohemia was interment in the contracted position in trench-
          graves. There were also cremation graves at Rossen, but some
          at least of these were furnished with the Jordansmihl variety
          of Danubian II pottery.’                                  Hs
  Crani-     According to Schliz? the Réssen skulls are quite distinct
    ology from the other Danubian, and approximate closely to those
          from the Nordic megalithic graves;they show a wedge-shaped
            profile in norma verticalis.   As a matter of fact, however, at
           least three distinct types are represented at Réssen, none of
           which are typical ‘Nordics’ such as appear in Westphalia or
           Mecklenburg. They agree quite as well with other true
           Danubian skulls.
 Economy      In the Rhineland, Schumacher says, the bones of game pre-
           dominated over those of domestic animals in the Rossen settle-
           ments. At Rossen itself the ornaments of stags’ teeth and
           boars’ tusks reveal a population more given to hunting than
           were the older Danubians. But all Danubian Ia domestic
           animals are also attested for Réssen.
Distribu-     Rossen pottery is restricted to Saxo-Thuringia, northern
      tion Bohemia west of the Elbe, Bavaria, and the Upper and Middle
           Rhine. East of the Elbe and south of the Berounka it is not
           found at all.
Summary       To sum up: for the Réssen folk hunting is on a par with
           stock-rearing and agriculture. Trade remains rudimentary.
              Specialization of weapons for war is questionable.
              There is no evidence for religious beliefs, but the dead were
           accorded ritual burial in the contracted attitude.
              The artistic aim is an opposition between light and shade
           based upon basketry patterns.
              Industry has advanced on Danubian Ia through the adop-
           tion of the slip for pottery. The house types are, as before,
           pit-dwellings or rectangular structures supported by posts.
              Distinctive archaeological features are vessels with rudimen-
           tary necks and ring-feet ornamented in jabbed and furrowed
            technique, shoe-last celts, disk mace-heads, arrow-heads, marble
            bracelets and beads made from trophies of the chase—deers’
            teeth, boars’ tusks, &c.
   Origin     The relation of the Réssen culture to the two described
   North   above has long been the subject of controversy. Usually only
     Sea   the ceramic evidence has been taken into account. Most
 megalith authorities+ seek the origin of
   culture
                                          the characteristic footed vase
            * Mannus, xi-xii, l.c.             3 Scheidt, Rassen, p. 46.
            * AFA. ix, pp. 202 and 219         4 Gotze, ZfE. xxxiii,p. (416); Schuch-
                                  DANUBIAN        I                              65
and the furrowed and jabbed decoration in the pottery from
North Sea megaliths. Schliz' would recognize in addition in-
fluence from corded ware. To Reinerth the rectangular houses
are also Nordic. The transverse arrow-heads from Rossen, if
really belonging to our culture, would afford a further link
with that area, though equally capable of derivation from local
epipalaeolithic stocks. At the same time every one admits a
substantial Danubian element. The Réssen culture would be
a hybrid with the Nordic element dominant.
_ Nevertheless, as long ago as 1900 P. Reinecke? proposed to Danubian
invert the relation between Réssen and the North Sea cultures
and to derive from Central Germany the forms found in the
megalithic graves to the north-west. Subsequently Stocky4
has shown that Réssen pottery may be regarded as a late variant
of Danubian Ib. The rise of the deep jabbed and furrowed
ornament, distinctive of Réssen, can be traced step by step in
stroke-ornamented ware; the ring-foot had already been taken
over by that fabric from Danubian II models, and appears in
the Central German Rossen form already degenerate.
   Attempts at polychromy had already been made under Danu-
bian II influence on spiral-maeander and stroke-ornamented
vases. The whole point of the Réssen system of incision was
to enable white paste to be firmly incrusted so as to produce a
contrast of light and dark surfaces. For the rest, Reinerth‘
admits that the Réssen culture of the Rhineland and Bavaria
is thoroughly Danubian. Stags’ teeth were strung together for
necklaces at the Danubian II site of Lengyel. Marble, too,
occurs quite frequently in Danubian II deposits in Moravia
and Hungary. Stone bracelets occur already in Vinéa I, and,
judging from discoveries in Thessaly, Egypt, and Spain, such
bracelets belong to the same complex as the shell bracelets
worn by Danubian Ia folk. They are foreign to the northern
complex.®
   Finally, socketed ladles, occurring sporadically in the mega-
lithic tombs of Holland, Hanover, and Denmark, as well as
shoe-last celts and plough-shares exported into the Nordic
province,’ are conclusive proof that an influence emanating
hardt, PZ. i, pp. 46f.; Bremer, PZ.         note Cervinka’s criticisms in Real. ii,
v, pp. 424 f., Real. viii, p. 238; Aberg,   De03e
Nordic, pp. 151 f.                          5 Chron., p. 24.
t Schliz, ZfE. xxxviii (1906), p. 328.      6 The bracelet from the Uckermark,
2p. 51, above.                              Schumann, p. 28, is quite isolated and
3 ZfE. xxxii, p. (602).                     of doubtful age.
4 Obzor, 1922; Chron., pp. 10 f., but       7 Cf. pp. 47 above and 114 below.
             56                           DANUBIAN      I
             from the south-east was really affecting the ‘megalithic’ culture
             of the north; for, as we shall see, such ladles are at home
             only in the Danube basin.
                Hence we prefer to reckon the Réssen culture to the Danu-
             bian family. Nevertheless, the divergences of the former from
             the main tradition are substantial when appraised from a cul-
             tural standpoint. However completely the arts and crafts of
             the Réssen folk may agree with those of the Danubians, the
             passion for the chase is a trait which could never have arisen
             amongst the essentially agricultural peasants. We need not
             deny a ‘Nordic’ element in the Réssen folk. Only this element
             was by no means necessarily derived from the North Sea coasts.
             It may just as well have been supplied by the epipalaeolithic
             aborigines of the Thuringian-Bavarian highlands; for the dis-
             tribution of that group of epipalaeolithic remains coincides
             approximately with that of Réssen pottery. ‘The use of basketry
             on the Elbe in an epipalaeolithic context may also be significant.
                                  IV.   THE   RHENISH       STYLES
Eberstadt         In the Rhineland a multiplicity of local styles arose through
      type   the interaction of the Spiral-maeander, Hinkelstein, and Rés-
             sen groups. The ‘Eberstadt style’ (Figs. 26-7), so-called after
             a site in the Wetterau excavated by Bremer,’ employs the
             Réssen technique, but the patterns are less close. Jars with
             ring-bases appear, as at Réssen, but there are round-bottomed
             pots and cylindrical beakers, square dishes, and curious sack-
             like vessels.?, For the first time we meet the perforated vases
             that become so common in the Bronze Age. ‘The implements
             are purely Danubian even to the disk-shaped mace-heads. The
             makers of this ware practised cremation; their graves on the
             Wetterau were precisely like those of the spiral-maeander
             people in the same locality, described on p. 44, save that the
             necklaces were made from round pebbles instead of flat shale
             plaques. At Rheingénheim in the Rhenish Palatinate crema-
             tion and inhumation graves containing analogous pottery oc-
             curred side by side (Fig. 26).
                The relative age of this style is given by a socketed ladle of
              Danubian IT type from the settlement of Insheim, in the same
             province A valuable link is thereby established with the
             py ladles from the North Sea megalithic tombs mentioned
             above.
              2 PA.Ve Pp. 4209 ff.                  band. iv, p. 53.
                Cf. Kossinna, Mannus, Ergdnzungs-   3 BRGK. vii, p. 178.
“OILY “gz   JpeysIoqy
                  ‘sosvA    ‘wrsyUEsUTOYY
                                    Todd, MOI   WOIT       ‘UOT]VUINYUT
                                                                puv    TOMO]MOI   WO}
                           UOT}eUWOIO
                                   “SaAvIs
                                         "JAI     Johodg
Fic. 28.   Grossgartach vases, Grossgartach, after Schliz.
                                                             Ot
                              DANUBIAN         I                              57
  Another interesting local group is that called after the village Grossgar-
ofGrossgartach near Heilbronn.             The round-bottomed vases—               tach type
slightly carinated bowls and pear-shaped flasks—bear a delicate
incised and incrusted decoration, reminiscent of fine netting,
covering the neck and part of the base of the vessels (Fig. 28).!




                                      Metres
                                           5       6        3        9   10

    Fic. 29. A. Spiral-Maeander and B. Grossgartach huts, Grossgartach,
                                after Schliz


The patterns are often suggestive of boats or even distorted
natural objects, but probably the whole decoration is inspired
by textile nettings.
   The Grossgartach huts? were shallow rectangular excava- Houses
tions with a porch in front and two ‘rooms’ at different levels.
   In the Rhine valley the simple spiral-maeander ware lived Spiral-
on side by side with the so-called mixed cultures and survived maeander            ware
              1 Schliz in Heilbronn-Festschrift, p. 22 and pl. Ix.
              2 Schliz, Grossgartach, fig. 4.
  3443                                 I
        58                             DANUBIAN I
          them. Near Worms Koehl! found that the several wares
          succeeded each other in the following order: Hinkelstein,
          Réssen, Grossgartach, Spiral-maeander. Schliz’s sequencenear
          Heilbronn was Grossgartach followed by Réssen and Spiral-
          maeander side by side. In Western Thuringia Spiral-
          maeander preceded Grossgartach pottery. At Hénheim in
          Alsace Hinkelstein ware overlaid Spiral-maeander.’
Relation     Most authorities hold that an influx of new colonists, perhaps
 to other from Thuringia, bringing Spiral-maeander ware, destroyed the
  groups earlier cultures of the Hinkelstein and Réssen families and their
          derivates. Still it isnot yet clear that the earliest Spiral-maeander
          ware of the Rhineland, as represented for instance at Flamborn,
          is not quite as old as the cultures it should have displaced.
             Be that as it may, the makers of Spiral-maeander ware did
          at one time or another occupy the whole Rhineland. They
          preserved the main outlines of their culture, as they had been
          established in Moravia, with extraordinary fidelity; but never-
         theless absorbed some elements, such as the use of the bow,3
          from the mixed cultures. Moreover, the pottery undergoes
           some modification or rather degeneration, perhaps under Hin-
           kelstein influence. While at Flamborn the features character-
           izing the middle phase of Danubian Ia are still preserved,
          much of the Rhenish pottery is decorated in the peculiar style,
           best illustrated at Plaidt on the Nette. It is this decadent ware
Omalian that is found in the cremation graves round Hanau. The same
  culture late ware reached the province of Liege in Belgium with the
           culture termed locally ‘Omalian’ (Fig. 31).4 In reality Omalian
           is nothing more or less than Danubian IJa inalate stage of
           evolution. Yet the Danubians, who arrived only in alate stage
           of their career, found the natives of Belgium still in an epi-
           palaeolithic phase of culture; Spiennian (i.e. Campignyan) re-
          mains have actually been found overlying Omalian hearths!5
           It was thus that the Neolithic civilization reached this corner
           of Western Europe at least. Still farther west the Spondylos
           bracelets found at Frignicourt on the Marne and some sherds
          from Villejuif near Paris have a very Danubian look. Dr. Stocky
         has in fact identified some sherds sent him from the Paris basin as
         * Mannus, iv, pp. 60f., but cf. Rein-   4 For a good summary see Marcel de
         erth, Chron., DsesO}                    Puydt, Annales de la Fédération arch.
         2 EZ NI Daa OF                          de Belgique, Congres de Liége, 1909.
         3 Arrow-heads are indeed quite ex-      Note that transverse arrow-heads and
         ceptional, but two transverse and two   flint sickle-teeth were found here.
         triangular specimens were found at      5 BSA. Brux. xxxix, p. 63, n. 2.
         Flamborn; Wérmser Festgabe, p. 26.
                           DANUBIAN I                           59
Danubian.’ So perhaps some day, when French archaeologists
turn to their pots, we shall be able to trace our Danubians still
farther west. And they certainly reach southern Holland.’
  _In the foregoing sections we have assumed that the Danu- Direction
bian I culture spread northward and westward. We are now of move- _
in a position to justify our assumption.                       ment
   In Moravia, Bohemia, and Bavaria the earliest spiral-maean- Division
der or linear ware was succeeded by a fabric, here christened. into
Stroke-ornamented ware, that coexisted with later phases of periods
Spiral-maeander pottery. But on the Rhine the succession of
wares was apparently reversed. Hence the first colonization of
the Rhineland cannot be earlier than the second phase of cul-
ture represented in Moravia. Furthermore, in Moravia Danu-
bian I culture was replaced or absorbed by another quite dis-
tinct civilization which we call Danubian II and whose advent
we take to mark a new period—‘Period II’. The influence of
Danubian II culture is seen in the later Stroke-ornamented
fabrics of Silesia and Bohemia and in the Réssen ware of
Thuringia.   In Silesia, Bohemia, and Bavaria the late Danu-
bian I wares are not seldom associated with offshoots of Danu-
bian II (Jordansmiihl and Miinchshéfen wares). ‘That means
that in these regions Danubian I culture persisted into Period
II. But Danubian II influence is already perceptible in the
Hinkelstein pottery that should mark the earliest Neolithic
settlement on the Rhineland.
   Hence the Danubian colonization of the Rhine basin falls in
the main into Period II—an epoch when Danubian I culture, Danubian
as such, had already vanished from Moravia. ‘The correctness Rhine in
                                                                 T reaches

of this late dating is conclusively proved by the socketed ladle Period II
from Insheim, very likely imported from the Danubian Il
people of Bavaria. Wahle and Reinerth think that the delay in
the colonization of the Rhine basin was due to the density of
the forest on the surrounding watersheds that would oppose
an impassable barrier to immigrants till the effects of the dry
                                                             of
Subboreal phase made themselves felt. The relative age
                                                 excludes the
the settlements in the several areas, therefore,
possibility of reversing the Danubian movement. The Rhine-
                                                        vice versa.
land was colonized from the Danube basin, not
Stylistic consideration  shows  that  the  occupat ion of  Belgium
was a yet later stage in  the same   advance .
               1 PA. xxxiv (1925), P- 572, n. I.
               2 van Giffen, in Rev. Anthr. 1928, Nos. 7-9.
                                                 60

                                  V.   THE    BUKK     CULTURE
               Before discussing the origin of the first Neolithic culture in
            Central Europe, we must glance at an ill-explored region to
            the east.
               The easternmost settlements with linear ware, yet identified,
            lie near Sommerein'        between the Leitha and the Danube, and
          at Agota near Zseliz* on the lower Hron (Gran or Garom).
          In each nothing earlier than the ‘music note’ style has been
          identified up to date.
             But from this point eastward along the léss slopes of Southern
          Slovakia and North Hungary extends a little-known civiliza-
          tion that exhibits close affinities with that described as Danu-
          bian Ia. It has been christened the Bukk culture because it
          was first identified in caves of the Bikk mountains near
          Miskolc.
    Sites    The most important sites that have yielded remains of this
          culture are the cave of Aggtelek, and open settlements, prob-
          ably in all cases hut-foundations, at Satoraljatjhely,* Bodrog-
            keresztur, Rakamaz-Timar, and Gava, all in the plain of the
            Upper Tisza.      But its traces are found far up tributaries, the
            Hernad, &c., among the mountains of Eastern Slovakia,’ and
           indeed right into the Tatra.
  Pottery     The typical Bukk ware is exceeding fine, thin-walled, black
           in colour, and usually well burnished. The most distinctive
           shape is a deep hemispherical bowl, very like the Danubian la
           bowl in outline, but flattened or indented on the base (Fig. 32).
           Shallow dishes of the same general plan are also known. ‘The
           only handles were pierced lugs, generally four in number; but
           some vessels were provided with short spouts, just below the
           rim, leading to a sort of strainer. Large pithoi are not rare.
Ornamen-      The designs are very finely incised and often filled with white,
    tation more rarely with red, incrustation.©    The principal figures are
           very complicated maeanders, key patterns, or distorted volutes
           (Fig. 30) formed by single lines or ribbons of parallel lines. But
           the vase surface is often broken up into vertical panels, and a
           multitude of tiny figures are used to fill up the gaps. Remark-
           able are the arcaded arches, radiating from the base, the effect
           of which Hoernes’ has compared to the lotos cups of Kamares
            * WPZ.x (1923), p. 66.                    4 AE. xxvii, p. 285.
            WBZ Xie Deer Tate                         5 Eisner in JA. ii, p. 341.
            3 Cf. Barlangkutatds, 1916, pp. 7 ff.;    © Wosinski, Ink. Ker, p. 173 and pls.
            Torténelmi és Régészeti Kézlemények,      cxivi1-1x. The material was Bolus.
            Miskolc, 1927, pp. 27 ff.                 7 Urgeschichte, p. 250
                                DANUBIAN         I                           61
ware. But really the ‘arcades’ may be only distorted volutes as
on the bowl figured here. Exceptionally a highly conventiona-
lized representation of the Mother-Goddess with upraised arms"
is introduced into this purely geometric framework.
   Franz assigns to the Bukk culture two other fabrics. Both
are found at Bodrogkeresztur, presumably with the standard
Bukk vases, though in the two metres of deposit at that site
there was room for admixture of foreign elements.? The first
is represented by a hemispherical bowl from Bodrogkeresztur,
a bottle of Danubian II shape from Tisza Dob (Fig. 55), and




                 Fic. 30. Bukk Vase, Aggtelek after Franz.   3

a bowl from Marosvasarhely.3 The designs are arranged in
panels in which key patterns, chequers, and other figures are
left reserved against fine cross-hatchings not quite in the tech-
nique of true Biukk ware. This fabric we still term ‘negative
Bukk ware’.
   The other fabric is illustrated by a bottle (apparently of
Danubian II type) from Bodrogkeresztur and the pedestalled
bowl from Tiszadada reproduced in Fig. 33. The designs are
wavy ribbons bordered by rather coarse lines quite different
from the sharp engraving on true Biikk ware. The fine polish
is also lacking. Some sherds of this ware are painted in North
Hungarian style. Both fabrics may well represent a rather later
variant of true Bikk pottery.
t Térténelmi és Rég. Kézl. l.c., pl.       Tarsulat, Evkényve, i, p. 7 (summary
V-VI.                                      on p. 214).
2 'The best account of the site is given   3 Dolgozatok, vi (1915), p. 234, fig.
by L. Bella in Az orszdgos m. régészeti    6c.
           62                               DANUBIAN        I
  Imple-     The great caves in the Bikk mountains were inhabited at
    ments various dates, so that there are doubts what implements belong
          to the Bikk culture. A sort of shoe-last celt was found at
          Aggtelek, and Dr. Eisner has discovered others in the Slo-
          vakian caves, but the implement is not very common 1n the
          area of the Biikk culture. An adze from Rakamaz Timar stands
          midway between a shoe-last celt and a bevelled celt of ‘Thes-
 Obsidian salian form. Obsidian was used for blades. Bone was fashioned
    Fish- into fish hooks‘ and simpler implements, and was sometimes
    hooks engraved, quite in the manner of the pottery.
Skeletons    There were many skeletons, belonging to long-headed and
          short-headed individuals,? at Aggtelek, but their date is un-
   Grains certain.   Remains of animals and grains were found in the
          same   cavern.  The users of the cave cultivated T7zticum mono-
           coccum, two varieties of Triticum vulgare, millet, beans, lentils,
         and peas.3 Their domestic animals were:
Animals        Canis familiaris                Bos frontosus
               Capra domestica                 Bos brachyceros
               Ovis aries                      Sus scrofa (dom.)
               Bos primigenius (dom.)          Sus scrofa palustris.
            All the léss settlements containing Bikk ware also yielded
         painted pottery of the North Hungarian type, and a synchro-
         nism between the two wares is demonstrated by the correspon-
         dence of their ornaments (see p. 106 below).
    Date    The similarity in form between the Bikk bowls and those
         of Danubian I would in itself incline us to assign the culture to
         Period I. Moreover, the Bikk huts at Bodrogkeresztur had
         been disturbed by graves dug late in Period II. On the other
         hand, Franz has observed crusting in Danubian II style on
         Bukk sherds. Nevertheless, we regard the Bukk culture as
         rooted in Period I. Its significance is that it attests the occupa-
         tion of the léss region of North Hungary by people akin to the
         Danubian I folk of Moravia. It was precisely in this area, as
         noted above, that influences from the south along the Danube
         should first become manifest after traversing the alluvial stretch
         in Hungary.
    Star    Allied to the later Bukk wares is what Professor Koztowski ‘
 pottery describes as Star pottery. It gets its name from the star-shaped

           t At Kenezl6-Fazekas on the Tisza.          pierre dans la caverne d Aggtelek, Buda-
           » Nyary, J., Les hommes de l’dge dela       Pest, 1877; ib. Az Aggteleki barlang,
           pierre dans la caverne d’ Aggtelek, Buda-   Buda-Pest, 1881, p. 66.
           Pest, 1877.                                 4 Mtodsa, p. 58 and pl. xt.
            3 Nyary, J., Les hommes de l’dge de la
Fic. 31.    Omalian pottery, Musées de Cinquantenaire, Brussels




IEG, Be     Bukk vase, Bodrogkeresztur.   A. M. N. Muzeum.    35




 PiGy 33)    Pedestalled bowl from Tiszadada, Nyiregyhaza.   Ol
                                        DANUBIAN   I                             63
    pattern reserved on the bottom of the bowls against a field
    hatched with rather sparse linear incisions. Besides open bowls,
    Koztowski assigns to this group high-handled vases which look
    distinctly like a third period form. Still the typical star-pattern
    bowls are found on the léss areas of Galicia accompanied by
    Danubian types of celt and even by Spiral-maeander and
    Stroke-ornamented pottery.’ The Polish fabric must therefore
    be regarded as a Danubian survival in this remote corner.
                                  VI.    CONCLUSION
        The neolithic civilization was diffused from ‘Moravia to Gradual
    Belgium, along the great natural routes described in Chapter I, nature of
    by a race of Danubian peasants. These were forced to occupy Danubian
    successively all the available loss lands through their own ex- expansion
    travagant methods of cultivation and the natural increase of
     the population. Their migrations were, however, perhaps ac-
     celerated by the intrusion into the eastern part of the province
     of fresh immigrants bringing with them a new civilization
     termed Danubian II.
        The whole expansion was a slow process occupying two
     periods of undetermined length. In its course secondary groups
     arose through contact between the Danubians and aboriginal
     tribes and under impulses from the new intruders on the east.
        On the other hand, in the course of the slow migration across
     various natural obstacles some elements of the original Danu-
     bian civilization were lost ; it is poorer at the end of its wander-
     ings in Belgium than at the beginning in Moravia and Silesia.
     Still, from the March to the Meuse a remarkable uniformity
     reigns.
        But where did the Danubians originate, and whence did they
     derive their domestic animals, their cultivated plants, and the
     arts of polishing stone and fashioning pots?
        Nearly all authors admit, what we have proved, that the Danu-     Origin of
4
    starting-point of the movement lay in the Danube basin. ‘To bians:
     Schliz, Danubian civilization was autochthonous in the Central East
     European léss lands, including Silesia, Bohemia, and Saxo- Central
     Thuringia. Menghin? adopts a similar position, defining the Europe?
    original focus as Bohemia, Moravia, and West Poland.
       But traces of epipalaeolithic men who might be the authors                     The
    of the Danubian culture are conspicuously lacking in this area.                   Baltic
    Some authors accordingly look to the Baltic to provide the
           1 WA. ix, pp. 20 ff.                        2 Urgeschichte, p. 774.
         64                 )            DANUBIAN I
            ancestors of the Danubians. Professor Kossinna* would derive
            them from the Scandinavian Shell Mound folk of Littorina
            times. The sole link is a rather far-fetched resemblance be-
            tween the Shell Mound pick of flint and its greenstone ana-
            logues from Nostvet on the one hand and the shoe-last celt on
            the other. Actually this hypothesis requires the Danubians to
            have traversed wide belts of forest land at the height of the
            Atlantic epoch.                                             cms
               Franz,? more wisely, looks back to Ancylus times. He insists
            on the similarity, long before noted by Reinecke, 3between the
            bone chisels from Maglemose and the shoe-last celt, and re-
            minds us further of the mace-heads from Danish sites and the
            ground and perforated pick from Holmegaard. He does not,
            however, advocate an immigration direct from the Baltic; but
            looks rather to the south-eastern outposts of Maglemose cul-
            ture, for instance in Poland, admitting also ‘Campignyan’ and
            other influences.
       The     Czech archaeologists, onthe other hand, are agreed in deriving
South-east the Danubian culture from the south-east.          Stocky4 in par-
            ticular has demonstrated in a masterly manner the deep-seated
            affinity between Bohemian ribbon ware and that of Butmir,
            Vinéa, Tordos, and other south-eastern sites. While denying
            to these sites any absolute priority, he regards them as mani-
            festations of a culture parallel to the Moravian and sprung
            from the same Hungarian root.
               The kinship between the Danubian culture of Moravia and
            those of the Middle Danube area has indeed been universally
            accepted. But until the relative chronology of the Upper and
            Middle Danubian cultures be established it remains theoreti-
            cally possible to invert the relationship postulated by the Czech
            school. The requisite chronological framework may however
            be deduced from the cultural sequences established in Moravia
             and Serbia respectively.
 Danubian       In the former area the end of the first period in which
     I and Danubian I culture had flourished was marked by the intru-
   Vinéa I sion of a new culture termed Danubian II. Now many of the
  Chrono- phenomena distinctive of Danubian II in Moravia make their
       logy first appearance in Serbia at the beginning of Vinéa II. It
             follows then that part of the long period represented by the
             four or more metres of Vinéa I must be parallel to Period I in
          * Die Indogermanen, p.'75; cf. Childe,   3 MZ. iii (1908), p. 45.
          Aryans, p. 171.                          4 ‘Studie v Ceskem neolitu’   in PA.
          2 MAGW. Wii, p. 26.                      1919-20; PZC., pp. 39-45.
                                       DANUBIAN             I                             65
Moravia; we shall see that there is probably an overlap between
Danubian II and Vinéa I. Danubian I in Moravia may
therefore be synchronized approximately with Vinca I; Period I
is a chronological division applicable to the whole Danubian
area."
   The significance of parallels between Vinéa I and Danu-
bian I being thus determined we proceed to recapitulate them.
   Neither the simple round-bottomed bowls nor the spiral Pottery
decoration occur early in Vinéa I. But bottles, similar to the
 Moravian, do occur there, and the use of lug-handles, some-
  times developed into fist-like forms, and of ornamental animal
  heads projecting from the vase walls is common to both cul-
  tures. The decorative technique of ware I at Vinca agrees
  with that used on Danubian I ware—but most closely with the
  latest style >—and the skeuomorphic style of the latter can be
  paralleled at Vinéa I. Crude clay figurines were made in both
  areas, and human shapes with upraised arms appear incised or
  in relief on the walls of vases.
      The distinctive stone implement in both areas was the shoe- Shoe-last
  last celt. The disk-shaped mace-head may probably be added celt
  as a further link.
      Shell bracelets were worn by the people of Vinca I as by the Shell
   Danubian I folk. The Spondylos shells used by the latter must bracelets
   have been imported from the Mediterranean, and have actually
   been found on the Lower Danube and perhaps in Vinéa I
   itself.
      The habitations in both areas were partly subterranean. Houses
   Vinéa illustrates the curvilinear plan, Tordos the rectilinear.
      A perfectly rational account of the genesis of the Vinéa I
   civilization has already been given. The agreement between
   it and the contemporary culture of the Upper Danube implies
   that the latter was derived from the same south-eastern source.
   That inference may be fortified by certain theoretical con-
- siderations.
                                                                   Gourd
       Schliz3 and Schuchhardt ‘ have shown that the Danubian la
 vases imitate gourd forms.                    The gourd, however, will certainly pottery
                                                             gourd
 not harden north of the Bakony. The true region for even
 vessels lies south of the Balkans, but it is grown and used
                                                                 .
 to-day in Serbia and all over the Hungarian plain for vessels
  « It will, perhaps, in the end turn out                * Cf. Stocky, PA. xxxiv, p. 572, and
  that    the levels     at Vintéa    containing         PZC, pp. 39 f.
  spirally decorated pottery, from 615                   3 ZfE. 1906, p. 342.
         5°5m.   deep,    belong     in time    to       4 PZ.1, p. 51.
  to
  Period II.
       3443                                          K
        66                                  DANUBIAN   I
         So it may be significant that clay imitations of gourds appear
         first just where the genuine article would cease to be available—
         in the region of the Biikk culture. That would explain the
    Palm absence of gourd forms at Vinéa. ‘The pattern on a linear vase
ornament from Heilbronn! is unmistakably representative of a palm—a
         reminiscence of a more southern home.
Originof |Some at least of the domestic animals and plants of the
 animals Danubians must have been brought from the south-east. Of
         the breeds of cattle, that derived from the Primigemius stock
         might theoretically have been tamed locally. ‘The ancestry of
         Bos brachyceros is still disputed, but he was certainly bred in
         very early times by Minoans and other Aegean folk. The
         European neolithic pig, Sus palustris, has been traced to the
         wild boar of Hither Asia, Sus vitatus, in which case he would
          certainly be an import from the south-east. The Danubian
          swine have generally been assigned to the palustris stock, but
          after a very careful study of the skeletal remains, Staffe*
          concludes that they really belonged to a domesticated variety
          of the European boar, Sus scrofa ferox. The Danubian sheep
          admittedly belongs to the family of Ovis aries palustris, whose
          descent from the Asiatic urial, Ovis vignet, is still unchallenged.
   Home      None of the Danubian grains could be derived from a grass
 of grain growing wild farther north than the Balkans. The wild an-
          cestors of the Danubian wheat, Triticum monococcum, grow in
         Asia Minor, the Eastern Balkans, and Southern Serbia.                    The
          plant was cultivated at Troy and in neolithic Thessaly, but not
          apparently in the southern or western Mediterranean lands.
          Its use can therefore only have been brought to Poland and
          Saxo-Thuringia along the Danube. ‘The emmer identified in
          the Rhineland and Belgium may have reached those countries
          independently along the western sea route. ‘The Danubian
          barley was presumably introduced by the same route as the
          wheat. The exact agreement, rather later, between the barleys
          (Hordeum hexastichon) from Troy and Lengyel deserves notice.
Origin of _ The essentials of Danubian I culture can. therefore be de-
   spiral rived from the south-east up the Danube corridor. There is
          one exception. The spiral and maeander characteristic of
          Period I in Moravia are lacking in earlier phase of Vinéa I.
          Menghin suggests very plausibly that these motives had been
          inherited from the geometric repertoire of Upper Palaeolithic
          art in Central and Eastern Europe. Perhaps the transmission
             PZ AN, Pp. 137 and fig. 29c.          Nahrung, p. 1037.
         * Real.    xi, p. 382.     Cf. Menghin,   3 It will be recalled that something
                             DANUBIAN      I                               67
was effected by the epipalaeolithic tribes inhabiting the dunes Palaeo-
of North Hungary. Still, in view of the high antiquity of the lithic
running spiral in Sumerian goldwork," it is possible that the affinities
motive may have reached Central Europe from Anatolia. Matz,
however, holds that the spiral was simply a development of
the primary skeuomorphic zig-zag ribbon (p. 51) in response
to inherent aesthetic tendencies.       If this motive, to which the
East Mediterranean area and even Egypt? offers such abundant
parallels, be the basis of all Danubian ornament, it will form
a fresh link with the south-east.
   The neolithic civilization was introduced into the léss lands
of Northern Serbia and the Banat by colonists coming up the
Danube from the Black Sea and the Aegean. It was essentially
East Mediterranean in character albeit somewhat degraded.
A yet more impoverished version of the same culture extends
from the léss areas of Northern Hungary and Lower Austria
over all the suitable land of Central Europe, spreading, a shade
mote degenerate still, to the Rhine and the Meuse. The
southern frontier of the northern culture begins precisely where
the geographical conditions favoured colonization by people
 coming from the south by water. Its rise might therefore be
 attributed to a northward extension of the same colonizing
 current that led to the foundation of Vina.
   It is not, however, certain that the northern Danubians were
 as a whole identical with the Anatolian-Mediterranean settlers
 at Vinéa. The incoming colonists would have found epipalaeo-
 lithic tribes inhabiting the dunes of Northern Hungary. An
 admixture between newcomers and aborigines may certainly
 be assumed. It is even possible that the northern culture,
 Danubian I as a whole, may have been the result of the adoption
 by the indigenous tribes of the southern culture brought up
 the Danube. It is further possible that the beginnings of
 Danubian Ia—i.e. the first impact of southern folk on the
 North Hungarian hunters—go back to a period not yet tapped
 in the deposits of Serbia, underlying Vinéa I, and that the first
 southerners came with gourds rather than pots. _
                                                         as we
   Be that as it may, the Danubian corridor was in fact,
                                                         of the
 expected, the passage-way by which the civilization        was
                                                       ed,
 Eastern Mediterranean, albeit filtered and impoverish
 diffused to Northern and North-Western Europe.
                                        plex, p. 13 above.
 quite like the Danubian disk mace-
 head, as well as steatopygous female   ‘ Antiquity, ii, p. 60
 figurines, belonged to the same com-   2 e.g, JEA. xiv, p. 268, fig. 6.
                                                          V
                           THE CIVILIZATIONS                   OF PERIOD         II
                                                 I. VINCA II
                     HE southern influence which we traced in the last two
                     chapters appears intensified in Period II, which begins
                before the end of Vinéa I in Serbia, and with the intrusion of
               Danubian II into Moravia. At the same time there is a large
               extension of the settled area in the Middle Danube valley, a
               fact to be explained partly by the onset of drier climatic con-
               ditions in the Subboreal Epoch. The culture of Vinéa II,
               which is largely a continuation of that of Vinéa I, spreads
               inland from the Danube into Southern Serbia and up the Save
Extension      and the Drave. From Jablanica* near Medjuluzje and Gradac
of settle- in Serbia, Jakovo? and     Samatovéi* in Slavonia, and Donja
    men   ™~
               Klakari3 and Donja Mahala? on the Save in Bosnia, as well as
               from certain sites on the Bosna, comes much material that can
               best be paralleled in Vinéa II. But all these sites have yielded
               ceramic and lithic types that almost certainly belong to a later
               epoch, probably the Bronze Age. For the moment we shall
               neglect these, and confine our attention to objects whose
               attribution to Period II may be justified by the stratification
               at Vin¢a. We shall here describe the Vinéa II culture, remem-
          bering that Vinéa I probably outlasted Period I.
  Pottery    All the wares of Vinéa I, except red-slipped ware, survived
          into the second period. Fluted and burnish-decorated ware
          extendedalso to Jablanica. The coarse incised ware, represented
          at all the above sites, is more carefully ornamented than before.
               The dots, filling the ribbon, are made with a sort of comb as the
          regular spacing shows. The incisions are filled with white
          paste.
Lugs and     True handles are not yet in use. Perhaps, however, the old
  handles lugs had already started on a course of evolution that was
                                                                       to
          lead up to the thumb-grip handles familiar from Macedonia,
          an evolution already accomplished in Crete in neolithic times.
          The string-hole is now horizontal and is enlarged until big
          enough to allow of the insertion of a rope ; it was doubtless
               * AfA. 1902, pp. 517 ff. Prof. Vassits     2 Unpublished. Material at Zagreb
               excavated this site before he attained     3 WMBH. Xap DOs Ont
               that skill which he displayed at Vintéa,   4 Glas. Zem. Muz. BH. xxxvii (1
               and failed, at least in his report, to     pp. 137 f.
               distinguish the stratification.            5 Evans, Palace, i, fig. 7.
                   THE CIVILIZATIONS           OF PERIOD        II                   69
 designed to keep a rope sling in place. The terminal horn is
 retained and even exaggerated. The same development is
 observable at Tordos, Jablanica, and Jakovo as in Thessaly.*
 Parallels occur as far north as Grosswerdein (Oradia Mare).
 Anthropomorphic lids and vases with figures in relief become
 scarcer at the 5-5 m. level in Vinéa, but still occur up the
 Morava at Gradac. But possibly bowls standing on a pair of
 human legs from Vinéa,? Klakari, Csdka, and Tordos belong to
 the period under review; they have not been found in the course
 of scientific excavations. The ordinary pedestalled bowl occurs




                       Fic. 34. Growth of lugs in Syrmia,
                        from sketches made at Zagreb. 2

 in a typical Danubian II form (with hollow foot) at Samatovci,
 Klakari, Donja Mahali,3 Novi Seher, and Csdka, at the last
site sometimes ‘crusted’ as at Lengyel. Side by side with the
old fabrics crusted ware appears at Vinéa and Csdéka, while
painted wares are found at Tordos.
   In the stone work no certain advances are detectable apart Stone
from the use of obsidian that begins with Vinéa II and is also obsidian
attested for Csdka, Samatovdi, and Klakari.                  The latter sites             Bored
have yielded a multitude of perforated axes and mace-heads,                               axe-heads
some of which may belong here though no perforated im-
plements were found 7” situ in Vinéa II.
    The horn harpoons remained in use but were supplemented                               Fish-
by stout fish-hooks which were also used at Jakovo. These                                 hooks
imitate copper models, and a copper specimen was actually
found at Vinéa. Horn mattocks, bored for shafting, appear
first in Vinéa II. 4                                      !
   Except along the Maros copper is scarcely more common in
deposits of Period II than in the preceding epoch.
t Tsountas, 4-2, figs. 214-17, shows      3 Glas. Zem. Muz. BH., l.c., cf. SV.
a transitional phase like that just de-   vii, fig. 11, for an exact parallel from
scribed.                                  Silesia (Danubian II).
2 Starinar, 1908, p. 187.                 AZ alle pare Lente. Os
              70               THE CIVILIZATIONS            OF PERIOD II
Figurines       In the ritual objects there is more diversity than heretofore.
              The figurines of Period IJ are often excellently modelled; the
              face, hair, and limbs are all indicated, nudity is no longer an
           invariable rule; sitting types appear beside the older erect
           form. The kourotrophos type, a seated female nursing a baby,
           was taken over from Thessaly and the Aegean’ (Fig. 35a).
           The clothed goddesses wear a sort of apron which in some
           cases is daubed all over with white, presumably indicating
           linen. Fig. 35b shows the fragment of a woman sitting or
           squatting before a hollow cylindrical object (broken off in our
           example).
 Libation     Another class of ritual object, probably assignable to this
    tables period, is the ‘libation-table’ with a hollow in the centre
           (Klakari) or supporting a small bowl (Vinéa ?IT) (Fig. 36), a
           type likewise found in Thessaly and up the Tisza as far as
           Sévenyhaza. The old style of four-footed table still subsisted,
           and is attested at Jakovo as well as at Vinéa II.
              Among the ornaments inherited from the previous period we
           should note the six-spiked clay pendants which reached Jab-
              lanica, Jakovo,       Samatovéi,       and    Klakari.   Stone     and_ shell
              bracelets were still worn.
   Houses        The houses of Vinéa II were no longer excavated in the soil.
              They were rectangular in plan and the walls were supported by
              posts. The roof was probably gabled and the gable-beam
              terminated in front in a bull’s head as in the hut-urn from
              Tordos. The actual clay model used as a phineal has been found
              in the latest excavations at Vinéa. There is another from
              Csdka, and the hut model from Stfelice in Moravia (Fig. 44)
              is similarly adorned.
                  In its essence the culture of Period II on the Middle Danube
              was merely a continuation of that of the previous epoch
              under southern and also northern ‘influences’. Its chronological
               and spatial limits are not yet satisfactorily defined. Above
                Vinéa II’ come strata containing Bronze Age wares. On
               stylistic grounds the polished orange wares from Jakovo and
               Samatovci should be quite as late. Even at Klakari a “bronze’
               arrow-head was found.” So probably Vinéa II lasted on well
               into Period III at least.
 Extension        The interest of the period lies in the extension of the area
 of settle-    of settlement, rendered possible by the decay of forests through
     ment      the increasing dryness, and perhaps accelerated by pressure
               from the north. Up the Morava the occupation of Gradac
                   * Cf. 4-2., pl. 31, 2; "Ed. *Apy. 1908, pp. 63 f.   2 WMBH.    xi, p. 43.
                                                           Po



Fic. 35.   a, Kourotrophos, Gradac; b, seated female, Vinga; c, seated
                idol, Cargija, M. Belgrad. a and b3,c¢ 5
                                                       3
                 THE CIVILIZATIONS          OF PERIOD        II                71
marked a step towards a new connexion with the Aegean across Morava
Macedonia. Perhaps political causes—the intrusion of vase valley
painters into the Lower Danube valley—made such connexions
desirable. Face-urns were still in use when the site was first
occupied.
   Westward some Danubians may have reached the Adriatic. The
There are spirals and knob ornaments on sherds from the Adriatic
Theresien cave and Jama Pejca in the former Kiistenland.? At
the former site shells of Spondylus gaederopus were identified,
and magnificent bracelets of the same mussel shell come from
Razanéa (Zadar) in Dalmatia.3 The idea of the spiral ornament,
the clay figurines, and the spheroid maces which are occasionally




             Fic. 36. Libation table, Vinéa II, after Vassits.    4

encountered in Upper Italy may have been derived from the
same quarter.
   But no actual Danubian settlements have been identified on
the Adriatic. The dwellers in the Istrian caves were hunters
and pastoralists akin to the troglodytes of Upper Italy, South
France, and Central Spain, skilled in the manufacture of arrow-
heads, but without any agricultural implements of stone.‘
Traders from the Middle Danube may have visited these
people—there is obsidian in the Theresien cave—in their quest
for Spondylus shell when the Lower Danube was blocked,
but that is all that is definitely proved by the remains yet
unearthed.                                              ;
   Nor is the route clear. Along the upper Save in Carniola no
Danubian remains have yet come to light. On the other hand,
along the Upper Drave in Carinthia> settlements have been
reported containing socketed ladles and sherds reminiscent of
the more northerly Danubian II (Lengyel) culture.
t MPK.i (1887),  pp.13 f. Cf. Frank-    4 Hoernes, IZEK. iti (1905), p- 47.
fort,  ee     ee é                      5 Franz, ‘Osterreich,’ p. 7; Nol. d. Vat.
2 MAGW. xxxiii (1903), pp. (70) f.      iii (1927), p. 86.
3 At Zagreb.
            72              THE CIVILIZATIONS          OF PERIOD      II
  Butmir     It was different farther south. At least the open valley at the
          head of the Bosna was occupied about this date, and material
          of a similar type has been collected at Novi Seher half way up
          the valley. The ruins of the famous neolithic village of Butmir
          form alittle hillock on the alluvial plain between Sarajevo and
          the Bosna springs. The deposit was a metre thick with hearths
          of several levels.
  Pottery    At the site vast quantities of pottery were collected, only a
          fraction of which is available for study and whose stratigraphy
          is regrettably vague. The ware is generally coarse and gritty,
          and is rarely decorated. Few forms can be identified. Piriform
          jars, bowls, and pots on a low foot, ‘fillers’ (as at Lengyel), and
          heavy pithoi are recognizable. Besides lugs, small loops and
          even bilobate handles were in use, but they are all better adapted
          for rope supports than hand-grips. Miniature vases were
          freely manufactured. In addition we have four-footed liba-
          tion tables as at Klakari."
    Orna-    The minority of sherds that are decorated at all exhibit dis-
mentation concerting variety of motives.        On large vessels plastic
          slashings and finger-tip impressions constitute the only decora-
          tion. Fluted ware as in Vinéa I and II is rare. We then have
          roughly incised ribbons with porntillé fillings, still mainly
          arranged in the skeuomorphic zig-zags of Vinéa I, and chequers
          and lozenges in alike technique. Again there are narrow hatched
          ribbons forming lozenges and spirals and lines bordered with
          points in pure Jordansmiihl style.*?, Occasionally stamped con-
          centric circles or applied knobs appear. Finally, the Danubian
          running spiral luxuriates over the vase surface. It is sometimes
            incised or ‘furrowed’3; at other times in relief either in the form
            of broad, smooth ribbon-mouldings, which irresistably suggest
            carving in wood or stone, or of thin wiry coils. Besides the
            running spiral we have interlacing spirals in triple or quadruple
            groups. Dr. Stocky further discovered some painted sherds,
            but these are not exhibited.
Stone im-        The stone artifacts are also varied.      Implements were manu-
 plements   factured on the spot ona large scale. We have specimens in all
            stages of manufacture, together with the slabs on which they
            were eventually ground. ‘Though shoe-last celts predominate,
            there are genuine axe-heads with squared small-sides. Per-
            forated implements are not uncommon, and besides the hoe
            * Frankfort, Studies, ii, fig. 12, c.    Bohemia) or fig. 52, below.
            ? Cf. Butmir, pls. 5~7, and Real. vii,   3 Cf. p. 52 above.
            pl. 202 (Levy Hradek nr. Rostok in
                THE CIVILIZATIONS     OF PERIOD   II            73
 with shaft-hole at right angles to the blade (like Fig. 56c), long ’
 shapely axes with rounded butt-ends were in use.
    The archaic disk-shaped mace-head was nevertheless retained Mace-
 amid these later types.                                              heads
    Flint and jaspis were worked up into hollow-, disk-, side-, Flints:
 and end-scrapers and borers.                                         Arrow-
    ‘Tanged arrow-heads attest the use of the bow.                    heads
    In the realm of religion the Danubian Mother Goddess is Figurines
 represented by excellent statuettes on which features and hair
 are indicated. The hands clasp the breasts or are upraised.
 No burials have been found, but the miniature vases may have
 had a funerary use.
    Of the houses only irregular depressions, burnt plaster, and
 a few post-holes remain. The last were insufficient to allow of
 a reconstruction of the huts.
    The villagers cultivated two wheats—Triticum monococcum Grains
 and T. vulgare or compactum, barley (Hordeum vulgare), and
 lentils (Ervum lens). ‘Their live stock consisted of the two Animals
 breeds of cattle (Bos brachyceros and Bos primigenius dom.),
 swine, and perhaps sheep. ‘The bones of game were so rare that
 hunting clearly played a negligible part in the economy of
 Butmir.
    Butmir was essentially an industrial centre buried in the Affinities :
 heart of the mountains, and must be judged accordingly. Its Danube
 Danubian substratum is revealed clearly enough in the shapes
 and decoration of the pottery, in the shoe-last celts and disk-
 shaped mace-heads, in the figurines and ritual vessels. But its
 affinities lie essentially with Vinca II and the uppermost
 strata of Vinéa I, and even the more northerly sites of a like
 age such as Jordansmiihl. But there are elements foreign to
 the Danubian complex in the flint work, especially in the
 arrow-heads, in the flat axe-heads, and in the rough pottery.
  Such things would be more at home in the cave culture of
. the northern Mediterranean coasts, and it is not improbable
  that the Danubian peasants at Butmir were manufacturing
  them for barter with the nomadic pastoralists of that group.
  But direct proof of the presence of such neighbours is lacking
 as      yet.
    The technique and form of the Butmir spiral ornament is The
 suggestive of wider relations. The quadruple spirals have Aegean
 often been compared to the decoration on the stelae and rapiers
 from the Shaft Graves at Mycenae. But the pattern goes back
 in the Aegean far beyond M.M. III. It was being incised in
      3443                       L
             74                 THE CIVILIZATIONS            OF PERIOD       II
             clay,‘ engraved on ivory,’ carved in relief on stone,’ and wrought
             in gold wire‘ in Early Minoan times. It is difficult to avoid re-
             garding one of the last two examples as revealing the immediate
             prototypes of the Butmir designs. Moreover, the axe-heads
             with squared small-sides suggest metal models. Hence we
             must assume that somehow, possibly up the Adriatic and the
             Narenta, Aegean objects of stone or metal were finding their
             way to inner Bosnia. Perhaps they were brought by the
             assumed ‘cave people’ of the coastal zone in return for the axes
             and arrows manufactured by the peasants of Butmir. On the
             other hand, since similar spirals, but incised only, are found at
           Tordos, the route may have been the old Danube corridor.
              So we discover in Period II not only an extension of the
           Vinéa culture in the Lower Danube but also the establishment
           of new links with the Aegean area.
  Lateness    The late date here assigned to Butmir in opposition to most
of Butmir authorities may be justified by three lines of argument. In
Danubian     the first place, the forms and ornamentation of the vases,> and
II paral-   then the stone implements, especially the axes, and the hoes
       lels like Fig. 56c, really agree closely with those of Period II at
            Vinéa and still more farther north (Lengyel and Jordansmiihl).
            And there are no grounds for regarding this quite eccentric
             Station as an originative centre.
   Italian    Secondly, the pottery from Pertosa and other Bronze Age
 parallels sites in Central Italy,° though doubtless a little later, is too like
           Bae of Butmir to be separated therefrom by any great interval
           of time.
   Subse-     Finally, the lateness of the first colonization of the Upper
     quent Bosna, that might be expected both on geographical and clima-
    events tological grounds, is only on a par with the
                                                          subsequent history
           of the region. The Butmir culture is succeeded by the Slavonian
           culture of Debelo brdo and the other hill stations that cannot
           begin before the end of Period III. Then there is nothing new
           until the Late Bronze Age.
              In reality the peasants, who had come up the Bosna in Period
             IT, seem to have lived on at Butmir until the end of Period III.

             * Fimmen, fig. 131 (Early Cycladic).         in ‘predynastic’ graves at Ur (circa
             Cf. Frankfort, Studies, pl. vt.              3500 B.C.) disposes of Dr. Frankfort’s
             ? Xanthudides, pl. tv, 516 (Koumasé)         contention that such Minoan spirals
             3 Ibid., pl. x1, 1904a (Platanos); cf. the   must have been inspired from Bosnia.
             Melian pyxis.                                Cf. Hall in Antiquity, ii, p. 60.
             4 Ibid., pl. xv, 455 (Platanos). The         3 Cf. n.2, p. 72. Cf. further Mannus
             discovery in 1927 of gold disks orna-        XI-XI, p. 316, fig. 12 (Réssen).
             mented with spiral coils of gold wire        ° Peet, op. cit., p. 402.
Fic. 37.   Sherds from Cséka, Varosi Muzeum, Szeged
                    THE CIVILIZATIONS               OF PERIOD      II           75
  Then they were expelled by the pastoralist tribes who occupied
  Debelo brdo.' The refugees escaped to Italy where they appear
  in Period IV.
     If the Vinéa culture extended to the south and west that Csékaand
  was partly to counterbalance ground lost farther north. At Tordos
  Cséka and Tordos most characteristic Vinca II types are mis-
  sing though the latter site has yielded many sherds agreeing
  precisely with Butmir.? Instead we have traits which serve as
  links with the new complex evolving in the north, and the Erésd
  civilization of the east. Stratigraphical evidence for the various
  elements of culture at Cséka and Tordos is not yet available,
  but we may place here the following innovations.
     The most striking novelty isa mud-coloured or black ware, Pottery
  ornamented with deep incisions encrusted with white paste
  (Fig. 37). The only discernible form is a small barrel-shaped
  vessel. Such have, near the rim, a round or heart-shaped


                      Fic. 38. Copper Axe from Cséka, from a
                                            sketch. 4

   button, through the centre of which a hole passes to the interior
   of the vase—a contrivance that often resembles the ‘spout’ of
   Bukk vases. The ornamentation is arranged in vertical and hori-
   zontal panels filled with small geometrical figures including the
   swastika. Groups of concentric circles between triangles may
   be intended vaguely for human faces. The spirit in which this
   ware is decorated is like that animating the incised counterpart
   of Dimini ware in Thessaly,3 and a generic connexion 1s not
   impossible, while the influence of the Biikk family is undeniable.     red
   The Csdka pottery is, however, occasionally ‘crusted’ withhave
   colour. Some heart-shaped button handles           from     Csoka
   been worked up to suggest a human face with slits forcaves.           eyes
 - and mouth and a pimple for the nose, just    as   in  the   Biikk
   The same fabric is found north of the Maros at Oscsana          d.
                                                sherd   s   of  dark-  faced Fret-
-—    Both Csdka and Tordos ¢ have yielded                               been work pot-
   ware from which small square or trian       gular      pits  have
                                                    this   techn  ique    was tery
   carved out and filled with white substance;                ria,    in   the
   more freely employed in the Aegean,           1n    Bulga
                                               and    at  Laib  ach   Moor  .
    Slavonian ware described below (p. 211),             n   to  this  phas  e
      Pending stratigraphical data we might      assig
   t Infra, pp. 212 ff.                           3 AZ, pl. 17.
   2 Frankfort, Studies, ii, p. 29, N. 3-         4 ZfE. xxxv (1903), P- 452-
          76                THE CIVILIZATIONS               OF PERIOD         II
 Copper spheroid mace-heads, a very primitive copper axe-adz
                                                             e from
   axes   Tordos, and a curious copper axe from Csdka. The latter 1s
          18cm. longand very narrow. The shaft-hole is about 5 cm. from
          the butt which has an almost circular cross-section (Fig. 38).
          Some of the graves from Csdéka, mentioned on p. 31 above,
          might just as well belong to Period II.
                                      Il. POLGAR        CULTURE
              Very closely related to Vinéa II, but beginning rather earlier,
           are two interrelated groups focussed farther north, which
           we shall term the Polgar culture and the Lengyel-Jordansmihl
           culture respectively.
     Sites    The first of these is best known at Polgar* and Kenezl6-
           Fazekas on the Tisza and at numerous sites in the léss region
           of Southern Moravia.” Similar material to that gathered at these
           stations comes from various points in Lower Austria ,3 and some
           sherds found on the Gran(Hron) in Slovakia‘ link the two
           groups. The hill settlement at Lengyel in Tolna County occu-
           pies an intermediate position between this and the next group,
           but the Hungarian National Museum possesses a very typical
           pedestalled goblet and other vases with heavy crusted spirals
   Phases from Tolna County.        In Moravia ceramic styles allow of a
           division of the Polgar culture into three phases. In settlements
           of phase A Danubian Ib sherds still occur ; pottery of phase C is
           found overlying that of phase A and separated from it by a
           sterile deposit o-5 m. deep. B is considered later than A, chiefly
Phase A. because copper is met in this phase.5 At least the first two of
           these styles are represented also at Polgar itself, but no strati-
           graphical separation of the material has been made at that site
           which was never scientifically excavated.
 Pottery:      The typical pottery of phase A is a fine carbonaceous black
  Crusted ware, probably fired in a sort of kiln. The surface is always
     Ware polished.     The distinguishing feature is the ornamentation,
            which consists of patches of earth colours applied thickly after
            the burnishing and firing of the vase. Red, white, yellow, and
            orange are the commonest shades, two or three colours being
            often used together. The patterns are very elaborate and in-
          t Unpublished.
                 subi                                      3 WPZ.x.X, pp. 1-10;
                                                                              —10; Menghi
                                                                                      Menghin, Nieder-
                                                                                                   J
          ? Palliardi, Chron., p. 9; MPK. i Osterreich, Pp. 12:                               f
          (1897), » pp.P 237 f. Pravék, ; 1911, , pp. Pp. 4 WPZ. . xi X1, pp. 110-17.
          4of. Cervinka, MS., pp. 74-84. There ‘5 Palliardi later treated ‘phase C’ as
          are sherds even in Bohemia, Stocky,             amere subdivision of the second phase
          PZC., p. 76; Schranil, Bohmen, p. 50.           B; cf. Schranil, Béhmen, p. 52.
Fic. 39.   Crusted ware, Jaroméfice.   M. Brno




Fic. 40.   Crusted ware. St¥elice I. M. Brno
    a                                                          Cc

Bien4r.    Figurines.   a, 6, Boskov8tyn; c, Stielice.   M. Brno.   oo




          Fic. 42.   Animal model, Stielice.    M. Brno.   2
                  THE CIVILIZATIONS            OF PERIOD     II            a7
    clude stripes, zigzags, maeanders (Polgar), triangles, stumpy
    spirals (Moravia), chequers, saltires, and kidney-shaped blobs.'
    At Polgar the white is often used as a border for the red stripes.
    A distinct tendency to group the patterns in vertical panels is
    detectable. In addition to this polychrome decoration flat
    bosses or buttons were often used ornamentally. In some cases
    simple incised patterns, including hatched maeander ribbons,
    underlie the crusted colours. These recall negative Biikk ware
    on the one hand and Jordansmihl ware on the other.
       The forms are varied. The leading Moravian types are Forms
    shown in Figs. 39-40. Big bottles, which seem descendants of




                Fic. 43. Cubical vase, Lengyel, after Wosinski.   3

    Danubian I forms like Fig. 18b, are not observable at Polgar,
    but the dishes and beakers, always with a marked keel, were
    common. Neither handled vessels nor pedestalled bowls occur
    regularly in this fabric in the Moravian sites. Still such bowls,
    but either uncoloured or painted in a dark on light technique,
    are not uncommon at Polgar, and there is one with crusted
    white and red daubs from Gésing in Lower Austria. The
    horn-like lugs are the nearest approach to handles. Conical Spouts
    lids surmounted by a crest-shaped projection, bowls with a
    short tubular spout, and queer clay boxes of parallelepiped
    shape with thick walls also occur in this fabric in Western
    Moravia.
-      Ladles with a perforated projection to serve as the handle— Socketed
    the so-called ‘socketed ladle —are distinctive    of the culture ladles
    (Fig. 40a) as are the   clay copies  of the   cubical ‘paint-pot
     common   in Early Minoan stone-work (Fig. 43);7 some even
    have two compartments as in Crete.3
      Miniature vases are very common.                    si.
       The shoe-last celt remain  ed   charact eristic    in  this phase; Stone
    with it were associated in Moravi a  small   triangu lar  celts with a éple-
                                                             3 p. (185).        ments
          t MAGW.   Wwiii (1928), pp. 7° ff.      2 MAGW. lvii,
                        3 Schranil, Boéhmen, pl. Vu, 12.
           78                THE CIVILIZATIONS           OF PERIOD       II
             blunt butt, sometimes of greenstone (nephrite). Possibly they
             were shafted with the aid of horn sleeves. [Perforated imple-
             ments are represented by anasymmetrical axe resembling a thick
             shoe-last celt with a shaft hole parallel to the blade (Fig. 56d).
  Obsidian Besides flint, obsidian now appears regularly both in Moravia
             and on the Tisza. The material seems to be derived from the
             Hegyalja Mts. in North Hungary, not very far from Polgar.
Rock cry- Chips of rock crystal have been collected both in Moravia
        stal (Jaromérice) and on the Tisza. ‘The arrow-head does not occur.
   Marble       The only bone implement deserving mention is a fish-hook
      beads from Kenezlé-Fazekas, but probably perforated horn axes
             were now in use. Among the ornaments worn were marble
             beads; the material may come from the Bihar massif.
 Figurines      Female figurines are very common at this epoch. The
             Moravian examples are often finely modelled; the hair, features,
             and even the toes are distinctly indicated (Fig. 42). Both erect
             and seated types were in vogue. ‘The former were occasionally
             modelled in two longtitudinal halves which were subsequently
             stuck together before baking. Model thrones were manu-
             factured for the sitting goddess to rest upon. At Polgar figu-
             rines are rarer, but even there the legs were separated. From
             Moravia come further a few flat models of animals (Fig. 43)
   Therio- and a goose. Most remarkable is a theriomorphic vase in the
  morphic shape of a two-headed ‘goat’ (? bull or horned ram) from
       vase Hradisko near KromerizZ.*
                ‘Spindle-whorls’ are not found.
  Houses        The material is derived from the usual hut-foundations,
          hollowed out in the soil, but a fragmentary model at Brno
          seems to represent the gabled roof of a house of the Stielice
          type described below.
  Graves     At Jaroméiice a cremation grave containing ashes in an urn
          was found among the house, but elsewhere interments in the
          contracted attitude have been noted.
   Skulls    We have a stray skull, perhaps derived from a grave, of
          a peculiar brachycranial type, from Stillfried in Austria.’
 Animals        Remains. of swine, sheep, and a small horse (? domesticated)
           and Bos primigenius (? domesticated) have been identified in the
           settlement at Znojmo.3
 Phase B     To the second phase (B), Palliardi assigned pottery with red
           designs on a light ground or with white patterns crusted on a
                  * Schranil, Béhmen, ; pl. vir, iE;
                                                  11  2 MAGW. ; xlviii           ,
                                                                         (191        Pp. 247.
                                             3 MPK.i, p 246.                    cet ic
                THE CIVILIZATIONS       OF PERIOD      II               79
red surface. With the second Moravian fabric may be com-
pared a fine red ware common at Polgar, but sometimes Pottery
decorated with black as well as with red colour. Similar material
has been collected in the plain of Trnava in Slovakia.‘ Some
sherds of this group from Raigern (Rajhrad), south of Brno,
now at Vienna,” seem to have been first coated with white and
then with red, the pattern being eventually produced by scrap-
ing off the red. ‘This technique recalls that used at Liano-
kladhi in Thessaly in the first neolithic period. Moreover, from




                                 Lomi:




Stielice II come two sherds with genuine red paint on a white
slip that look remarkably like Thessalian A 3 6 ware. Curvili-
near motives are rare in phase B. The vase forms are the same
as before, but the pedestalled bowl is certainly attested also in
Moravia.
   The stone implements show few innovations. Obsidian was
no longer imported into Moravia, though it is found in a deposit
of the period at Weikersdorf in Lower Austria. The deers’ horn
axes occasionally have a squared hole for the shaft.
   ‘Spindle whorls’, in the form of small clay disks, and pyra- Weaving
midal ‘loom weights’, were now being manufactured.
  Interesting ornaments are a copper ring from Stfelice Il, Mediter-
and imported Mediterranean shells (Cassis saburon) from ranean
Weikersdorf.3                                               ;                shells
   The domestic architecture of the period is illustrated by Houses
the model from Stielice II, shown in Fig. 44. It represents a
rectangular house with a gabled roof supported by stout posts.
The gable terminates in front in a bull’s head. Actual finials
of this form modelled in clay have been found at Vinéa I and
Csoka.
        ii, p. 338.
     t ITA            2 MPK.i,pl.v,7.    Cf. Schranil, Bohmen, p. 53.
                                 vx      a
                             THE CIVILIZATIONS          OF PERIOD         II
            80
Phase C.       The last phase in Moravia is represented by pottery with
            designs in white on a black ground, which is sometimes rubbed
            over with graphite. Other characteristic innovations are:
               Symmetrical heart-shaped axes of stone, perforated (Fig. 56a)
                  for hafting.                                ;
               Chisels with an almost rectangular cross-s ection.
               Ladles with a solid crook handle.
               Clay stamps (pintaderas).
               A figurine with upraised arms (Fig. 46).
               Biconical whorls.
               In the Moravian settlements of group C, pots with slashed
            mouldings characteristic of Period II already begin to appear.




                               Fic. 45. Vase from Péczel, after Hampel.        4

  Miscel-     A few objects from Polgar do not fit into the Moravian
  laneous  scheme. Several curious bowls of black ware, divided by a
     finds partition into two unequal compartments, deserve notice. On
Bipartite the outer rim at the ends of the partitions sit big button handles
    bowls (Figs.45and47,2-3). The outer walls and the tops of the button
           handles are decorated with deep incisions filled with white paste
           which is also crusted on the surfaces as in ware A above. The
           patterns include chequers and stars. The latter device recalls
           that on Late Bronze Age sword pommels, but the technique of
           our vases is Danubian II. Analogous vases are known from
           Szerbkeresztur, south of the Maros,'’ from Pusztaistvanhaza,’
           from Péczel, east of Buda-Pest,3 from Cenke,near Parkan,on the
           Slovakian border, and from near Ossarn in Lower Austria.‘
             t AE. xiii (1893), p. 302.               ¢ Gymnasium Bratislava.
             2 M. Kecskemét.                          5 Nol. d. Vat, iv (1928), p. 6.
             3 Hampel, pl. Lxxviul, 1.
       Fic. 46.   Figurine with upraised arms, Stepanovice. +




Fic. 47.   Ansa lunata and handle of vase similar to Fig. 45, Polgar,
                          M. Nyiregyhaza
                  THE CIVILIZATIONS           OF PERIOD II                      St
   We find further at Polgér sherds, including pedestalled
bowls, painted with geometrical designs in warm black on a
pinkish slip, fragments of ansa lunata like Fig. 47, 1, and fine
knobbed ware, a fabric which occurs in Moravia in Periods I
and III. Conical vases with perforated walls occur as in Bronze
Age sites. And it must be noted that even La Téne fibulae
are included in the Polgar collection.
   The site has further yielded a clay model of a boat in good Boats
red ware. The vessel has a distinct keel, and appears to be
something more than a dug-out.

                     III.   LENGYEL-JORDANSMUHL

   The cultures with crusted ware are known almost exclusively
from settlements. Those with predominantly monochrome
pottery are best represented by cemeteries. The pottery allows
of the division of the material into four groups: an East
Hungarian group on the Tisza; a West Hungarian group
beyond the Danube in Hungary and Slavonia; a north-eastern
group in Moravia, Silesia, Bohemia, and Saxo-Thuringia; anda
north-western in Bavaria. ‘The most important sites in the four
groups may be enumerated here:
 1. Lucska* in Sub-Carpathian Ruthenia—cemetery (Map
     PEt tr).
   . Tiszadob,” County Szablocz (Map III, 5)—cemetery.
   . Tiszadada (? cemetery) in County Szabolcs near 2.
   . Bodrogkeresztur 3 (Map III, 2)—-cemetery.
   . Tiszaug (Map III, 7) *—large settlement and a few con-
      temporary graves.
  MN
  pWN
  NN . Tiszasas (Map III, 8)—remains of an extensive cemetery
       brought to light during drainage works.
     . Pusztaistvanhaza (Map III, 9)—extensive cemetery.3
  CoN] Kovacshalom,’ near Szeghalom on the Szebes (Map III,
     .
       10)—mound consisting of remains, perhaps of several
       settlements, together with graves.
  g. Possibly the chalcolithic settlements and cemeteries re-
       cently excavated by Dr. Roska® at Bihar and Ermihaly-
       falva may belong to this culture.
 1 AEF. i (1881), pp. 272 f.               4 Material at Kecskemét unpublished.
 2 No report available; material at       ‘5 AE, xxxiii (1913), pp. 39 f. and 149 f.
Nyiregyhaza.                               6 Dacia, i (1924), p- 313-
 3 WPZ. xiii; cf. p.61, n. 2 above.
   3443                               M
82                THE CIVILIZATIONS               OF PERIOD   II
Io.    Szarvas, in County Békés—a low mound, 2 metres high,
       covering remains of huts and graves. ‘The pottery 1s
       exactly like that from Obessenys."
(I.    Sévenyhaza* (Map III, 13), north of Szeged—settlement
       of various dates.
£2, Kurticsi,3 near Arad—settlement of various dates.
[3: Obesseny6,? south of the Maros (Map III, 15)—settlement
    and graves of various dates.
14. Szerbkeresztur’ (County Torontal)—settlement of various
    dates.
Western Group.
I.  Lengyel,° in County Tolna (Map III, 17)—settlement and
    two cemeteries.                      eke
2. Tevel, Simontornya, and other sites in the same county
    graves (Map III, 16), furnished with similar pottery, came
    to light.’
3. Babska in Slavonia—graves.

   Links between the two groups may be provided by Péczel
(Map III, 18), where a bipartite vase was found, a chal-
colithic grave containing a dagger likethat from Bodrogkeresztur
at Godollé, and Cenke near Parkafti on the Slovakian border ®
(Map III, 20).
North-eastern Group.
1. Gocnod in the plain of ‘Trnava in Western Slovakia (Map
      Ill, 21).
2. A growing number of graves and settlements in Central and
   North-Eastern Moravia, especially NémC¢ice ® on the Hana,
   Seloutka,"" Krenovice,” near Austerlitz-Slavkov (graves),
   and ‘Troppau % (Oppava).
3. Ottitz™ in Upper Silesia—settlement.
   AE, xxxv, pp. 11 ff.                     formity of the grave goods, may repre-
   M. Szeged.                               sent two periods.
   AE. xix (1899), pp. 18 f.                7 Wosinski, TT., pp. 70, 189, 197,
   AE. xxix, p. 146; xxxi, p. 147.          and 200.          :
   AE. xiii (1893), p. 300.                 8 Material in Gymnasium at Brati-
nd
w
   Wosinski, Das prahist. Schanzwerk.
 Ant
                                            slava.
 The site was occupied at various dates;    9 TTAT i, peso.
 the Bronze Age folk dug their huts in      10 Pravék, 1926, p. 29.
 the léss, thereby destroying all strati-   " Cervinka, MS., p. 82; Schranil, pl.
 fication. Objects not in harmony with      VIL    O17.
 our general knowledge of the period        2 Real. ii, p. 62, pl. 25a.
 have accordingly been neglected in the     13 MPK: i, p;340.
 following account.      Even the two       4 SV.vi, pp. 33 ff.3 .. vite St
 cemeteries, despite the seeming uni-
                 THE CIVILIZATIONS          OF PERIOD       II               83
4. Jordansmihl '—large settlement and cemetery on the
   approach to the Glatz pass.
5. StreSovice, * Podbaba, 3 and other sites in the valleys of the
   Upper Elbe, the Moldau, and the Eger—hut foundations
   and graves.
6. Réssen‘ near Merseburg on the Saale (cremation graves),
   Mittelhausen (settlement).
North-western Group.
   Miinchshéfen near Straubing—graves.
    Asenkofen on the Isar and various caves in Lower Bavaria,°
    with extensions as far as the Federsee Moor to be discussed
    below.
   A link between the north-western and south-western
groups is provided by the settlement recently discovered at
Niederperwend near Wels® (Map III, 47), showing that
the Danubian II culture reached Bavaria along the Danube, not
from Bohemia.
   Stray remains from Salzburg,’ and those from Carinthia,’
cannot yet be certainly attached to either group.
   The pottery was fired in a closed kiln of beehive form, as the Pottery
ruins found at Ottitz in Silesia show. The potters’ aim was a
black ware technically identical with the crusted ware of class
A. The surface is always polished and often slipped.
   A. Pedestalledbowls(Fig.48,2): thisisthe most characteristic Forms
form. The pedestal is always hollow, in Hungary and Bavaria
generally high, and especially in Eastern Hungary frequently
perforated with large circular apertures. Such vessels were used
by preference for sepulchral purposes, and at Lengyel occurred
in almost every grave;? but though the settlement near Tiszaug
has yielded dozens of specimens, none occur in the graves there.
 Some of the specimens from this site have square pedestals.
   B. Shallow dishes in which the ‘neck’ in no case continues
the curve of the base; in the north-east group the rim is often
 inturned (cf. Fig. 40, 2).
 t SV. vii; AfA. v, pp. 136f. An ex-      4 Mannus, xi-xii, pp. 310 ff.
 tension of Danubian II into Western      s Reinerth, Chron., pp. 89 f.; Bremer,
 Galicia may be inferred from the         in Real. viii, p. 332-
 occurrence there of pedestalled bowls;   6 Nol. d. Vat, iii, p. 86.
 Koztowski, Mtodsa, p. 58, pl. XIv, 11.   7 Franz, ‘Osterreich’, p. 7.
 2 Stocky, Pr. Pr., p. 133 PZC., pp. 77   8 [bid., cf. p. 71, above.
 and 170f.; Schranil, Béhmen, p. 56.      9 Wosinski regards the Lengyel vessels
 3 Mannus, iii, pp. 245 f; cf. Stocky,    as lamps. He names them “Toten-
 Chron., p. 10.                           lampe’.
                 THE CIVILIZATIONS            OF PERIOD            II .
84
     C. Deep squat bowls; some examples in East Hungary from
Tiszadob,     Pusztaistvanhaza, Tiszaug,              and     Bodrogkeresztur
have four small wart-like feet (Fig. 49).
     D. Biconical urns sometimes with a cylindrical neck (Fig. 49).
     E. Big bottles flat on one face and with three rows of
small handles       on the other          (Obessenyé,       Babska,           Seloutki)
     et):
Ce ae with high handles (Lengyel, Bodrogkeresztur,
Gocsnéd), with analogues in the north-eastern group (Fig.48,3).
   G. Two-handled mugs (Lengyel, Bodrogkeresztur, Puszta-
istvanhaza, Gocsndd’) (Fig. 48, 1). A variant on this form is




              Fic. 51. Flat-faced Butté, Obessenyé, after AE.             4

characteristic of Jordansmihl (Fig. 52) and similar stations
in Moravia.
     The Jordansmiihl form is preserved, but with only one handle,
in Bohemia.?, Otherwise forms F and G are exceptional.
   H. Bottles with long necks and two lug handles near the
rim. This type is apparently restricted to the Tisza (Fig. 53a
and 55), and may be later.
   I. Deep crater-like vessels which, like the dishes of Class B,
generally have a distinct neck.
  J. From the cemetery near Tiszasas the engineers in
charge of the regulation works have rescued a remarkable
string-hole vase. ‘The body is globular, with two pierced lugs
on the belly. The lid which fits on to the short cylindrical
neck is itself cylindrical, with the two string-hole lugs projec-
ting obliquely at the junction of the cylinder with the flat cap.
   K. At Obessenyé a number of very large globular jars3
* Stocky, PZC., fig. so.                    same   types    were    found      at Békés-
2 Stocky, BAP., pl. xvi.                    Szarvas, AE. xxxv (1915), p. 19.
3 AE. xxxi, pp. 156f., figs. B-E.   The                                       eS Se
     Fic. 49.   "Tiszadob, bowls.   M. Nyiregyhaza.   BI




       Fic. 50.   Lengyel, urns.    M. Szekszard




a)
                                 Fic   52.   Jordansmihl > amphora.       4




                  Fic. 53.   Amphorae, Pusztai istvaanh aza.
                                                         ,
                                                                 A.M     N Muzeum.      ae
                                                                                        5




Fic. 54. Pusztaistv4nh4za , bowl.
                                               Gas           Danubian    II vase in negative Bukk style,
       A. M. N. Muzeum
                                                             Tiszadob.   M . Nyiregyhaza.    2
                                                                                             5
                        THE CIVILIZATIONS         OF PERIOD      II              85
      with low necks, and often decorated with knobs, were excavated,
      but their stratigraphical position is not recorded.
         Cubical vases and socketed ladles, such as are associated with
      crusted ware at Polgar and in Moravia (Fig. 40), also occur at
      Lengyel, in Bohemia, and in Lower Bavaria.1          At Lengyel
      curious fillers are common; they may be related to the ‘cornets’
      for paint from the graves of SusaI. Bodrogkeresztur yielded
      square-mouthed bowls, odd square urns on four feet, and other
      queer types. Analogues have recently turned up at Tiszaug.
      To this same period we may assign some of the Biikk ware
      described on p. 61. Stocky? assigns to the same context a
      curious trough in the shape of a flat-bottomed boat from
      Velezice in Bohemia.
         In general decoration is limited to nipples and bosses like Ornamen-
      those of crusted ware. The nipples sometimes, as at Bodrog- tation
      keresztur and Miinchshéfen, develop into large conical warts.
      In Moravia (Néméice) and Bohemia (TrebuSice near Slane) 3
      we find regular hollow warts pushed out from the inside. On
      coarse vases plastic ornament is not uncommon.
         At Lengyel the vases of this group, especially forms A, B, F,
      and G, were often crusted with running spirals and other
      patterns in red, white, or yellow as in Polgar ware of Class A.
      This technique may have been more generally employed; for
      the colours, not being fixed, may easily have been washed off
      inadvertently by the excavator.‘
         Incised decoration is only employed in certain areas, and
      forms local styles. In Eastern Hungary the Pusztaistvanhaza
      ware is heavily incised and generally incrusted, sometimes with
      powdered shell (Figs. 53-4). ‘The combination of deep in-
      cision, with sharply edged cylindrical pits, pressed so deeply
      into the clay that a bulge is observable on the other side of
      the thick wall, is characteristic of the true domestic ware of the
      settlement at Tiszaug, but is rare in graves both there and at
      Pusztaistvanhaza. One tall bottle of type H has an arcaded
      moulding round the rim rather in the style of the Moravian
      ‘Nordic’ ware.
         The Jordansmiihl         ‘amphorae’     in Slovakia, Moravia, and
      Silesia and the corresponding cups of Bohemia are regularly
      decorated with incised lines and rows of dots forming maean-
      t Cf. p. 77 above.                      from Bohemia (Mannus, ie pH 245)5
      2 PZC., pl. LVI, 21.                    and at Ottitz in Silesia at least one
      3 Stocky, PZC., pl. tv1, 7; Schranil,   vase was ‘painted’ with dark stripes
      Eceaplalxanr2.                          (SV. vii, p. 8),
      4 Traces have in fact been recorded




woh
        86              THE    CIVILIZATIONS            OF PERIOD   II
        droid and other geometrical patterns. This fine incised work
        really recalls that on crusted ware A in Moravia,’ and that on
        Bukk ware farther east.2 Along the Tisza we have instances
        of the fine cross-hatched decoration that we term negative
        Biikk style applied to Danubian II vases (Fig. 55). A sort of
        shallow fluting, a technique already familiar at Vinéa in Period
        I but appearing in Moravia first in Period III, has been em-
        ployed for the decorations on some cups of form G, from
        Pusztaistvanhaza and Gocsnod.
           Finally, in many bowls from Tiszaug a flat projection, rising
        from the rim to form a handle, exhibits on the outside a plastic
        reproduction of a nose and pair of eyes. ‘The Miinchshéfen
        pottery of Bavaria is decorated in furrow technique, and the




         Fic. 56. Stone and copper axes, a, b Lucska, c Jordansmihl, d and e Stielice I
                                    (2 views of same).   3

         rims of the vases are regularly ‘milled’. The furrowed patterns
         include hatched triangles so arranged as to leave a reserved
         zigzag ribbon between them.
   Stone    In the settlements of this group, at least in Western Hungary
  imple- and Silesia, shoe-last celts still occur in profusion. Triangular
   ments greenstone    celts have been picked up at Lengyel and on
         Silesian sites as with the crusted ware of Moravia. Perforated
         axes (Fig. 56a) were met in the graves of Lucska, Kovacshalom,
         Lengyel, and Obessenyé, and also at Jordansmiihl and Ottitz
         in the settlements. Perforated horn picks and celt-hafts are
         well attested at this date in Hungary. A chisel made of shell
         from Lengyel deserves notice. The spheroid mace-head was
Obsidian found at Lengyel. Obsidian was in use all along the Tisza, at
         Lengyel, and at Babska and also at Ottitz. Large obsidian or
         flint blades, apparently worn in the hair, were regularly buried
         with the deceased at Bodrogkeresztur and Pusztaistvanhaza.
  Copper    Copper is by no means rare in graves of this group. Beads
                t Cf. esp. Stocky, Pr. Pr., pl. 1, 7.        a) CE TTAUIM, p.340-
                THE CIVILIZATIONS                      OF PERIOD        II              87
of that metal were worn at Bodrogkeresztur, Pusztaistvanhaza,
Lengyel, and Jordansmiihl. The last two sites yielded spectacle-
spirals of copper wire. The Jordansmihl graves were very
rich in such trinkets. Wire rings were worn on the fingers and
toes, and bracelets; some, terminating in spirals, encircled the
arms (Fig. 57). Along the Tisza copper was already used for
implements. We have a copper axe-hammer, shaped like the
perforated stone axes from Lucska (Fig. 56b), a knife or dagger
without rivets or midrib from Bodrogkeresztur, and an awl
from Pusztaistvanhaza.* Very probably a copper axe, similar to
that from Lucska, picked up near the Jordansmiihl settlement,


                                               S
                            TU DIVITTATY
                          be iM MPT
                  idie



                           PEIN     Tae
                            Leavesaneeancart




            Fic. 57      Copper trinkets, Jordansmihl, after Seger. 4

belongs to this same period. The implements from Tordos and
Cs6dka should also be remembered. _
   The use of gold is attested by the discovery of hollow cones Gold
of gold leaf in three graves ofBodrogkeresztur. Parallel to the
       runs a border of bossed    points.
oe iiiton to metal enkets: small disk-shaped beads of Marble
marble (like Fig. 66, 31) were strung together and worn on the
arms and legs or as girdles by the women buried in the ceme-
teries on the Tisza.          Marble beads, and fossil 3 Dentalium shells Imported
were also found at Lengyel as well as bored teeth. Conical shells
buttons with V-perforation seem to have been manufactured
« One analysis gave from 2°7 percent.              7? ee               1923-6, p. 30, figs.
                                                    5, 0,7, anda 14.                   d
to 3°4  per cent. tin; but subsequent
Patients revealed no tin, only 0-78                3 Perhaps, however, recent shells a
per cent. antimony and traces of lead,             ported from the Red Sea (Wosinski,
bismuth, and arsenic. AfA. v, p-. 125-             Lengyel, p. 27).
         88               THE CIVILIZATIONS         OF PERIOD       II
            at this period at Lengyel."_ From the Lengyel graves came
            further bulla made from Tridacna shells imported from the
            Indian Ocean, as well as mother-of-pearl disks. Tridacna shell
            disks were also found in grave 2 at Kovacshalom.’
 Weaving       Spindle-whorls occur at Lengyel and Jordansmiihl. A stamp
            or pintadera was found at Bubenec near Prague.
Figurines      Figurines are never encountered in the graves, and are ex-
            ceedingly rare in settlements. There are, however, several frag-
            ments from Ottitz in Silesia, the leg of a sitting figure from
            Lengyel, a fragmentary foot from Réssen on the Saale, and one
            or two stray pieces from Bohemia? and Saxo-Thuringia ‘¢ that
            may belong here.
 Villages:     The settlements are not very well known. The hill, termed
Fortifica- Lengyel, was surrounded with a flat-bottomed moat, 2m.
       tion wide, which agrees in section with the moats defending
            neolithic hill-settlements in South-West Germany.’ Otherwise
            there are no grounds for assigning the earthwork to the Stone
            Age rather than the Bronze Age, to which Wosinsky thought it
            belonged, or even the La Tene period. Itis, however, obvious,
            from the extent of the cemeteries, that the Danubian II people
            lived in regular villages.
   Houses      The houses within the settlement of Lengyel were apparently
            not excavated in the soil. Rectangular houses containing
            Jordansmiihl pottery® have been recognized in Moravia.
            Elsewhere, however, pit-dwellings have been reported (Silesia,
            Bohemia, and Moravia). The huts at Szarvas were round,
            formed by a ring of upright sapplings tied together at the top
            and covered with wattle and daub. Both at Lengyel and Ottitz
            the outer walls of the fire-places were plastered with painted
Fire-dogs clay. From Kovacshalom comes a horn-shaped fire-dog like
            those common in the Late Bronze Age of the Upper Danube
            and Rhine.?
   Graves      We are better informed as to the dwellings of the dead.
            Save in Bohemia and Saxo-Thuringia, the departed were
            regularly interred in trench graves often dug close to the huts.
            The corpse was always laid to rest with the legs flexed, and
            sometimes in a strictly contracted attitude, lying generally on
          t The well-known marble rings from      3 Stocky, PZC., p. 80.
          Réssen are assigned to this period by   + FST. xii, pp. 74 f.
         Niklassen, but Cervinka points out       5 PZ. ii, p. 15.
         that similar ornaments   are found in    © Real. ii, p. 60 (Pavlovice near Pre-
         true Réssen graves in NW.    Bohemia _ rov).
         (Real. ii, p. 63).                     7 AE. xxxiii, p. 128, fig. 7.
         2 AE. xxxiii, p. 131.
                THE CIVILIZATIONS               OF PERIOD        II                 89
the left, sometimes on the right side. Double and even multiple
interments (man, woman, and child) in the same grave have
been recorded on the Tisza (Bodrogkeresztur, Pusztaistvan-
haza, and at Lengyel). Red ochre was placed by the corpses at
Lengyel, Kovacshalom, and Obessenyé. In contrast to the
almost universal practice of inhumation stand cases of crema-
tion reported from Lucska, Prague-Bubenic, and Réssen on the
Saale. At Pusztaistvanhaza Dr. Hillebrandt found richly
furnished graves containing no skeleton; in other cases the
feet had been amputated, a phenomena also noted at Lengyel.
Headless corpses were also found by Hillebrandt at Bodrog-
keresztur."
   At Lengyel and Bodrogkeresztur the skeletons belonged to Cranio-
tall, powerfully built individuals with definitely long heads. logy
The Jordansmiihl folk were slighter and less dolichocephalic.’
Scheidt 3 assigns one Lengyel skull to his ‘Chamblandes type’,
and the Jordansmiihl crania to the East German long-headed
group. One child’s skull from Lengyel is said to have been
trepanned. An old man buried at Szarvas was markedly
brachycephalic; a woman from the same cemetery was mesati-
cephalic.5
    Ceremonial burial was not reserved for human beings. At Animal
Jordansmiihl the complete skeleton of a young Bos primigenius burials
was interred in along trench. Under it lay five dogs’ skulls and
near by the skull of an infant.
    The animal remains from Lengyel® and Jordansmihl’ have Animals
been carefully studied. Assuming that those from the former
site belong to the ‘neolithic’ period, the results are as follows:
      Cattle—Bos brachyceros.® 7
                Bos primigenius (domesticated). ° 7 *
      Swine—Sus palustris.©7
      Sheep—Ovis aries palustris.°7
      Dogs—Canis palustris.
               Canis intermeduus.’
    Horse bones are reported from Lengyel and Obessenyé; but
it is uncertain whether the animal was domesticated, while the
stratigraphical position of the remains is unknown.
t AF, xli, p. 279.                           6 Wosinski, Lengyel, iii, p. 282. A.
2 AfA. vii, p. 232; indices 69°9-78°6;       7 AfA. v, l.c.
     ee ee ete m.                            8 According to Keller (AfA., l.c.).
BHO Pu cit., Pp. 7O-                         The domestication is denied by Holde-
4 Wosinski, Lengyel, p. 63.                  fleiss, Verh. Gesell. D. Naturforscher
5 AE. xxxv, p. 14.                           u. Arzte, Breslau, 1904, pp. 269 f.
  3443                                   N
           go             THE CIVILIZATIONS          OF PERIOD        II
 Grains       At Lengyel the usual Danubian wheat, Triticum monococcum,
           was cultivated as well as Triticum vulgare, Triticum sativum,
           Hordeum hexastichon,: Panicum milliacum (millet), and F aba
           vulgaris.   Whether the grains, said to be derived from straw-
           lined silos,* actually belonged to the Danubian II epoch is
           uncertain.
                              IV.   PERIOD     II AS A WHOLE

Chrono-       The relative chronological position of the Vinéa, Polgar,
    logy   and Lengyel-Jordansmiihl cultures is given by the following
           facts. The position of Vinéa II is fixed stratigraphically. An
           approximate synchronism between Vinéa II and the Polgar
           A culture in Moravia may be inferred from the agreement in the
           pottery (crusted ware) and types of figurine (sitting types,
           modelling of the head), and the common use of obsidian,
           though we believe that these traits appear earlier on the Upper
           Tisza than at Vinéa. The Moravian groups are in turn de-
           limited above by the Danubian I b sherds associated with the
           oldest (group A), and below by the anticipations of the ‘Nordic’
           culture, belonging to Period III, in group C. Polgar itself is
           perhaps similarly limited below by the appearance of the ansa
           lunata.
              That the Jordansmiihl culture occupies approximately the
           same position between Periods I and III is also clear when it is
           recalled that Danubian I culture lasted longer in Silesia than
           farther south. At the type station 2 hut foundations contained
           only Danubian I ware, and 12 Danubian I and Jordansmthl
           ware. The latter was found pure in 39 huts and, mixed with
           Danordic ware,in 5. Inthe cemetery 49 graves yielded Jordans-
           miihl pottery alone; in 2 it was mixed with Danordic ware.
              The appearance of the ansa lunata at Lucska and 'Tiszadob,
           and of fluted ware at other sites might suggest a corresponding
           limit for the ‘Tisza cemeteries since these devices are charac-
           teristic of Period III in Moravia. As a matter of fact we shall
           see that these cemeteries really last well into Period III. Dr.
           Hillebrandt 3 has indeed proposed to divide them up between
           three phases distinguished by the extent to which copper was
           used. His scheme is (1) Lengyel-Polgar (copper used only for
           ornaments), (2) Pusztaistvanhaza-Bodrogkeresztur (copper
           knives and awls), (3) Lucska (bored copper axes). hough
           x A small variety identical with that   2 Wosinski, op. cit. iii, p. 18.
           found at Troy, cf. PZ. xiii (1921-2),   3 AE. xli (1927), p. 57.
           p- 172.
              THE CIVILIZATIONS          OF PERIOD      II       gi
some such division is necessary, Hillebrandt’s scheme fails to
take into account local divergences; Lengyel in particular is
not as.a whole so old. Stratigraphy, not typology, must form
the basis of any valid division. In Bavaria the Miinchshéfen
pottery is sometimes associated with Danubian I wares (Réssen
and Hinkelstein), but once at least overlies Réssen* pottery.
   The internal subdivision of the period thus defined is less Subdivt-
easy. It may be assumed that Polgar A slightly antedates SiOns.
the beginning of Vinca II. But how is it related to the two cul-
tures juxtaposed to it in Tiszadob and Jordansmiihl respec-
tively? Dr. Cervinka seems inclined to regard the Jordans- ordans-
miihl group in Moravia as ‘crusted ware without the crusting’, mihl and
i.e. a fourth phase of the Polgar culture. But since its lower Polgar
limits are the same as those of the latter, this view must be
abandoned. Jordansmiihl should rather be regarded as parallel
at least to the later phases of crusted ware in Moravia. The
Lengyel material is so closely allied to the earliest Moravian that
a partial synchronism seems certain ; common to both groups are
the technique of ornamentation, the socketed ladle, the per-
forated cube, greenstone-celts, &c. In that case the beginning
of the Tisza cemeteries could not be much later. At the same
time there are close agreements between Lengyel and phase B
of the Polgar group. We might therefore place the beginning
of the culture at Lengyel and on the Middle Tisza in phase A
and synchronize its northward expansion with phases B and C.
But on the Middle Danube, as we shall see, there is little
material at present to occupy Period III despite the /unata
sherds, so that a longer duration of Danubian II culture in this
area might be postulated. That is only to be expected in view
of the enormous number and great size of the settlements and
cemeteries there.               |
   In Danubian II points of contact with the Aegean become Aegean connex-
very abundant, and can in some cases only be explained by ions
direct intercourse between the two areas.        Actual  Aegean
manufactures have not, indeed, been detected, but foreign Imports
substances of southern provenance establish beyond question
                                                                  of shells
the existence of traffic along the Danube. The   most conclusi ve
instance is provided by the Mediterranean shells found with
crusted pottery at Weikersdorf in Lower Austria and the
 Tridacna ornaments from Lengyel and Kovacshalom. Afrag-
ment of ivory from Babska in Slavonia would be equally con-
clusive were its stratigraphical position secure. The ‘marble
                : Mannus, xv, p. 215; Germania, vi, p. 45
         92                THE CIVILIZATIONS           OF PERIOD    II
           beads from Pusztaistvanhaéza and from Moravia cannot be
           claimed as Aegean imports without petrographical examination;
           the material more probably came from the Bihar massif.
   Mace-      The spheroid mace is an old Asiatic and Aegean type that
     heads presumably came up the Danube at this epoch.
    Metal     None of the metal tools or weapons are demonstrably 1m-
 axes and ports from abroad, and even the metal may have been won
    knives locally, though the knowledge of metallurgy must have been
           learned from the south-east. Indeed both the rivetless knives
           from the Tisza cemeteries and the bored hammer-axe from
           Lucska stand so close to stone forms that they might well
           be local products. Still, the axe is closely allied to the primitive
           axe-adzes from Tordos. These have parallels in Crete in
           Early Minoan II times’ that might illustrate the origin of
           the type. Onthe other hand, there are better prototypes farther
         east, and we shall see that there is other evidence about this
           time for a current of influence across the steppes from the
           Caucasian region.
    Metal     But if tools and weapons are inconclusive, the copper spec-
     vases tacle spirals from Jordansmihl and Lengyel copy a familiar
 copied in Trojan type. It is equally clear that exceptional ceramic forms
      clay imitate metal prototypes that were current at Troy. The two-
           handled tankards are obviously metallic as are the cups with
           high handles. One of the metal originals of the former type
           was found in the Treasure of Priam. The isolated string-hole
           pyxis from the cemetery near 'Tiszasas is again a pure Aegean
           type, to which the same Treasure offers metal parallels.? But
           the shape was much older; at Troy it goes back to the First City,
           and an exact parallel to our specimen comes from an E.M. II
           deposit in Crete.3
  Aegean      Other elements in Danubian II pottery are likewise to be
pot-forms derived from the Aegean area. The high-footed bowl is an
           old Aegean form that begins in Crete in pre-Minoan times.
           The most precise parallel is a fragment from Hissarlik, with a
           perforated pedestal, as on the Tisza, that is assigned to Troy I.4
          The variant with human feet that we find at Csdka, Vinéa, and
          Tordos is also found in Asia Minor at Yortan.’ Again, the four-
          footed libation tables like Fig. 36 seem to have parallels in
          the I 3 ware of Thessaly.’      And in a Danubian II context
          * Evans, Palace, p. 194, n. 3.             op. cit., fig. 17.
          2 SS., no. 5859.                           5 Forsdyke, Catalogue BM., p.   10,
          3 Evans, Palace, fig. 24.                  fig. 16.
          4 Schliemann
                       , Ilios, fig. 50; cf.Evans,      Wace and Thompson, p. r11.
                 THE CIVILIZATIONS             OF PERIOD       II              93
appear in Moravia one or two sherds that might really have
been manufactured in Thessaly during the first period.
Most striking of all are the clay cubes with their hollowed
bowls that so patently copy early Minoan stone vessels, pre-
 serving even the perforations at the corners."
_ The spread and multiplication of figurines in Period II may Figurines
 in itself betoken intensified intercourse with the south-east.
 The aprons, the steatopygy, and the position of the hands are
 all ancient East Mediterranean elements. ‘The kourotrophos
 type that now appears for the first time must in any case have
 come up from that quarter; she was being modelled in Central
 Greece during the first neolithic period.? So too the clay Clay
 stamps or pintaderas that are associated with Jordansmihl stamps
 pottery in Bohemia and with the latest crusted ware in Moravia
 came up-stream; for they have exact parallels in Thessaly I,
 and Troy II and farther East.3
    But if all these elements were supplied by the Aegean, the Danubian
 relations between that area and the Danube basin were by this IT ele-
 period bilateral. The crusted ware that invades Thessaly at ments in
 the beginning of the third period there is identical with that Greece
  of Polgar and Lengyel, but reaches Thessaly from the north Crusted
and not vice versa.         So, too, the bored stone celts that are first ware
found in Thessaly at that time are most likely derived from the Bored
Danube area. Hence at least by the third Thessalian period celts
Danubian elements were filtering across the Balkans into North
Greece. That was indeed only to be expected, since we have
already noted how the Danubian province was extending its
frontiers up the Morava at the beginning of Period II.
   However, we have observed indications of direct contact with                        Relations
North Greece during the first Thessalian period. Now, at with  Thessaly I
the close of that epoch, Frankfort finds a number of intrusive
elements appearing in Macedonia and Central Greece that he
terms ‘Danubian’ and takes as evidence of a great invasion
from beyond the Balkans.        Some of Frankfort’s intrusive
elements we regard just as survivals of the aboriginal complex
 common to Greece, Anatolia, and the Danube basin. Carboni-
ferous wares, as our author himself admits,’ formed an original
 t Xanthudides, pl. x.                       Egyptian button seals that belong
 2 Chaeronea, ’E¢. ’Apx., 1908, pp. 63 f.,   to the age of the VIth and later dyn-
 pl. Ar.                                     asties are members of the same family ;
 3 Tsountas, 4-2, fig. 272; Schlie-          cf. Evans, Palace, i, p. 112.
 mann, Ilios, fig. 496; Childe, Most         4 Studies, ii, pp. 42-50.
                                             5 Op. cit., pp. 14 and 60.
  Ancient East, fig. 63. The filled cross
 on all these recurs in our area. The
         94                THE CIVILIZATIONS            OF PERIOD       II
         substratum on the west side of the Aegean as on the east, and
         we should prefer to treat the burnish-decorated and ribbed
         wares in the same category. Other of his elements are not
         Danubian at all in our sense of the word; white painted ware
         is not found on the Middle Danube, but seems to be at home in
          Anatolia. The raking and similar handles again are not native in
          any true Danubian sites ; they belong to the caveculture of which
          we have traces all along the Mediterranean coasts from Sardinia,
          Italy, Istria, and Crete* to Macedonia and even Cyprus, and
          only begin to trickle into the Danube basin in the Bronze Age.
  Danu-      Still there may well have been a re-enforcement of the older
 bians in aboriginal stocks from beyond the Balkans in Central Greece
 Central and even Corinthia. Some elements there, notably the ‘legs’
  Greece from Drakhmani,’ and perhaps also the beaded ware from
          Phocis and Boeotia, might have been inspired by such a re-
          enforcement. It is much more doubtful whether we should
Cyclades allow this northern element to extend to the Cyclades. As
         evidence of its presence, Frankfort3 cites the horned, raking,
          and other handles that have just been discussed, decoration by
          means of impressed triangles, ‘fretwork’ ornament, and the
          spiral. ‘The first of these elements has already been dismissed;
          fretwork is a style of decoration taken over from the wood-
          carver ‘ that certainly appears occasionally in the Danube basin,
          but, as far as can be judged, first in Period III. The spiral needs
  Spirals more careful consideration. It was certainly a motif that
          took root as an element of ceramic decoration more firmly in
          the Danubian region than anywhere else, and the agreements
          between the Cycladic versions of it and those from Butmir
Synchro- and ‘Transylvania cited by Frankfort are perfect.’ In view of
nism be- the non-ceramic material in which similar patterns are often
    tween elaborated ° it would be rash to dogmatize on this point; it may
  Butmir be that these Cycladic spirals have been suggested
                                                                by Danubian
and E.C models, but Babylonian
                                     influence transmitted through Troy is
      IT,
          far more likely.’
              In any case we may very well admit that the Vinéa culture,
         * For Cretan handles        see   Evans,   finds from Malka (Evans, Palace, li,
         Palace, fig. 7, 3.                         fig. 164) and Byblos (Syria, iii, p. 285,
         a Frankfort, Jic., pl. 1V7.                fig. 5, 11) reveal the spiral flourishing
         3 pp. 49-50.                               in Middle Minoan stone- and metal-
         4 The influence of wood-work was           work when it was scarcely used on
         always pronounced even on the oldest       pottery.
         Cycladic ware; vide, Forsdyke, Cata-       7 Cf. p. 51 above and Antiquity, ii,
         logue BM.., p. xxix, cf. A 31 I-15.        p.__. On ‘fretwork’ see Hall, Aegean
         5 Pls. v1, 1-3 and 1, 11-16.               in Bronze Age, p. 60.
         6 Cf. p.74 above. Note too that recent
              THE    CIVILIZATIONS       OF PERIOD     II              95
that had spread up the Morava to Gradac by the beginning of
Period II, actually overflowed the Balkan barrier early in that
period, sending out colonists to Macedonia and Central Greece.
We have already hinted that the Vinéa folk were by that time
being subjected to a pressure from the north, a pressure whose
continuation introduced crusted ware both to Vinéa II and
Thessaly III.
   The Aegean connexions traced above allow of an approxi- Absolute
mate dating of the second period in the Danube valley. In the dates
Polgar complex we have connexions with Thessaly I in the
sherds from Raigern and Stielice II, and in the clay stamps
that recur at Sesklo. So in Lengyel and Jordansmiihl we find
forms derived from models belonging to Troy I and also to Troy
II. Conversely, we have late Vinéa I elements (belonging in time
very possibly to Period II) appearing in Greece at the end of the
first Thessalian period and exact parallels to Butmir designs in
an E.M. III context on the Cyclades.’ Finally, crusted ware
from Vinéa II, that is to be equated with an advanced stage of
Danubian II, appears in Thessaly in the third period when
‘Urfirnis ware’ was still current. Hence Danubian II must
have begun about 2,500 B.c. or even earlier, and lasted down to
the last-named date, about 2,100 B.c.
   Vinéa II was, as we saw, in the main a continuation of the Summary:
older culture, but we had to admit pressure on it from other Vinca I
groups that we have designated Polgar and Lengyel. The rise
of these and their interrelations must next be discussed briefly.
   In the Polgar culture the basis of life is agriculture combined Summary:
with stock breeding and some hunting and fishing. ‘Trade Polgar
is not sufficiently developed to maintain a regular supply of
raw materials such as obsidian.
   War is not prominent, and the settlements are apparently
small.
   The main object of worship is the Danubian ‘mother god-
dess’. The dead are either cremated, the ashes being interred
in the village with only symbolic offerings, or buried in the
contracted position. Perhaps the whole series of model animals,
chairs, and houses were made for funerary use. The art shows
a keen sense of colour, hampered by imperfect means of ex-
pression in pottery. Save in the west," the spiral is used
only as a secondary element and usually in an exceedingly
degraded form.
    t For the date see Forsdyke, p. xxix.  i
                                                     s from Lengyel.
    2 Jenny (MAGW viii, p. 70) takes all his example
       96            THE CIVILIZATIONS      OF PERIOD    II
           The potter has gained complete mastery over his material
        and uses an oven. Weaving and the bow are, on the other hand,
        perhaps only acquired during the period.
           As tools, besides the shoe-last celt, triangular ‘pebble’ axe-
        heads, horn axes, and flint or obsidian knives are used. Spe-
        cialized weapons are absent. The pottery shows a variety of
        truly ceramic forms including theriomorphs though lacking
        genuine handles. Ladles with bored handles are characteristic.
           Imported sea shells are used as ornaments.
           Substantial rectangular houses with gabled roofs coexist
        with ‘pit-dwellings’.
Lengyel    At Lengyel and Jordansmiihl we find other traits.
           Trade playsa real part in the communal economy, in addition
        to the avocations attested for Polgar. ‘The settlements are con-
        centrated in a very conspicuous way at the junction of trade
        routes, and the extensions up the KGrds and to Salzburg sug-
        gest a search for gold and copper.
           Some men at least are warriors. The people live together in
        comparatively large villages and perhaps fortify them. The
       graves containing a man and a woman, or a man, a woman, anda
       child, show that monogamy prevailed. The position of women
       was high as the wealth of women’s graves testifies.
          The sway of the mother goddess is waning. But the dead
       are treated with great respect, and buried ritually with an
       abundance of vases, weapons, and ornaments.
          Art finds little expression in ceramic decoration, but a taste
       for colour is still attested in the interior of the houses. The
       spiral motive is accidental, but, when used, preserves a good
       running form, worthy of Butmir.
          Weaving is attested by whorls and spools. Perhaps on the
       Tisza copper is worked locally.
          With the addition of copper awls the tools are the same as at
       Polgar; but there are specialized weapons—spheroid mace-
       heads, perforated stone and even copper axes, and, on the Tisza,
       copper daggers, these being perhaps secondary accretions.
          Copper trinkets of Aegean form, gold buttons, and the teeth
       of game (deer) are worn as ornaments in addition to shells.
          The architecture agrees with that of the Polg4r complex.
       So, too, do the ceramic forms, save that the pedestalled bowl is
       universal and true handles are coming into general use.
          Thus, despite the very large measure of formal agreement,
       the inner characters of the two groups are in contrast. At the
       same time, notwithstanding a patently Danubian I substratum,
              THE CIVILIZATIONS      OF PERIOD    II           97
both cultures seem more than Danubian I enriched by trade
 borrowings.
    The Lengyel complex has a distinctly ‘aristocratic’ aspect,
and we remember that it appeared as an overlord culture
among the Danubian I peasants of Bohemia and Silesia. One
might be tempted to identify the new aristocracy with the
Anatolian prospectors and traders whose activities on Danubian
‘waters are so conspicuously reflected in many imitations of
Troadic objects. At the same time an infiltration of nomad
 Nordics from the steppes farther east might afford a better
 explanation of the tall long-headed skeletons, the axes, used
 apparently as weapons, and the red ochre in the graves. And
 in any case the survival of Danubian elements must not be
 under-estimated; even the axes might be nothing more than
 improvements of the bored celts of Period I.
    In the Polgar culture the Danubian traits are more pro-
 nounced, yet even here borrowings from the new ‘aristocracy’
 are undeniable. Both groups may then be regarded as due to
 a fusion between the Buikk culture and some new ethnic
 elements. This fusion took place in North-Eastern Hungary,
 whence the new compounds spread northward, westward, and
 southward.
  In Vinéa II we see the results of their southward advance,
but we believe that Vinéa I overlapped with the earliest
phases of Polgar and Lucska. The expansion of Vinéa I up
the Bosna and the Morava and even into Thessaly, might have
been actuated by the pressure of the steppe element that was,
on one hypothesis, absorbed in Lengyel, and would in any case
have opened up channels whence the knowledge of painting
could reach the léss lands. Then towards the end of the period
there was a regular overflow of Vinéa II elements into Thessaly,
bringing thither crusted ware and bored celts. For some time
hereafter Thessaly, Macedonia, and the South Danubian re-
gion form one continuous province where culture developed
on strictly parallel lines during Periods III and IV and possibly
still in Period V.




  3443                          oO
                                               VI
                                 PAINTED           POTTERY
               HOUGH the Danube was the main highway by which
               culture might reach Central Europe, cross-currents from
          the Ancient East following a more northerly route were always
          possible. Rather problematic evidence of such is in fact at
          hand.
  Erésd       On the extreme eastern border of ‘Transylvania in the Upper
           Alt valley, twenty-six settlements of a distinctly advanced
           population have come to light. The settlements all lie high on
           the léss terraces in naturally defensible positions (Map III,
           A-D). The material from all sites is remarkably uniform, but
           Erésd is the only one thoroughly explored, and is, therefore,
 Village adapted to serve as the type station. The prehistoric village is
           perched upona léss spur that rises steeply some 180 feet above
           the plain of the Alt. The site is protected on either side by
           deep ravines carved in the friable soil. A ditch had been dug
           across the neck that alone connected the settlement with the
           plateau. The area cut off by this moat is approximately
           5,000 m*. Within this space a strip on the north about 8 m.
         _ wide and 60 m. long has been excavated down to virgin soil,
           which was encountered at a depth of 4 m. Two layers of brick-
           red, burnt clay, separated by 1:30 m. of black deposit and
           capped or underlain by similar dark strata, evidently represent
           two distinct structural epochs in the history of the village. It
           is, however, stated 3 that the same pottery was found both above
           and below the lower clay layer and even in the black earth
           above the upper band; first in the ‘yellow subsoil’ did remains
           of coarse fabrics of later character come to light.
 Erésd I      In virgin soil one or two shallow oval pits had been excavated,
    ‘Pit- the largest being about 2 x 1m. across. There were further
dwellings’ deep bottle-necked excavations, none more than 1} metres in
          diameter at the base. Such pits were found to be full of ashes
          and kitchen refuse. Whether any of these holes in the ground
          really represented the first dwellings of the artists who pro-
          duced the magnificent pottery, characterizing the site, seems
          open to doubt: I personally regard them as silos. Hearths on
          « 'Teutsch, MPK.i,pp. 365 ff.; L4szlé,    mains only.    For Priesterhiigel   see
          Dolgozatok, ii (1911), pp. 175-260.       Teutsch, 1. c.
            Laszl6, Dolgozatok, 1914, pp. 280-      3 Laszld, Dacia, i, p. 26.
          417, dealing with architectural re-
   Sh
   |
                                         a                @|
  °|                      @
                                        ea.
                                         Sey                   \



                        tees
                                                           7\
   Va            se                                            |
       \
                 esse                                              |
                                                                   |
       °                  ee                        °      e
                           &                    s
                                                                       |
       i
       '




                                                               °
       ,                                   wa
           |                  @           @                        :



                                                                   :
        ®  |
           \                                                       3



    Os                                  Yee: ates.
                      —---        Probably walls
                      sane        Walls of roofed area

               Fic. 58.        Plan of megaron at Erésd




Fic. 59.                Reconstruction of megaron at Erésd
Fic. 60.   Vases from Erésd, Szekler National Museum




             Fic. 61.   Vases from Erésd.   +
                           PAINTED         POTTERY                            99
the level of virgin soil have also been discovered. It looks as if Defences
the original settlement had already been protected by a double
line of earthworks separated by a wide moat and reinforced by
stakes at the top of the sloping bank on the north.
  After about a metre of black earth, representing debris of Erésd II
occupation, had accumulated, a large section of the village was
rebuilt, the black earth having been partially levelled. The
remains of the new houses are well preserved. They lie ‘in’
(and just under) the lower stratum of burnt clay that consists
of their ruined floors, walls, and roofs.
   These houses are all rectangular in outline and were divided Houses
into two rooms. The compartment on the north constituted _
a sort of entrance porch, open in front and probably also on the
west side (Figs. 58, 59). The floor of the inner room behind
was about 9 inches higher than that of the porch. The floors
consisted of stamped clay resting upon the black earth. The
walls were of wicker-work, plastered with mud and supported
by vertical posts. The roof was probably gabled; three particu-
larly stout wooden posts in the centres of the front, partition,
and rear walls respectively must havesupported the ridge-piece.’
The roofed areas were, in one house, 8-15 x 5:5 m’, and in
another 6:6 x6:4_m?. Hearths of stone and clay were built
both in the porch and in the inner room. The hearths and the
 walls were plastered with clay, the surface being subsequently
 painted. A house at a higher level had been decorated with
 an elaborate moulding of painted mud-plaster that presumably
 stood over the inner doorway. The houses of the lower burnt
 stratum were arranged in rows. Seven have so far been un-
 covered along the north side of the village. There is room in
 the unexplored section for two similar rows, so that the whole
 settlement may have comprised twenty-one households.
    In the upper levels hearths, similar to those already de-
 scribed, were encountered, but the exact outline of the houses
 to which they belonged could not be determined.
    The pottery of the Alt stations is uniformly good. The               Pottery:
                             brick  or  orange  red,  but  the body  in  fabric
 normal surface colour is a                                           is
 thicker pieces is occasionally greyish * and even the surface    seem
 sometimes black or even mottle   d.    Nearly  all Erdésd  vases
                                                                    are
 to have been ornamented with painted patterns which            regular
 sometimes combined with mould         ed   decorat ions.    A

 x Just the same sort of house is being      Cf. Tzigara-Samuras, L’ Art du Peuple
 built by Transylvanian peasants to-day.     Roumain, p. Il.
                                             2 L4szi6, 1911, p. 240.
          100                            PAINTED      POTTERY
          closed oven was used for their manufacture; Dr. Laszlé found
           the ruins of such an oven full of vases. This, together with a
           clay model, discloses a sort of beehive structure.*      _
Ornamen-      The main   styles of painting are  as follows: (a) white on the
    tation natural red (or black *) surface; (b) white outlined with black on
           the red surface, natural or washed, the pattern in this case
           being reserved; or (c) (rare) red outlined with black on a pale
           buff slip. Then a sort of corrugated decoration (d) was also
           used. ‘The designs consist of broad shallow flutings, the raised
           surfaces being often painted white. The concave surfaces are
           highly polished, and when they meet form a sharp angular
           ridge (Fig. 62). The designs are based on the horizontal
           S-spiral and maeander, and are at first strewn about the surface
           regardless of the form of the pot; in typologically later vases,
           according to Dr. Frankfort,3 a tectonic arrangement comes into
           play, the patterns being accommodated to the shape. In some
           cases the patterns are so sharp and the figures recur with such
           uniformity that the use of some sort of stencil must be admitted.
           The painted patterns are sometimes supplemented by low
           round bosses.
   Forms      The shapes‘ of the Erésd pots are still but little removed
           from the primitive. The distinction of several parts of the vase
           is scarcely accentuated. More than two-thirds of the vases
         have the inverted truncated cone for their structural basis;
         only a minority go back to hemispherical types.5 Though
         pedestals and string-hole lugs are common, no genuine handles
         occur. Short tubular spouts,° opening just below the rim, have,
         however, been found at Erésd and some other sites, but very
         rarely.
             The most distinctive forms are: (a) conical dishes (or lids),
          sometimes with incurved brims;7 (0) string-hole lids like Fig.
          60,1; (c) hollow tubular supports (Fig. 61, 1); (d) pedestalled
          bowls in which the dish has coalesced with the support Fig.
          61, 2; (e) biconical beakers with a very narrow base or on a
          low stand-ring ; * (f) open craters (Fig. 62); (g) urns with short
          ™ Childe, Dawn, fig. 67. The same           3 Op. cit., pp. 19 and 21. The pots
          type of oven’is used by the local           cited as evidence in n. 4 are not dat-
          peasantry to-day.                           able.
          2 Frankfort, Studies, ii, p. 29 and n. 1,   4 Studied in detail by Dr. Laszlé in
          describes a class of pots painted, with     Dacia, i (1924), pp. 1-27.
          thin white lines, best represented in       slbid... ps 23).
          Erésd IIb, to South Danubian in-            6 Laszl6, 1924, pl. x11, 1-3.
          fluence, without adducing any evidence      7 Ibid., pl. 1; 1911, figs. 11-14.
          for this attribution.                       § Laszld, 1911, fig. 23.
     Fic. 62.   Vase from Erésd.    4+




     Fic. 63. Vase from Erésd.     ¢1




Fic. 64. Ladle, Erésd, after Teutsch.    4
                          PAINTED        POTTERY                                IOI
necks (Fig. 60) ;.(2) ‘amphorae’ with string-hole handles (Fig.
63); (z) large ovoid pithoi ;* (7) theriomorphs ;* (A) rectangular
vases;3 and (J) ladles generally with very long handles (Fig. 64).
Miniature vases of all shapes are common. Curiously enough
a vase of form (g) at Kronstadt approximates very closely to
a Villanova ossuary in shape.
   Polished stone implements are comparatively rare. ‘The Stone
most characteristic is an adze, flat on one face and curved onthe ple-
other rather like a ‘shoe-last celt’, but differentiated by its ments
squared small sides and other details (Fig. 65). No perforated
stone axes have been found in situ. Blades of flint are scattered
about in profusion.       Even triangular and, perhaps also trans- Arrow-
verse,‘ arrow-heads and ‘saws’, i.e. sickle-teeth (Fig. 66, 12), heads




                Fic. 65. Stone celts, Oltszem, after Laszlé6. 4

occur. Obsidian blades have been found at Malnas and Sickle-
Priesterhiigel. The material was probably derived from Mt. teeth n
Hargita, which is quite near, and not from the Aegean or the Obsidia
Hegyalja.                                    ;
   Bone and horn was   very  freely used. Chisel s, borers, fish- Fish-
                                                                  /ooks
hooks (Fig. 66) and—most characteristic of all— various typesded  Horn
of spatulae were made from bone. Horn and antler proviaxes, hafts
piercers and picks of classic types, and when perforated
hammers, and hafts.5                                         :            me,
                                                          jority Copper
   Copper has been found at most sites, butat Erésd thema
                                                      clay or the
of the finds were made in the upper stratum of burntred already
superimposed black earth, though the metal appea    the simplest
in the bottom layer.“ Apart from an axe-adze, ofcopper occurs
type found above the painted pottery levels
                                          4 MPK. i, p. 367, fig. 4.
Ti TOLL ig. .32-
                                          5 Dolgozatok, ii, figs. go-I.
2 1911, fig. 86, apparently represent-
                                          6 Dacia, i, p. 27-
ing a sheep.
3 1924, pl. Ix.
          102                        PAINTED     POTTERY
          only as awls (Erésd), fish-hooks, and pins (Priesterhiigel), or
          beads and bracelets.




                NEEE
                oeee
                eS
                hy LLL
                  ore
                   LZ
                 x




                Fic. 66. Flint and bone implements, clay models, pintaderas   and beads,
                                    Priesterhiigel, after Teutsch. 2

   Gold     Gold in form of a thin ribbon helix and a wire ring has been
          found at a low level at Erésd, and was presumably imported
          from West Transylvania.
Figurines   All the settlements yield rough clay figurines. These
                           PAINTED POTTERY                                 103
generally represent a nude female and slightly steatopygous per-
sonage standing erect (Fig. 66,36). Some have been modelled
in two vertical sections which were subsequently stuck together,
as in Moravia. One fragment from Erésd is decorated in the
style of Cucuteni A. Male statuettes are very rare. One from
Oltszem is depicted squatting. Besides the anthropomorphic
figures, models of cattle, sheep, goats, and swine (Fig. 66, 27—
29) have been noted. One recently unearthed is remarkably
like an elephant.
   As ornaments the people of the Alt valley wore bracelets Orna-
of copper and necklaces composed of copper helices and tubes, ments
Umio-shell and marble (? white limestone) disks (Fig. 66, 31),
bears’ teeth, stags’ teeth, and horn beads.  A regular hoard of
such finery was discovered in a pot lying in the upper layer of
burnt clay at Erdsd. Rectangular laminae from boars’ tusks,
perforated at either end for sewing, were also in use.
  Painting of the person is indicated both by the figurines, Tattooing
ornamented in Cucuteni style, and the occurrence of clay
stamps or pintaderas, sometimes bearing traces of red colour.
They were usually designed to give a double-spiral impression
. ig. 66, 38-40). At Erésd they are.restricted to the lowest
ayer.”
   It is obvious that the creators of this rich civilization Agricul-
