            vival of Danubian II tradition such as was seen, more clearly,
            at Oszentivan.
Domestic       All the above-mentioned types recur in the settlements,
    ware    generally in larger sizes (cf. Fig. 138). Other domestic types
            are a sort of amphora with no very distinct neck (Fig. 1394),
            deep bowls with horizontal handles (Fig. 139b),a small jar,
            roughly biconical in shape but with a very rounded profile, a
            pot with cylindrical neck, and pithoi with roughened bodies
            but smooth necks. In some Lower Austrian settlements, vases
            with spikes on the inside (as in Stary Zamek II), sieve vases
            or ‘cheese-strainers’, and even spouted vases° are found.
Ornament       The only regular ornamentation on Aunjetitz pottery is re-
            presented by small nipples on the shoulder ;7 there are generally
            three on mugs, one being replaced by a handle on amphorae.
            But one early vase from Moravia® is adorned with two rows
            of regular conical warts, while a few settlements have yielded
            knobbed ware like that described on pages 39, 81,and 120above.
            Incised decoration occurs, but quite exceptionally, in Moravia,
            the ornament being limited to zig-zag lines (Fig. 1374).
   Trade       The Aunjetitz population were essentially agriculturalists,
            but they were kept in regular connexion with foreign areas by
            pedlars who travelled with ready-made metal implements and
            ornaments over a wide area. ‘The hoards, representing the
            > For these cf. PBI 1804; p. 523          p. 80) inverts the relationship.
            Pravék, 1903, pls. xuiI-xiv; Arch.        5 Cf. Kossinna in Mannus, iv, p. 180.
            Ixxiv, p. 164, fig. 8c.                   6 e.g. Langenlois near Krems, WPZ.
            7 MAGW. xxxii (1902), p. 126.             vii, p. 69, fig. 1; MAGW. li, p. 41.
            3 Cf. Gjerstad, p. 114, pyxis 3, for a    7 Many specimens in the Museums of
            Cypriote parallel.              ‘         Prague and Brno.
            4 Schranil, Studie, fig. 16; he thinks    8 Real. i, pl. 52a (bottom left-hand
            they are derived from the Bulgarian,      corner)= WP2Z. iii, p. 34, fig. Iv, 3.
            whereas Menghin (Gétze-Festschrift,
Fic. 135.    Marschwitz jug, Guckelwitz near Breslau.     M. Breslau.   4




               Fic. 136. Aunjetitz mugs, Moravia.     M. Brno




            Fic. 137.   Aunjetitz vases, Charvaty.   M. Olomouc
       Fic. 138.   Domestic ware, Vysoéany.   Narodni M. Prague.    +




Fic. 139.   Domestic ware, Praha-Libet and Kobyli8y.   Narodni M.       1
                           THE EARLY BRONZE AGE                                            233
stock-in-trade of such pedlars, mark out regular trade routes.
One ran from the Elbe basin up the Moldau, then crossed the The
Bohmer Wald and debouched upon the Danube near Linz. amber
The pedlars forded the river at this point, then traversed route
Bavaria, and reached Upper Italy by way of the Brenner.
Amber was the main commodity carried down this route; the
products of the North Italian bronze industry—lItalian celts
and daggers—being brought back in exchange. A counterpart
to this route was that by which the amber was brought to
Bohemia. The main line in this direction lay along the Elbe
and led to the Danish deposits.t It is not unlikely that a
second route reached Silesia through the Glatz pass and then
tapped the East Prussian deposits by way of Poznania.” Finally, The
Bohemia must have been connected with Hungary or at least copper
Slovakia. This route is not so well marked by depots, perhaps route
because it passed through aterritory occupied exclusively by
the Aunjetitz folk. Its existence must be inferred on a priori
grounds. In the first place Bohemia possessed no appreciable
stocks of copper, and the deposits of the Austrian Alps were not
yet in full exploitation. It is therefore to be presumed that the
necessary metal was brought from the rich lodes of Slovakia or
Transylvania. The gold from Aunjetitz graves is thought by
Schranil to be derived from the same quarter, though in view
of the local supplies his conclusion seems questionable. In
any case, direct relations between Bohemia and Hungary are
attested for the transitional period and the epoch of the proto-
Aunjetitz culture. In the Aunjetitz period itself the parallelism
between Bohemian and 'Tészeg pottery and the frequent occur-
rence of Hungarian types—notably the gold ‘ear-rings’ of type
A1—in Bohemia bear witness to the maintenance of such rela-
 tions.   More tangible evidence is furnished by the hoards of
 Stomfa‘ in County Pressburg, Ung. Altenburg in County Mo-
 sony (right on the Austrian border), and Stollhof in Lower
 Austria. The torques, Ar, of which the depot of Ung. Alten-
 burg is said to have contained 1,000 specimens, are believed
 to represent the ingots of raw metal since they usually consist
 of almost pure copper.®
 1 Navarro   in G¥.      1925   (Dec.),   pp.        runs across Pomerania and Branden-
 486 f.                                              burg towards Saxo-Thuringia, _
 2 Kostrzewski’s   map     in Przeg A. ii,           3 Pace   Birkner   MAGW.       vii,    p.
pl. v1, shows two series of Early Bronze             (157).
 Age deposits converging upon the                    4 AE. xix, p. 233, pl. 11.
mouth of the Vistula. The one tra-                   5 ZfE. 1896, p. 72.
verses Poznania and Silesia, the other               © Schranil, Boéhmen, p. 111.
   3443                                         Hh
             234                    THE EARLY BRONZE AGE
                Along all these routes arose secondary centres of industry
             closely allied to the Aunjetitz culture, and in part either colo-
             nies from Bohemia or parallel developments of the proto-
             Aunjetitz group. It is convenient to deal first with the West
             Hungarian group.

   Veselé      Veselé and Gdta Types. In Eastern Moravia and at some
     type   Lower Austrian sites we can recognize ceramic types that recur
     sites  in a purer form in Western Slovakia. The principal sites are
            Veselé (near Piestany) and Maly Varad,’ but the same types
            are found far up the Waag valley in County Trencen.’:
    Veselé     From bell-shaped pits laid bare in a brick-works at Veselé
   pottery (Fig. 140) come, besides the common cylindrical mug on three
            feet like Fig. 137d, many mugs with a band handle extending
            from the rim of the funnel-shaped neck down to the small
            globular body (Fig. 141 b), amphorae with cylindrical necks
            (Fig. 141 f), string-hole vases, and lids in the shape of an in-
            verted cone with a handle on the inside as in the later Vattina
            form shown in Fig. 161 below. Some of the funnel-necked
            mugs of this group are decorated with cord-impressions.3
               Though skeletons whose skulls have been stained green
            from bronze ear-rings or lock-rings have come to light at Veselé,
            no graves have been properly excavated, and so no distinctive
            bronze types can be cited.
               The group is connected with the Aunjetitz culture on the
            strength of the tripod mug and the technique of the pottery.
            At the same time the cord ornament just mentioned suggests
            that the late Corded Ware culture represented in Stary Zamek
            II contributed to its formation.
Gata type      South of the Danube in North-Western Hungary and the
      sites adjacent tracts of Lower Austria south-east of a line running
            from Bruck to Hainburg,‘ we find a series of cemeteries and
            settlements of an Aunjetitz character but containing a rather
            different inventory of ceramic and metal types. The principal
            sites are the cemeteries of Gata (now Gattendorf) 5 and Jessehof
            Puszta ° on the Austrian border.
  Bronzes      The grave-goods include many ‘Aunjetitz’ bronzes: flat celts,
            a triangular dagger (or halberd !) blade, pins of types Ar, A3,
             t Real. ii, p. 72; ITA. Prague, p. 341.   4 Real.ii,p. 261; Franz, BRGK., p. 18
             ie material is to be seen at Brati-       and fig. 11.
             slava.                                    5 AE. xviii, pp. 146 f.; xix,   p . 47 ff.
             2M. Ture. Sv. Martin.                     6 Hampel, pl. cLxxxviti.      roe
             3 BRGK. xvi. 1925-6, p. 18, fig. 10.
                 Fic. 140.      Veselé, view of site
a                  b                         @                      d




                                                                &
    Fic. 141.   Veselé vases.    Private Collection, Veselé.   1
                                                               6
                      THE EARLY           BRONZE    AGE                      235
A4, and A6 (with plain or decorated heads), ear-rings of type 1,
torques of type A1, copper tubes, and simple arm cylinders of
plain bronze wire, but no Aunjetitz pins (A2), manchette arm-
lets (A2), nor amber beads.
   The pottery agrees in fabric with that of Aunjetitz. The Pottery
forms differ slightly. In the mugs the handle generally begins
below the neck, as in the Aunjetitz form, but is placed rather
higher up; the body is well formed, differentiated from the
neck by a shoulder groove or even aplastic ridge; it was made,
according to von Miské,' apart from the neck with the aid of
a wooden mould. The other leading type is the hour-glass
mug, already mentioned as related to Aegean and Perjamos
types.” Plastic ridges are sometimes used ornamentally.
   Some of the pins? may be derived from Bohemia, but that
in no wise means that the whole culture is merely an emana-
tion from Aunjetitz. On the contrary, it is a parallel off-shoot
from the same southern stem, and one which reveals the ori-
ginal southern inspiration more pure than its more northerly
brother. The Aunjetitz forms would have reached it quite
naturally in the course of trade, for the routes to the copper
lodes would pass across its area.
   In the area traversed by the amber route on the Upper Straubing
Danube a culture arose very similar in its content to the classi- group
cal Aunjetitz culture east of the Béhmer Wald. Its centre lay
on the Upper Danube plain round Straubing and Regensberg,
but outposts perhaps reached as far as Upper Bavaria and Cann-
statt on the Neckar.‘
   It is likewise represented by cemeteries containing contracted Burials
skeletons of which that at Straubing® on the Danube is the
most important. At Kelheim, however, two cases of cremation Crema-
and a pithos grave containing a child’s skeleton have been re- tion
ported.’ These graves on the Upper Danube agree very closely
in the metal furniture with the Bohemian; they contain not only Bronzes
triangular daggers, awls with bone handles, amber beads, and
torques of type Ar, but (rarely) even the characteristic Aunjetitz
1 AfA. xv, p. 265. The Gata cup is         head shown in Syria, 1925, or LAAA.
found occasionally in Aunjetitz graves     vi, pl.xx1. Apart from the pins no Gata
in Moravia, e.g. at Opatovice near         types are peculiar to Aunjetitz to the
Rajhrad, Pravék, 1903, pl. XII, 7.         exclusion of the ‘southern prototypes’.
2 p.217 above. Reinecke first noticed      4 Behrens, p. 64, no.9; MAGW. liv,
the Aegean origin of the type, MAGW.       pp. 111 f.; Kraft, Bronzezeit, p. 17.
XXXli, p. 126.                             5 Behrens, pp. 65 f. and pls. v and v1.
3 Pin A4, however, may be connected        6 [bid., p. 65, no. 12.
with the Syrian eyelet pins with a bulb
            236                   THE EARLY         BRONZE    AGE
         pin Az. Pins of type A6 with unornamented heads were,
         however, far commoner. Distinctive of the group are further
         helical wire cones of astounding workmanship (Plate 14,
         A1), parallels to which are, however, known in Lower Austria.’
         They seemed to have formed the model for the Middle Bronze
         Age spiked tutulus and so may have been worn on the girdle.
         Twenty ‘ivory’ disks, 3 cm. diameter and ornamented with
         engraved circles, are said to have been found in grave 4 at
         Straubing.
 Pottery    The pottery from these graves again differs from the stan-
         dard Aunjetitz ware in preserving the pouched form of the




                          Fic. 142.   Dish from Straubing, after Behrens.   }>°

            jugs as against the. Bohemian-—Silesian keeled variant, while
            some examples come very near to Gata types.” The dishes, too,
            have rims turned up into five peaks (Fig 142), whereas farther
            east the points are four in number and lie horizontally. Some-
            times these bowls exhibit a series of horizontal slits under the
            rim.3 Incised ornament, as in the proto-Aunjetitz pottery, is
            not unknown, and decorative plastic ridges occur. ‘This group
            may be regarded as a series of trading outposts, planted from
            Bohemia at the end of the proto-Aunjetitz phase, but the possi-
            bility of direct affiliation with cultures flourishing lower down
            the Danube (Gata) must be kept in mind.‘
Silesian-         As the proto-Aunjetitz culture was common to Silesia and
   Polish Bohemia it is natural that close connexion should subsist be-
   group
            ™ In the MBA. depot found near            gold helices from Ur show.
            Stockerau, unpublished, in Naturhist.     2 e.g. Behrens, pl. v, 20.
            Museum, Vienna.      The remarkable       3 Behrens, pl. v, 22.
            technique which they illustrate had       4 The graves or settlement at Maut-
            been evolved in Mesopotamia during        hausen in Upper Austria would pro-
            the fourth millennium, as marvellous      vide a link (Theuer, pl. 111, 1).
                        THE EARLY BRONZE AGE                                      237
tween the two regions in the subsequent phase. In fact in their
furniture the Silesian and Bohemian graves of Period IV corre-
spond exactly.! The majority of the Silesian cemeteries lie
between the Glatz Pass and Breslau, with outposts on the Upper
Oder and round Glogau. Thence they are strung out across
Poznania in the direction of the Vistula elbow at ‘Torin. The
Aunjetitz pin Az is not met in graves north of the Wartha,
but pin A4 and manchette armlets occur beyond that river.’
It is to be noted that some of the people interred in these
graves were so small (under 5 feet high) that Seger 3 described
them as ‘pigmies’.
   The true Aunjetitz graves from Saxo-Thuringia, most of Saxo-
which lie along the Saale valley,* are explicable in the same Thurin-
way through a colonization from the south-east along the gian   group
amber trade route.
   The relative dating of the Aunjetitz and allied cultures is Chrono-
not to-day so simple as it appeared some time ago. It was logy
thought by Montelius, Kossinna,’ and most other authorities
that the Aunjetitz graves all belonged exclusively to the Early
Bronze Age, and Seger ° supports the same doctrine to-day.
That view is, however, not easy to maintain, at least for Bo-
hemia, Moravia, and Lower Austria. In the areas of the thickest
Aunjetitz settlements Middle Bronze Age cemeteries and vil-
lages are totally lacking in Bohemia and are rare in Silesia,
Moravia, and Lower Austria, a fact which suggests a survival
of the Aunjetitz culture into the later period? Such an infer-
ence is supported by the sporadic occurrence in Aunjetitz
graves of types characteristic of the Middle Bronze Age, €-9.
pins A6 decorated, C3, bilobate pins, and even isolated Late
Bronze Age types—such as vase-headed pins. ‘The recently
discovered fibulae, too, point to an approximation in date
between the late Aunjetitz culture and the Late Bronze Age
of the Tyrol. Confirmation of these doubts is provided by the
cemetery of Geméinlebarn in Lower Austria. ‘The unpub-
lished pottery from this site, exhibited at Vienna, illustrates a
continuous evolution from inhumation graves with a typically
   SV. ii, pp. 17 ff.; iv, pp. 3 ff.; Real.   VAT., p. xxix; cf. listin JST. vi, p. 30.
i ply 5 i                                     5 Mannus, iii, p. 316.
2 Cf. yon Richthofen’s map facing p.          © Real. i, p. 270, § 24.
 12, and Przeg A. ii, pl.vi and pp. 188f.     7 Kraft (p. 83) has in fact admitted
3 SV. ii, p18.                                that the mature Aunjetitz culture
4 Limited on the north by aline from          overlaps with the beginning of his
Brunswick to Magdeburg, and south-            phase B. Cf. Schranil, Bohmen, p. 146.
west by Mulhausen and Weimar,
             238                 THE EARLY        BRONZE       AGE
             Aunjetitz furniture to cremation graves; in the latter Late
             Bronze objects such as two-membered fibulae with leaf-shaped
             bow, round backed knives of types 2 and 4, and mas-
             sive twisted rings already occur. The only conclusion is that
             the Aunjetitz culture in Lower Austria lasted, virtually un-
             changed, throughout the earlier phase of the Middle Bronze
             Age to pass over gradually into the Urnfield culture.
             As a matter of fact the general trend of thought is towards
             this heresy. We believé that the Aunjetitz culture covers
             phases A and B of the Bronze Age.
 Absolute       The absolute chronology is perhaps less debatable. The
  chrono-    classical dates proposed by Montelius, accepted by Dechelette,
      logy   Hubert,   Kossinna,    and Seger, and even              raised by Hubert
         Schmidt, are still unsupported by solid facts. The occurrence
        of ingot torques of Aunjetitz or proto-Aunjetitz form in a
        hoard of thirteenth dynasty date at Byblos gives one fixed
        point, provided an approximate synchronism between the first
        use of the type in Central Europe and in Asia Minor be ad-
        mitted. Another indisputable date is given by the model of a
        Vapheio cup from a grave at Nienhagen.* These fixed points
        represent an upper limit of 1900 B.c. and a lower limit of 1450
        B.C. Perhaps the balance of probability favours putting the
        beginning of the Aunjetitz culture near the upper date.
Summary    The Aunjetitz culture and its outposts introduce us for the
        first time to a society in which manufacture and trade indis-
        putably play a regular role on a par with primary industry.
        That implies a degree of industrial specialization: there must
        have been miners and smiths as well as traders. On the other
        hand, there are no obvious indications of a sharp social strati-
        fication nor of a specialized class of warriors. At the same time
        the number of hoards implies that travel was hazardous. The
        wealth of ornaments in women’s graves shows that the females
        enjoyed a relatively high status.
           Apart from the well-furnished and strictly orientated graves
        the religion of these folk is a sealed book. Nevertheless, disk-
        headed pins of type A6, engraved with a cruciform pattern,
        may be related to a cult of the sun. Neither in pottery nor
        metal work did the Aunjetitz folk achieve much in the way of
        art. ‘The patterns, though finely engraved, are essentially recti-
        linear—principally triangles (Figs. 132, 134).
           The bronze worker displayed both skill and originality. He
        could use a closed mould, sometimes made in several pieces
                           * Real. i, pl. 53 a; Evans, Palace, ii, p. 175.
                      THE EARLY         BRONZE    AGE                      239
and very neatly fitted together, and perhaps was already ac-
quainted with the cive perdue process. He could also rivet
pieces of bronze together. In the use of the hammer he had
made less progress. If the prototypes of many of his products
had been supplied by the south, he developed them in a quite
original manner. His production as a whole is thoroughly
native. The safety-pin might even have been his invention,
though its value was not fully appreciated locally.’
   The distinctive tools are flat or flanged celts, and chisels
and awls with bone handles.
   The sole weapon was the dagger which could also serve as
a knife.
   The Aunjetitz culture is essentially the continuation of the Origin:
proto-Aunjetitz, as its general habit, its burial rites, tools, orna- Metal-
ments, and, above all, its pottery indicate unambiguously. The lurgy
vital difference between the two is the freer use of metal in
the former, which possessed a school of metallurgists producing
for the local market. What are the roots of this metallurgical
industry?
   The exploitation of metal ores presupposes a considerable Links
knowledge of the property of minerals, that could only be with   Asia
acquired by practical experience. The mining or washing for Minor
tin ores, upon which the Aunjetitz culture was most imme-
diately based, must have been initiated by visitors or explorers
trained in the necessary processes where metallurgy and mining
had long flourished. But we have been finding on every page
of the last two chapters vestiges of connexion with, and in-
spiration from, one such centre in Anatolia, and we know
to-day that the Mesopotamians of the fourth millennium were
already acquainted with the value of tin. We saw, in fact, that
the proto-Aunjetitz culture from which the Bronze Age civi-
lization sprang was absolutely saturated with such Anatolian
influence. In the Aunjetitz bronzes themselves we find many
types of Troadic or“Asiatic origin. In addition to the ear-rings
and knot-headed pins, traceable already in the preceding epoch,
we can now cite the shield ornaments” and the racquet pin
As; the latter was used in Mesopotamia as a hair-ornament
in the fourth millennium.3
   What is still more striking is that a Syrian type of torque,
which perhaps was already so used in its homeland, should
t Cf. p. 254 below.                      4 In view of the large numbers in the
2 With fig. 132 cf. SS., no. 5878.       Byblos hoa        rd
                                                     ;unfortun  ately they have
3 Childe, Most Ancient East, fig. 82.    not been weighed.
           240                    THE    EARLY       BRONZE     AGE
           have been adopted by the Central European metallurgists as
           a unit of the raw metal. It is equally important that one of
           the distinctive tools of the Aunjetitz metal-workers, the grooved
           stone hammer, is also found in such early mines in Armenia
            and Sinai as have been explored.*                           e
                We may also      recall the  pithos  burials and  the trinity  of feet,
            distinctiv e  of  Aunjetitz    pottery, as  Troadic  features.   Then,   in
            the light    of  all  this, we   remembe  r   among   the earliest   dated
            implements of rich bronze the celts from Priam’s Treasure in
            Troy II, 3. The conclusion is that the Aunjetitz school of
            metallurgy would have been founded by immigrants from that
            quarter. But the traces of Trojan or Anatolian influence for
            the most part go back to Period III, as do the roots of the
            Aunjetitz culture. The maturity of that culture seems to fall
            in an epoch when trade with Troy was languishing or non-
             existent. In other words, the rise of a local bronze industry in
            Central Europe seems to coincide with the cessation of exports
            to Troy, probably owing to the fall of that city;? deprived of
            their former market, the immigrant metal-workers in Central
            Europe began producing for home consumption. So the rise
            of the Aunjetitz culture would be a reflex of the fall of Troy II.
                In any case we seek the prime motive force in Bohemian
           ‘metallurgy in the presence of a very few foreign craftsmen
            hailing from the south-east.
West con-       But there were other prospectors in Central Europe—the
   nexions Bell-beaker folk from the west. And Schuchhardt and Schmidt
            assign a great role to Spain in the development of Central
  Spanish European metallurgy. There are certainly many points of
 parallels agreement between the Aunjetitz culture and western com-
            plexes. The daggers and celts can be paralleled at El Argar,
            and even a halberd of Almerian type is reported from an Aun-
            jetitz grave in Lower Austria. The characteristic implement
           * Chantre, Caucase, i, p. 50; Petrie,      garded with scepticism so long as the
           Explorations in Sinai, p. 50, fig. 56;     evidence for early civilization in the
           Schliemann, Jlios, fig. 631. Frankfort,    former region is so thin. But we have
           Studies, ii, pp. 148 f., has postulated    already admitted an impulse from the
           a Caucasian centre of metallurgy from      east as one factor in the rise of the
           which the torques, the racquet pins,       Hungarian Copper Age civilization.
           the ear-rings with flattened ends; and     2 Had the Aunjetitz culture and the
           other elements here disclosed would        Danube trade existed during the life
           have been diffused on the one hand         of Troy II, we should certainly expect
           to Mesopotamia, Syria, and Anatolia,       to find Aunjetitz types and amber
           on the other to the Danube basin. This     there, whereas the only objects of dis-
           attractive explanation of the earlier      tinctively European affinities, the axe
           class of parallels between the Caucasus    mentioned above and the bronze celts,
           and Central Europe can only be re-         would be more in place in Period III.
                      THE EARLY          BRONZE        AGE                      241
of the smith, the grooved hammer stone, is found in prehistoric
mines in Spain and Britain,’ but of course the type occurs also
in the Ancient East as noted above. Seger* has drawn atten-
tion to a pair of copper bulls from a depot of this period found
at Bithyn in Poznania which may be matched in Brittany.
But again the type is probably oriental in origin. We know
that people brandishing the typically ‘Iberic’ halberd crossed
the Ligurian Alps. Finally, the Aunjetitz pottery is often
startlingly like that from the graves of El Argar.‘
   These coincidences are certainly puzzling. Perhaps, how-
ever, they are sufficiently explained by the common Asiatic
origin of metallurgy in Western and Central Europe and the
presence of the Beaker-folk in both areas.’ Nevertheless, the
influence of the latter side by side with our hypothetical south-
eastern prospectors must have been substantial.
   Finally, Upper Italy undoubtedly exercised an influence on Italian
the evolution of the Aunjetitz culture. The characteristic influence
round-heeled dagger was possibly developed there out of the
Early Minoan forms that appear in the graves of Remedello,
and the same centre can put in a claim with Troy, Spain, and
Central Europe to the first invention of the flanged celt. Both
these types appear in Italy in the ‘Periodo eneolitico’. It is
practically certain that the bronze-hilted dagger, as well as
certain types of pin (trilobate, &c.) and the celt with an in-
dented butt, is Italian in origin.
   This Italian influence was no doubt due to trade. The land
amber trade route terminated at the head of the Adriatic, and
Upper Italy thus became the intermediary between Central
Europe and Pylos, Mycenae and Knossos. As the interchange
of goods between Italy and the north apparently became regu-
larly established during the Bell-beaker phase, it is not easy to
decide which area had the priority in some of the earlier inno-
vations. But it may be safely asserted that the convergence
in Bohemia of this current of intercourse with the south-west
and that from Hungary gave the Aunjetitz culture its dominat-
ing position in the Early Bronze Age.
t Evans, Stone Implements, p. 234.            mian, but the omphalos base and the
2 Real.i,p.270.        -                      handles of the latter are never found.
3 Déchelette, ii, fig. 198.                   5 The first round-heeled daggers go
4 Siret, Questions, p.156. The Spanish        back to the Bell-beaker epoch in Bo-
wares are even mottled like the Bohe-         hemia.



  3443                                   li
                                            242
              Il.   THE   SAXO-THURINGIAN              BRONZE           CULTURE

      We have seen above that the Aunjetitz culture is represented
      by a series of typical graves in Saxo-Thuringia. But the Early
      Bronze Age in this area has a character of its own, revealed by
      peculiar weapons and burial rites existing side by side with the
      ordinary Aunjetitz forms and customs.
Royal    Besides flat graves (and pithos burials) a number of barrows
tombs in this area belong to the period with which we are dealing.
      The great tumulus near Leubingen’ covered a gabled mor-
      tuary-house. The floor, paved with stone flags on a mound of
      earth, measured 3-9 x 2:1 m?. The side walls of oak beams,
      overlaid with thatch, sloped up to a rafter supported at one
      end on an oak trunk.
         In the chamber an old man lay extended, and across his
      body rested the corpse of a young girl. The grave-goods were:
      a halberd blade engraved with lines parallel to the edges, like
      Fig. 143, a triangular dagger blade similarly decorated, two
      flanged celts of type Az, a flat chisel with rudimentary lugs
      at the side,” a perforated axe of serpentine 30 cm. long and
      resembling a late Danubian ‘plough-share’ in outline, a cylin-
      drical bracelet of massive gold adorned with ornamental ribs
      on the outside (Pl. 8, A3), gold pins including type A2, and
      gold ear-rings or lock-rings of type D4, anda large jar.
         A barrow near Helmsdorf3 was only slightly less rich. The
      chamber was a large stone cist probably roofed with wood. It
      contained a triangular dagger, a celt stated to be of English
      manufacture,‘ a simple diorite axe-hammer, gold bracelets and
      pins, one of type A2. A small cist near the periphery of the
      barrow contained a contracted skeleton with a very late corded
      beaker.
         Besides these royal graves Early Bronze Age interments are
      found, often with ‘neolithic’ burials, in many barrows, €. 9.
      the Baalberg* near Bernburg, Dorndorf,° Gosek,’ Kétzschen
      (Merseburg).*
         These barrows introduce us to a series of forms strange to
      Bohemia. ‘The hoards between the Saale and the Elbe supple-
      ment the information given by the burials, revealing, as dis-
      Tepes V, Pp. I-59.                         tionally low nickel content in the im-
      ? With this cf. the chisel from Kuttlau   _ plement.
      in Silesia, Gétze-Fest., p. 85, fig. 3.     SAPS at, splekiys
      Sep One Vis                                 & Tbid: ple xite ds
      4 l.c., p. 55. This opinion is based        7 Ibid., p. 67.
      both on the form and on the excep-          § VAT.; p. 13.
Fic. 143.   Hoard of Neuenheiligen, British Museum.   }
         244                    THE    EARLY       BRONZE   AGE
          and there are copper deposits near Halle.’ This commercial
          importance is reflected in the exceptional wealth of gold in the
          graves, and still more conspicuously by the remarkable hoard
          of gold celts and ornaments found at Merseburg.’
Summary      The Saxo-Thuringian Bronze Age civilization has a different
          aspect from that of Bohemia. Industry and commerce indeed
          form its economic basis. But war is an absorbing interest.
             The royal tombs, under huge barrows, indicate powerful
          chieftains among the merchants. For them at least a barrow
          was erected. Traces of human sacrifice are associated with the
          burials of chiefs. The jewellery discloses a certain aesthetic
          sense as does the rich ornamentation of the weapons.
             The tools conform on the whole to Aunjetitz types, but the
          halberd and the ‘double-axe’ are added to the armament. The
          Leubingen grave discloses a curious type of rectangular house-
          construction.
             In explaining these differences we must again distinguish
          between the industry and its users.
   Origin    The general war-like character of the culture (especially the
          use of the battle-axe), and also the burial rite of the chiefs,
          point unmistakably to a survival of the Corded Ware folk.
          These presumably constituted a military aristocracy among the
          Aunjetitz people, who were buried in simple flat graves.
  English    The peculiarities of the industry are explicable in terms of
     con- the special commercial relations of its area. ‘The Central Ger-
  nex1ons man halberds find their closest parallels in Ireland‘ rather than
          in Spain or Italy. The flat-tanged dagger from Neuenheiligen
          may likewise be inspired by British models> if not descended
         directly from the local Bell-beaker weapons.              So, too, the shaft-
         hole double-axes are to be connected with the symbolic copper
         axes brought fromthe Atlantic across France.® Thustheoriginal
         southern stimulus which produced the Aunjetitz culture was
         blended in Saxo-Thuringia with inspirations radiating from
         Britain and the west. ‘The conjunction of the two currents in a
         well-organized but warlike and vigorous society gave to the Saxo-
         Thuringian bronze culture its peculiar vigour and originality.
         « These are so inaccessible and hard       Morbihan, figured by Dechelette (ii,
         to work that they can scarcely have        p. 198) as a halberd, looks even more
         been exploited in antiquity.               like our specimens; but an examina-
         2 VAT., p. 15 and figs. 162 and 189.       tion of the original in the Ashmolean
         3 Note that the Bronze Age graves          discloses that it was not hafted as a
         frequently lie in barrows built by the     halberd.
         Corded Ware folk in ‘neolithic’ times.     5 As Archaeologia, xliii, pl. xxx, 1;
         4 Cf. e.g. Coffey, Bronze Age, fig. 10.    cf. Gétze-Fest., p. 94.
         The implement from San Fiacre,             6 Vide p. 193 above.
                                     245
                    Ill.   THE   ADLERBERG        CULTURE
In the Rhine valley a bronze industry arose contemporary with
Aunjetitz and partly on the same foundation. A round-heeled
dagger of Italian type was already found in this area with a
zoned beaker, in the neighbourhood of Bingen.’ At a rather
later stage, certainly after the Beaker folk had left for England,
a regular series of small cemeteries on both sides of the river
bears witness to the existence of a local bronze industry. ‘The
most important is that on the Adlerberg, near Worms, where
the graves were adjacent to pit-dwellings of the usual type.’
The graves were usually simple trenches containing contracted
skeletons. These belonged to tall individuals, nearly six feet
high, but brachy- or mesaticephalic.3 The grave-goods were
poor. Bronze‘ was represented only by triangular daggers,
awls, wire rings, and pins with flattened head bent over in a
roll (C1)—a type characteristic of the Early Bronze Age on the
Rhine. Flint knives and arrow-heads were still common. Rings
of ivory and Mediterranean shells (Columbella rustica)° dis-
close connexions with the south. The pottery was rough and
unornamented. The leading forms were a squat cup with
ribbon handle on the shoulder and round-bottomed. bowls.°
Other graves of the same epoch introduce us to cups and
pyxides with survivals of Bell-beaker ornament (triangles), but
no new bronze types.? Only the use of barrows of rubble to
mark the graves at Monsheim ° needs mention as foreshadow-
ing the general rite of the succeeding period.
   The Adlerberg culture is patently a descendant of that of
the Zoned-beaker folk of the preceding epoch. Schumacher ?
considers that contact with the Mediterranean was secured by
way of the Rhéne, citing the graves from Savoy and the Jura
which Piroutet ® regards as inspired by the Aunjetitz culture.
The western trade route, marked by the copper double-axes,
may also have played its part.” Evidence of contact with
Central Europe ata rather later date is supplied by depots
from the Mainz basin. One or more unearthed at Dexheim
contained ingot torques At, and pins like A5 and A6. A gold
Aunjetitz pin, A2, was dredged out of the Rhine. So, in a
  Behrens, no. 83, p. 80, and fig. 21.     7 Behrens, figs. 18 and 20.
2 [bid., p. 75.                            8 Ibid., p. 78, no. 71. So also in Al-
3 PZ. iv, p. 58 (Schliz).                  sace (Schaeffer, p.152), and on the
4 I know of no analyses to prove the       Lower Rhine.
presence of tin.                           9 BRGK. x, p. 22.
PUB RGIG x, Do2t.                          10 L Anthr. xxviii (1917), p. 67.
6 AuhV. v, pl. 2.                          1 Supra, p. 193-
       246                      THE EARLY            BRONZE   AGE
       barrow near Haguenau, a torque of type Az was associated
       with other Danubian types of the Early Bronze Age.
          This poor industry forms the background for the tumulus
       culture which blossomed exuberantly in the Middle Bronze
       Age. It is misleading to speak of an Adlerberg phase as an-
       terior to Aunjetitz or Straubing. The poverty of the culture
       indicates only that the Rhine valley was at the moment cul-
       turally a backwater.
                              APPENDIX        TO CHAPTER          XII
                      Note on the Divisions of the Bronze Age
         It is implied in the very definition of the Bronze Age that 1t was
         a period when exchange and trade were conducted regularly
         over wide areas; the manufacture of bronze itself presupposes
         constant intercourse between areas producing tin (Bohemia
         or Britain) and those where copper was available (in our case
         Slovakia, Transylvania, the Austrian Alps, or Yugo-Slavia).
         The general use of metal was only rendered possible with the
         establishment of a system of distribution and communication
         supplying the areas where bronze was used. The general
         commercial interconnexion which was thus the precondition
         of the existence of a Bronze Age is reflected in the wide distri-
         bution of various types and implements. A study of imple-
         ments, weapons, and ornaments accordingly renders possible a
         chronological correlation of the several interconnected areas.
Typolo-     Fashions in tools and ornaments changed; improvements
    gies were made which were diffused, more or less rapidly, over the
         whole area covered by the continental economic system. In
         some cases at least the changes and modifications in the form
         of the objects proceed in a logical order. By correlating the
         several stages in the evolution of celts, daggers and swords,
         knives, pins, &c., by a comparison of ‘closed finds’'—hoards or,
         better still, tomb-groups*—it is possible to divide the Bronze
         Age up into several typological phases.
        1 i.e. a group of objects deposited to-       stituting the stdock-in-trade of some
        gether at one time and presumably in          pedlar. Founder’s hoards, including
        use simultaneously at the time of their       used objects collected to be melted
        deposition.                                   down and recast, and votive deposits—
        2 For chronological purposes the several      weapons or ornaments castinto a sacred
        archaeological deposits may be ar-            pool or bog or deposited under a sa-
        ranged in the following order of value:       cred stone or at the roots of a holy
        (1) grave-finds: the arms and orna-           tree—are almost useless, for the con-
        ments used by the dead man during             temporary use of the objects is not
        his life; (2) trader’s hoards: new            guaranteed.
        articles finished or nearly finished, con-
                       THE EARLY BRONZE AGE                                        247
   The course of evolution is presumably from crude and Condi-
simple to more elaborate and satisfactory forms. But no tions of
typological series can legitimately be based on this criterion validity
alone. For its validity it is essential that two or more terms
shall be fixed in the historical time series by association with
datable objects. Again, the typological division rests on the
parallel development of several series of objects as revealed by
the frequent association of members of the respective series.
Finally, the system is only applicable to regions that are demon-
strably in constant and regular contact, as evidenced by the
frequent appearance in the one area of objects proper to the
other and vice versa. It would be thoroughly unsound to
attempt to extend the system to areas entirely disconnected or
connected only by occasional intercourse.
   Anumber of systems have been proposed for Central Europe. Various
The oldest is that of Montelius, elaborated primarily for Scan- systems
dinavia,* but extended by many German and Polish archaeolo-
gists* to the whole of our area. Montelius recognized six
phases of the Nordic Bronze Age, termed periods I, II, III, IV,
V, and VI, of which the three last overlap with the Early Iron
Age of Austria and Italy. Sophus Miiller3 worked out a more
elaborate scheme for Denmark. According to him the pure
Bronze Age falls into six main phases. Finally, P. Reinecke,‘
basing his conclusions primarily on the South German and
Hungarian material, but taking into account also Miiller’s divi-
sion of the Danish finds, distinguishes four phases of the Bronze
Age, A, B, C, and D, followed by a “Hallstatt A’ phase in which,
however, bronze was still generally used north of the Alps.
   We shall in general follow Reinecke’s terminology, but for
convenience bracket B and C together as Middle Bronze Age,
and D with Hallstatt A as Late Bronze Age (Period VI). An
approximate correlation of the several systems is given in the
following table:
Danubian                =                   ;
  periods. _ Montelius.   S. Miiller.    Reinecke.       _
                                        JSA                    Early Bronze Age

                  Z             :
                                2-3     : CI         i        Middl
                                                                 1  cy»        ”
      V           II            4         C2         J
     VI          Ill            5-6       D          V
                 IV             7-8       HACE               | Tate       he
 1 Om Tidesbestimning inom Bronzedl-    hhardt and Splieth.
der.                                    3 MSAN. 1908.
 2 ZfE. 1902, Kossinna, Kostrzewski,    4 AuhV. v, passim; Gédtze-Fest., pp.
 Schumacher, BRGK.x(1917),Schuc-        131-2.
        248                  THE    EARLY      BRONZE    AGE
           The various types of bronze objects are of unequal value for
        a general chronology. Ornaments reflect definitely local taste
        and frequently differ widely from place to place. In given
        areas the pins and bracelets may evolve in a regular manner and
        so furnish valuable data for local chronology. But the re-
        stricted range of such objects and their personal character
        unfits them to serve as a general framework, They are only
        valuable as checks.
           Tools and weapons are in a different category. Improve-
        ments in these were so vitally important to the life of the
        communities that they would fairly soon be generally adopted.
        In the case of swords and daggers in particular the several
        types have a relatively uniform distribution over the various
        areas comprised within the Central European economic system.
Daggers    In the Early Bronze Age only the triangular round-heeled
        dagger was in use in the area of Aunjetitz culture and its con-
        geners. In hoards of the later phase of this culture, perhaps
        already phase B of the Bronze Age,’ bronze-hilted daggers
        appear as imports from Italy or, as Kraft” suggests, from western
        Switzerland, and these are imitated locally, the hilt and blade
        being cast in one piece with ornamental imitations of rivets (A3).
        A specialized variant of this type characterizes the Tumulus
        Bronze culture of South Germany in Period V (As) (Plate 1).
 Ogival     In the area of the Tumulus Bronze culture we find b
daggers Period V (phase B) an ogival knife-dagger, probably not
        derived from series A, but quite possibly going back to the
        thomboid copper daggers found in the East Alpine lake-
        dwellings.3 ‘The bronze specimens of this series have broad
        butts carrying four or six large rivets (type B1) in phaseB, while
        later the butt tends to become narrower and the number of
        rivets is reduced to two (types B2 and B3).
  Short     In Period V (phase B) a development in the direction of a
 swords longer weapon was already beginning.           The bronze-hilted
        dagger, based on Italian models, was elongated, and its blade
        widened till it formed a short sword, type AA4 (Fig. 147, 1);
        stray specimens of this type are known from Denmark, North
        Germany, Upper Italy, and Hungary. These weapons are
        still better adapted for stabbing than for slashing, since longi-
        * In the depot of Falkenwalde, found    4-5 (Oudh. Meded.    1926, p. 28), is
        with celts with rudimentary stop-       likely.
       ridge, Mannus, xviii, pp. 359 f.         4 Naue, Schwerter, pl. x1x, 3-6; Mil-
        2 ASA. xxix (1927), p. I0.              ler in MSAN. 1908, fig. 10; Man,
        3 But a direct relation to Middle        xxvi. 84.
        Minoan types, Remouchamps’ forms
                       THE EARLY           BRONZE       AGE                       249
tudinal rigidity is secured by a midrib, but the treatment of
the blade already anticipates the leaf-shape characteristic of the
slashing swords of Period VI. Farther west, a similar develop-
ment, beginning with the flat round-heeled dagger Ar, led in
France, Switzerland, North Italy, and perhaps West Hungary,
to the short sword, A6, by Period V (phase B).
    Really long weapons, at first adapted primarily for thrusting, Rapiers
were in use from the beginning of phase B. ‘The commonest and
type is the rapier characteristic of the Tumulus culture of swords
South-West Germany and Bohemia. The earliest forms (A1) Series I
have broad heels and are provided with six (more rarely, and
perhaps later, with four) large rivets for the attachment of a
hilt of wood or other perishable material; later the heel is
narrowed till by phase D it disappears altogether and the blade
ends above in a triangular tang, type A3... A contemporary
variant has the midrib prolonged into a tang and bent over, much
in the style of the far older Cypriote daggers. Most of the early
rapiers of series A that have been found in closed deposits
come from the barrows of Wurtemberg, Upper Bavaria, and
Bohemia. They are quite exceptional on the Rhine and in the
north, and are missing altogether in East Germany. On the
Middle Danube they are distinctly rare ; the only grave-finds in
which they occur seem to be those of Zenta and Vattina. Hence,
though it would be natural to believe that these rapiers were
inspired by Minoan models, a spontaneous growth on the
Upper Danube seems more likely unless the prototypes were
introduced up the Adriatic and across the Brenner.’
    A second series is provided with bronze hilts like daggers of Series IT
type A2.3 These had given rise to short swords of type AA4 Bronze- hilted
already in phase B, and by phase C we find a weapon with a swords
broad oval hilt in the South German barrows.1 The grip con-
 tracts gradually from the pommel to the guard, and then expands
again to form the guards (type B1 =Naue Aa). A slightly
later variant (B2 = Naue C), well attested for phase C2 at latest,
has a flattened cylindrical grip. Then in phase C2 the cele-
 brated form with an octagonal grip was evolved, apparently
on the Upper Danube, though stray specimens are found both
t A well-dated specimen is that from           3 In discussing the development of
Courtavant, Aube; Dechelette, ii, p.           this series the native Scandinavian
 148; B.M. Bronze, fig. 137; cf. AE.           types have been neglected, since they
xix, p. 237; Kraft, AsA., 1927/8, p.34.        are not only highly specialized, but, to
2 The rapier, 34cm. long, from an              my knowledge, never occur outside
‘Early Helladic’ grave in Levkas(Dé6rp-        the Teutonic province.
feld, Alt-Ithaka,B.62,3),issuggestive.         4 Naue, Schwerter, pl. XLII, 1-3.
  3443                                    Kk
        250                      THE EARLY           BRONZE   AGE
         in Denmark and North Hungary.’ The type outlasts the limits
         of Period V since some specimens have the swelling grip and
         leaf-shaped blade distinctive of the Late Bronze Age. But now
         the facets of the octagon are eliminated and we have a type with
         pointed oval (B4) or nearly round grip, swelling out towards the
         centre. The majority of these swords were definitely designed
         for slashing and, especially in Hungary, have been provided
         with leaf-shaped blades. The Hungarian form, with ridges on
         the pommel (Bs), belongs to phase E and even Period VII; the
         Ronzano (B6) and antennae (B7) types represent parallel
         developments farther west, probably in Switzerland.
     II     The last series of swords is constituted by those with a wide
 Tanged tang that was plated with wood, bone, or ivory to form the grip.
  swords Flanges to keep the plates in position border the tang. ‘The
         rudiments of the device appear on certain swords of type Ao in
         Western Hungary” that may conceivably belong to phase B.
 Mycen- But the regular series begins in phase C.3        Precisely in the
    aean same period we find imported Mycenaean rapiers, our Co,
 imports in both South Germany and Scandinavia.* The corresponding
        native type, C1, found both in Bavaria and Slovakia,> was a
        stabbing weapon, the hilt having sloping shoulders as in the
        contemporary bronze-hilted variant Br. But in Scandinavia
        and East Germany a variant, C2, already equally adapted for
        slashing as for thrusting,is assigned to this phase ;° its shoulders
        are often more rounded, and at first there are no rivets in the
        tang; the platings were presumably kept in place by binding
        thongs. In Period VI weapons of this family were developed
        into genuine cutting swords, perhaps under the influence of the
        West Hungarian type Ao, though the actual diffusion of the
        slashing weapon seems bound up with the spread of the urn-
        field cultures of Lausitz type.’
Origin of | Swords of series C are peculiarly important for their Aegean
  C 2-3 connexions that make them aserviceable basis for the absolute
        chronology of the Bronze Age. The type has been studied in
        detail by Kossinna,’ Sophus Miiller,? Naue,                       Peake,’     and
         * Kammerberg (Franconia), Obrnic             3 For these see p. 327 below.
         and ‘Tachlovice      (Bohemia),    Forré     4 Hammer, AuhV. v, pl. 62, 1132;
         (Abauj) ; cf. MSAN. 1908, fig. 83;           MSAN. 1908, fig. 116; cf. Reinecke’s
         Splieth, pl. 1, 35, and p. 337 below.        comments in AuhV. v, p. 362.
         ? Peake, Bronze Age, p. 87, has recog-       5 Asenkofen E, Szomolany.
         nized the high antiquity of the type,        6 MSAN. 1908, p. 57.
         and rightly, if rather vaguely, diag-        7 Cf. p. 371 below.
         nosed its starting-point, but has exag-      8 Mannus, iv, pp. 274 ff.; DV*., pp.
         gerated its significance; for the distri-    125 ff.               9 MSAN. l.c.
         bution cf. p. 399 below.                     10 Bronze Age, pp. 88 ff.
                        THE EARLY            BRONZE   AGE                       251
 Reinecke.’ The first named argues for a Germanic origin. He Scandi-
makes the absence of rivets from the tang the test of antiquity. nava
 On this assumption the oldest type is commonest in the Ger-
 manic province ; but all that is actually proved is that the swords
 with rivetless tangs are a local northern variety. ‘The failure
 of the genuine Germanic swords with inlaid bronze hilts to
 spread at all outside their native area is really a sufficient
answer to Kossinna.?
    Sophus Miiller locates the original home in Italy, though Jtaly
 admitting that early forms are rarer there than in the north. or
 Peake has concentrated his attention on the form of the Hungary?
 shoulder, without entirely proving the vital importance of that
 section in the evolution. On his theory the earliest type had
 round shoulders and the sloping shoulders are very late.
 Reinecke’s typology leads to just the opposite conclusion, and
 we accept it here as being alone supported by any number of
 closed finds.
    But we are reluctant to accept his conclusion that the Aegean
 developed types—C3 and C4—are native to the Aegean. No
 doubt the flanged tang was evolved there since it goes back to
 Middle Minoan times. It is therefore highly significant that
 the device was first * adopted in North and Central Europe
 just at the moment when Mycenaean rapiers with flanged tangs
 actually appear as imports. But we still regard the swords of
 types C3 and C4 as native creations of the smiths of East
 Central Europe, without attempting to limit more precisely the
 place of origin. Our absolute chronology is based on the
 assumption 5 that the form originated in Central Europe even
 though it continued in use there long after its appearance in the
 Aegean and its translation there into iron.
    The imported Mycenaean rapiers, appearing in closed finds Chrono-
  in the latter half of Period V (phase C), belong to the Late logical                 infer-
                                              Most of his specimens of C and D
                                                                                       ences
 « Last in Gétze-Fest., pp. 131 f.
 2 The southernmost closed find of            are nearly as late. Clearly Peake’s
 Germanic swords known to me is               series does not follow a chronological
 from the barrows near Havermark,             order as required.
 IST. viii, pp. 135 ff., fig. 22.             4 Apart from the little ‘Ciempozuelos’
 3 The age assigned to his type A=            daggers of Period III, which have no
 our Ao, may be accepted, but it is           descendants in Period IV.
                                              5’ WPZ. xiii, p. 42; cf. Remouchamps,
 doubtful whether it is in the direct line
 of descent at all. Our type C1, which is     Oudh. Meded. 1926, pp. 43 and 67.
 certainly very early, comes nearest to       There is indeed no doubt that swords
                                               of this form remained   in use   long
 Peake’s E. The only Hungarian speci-
 men of B cited comes from a hoard             after 1200 B.C.
 dated by a fibula to Period VII.
             252                   THE EARLY        BRONZE   AGE
             Mycenaean A period in Greece, circa 1350 B.C.: the slashing
             type C3, characterizing continental deposits of our Period VI,
             appears in Greece about a century later. The border between
             Periods V and VI must therefore be drawn not much after
             1300 B.C.
    Celts       After the swords the celts provide a chronologically useful
             series, but local divergences are much greater, and in Hungary
             there was no evolution at all since the shaft-hole axe was in
             use throughout Period V. Flat celts and flanged celts of types
             Ax and A2 were alone in use during Period IV. In Period V
             an evolution began along four main lines (Plates 3, 4).
  Winged       The builders of the South-West German tumuli were using
      celta very slender variant of the flanged celt (B1) by Period V, and
          then improved upon it by widening the flange to form wings,
          thus reducing the risk of the axe-head wobbling sideways on
          the shaft. In phase B—C the wings stand mid-way up the body
          (type Bz); they begin to approach the butt in the latter half of
          Period V (type B3), until in Period VI they are raised up to the
          butt (types B4f). The early phase B2 is best represented in
          Italy, West Hungary, and Wurtemberg. Type B3 is common
          also in the Bohemian tumuli, while the Late Bronze Age types
          were at home in the whole Alpine area.
Bohemian     A second series seems to have begun by narrowing the space
  palstav between the flanges and widening the flanges into wings at the
          same point. Longitudinal slip as well as side slip was thus
          diminished. The ultimate result, affected perhaps’  by series D,
          was the Bohemian palstav, C3. The latter type is character-
          istic of the Hercynian tumuli, though it was exported to South
          Russia, North Serbia, and Upper Bavaria. What may rank as
             intermediate stages,C1 and C2, are represented firstin Bohemia’
             and then farther west in Switzerland and Upper Bavaria.’
             They may go back to phase B, while most celts of type C3
             must rather belong to phase C3 During Period VI, C3 was
             ousted by the socketed celt which, however, in East Central
             Europe, is often ornamented with a V-pattern reminiscent of
             the opening of C3 (type C4).
  Palstav       To prevent the axe-head slipping back into the shaft at each
             blow (longitudinal slip), a stop-ridge was developed between
             the flanges. Anticipations of this are to be seen in celts from
             Aunjetitz deposits in Bohemia, and Silesia (type Dr). Then
             * Schranil, Studie, fig. 12, 8, with    kofen E, Muhltal, XIV, 3.
             Aunjetitz types.    *                   3 With A2 at Kbely, Hladome?, and
             7 Reitnau (AsA. xvii, p. 93); Asen-     Brunn XI.
                      THE EARLY          BRONZE   AGE                     253
in Period V the developed palstav (type D2) was evolved
apparently on the Rhine. Lissauer terms it the North Ger-
many type, but the majority of specimens in our area come from
the Rhine basin.’ Farther west Lissauer’s West European
type was in use; it differs from D2 in that the stop-ridge is
curved to accommodate the rounded end of the bent shaft.
   In Scandinavia and East Germany astraight-sided flanged Socketed
celt, Er, was in use at the beginning of Period V. It was often celt
secured to the shaft by binding with bronze wire, and later
by a loose bronze collar, typeE3. According to Sophus Miller?
the collar came to be cast in one piece with the blade, and then
the suppression of the saeptum produced the earliest socketed
celts, E5. ‘The Danish evidence shows that this evolution was
completed by phase C. But the intermediate steps are missing
in Scandinavia. Sophus Miiller would seek them in East
Germany, and a possible candidate for the position has, in fact,
recently come to light in Silesia, type E4, where the saeptum
is certainly still in place, but the band has been triplicated.
Dr. Harrison,3 who has successfully proved that Montelius’
typology, deriving the socketed celt from the winged types like
B5,is untenable, denies the validity of Sophus Miiller’s scheme
too, and would look for influence from farther east.4                Be that
as it may, it is clear that the socketed type was in regular use in
Scandinavia and East Germany before the end of Period V,
won general acceptance in Bohemia and North Hungary in
Period VI, and was gradually ousting the winged type in the
North Alpinearea and Italy as iron was coming into regular use.
   Socketed spear-heads came into general use early in Period Spear-
V. Those of this age have a small leaf-shape blade; in Period heads
VI the blade is lanceolate or rhomboid in outline and often
ribbed. Prototypes for the socketed spear-head have not yet
been identified in Central Europe, so it must be assumed that
the type was introduced ready-made at the beginning of Period
V. The specimen from Langquaid,° being still associated with
Aunjetitz types, must stand early in the series, and implies
that the model was introduced from the Aegean in connexion
with the amber trade. Early examples from the Middle Danube
basin may equally well have been inspired by models brought
up-stream in return for gold.
t ZfE. xxxvii (1905), p. 796.             ready known in Period V, as the pre-
2 MSAN. 1908, p. 28.                      sence of socketed spear-heads shows;
3 Man, xxvi, 143.                         cf. p. 326 below.
4 'The technical presupposition of the    5 Behrens, p. 13, fig. 4.
socketed celt, core-casting, was al-
          254                  THE    EARLY       BRONZE    AGE
 Razors     The only other implement that shows any sort of orderly
         development is the razor. Apart from some curious and un-
         datable specimens from Hungary,’ specialized razors can only
         be traced in Period VI; previously tweezers had been used for
         dipilatory purposes. At the very beginning of Period V1, how-
         ever, we suddenly find a whole crop of double-edged razors in
         the area of the Hercynian tumuli and a few stragglers on the
         Rhine. In most of these it is still possible to discern the
         peculiar indent in the blade that characterized the Italian and
         Sicilian razors of the fourteenth century; we may therefore
         conclude that the Hercynian types are inspired in the last resort
         by Italian models.? Actual Italian forms are only found farther
         to the south-east, such as the undatable example from Pilin.
         Razors of types A 1-2 were characteristic of the first half of
         Period VI (Reinecke’s phase D). In the subsequent phase,
         Reinecke’s Hallstatt A, the well-known penannular type A4 was
         evolved, apparently in the Swiss lake-dwellings. ‘Then stray
         single-bladed razors of Benacci II form herald the beginning
         of Period VII (Plate 5).
 Fibulae    In addition to tools and weapons the fibulae provide a use-
         ful guide to the division of the later phases of the bronze age.
Series A The earliest safety-pins of a very simple violin-bow form appear
         in ‘Aunjetitz’ graves in Bohemia and Lower Austria. But,
         though apparently known so early in Period V, the device
         was not generally adopted in the Danubian area for a long time.
         Fibulae next appear in the standard Peschiera form with a
         twisted bow in the Tyrolese urnfields belonging to phase D
         and, in the equally old variant with a spiral catch-plate, Ar,
         in North-West Hungary. North of the Alps no improvements
         were initiated during the Bronze Age, though in Bavarian urn-
         fields that are still assigned to phase D appears a variant on
         type A3 in which the spring as well as the catch-plate consists
         of a spiral disk, as in B4;* while in Swiss lake-dwellings and
         graves of phase E, stray ribbed fibulae like A’2a were imported
         from Upper Italy. South of the Alps Az develops through
         the series A2 to A5 and A6 east of the Danube, and into the
         harp-fibula west of the river. Still farther south there is
         another series in Illyria and Bosnia, described in Chapter XIX.
Series B    In the north an entirely different series, in which the pin
          * Szobi Kovacsbanya, Hampel, pl.         Weapons, p. 49.
          COMKV Gea Soprony-Nyek, ibid. pl.        3 WPZ. xi, p. 33; Schranil, Bohmen,
          oa and Vattina, Man. xxvi. 100,           p. 101.
            eelee                                  4 Wagner in Gotze-Fest., p. 173, fig. 4.
          2 Cf. p. 300 below; Petrie, Tools and                                        ae
                       THE EARLY           BRONZE   AGE                     255
is a separate member, developed. The simplest form, B1, is
assigned by Sophus Miiller’ to his period 3 (=phase C1), and
even B2 still falls within the limits of Period V. Both these
types are virtually confined to Scandinavia.” But in Period VI,
B2 and the Hanoverian variant appear in the north and
occasionally in Central Germany, Bohemia, and even Moravia.
At the same time a variant with a flattened oval bow, B3,
develops out of Bx in East Central Germany and spreads
southward with the Lausitz culture. It appears in the Rhine-
land in graves of phase E, but probably reached Bohemia and
Moravia earlier. In the latter regions a subvariety with figure-
eight twists at each end of the oval bow was developed and
appeared apparently in graves of phase D. In that direction the
development of the two-membered fibula was arrested by the
spread of members of series A with the Hallstatt culture. But
on the Rhine a variety with a wavy bow, B4, was created in
phase E under the influence of the Bavarian variant of A3.
   The earlier stages of the A series are important for their
Aegean connexions, but the uncertainty as to which area can
claim priority makes it perilous to use them for absolute
dating. Reinecke? and Blinkenberg‘ have recently revived the
view that the series started in the Mycenaean world. In that
case, since the safety-pin first appears there late in the four- Origin of
teenth century, the earliest European examples should be later the safety-
than 1400 B.C. But it is difficult to bring down the so-called pin
Aunjetitz fibulae from Gemeinlebarn so low. On the other
hand, if the invention of the safety-pin took place in the vicinity
of Bohemia and Lower Austria where these earliest examples
 appear, it is curious that the simple forms are so extremely rare
 in the Danube basin, and that for a long time no evolution can
                         in fact, clear that only in Scandinavia,
be traced there. It seems,
Italy, and Greece, and then in a small area south of the Alps—
Styria, Slovakia, Western Hungary, and Illyria—did the brooch
fili a real need of the Bronze Age population. And in the last-
named area that need was only felt at a comparatively late
date. Still, the facts are perhaps best understood if we assume
that a sort of safety-pin was first invented in Bohemia early in
Period V, and that the idea was transmitted thence in two
directions along the amber trade route to be realized in
t MSAN. 1908, p. 32-                        of Forsdyke have produced evidence
2 Cf. Mannus, iv, p. 175.                   very unfavourable to this derivation
3 Gotze-Fest., l.c.                         of the safety-pin from the Minoan
4 Fibules, p. 40; the latest excavations    ‘hair-pin’.
256                      THE EARLY         BRONZE    AGE
different forms—Az and B1 respectively—at either end. The
earliest Danish two-membered fibulae would thus be con-
temporary with the Peschiera brooches of Italy and Greece.
Then the forms like A3 could very well be parallel to, or even
derived from, their analogues found in sub-Mycenaean tombs
on Cephallenia' and in pre-Villanovan hoards in Italy.’
   We see then that Period V is clearly distinguished from IV
by the appearance of rapiers, short swords, socketed spear-
heads, and celts of types, Bz, C3, &c. Period VI is no less
clearly defined by the spread of slashing swords, especially
C3, C4, socketed celts, and fibulae including A3. Now the
Mycenaean rapiers of fourteenth century type reach our area
before the end of Period V, while the fibulae then current in the
north are parallel to the fourteenth-century Greek types. On
the other hand, the slashing swords, characterizing Period VI,
appear as intruders in Greece during the thirteenth century,
while the Greek and Italian parallels to fibulae like A3 can be
little if at all later. Hence, we may add to the dates suggested
at the end of the chapter the following figures :
                                  Reinecke’s.
               Period.              phase.          Absolute dates.
                  IV                   A              1850-1500
                    Vv               SB               1600-1450
                                     Ve               1450-1300
                   VI                JSD              1300-1100
                                     LE               II00— goo

* Blinkenburg, op. cit., fig. 13b; "Apy.    2 Randell-Maclver,    Villanovans,   pl.
Acdr. 1919, p. 118.                          19, 13.
       1              apysarrg                  (EePop                                  li       aasphinyy
3443
       2              nrumbvoy                                a                         ee       um,
       *             VPAspas
                         ay                                          bNe                     é
        >                   WsyPsyougys-suU

        9           AYU]
        2             udjorursy
       (banky)
       Jsbuna
        8         aunig
        6        UPZ1d


         2            aypumuh
       JHogsucsy,
       1
         #1            aunggngswy




L |




                                    de   ‘IIA            ZLILEINAV
                                                              CNV          SO'TOINOLL        SHaN.LTNO
                                          Detva
                                          Almas
                                          Bakony Romand
                                          Lovasberény
                                          Dunakeszi
                                          Soroksar
                                          Ercsi
                                          Dunapentele
                                      0CI Simontornya
                                      OQWhwWNH
                                     10 Bélcske
                                     11 Kélesd
                                     12 Gerjen
                                     13 Harcz
                                     14 Lengyel
                                     15 Szekszard
                                     16 Vatya
                                     17 Izsak
                                     18 Nagyk6rés
                                     19 Szeremle
                                     20 Kiskészeg
                                     21 Bijelo brdo
                                     22   Erdut
                                     23   Babska
                                     24   Suréin
                                     25   Vinéa
                                     26   Temes    Kubin
                                     27 Klitevac
                                     28 Gradac
                                     29 Zhuto Brdo
                                     30 Dubovac
                                     31 VrSac
                                     32 Vattina
                                     33 Tolvadia
                                     34. Temesnagyfalu
                                     35 Pécska
                                     36 Zenta
 g
     roup   1 (Lovasberé             37 Mezéberény
      ” P 11 (Bijelo       ee        38 Keménytéto

                    oe akbina
      »are mg s heeLeevac-Vaks       40   Tiszafiire d
                                     40 Tiszatl
                                     41 Egyek
      ae VE
               gyek                  42, Mohi puszta
 Doubtful sites                      43 Szihalom
                       3             44 Fores
                                     45   Aszé
                                     46 Pilin
Map VIII. THE URNFIELDS OF HUNGARY   47 Kisterenne
                                    XIII
             THE HUNGARIAN                 BRONZE        AGE
            I. THE     CHRONOLOGICAL           FRAMEWORK          —
      URING Period III-IV we saw that the Hungarian plain Complex-
       was occupied by several distinct cultural groups. Apart ity
from the outposts of Alpine—Nordic folk living in hill stations of culture
in Slavonia these might be divided into two categories accor-
ding to their mode of life, namely, quasi-nomadic pastoralists,
burying their dead under tumuli in North-East Hungary, and
sedentary folk along the rivers. During Period IV the increas-
ing dryness allowed freer movement to the former group, while
the decline of the trade with Troy impoverished the riverine
villages. As the first group have left few remains, the inter-
action of the two is hard to follow.          It is clear that, before the
end of Period V when trade connexions with the Aegean had
been re-established with the foundation of Troy VI, a state of
equilibrium had been reached. The whole plain was occupied
to an extent never before nor after attained in prehistoric times
by a relatively civilized population. Their remains are found in
the huge urnfields where the blending of cultures is clearly
visible. But the urnfields' presuppose an intermediate stage
of development, later than what we described in Chapter x
The object of the present section is to survey the remains of
this transitional stage and at the same time to expound the
basis of our chronology.
    The attempts to produce a typological classification of the Futility
                                                                   typologi-
                                                                             of
 Hungarian Bronze Age* have come to shipwreck on               the
                                                                   cal divi-
 rarity of genuine closed finds and on the longevity of most of SIONS
 the types which persist throughout the Bronze Age. On         the
 other hand, the ceramic sequences established at stratified
 sites provide an unimpeachable basis for chronology.
    Many of the great river-side villages, founded in Period III sites
                                                                   Stratified
 or earlier, were inhabited continuously throughout the      Hun-
 garian Bronze Age. Though Perjamos, Oszentivan, and Nagy
 Rév were abandoned early in the period, the Nagy Sancs at
 Pécska, Tészeg, Gerjen, and other sites were occupied con-
 tinuously. Only the two first-named have been scientifically
 excavated, and they must form the basis for the division of the
 material from other sites.
                                                      pp. 210 f.; and von Miské,
 t Cf, Reinecke, AE. xix (1899); Kossinna, ZfE. 1902,
 AfA. xv.
           260                THE HUNGARIAN          BRONZE      AGE
Stratifica-     In the settlement near Pécska* the pottery affords the
  tion near clearest evidence of continuity throughout the long period
    Pécska represented by four metres of deposit. The mound is divided
  Cultural up bya series of layers of burnt clay-plaster, interspersed with
continuity strata of ashes and refuse. The pottery on either side of the
             burnt layers in no case allows of the assumption of a sharp
             break; the same types—notably the Perjamos mug—evolve
            slowly from the bottom to the top. The excavator, Dr. Roska,
            distinguished fifteen strata of varying thickness. We shall here
            simplify his scheme, taking as main divisions points where
            ceramic types, distinctive of specific groups of the Hungarian
            Bronze Age as represented elsewhere, first appear. By this
            procedure we obtain seven main levels denoted by the letters
            A to F respectively.
 Perjamos      Roska’s levels I to VII, comprising the lowest 92 cm., yield
      types pure  Perjamos types ; we designate these by the letter A. In the
            next five layers (from 0-92 to 1:60 m. above virgin soil) no fresh
            types occur; throughout, the old forms develop in ever richer
            variety, but the ‘ansa lunata’? appears already in the tenth
    Amber stratum. These layers we term B. As distinctive of them we
            may mention an amber bead from stratum IX (1-00-1-10 m.)
            and the stone mould for a rhomboid dagger or spear-head3
            from X.
  Pannon-      First in the twelfth stratum (1-60—2-00 m. above virgin soil)
zan wares does a definite link with another cultural group appear.        This
            is a sherd of ‘incrusted ware’ of Pannonian or Kliéevac type.‘
            In the same level a mould for a flat celt or chisel was encoun-
            tered. We call this level C, and synchronize it provisionally
            with the correspondingly lettered strata at Tészeg.
      Ansa     In the succeeding thirteenth stratum, 0-50 m. thick, Roska
    lunata found fragments of ansa lunata jugs, and in particular a very
            metallic variant of the native hour-glass type (Fig. 217) 5 which
            recurs at Gerjen.° From the same level came moulds for a
            socketed spear-head of late type and an axe of type C2.7
            Though the latter form is met at the bottom of the C layer in
            Tszeg we term layer XIII at Pécska, D.
               In the succeeding fourteenth level (from 2-50 to 2:95 m.
            above virgin soil) the leading type is an hour-glass jug with con-
            tracted mouth like Fig. 221.5 Clay moulds for flat celts and
          ‘ Dolgozatok, iii. 1912, pp. 1 ff.       ¢ Wosinski, TT., pl. cv, 4.
          2 At Tészeg it is characteristic of C.   7 Dolgozatok, figs. 55-6.     Cf.   fig.
          3 Dolgozatok, l.c., fig. 25.             147, 5-12.
          4 Ibid., fig. 43.                        8 Ibid., figs. 59-60.
          s Ibid., fig. 45.
                THE HUNGARIAN             BRONZE      AGE           261
axes of type C2 are still found. Above this is a disturbed
deposit, presumably Iron Age.
   In the parallel site on the Upper Tisza, Tészeg, the lowest Stratifi-
level, has already been described. Above it come the remains cation at
of a very extensive and rich settlement. The pottery is a Toszeg
development of that of Tészeg I, but now the characteristic
jugs and mugs have an angular profile. We designate this
layer by the symbol Br.
_ The rich deposit, characterized by several layers of ashes, Barren
just described, is succeeded by a layer, over 1 m. thick, of layer
yellowish earth. It is full of animal bones and shells, and
at frequent intervals floors, indicated by very thin bands of
loose ash, and post-holes can be discerned. But no hearths nor
deposits of burnt clay were detected, and sherds were extra-
ordinarily rare. Yet from this poor layer came several moulds, Moulds
including one for an axe of type C2 (in an early variant with
ornamental ridges bordering the shaft-tube). Among the rare
sherds, evolved Br types predominate, but before the top of the
layer incrusted sherds, hollow harpoon-tips, and other forms
proper to level C already appear. The first amber beads belong
to the same context. The significance of this layer is puzzling.
The site was still inhabited, but we may question whether the
occupation was as intensive or as continuous as before. Pro-
visionally we designate the layer by the letter B2.
   Farther up lies a rich deposit, 1m. thick, indicative of
intensive occupation. It is traversed by four or five burnt
layers, and contains hearths at several levels. ‘The commonest Buckel-
pottery is the distinctive “Tdészeg wart ware’ (Buckelkeramik, keramik
Figs. 162-3) mixed with abundant sherds of imported incrusted Pannon-
ware of Pannonian type. On the strength of these imports we 1an ware
term this level C, equating it with the corresponding phase at
Perjamos.
   Finally, C is overlaid by a single burnt stratum containing Fluted
hearths and a new fluted pottery identical with that recently ware
found with the latest Mycenaean remains at Vardaroftsa in
Macedonia.3 With this was associated a seemingly local fabric
ornamented with spirals (Fig. 213 b).
   The above scheme is not without difficulties. It is based Difficul-
deliberately on the assumption that the bronze types persisted ties
while ceramic forms changed (axe C2 in Br at 'Tdszeg, in D at of
Pécska). It would also be easy to object to the assignment proposed       division
           t Ibid., fig. 67.                  2 Cf. p. 263 below.
                         3 Ant. F. vii (1927), p. 48.
       262               THE HUNGARIAN BRONZE AGE
       of the Pécska D-Gerjen group to a later epoch than the in-
       crusted ware that characterizes the main Urnfield period of
       Central Hungary. There are still many stratified sites the
       excavation of which will establish once for all the sequence of
        cultures in the Danube—Tisza basin, and therewith the abso-
       lute and relative chronology of the Bronze Age.
          With this proviso we may indicate the main links with the
       other cultural groups of Hungary. On the strength of the
       mould for an axe-head from Tészeg B, we assign to this phase
       the hoards and graves containing allied weapons, a dating which
       agrees with the typological position assigned to the sword from
       Hajdu Samson.’
          The incrusted ware from the C layers at Tdszeg and at Pécska
       allows us to place in this phase the bulk of the earlier urnfield
       material and the appropriate phases of the corresponding settle-
        ments—Vattina, &c.
           As representatives of D we may cite in the north the mass of
        finds from the urnfields of Upper Hungary, Mohi Puszta,
        Egyek, Aszéd, Hatvan, Pilin, &c., where fluted cups,’ as in
          Toészeg D, occur. As much of the material from Gerjen corre-
          sponds to that from Pécska D we assign it to the same phase.
Division So,too,among the cemeteries belonging to the large prehistoric
of Vat- village of Vattina in the Banat, Milleker 3 distinguishes that
     tina on the farms of Szimics and Kory-Naschitz which were charac-
  culture terized by an unusual paucity of bronze gifts but a rich ceramic
          furniture. Here high-handled cups similar to those from
          Gerjen (Fig. 219) predominate; these show a special type of
          wrinkled wart ornament found on vases of Benacci II form
          from the same area (Fig. 222) and agair. on the pottery of
           Troy VII. On these grounds we refer the Kory-Naschitz
           cemetery at Vattina and the analogous settlement at Omoljica
           on the Danube‘ to phase D, while the urnfield of VrSac which
           has yielded many bronzes would be confined to C.

                         II. PHASE   B OF THE   BRONZE,    AGE
           Remains corresponding to the B levels at Tdészeg and Pécska
        are as yet rare, and it is impossible to define the cultural groups
        then existing. But as an introduction to the mature Bronze
        Age civilization of Hungary we shall describe the monuments
        * Man, xxvi. 84.                   4 Finds   in National   Museum,   Bel-
        2 Hatvan, Pilin, &c.               grade.
        3 Vattina, p. 61.
                   THE HUNGARIAN           BRONZE     AGE               263
of this age under three heads, postponing to the next section a
description of the Hungarian bronze industry.
(a) The Terramara of Toszeg. At 'Tdszeg the culture of phase
B was clearly, in the main, just a development of that de-
scribed on p. 216 above as Tészeg A.
   The pottery in its fabric agrees with that of the antecedent Pottery
layer. ‘The commonest form, too, is just a development of the
Toszeg jug (Fig.124), whichis, however,     now angular like mature
Aunjetitz jugs. The old vase-stands and flat lids went out of
use, and a deep carinated dish with four handles just under the
rim appears for the first time. It seems to have grown out of
the Early Bronze Age form shown in Fig. 126d.
    Stone implements are now rare, but bone and horn was Horn and
still freely used, as in the first settlement.                       bone tools
    Metal ' appears in the form of flat celts and flat, triangular, Metal
round-heeled daggers with rivets for the hilt, identical with our
type Ai from Bohemia. Among the bronzes are massive
bracelets with slightly tapering ends and pins of type A4. Gold
ear-rings of type D1 were also worn.             An indispensable
adjunct to the use of knife-daggers was the square plaque-
shaped whetstone, reminiscent of the bracer but thicker, Whet-
narrower, and not curved to fit the wrist.                                     stones

   Abundant remains of grain and the bones of domestic Food
animals disclose the main diet of the inhabitants of ‘Toszeg. supply
These also consumed the flesh of game—including the red
deer—and collected fresh-water mussels.
   The bones and hoofs of horses are already relatively Horse
common at this level; the discovery of the horn cheek-piece of domesti-
a bit ? proves that the animal had already been tamed. This cated
is the earliest conclusive evidence for the domestication of
the horse in Europe, and probably the oldest bridle bit found
anywhere in the world.3 It is probable that the horse had been
introduced domesticated during Period III by the nomad
invaders whose barrows are found along the Upper Tisza
(p. 206). The invention of the bit perhaps took place in that Bits
region. Thence it was rapidly diffused along the trade routes
northward to Sweden.* It was soon conveyed from Hungary
t Felentés a M.N. Muz.    1907 évt, p.    nose-rope and halter: Carter and
 180, fig. 27.                            Newbury, ‘The tomb of Thutmésis
2 Found in May      1927; for the shape   IV’, Cat. Cairo Museum, p. 26.
cf. fig. 160 below.                       4 Specimens belong to Montelius’
3 The horses drawing the chariot of       Bronze I (?) from Kvarnby (Sweden)
Thothmes IV, whose reign is no earlier    and Trebnitz (Wimptsch, Silesia);
than Tdszeg B, were controlled by a       PZ. ii, pp. 175 and 178.
            264               THE HUNGARIAN           BRONZE      AGE
         to Italy,t and in the Urnfield period to the Alps, the Rhine
         valley, and even the Caucasus.’
 Houses     The houses of Tészeg B approximated to the megaron type.
         But the two long sides were never exactly parallel and the
         corners were generally slightly rounded. In the long inner
         room stood a hearth of baked clay (Fig. 144).3 The floor was of
         stamped clay, possibly spread over a layer of rushes or even
         saplings. Along one wall there are often remains of a rough-
         hewn log through which at times holes have been cut for the
   Piles reception of the uprights.   ‘There are further occasional re-
         mains of stout piles reaching just to the level of the floor.
            Nevertheless, the houses were not raised above the level of the
            surrounding soil.
               If the Tészeg huts were thus in no sense pile-dwellings,
            it remains none the less possible that the whole settlement
Palisade    rested on an artificial embankment. The inner sides of the
            moats or natural watercourses‘ were certainly strengthened
            with a palisade of stout piles. These may have served less
            to protect the settlement against foes than to support the
            natural or artificial mound on which it stood against erosion by
            water.
           Graves of this period are unknown at Toszeg.
  Allied   Toszeg was certainly not an isolated phenomenon. Szihalom
    sitesand '‘Tiszafiired must have been very similar. The same
         ceramic types are to be found west of the Danube in Tolna
  Gerjen County.5 Moreover, the so-called terramara of Gerjen® must
         have been occupied in phase B as in phases A and D, and it
            may have been constructed on the same plan as Toszeg.
            Wosinsky certainly mentions piles, though elsewhere? he
            speaks of beehive ‘pit-dwellings’ as being excavated in the
            mound.     So, too, in the zerramara near Pécska Roska found a
         ‘pit-dwelling’ the mouth of which opened into the seventh
         layer (our B).’
    Was     The ‘Flat Hill’ of T’észeg has been compared, ever since the
Toszeg a days of Pigorini,’ to the famous settlements in the Po valley.
   terra- Yet     if the traditional definition of a terramara® as a ‘lake-
  mara ?
            « Peet, Stone and Bronze Ages, p. 353.   were first dug at a later date when this
            2 Chantre, Caucase, pl. xx bis, 10.      type of structure became comm
            3 Felentés a M.N. Muz. 1912 évi,         elsewhere.                           be
            pp. 194 ff.                              8 Dolgozatok, iii, p. 73.
            4 Cf. p. 220 above.                      9 CIA. 1877 (Buda-Pest), p. 19 ; Mun-
            5 Wosinsky, TT., pl. Lxxxu, 1, 4, 5.     ro, Terremare, p. 450.
            ° Ibid., pp. 410-34.                     10 Peet, Stone and Bronze Ages
            7 Ink Ker., p. 51; very likely these                                8, P- 331.
                      THE HUNGARIAN           BRONZE    AGE                       265
dwelling on dry land’ be accepted without reserve, the com-
parison cannot be admitted as relevant. But perhaps the
reconstructions and plans, based upon very early excavations,
should not be interpreted too strictly. Real points of agree-
ment between the Tisza and the Po are disclosed in the pali-
sade of piles (the contraforte of the Italians) and the puzzling
constructions of horizontal logs at Tészeg. The horn cheek-
piece from a bridle bit is another vital link, and the bone




          Fic. 144.   House from the terramara of 'Tészeg, after Marton.

arrow-heads are likewise significant in both areas. And if
neither the ansa lunata nor the plastic figures of animals so
common in the Italian stations have yet been found zn sztu in
Tészeg B, both had been known in the Danube—Tisza area
earlier, and reappear in Tészeg C. And many ceramic forms
—the flat lids, the ‘vase-stands,’ &c.—are common to the two
cultures.”            ;
   It is not therefore     impossible that Tészeg, or some more
westerly stations  of  the  same type, may contain the germs from
which the terramara      culture of Italy sprang.
(b) Graves   of Phase    B.   Besides  the remains collected in the
appropriate layers   at  Tészeg  and  Pécska  and certain hoards, the
 only monuments of this early phase are a few tombs.
   In several of the great urnfields belonging to phase C or
 : Anadmirable summary of the points        elentés a M.N.    Muzeum       1912    évi,
 of agreement is given by Marton in         pp. 192 f.
   3443                                  Mm
                               THE HUNGARIAN           BRONZE         AGE
             266,
Inhuma- later, a few inhumation graves containing contracted skele
                                                                         tons
      tion and a distinct pottery occur. Thus at Bene,   near  Kecsk  emeét ,
graves in the corpse was accompanied by ansa lunata     jugs  and   a  pin  of
 urnfields type A4.
 Warrior      Typologically the warrior graves containing rapiers and
   graves battle-axes from Zenta: and Vattina (Fig. 145)’
                                                                 belong to
           phase B23 In each case the rite was inhuma  tion;     at  Vattina
           the corpse lay in a sort of wooden coffin.  ‘   Anoth  er    grave




                                                                  \
                                                                      WN
                                                                           hy
                                                                        il i




                    Fic. 145. Grave group, Vattina, after Milleker.    a4, b 4,c34,d4

  Cowrie     at Vattina contained a cowrie shell5 showing that trade with
    shells   the south was already beginning again.
   Cord-        Finally, in the urnfields of the Banat and Eastern Syrmia are
    orna-    some cremation graves which may yet belong to phase B. In
  mented     these the cinerary urn is a sort of corded amphora. Save for
     urns    the rim that betrays the influence of metal vessels, the urns in
             question correspond exactly in form and ornamentation to the
             ‘neolithic’ vases of Thuringia (Fig. 146c, cf. Fig. 86). One
             such urn contained, besides ashes, an undecorated pin of type
             t AE. xviii, p. 287; rapier A2; axe      lus A4, pendant B4, pin B7, and an
             At; pin C7; bracelet Fr.                 arm cylinder), come from a grave.
             2 Milleker, Vattina, pl. 1, 1, 2, and    4 Milleker, J.c., p. 62.
             4 (rapier A2, miniature axe, pin C7).    5 M. Vr8ac; other furniture, a thin
             3 Probably the articles shown in Ham-    bracelet of form D1, a tutulus A2,
             pel, pl. cxxxu (axe Ar, spear, tutu-     and a two-handled cup.
ee   ‘uao01gaq{ ‘JAI      ‘UOsuRg npfepy jo prvopy    “LVI ‘OY
     riko
            ‘OVSIA “JA   “BUINIVA WIOIJ sUIN popIOD   ‘OFI ‘DIY
                  THE HUNGARIAN      BRONZE     AGE                     267
C3, a sort of razor, and a heart-shaped pendant, B3.‘ We sug-
gest placing the corded urns in phase B on account of the
‘neolithic’ affinities of the form and decoration. ‘The type
seems later to have been modified; curvilinear patterns re-
sembling Prince of Wales’ feathers replace the linear motives
and the cord impression is imitated with the aid of a twisted
ring.
   We have seen that cremation was quite often practised by Influence
the makers of corded ware,? and that they were already of corded
spreading over the Hungarian plain in Period III. The sug- ware
gestion is that the cord-ornamented ware of the Banat and
Syrmia represents the funerary pottery of some of the invaders
who had settled down among the native Danubian and
Perjamos     folk as conquerors   or overlords, and that, as in
Alsace,3 the introduction of cremation was inspired by their
example. Traces of the same folk are also observable in the
urnfield pottery farther north. Hence one may conclude that
they constituted an important element, perhaps the main
unifying principle, in the urnfield cultures that we must next
describe.
  t Man, xxvi, 100, fig. 1.   2 p. 150 above.         3 p. 309 below.
                                               XIV
                 THE     URNFIELD          CULTURES            OF HUNGARY
                                   I. GENERAL FEATURES
                 EFORE the end of the Middle Bronze Age the various
                  economic groups inhabiting the Hungarian plain in the
             Early Bronze Age had amalgamated and settled down. Hun-
             gary was again a unitary province. The civilization of the
             period is best known from the extensive cemeteries of flat
             graves—for the most part urnfields. Considerable local diver-
             gences can be detected, but all the groups were continually
             interrelated as the even distribution of the leading bronze types
             and, still more, of ceramic products indicates.
   Local        Within the plain it is convenient to distinguish five main
  groups     local groups. ‘Taking the chief funerary vessels as the basis of
             division we get the following scheme (Map VIII):
             1. Lovasberény—Vatya group, from the Danube north of the
                 Bakony to the Middle Tisza.
             2. Bijelo-brdo group along the Middle Danube and in Eastern
                 Slavonia.
             3. The Kligevac group in North Serbia.
             4. The Vattina culture in the Banat and on the Maros.
             5. The Upper Tisza group.
                We may first summarize the common features.
Distribu-      The most important settlements lie, as before, along the
  tion of great waterways, but now extend on both sides of the Danube
   settle-beyond the borders of the loss into country previously un-
   ments.
          occupied. The extension of the area of settlement can only
          have been rendered possible by the dry climatic conditions of
          the Subboreal epoch; the forests were thinning out and the
          inundations less frequent and less extensive. The quantity
          of boars’ and red deers’ bones from the settlements never-
          theless implies the existence of considerable woods, even at
          this period.
 Regular     The large size of the cemeteries indicates a sedentary popu-
 villages lation. The remains of grains and the animal bones show that
          both agriculture and stock-breeding were practised. The pig
          in particular was a staple article of diet.'. Horn cheek-pieces
          from bits from Vattina, Tdészeg, 'Tiszafiired, and other sites
          show that the horse was domesticated. Milleker* denies that
                    * At Vattina joints of pork were often deposited in the graves.
                                             Vattina, p. 55.
            THE URNFIELD          CULTURES       OF HUNGARY                269
  he was ridden, but the typical weapon is perhaps better adapted Horse
  for a knight than for a foot-soldier.t Hunting was everywhere domesti-
  important, and fishing played no less prominent a role; when cated
  the village was not established on a river bank, preference was
  given to the shores of an inland lagoon.
     The importance of trade is revealed in the position of the Trade
  settlements. ‘Those which do not lie on the waterways com-
  mand cross-country routes—the overland route cutting off the
  Danube bend between Pressburg and Buda-Pest (Lovasberény),
- and its extension towards the gold-bearing rivers flowing from
  Transylvania (Izsak, Vatya, Kecskemét), and again the short
  cut from the Maros to the mouth of the Morava (Vattina,
 Vrsac, Palanka, Kli¢evac). This commerce brought in the
 first instance tin from Bohemia, but occasional amber beads Amber
 (Bélcske, Vatya, Tdészeg, Pécska, ‘Temes-Nagyfalu) suggest that
 the chief product of the Baltic? was imported along the same
 route. In exchange for the northern commodities, not only
 copper and gold but the finished products of the Hungarian
 bronze industry were exported, as numerous finds in Bavaria,
 Bohemia, Silesia, and North Germany show.3
    Of greater historical significance was the trade with the Imports
 Aegean which revived with the resurrection of Troy. Cowrie from
 shells from a grave at Vattina and paste beads from Vatya, Mediter-
 Keménytété       (near Tiszaug), and Tészeg are conclusive proof ‘anean
 of such trade, but its influence is seen in many of the bronzes.
    The inhabitants of the Hungarian plain were not only traders Metal-
 but also most successful metallurgists. Especially in the vil- lurgy
 lages along the Tisza moulds for axes and other tools are quite
  common, and the Hungarian bronzes were, as we have said,
  exported far and wide. The mining region of Transylvania
  has unfortunately scarcely been explored, and from North Hun-
  gary and Slovakia we can only point to a few stray pots and
  bronzes of early type ¢ to prove that the minerals were being
  exploited in the first Urnfield period.
     The extent of the villages and cemeteries betokens regularly Chiefs
  organized communities. Some graves of passing wealth, par-
  ticularly in the Banat, evidently belonged to warriors > who
  : Suggestion made by Prof. Myres        3 Cf. pp. 272 and 316 below.
  before the O.U. Anthropological So-     4 Note especially the halberd from
  ciety, 2 June 1927.                     Hont, ZfE. 1896, p. 76, and the
  2 But there is amber in Transylvania,   curious axe with early decoration from
  and Milleker believes the beads found   Kisterenne, AE. xxxiii (1913), p. 310,
  in the Banat came from this source.     fig. 29. Cf. p. 222 above.
  Fiihrer, p. 14.                         5 Cf. p. 266 above.
             270           THE URNFIELD      CULTURES        OF HUNGARY
           might be chiefs, but as a rule the cemeteries seem free from
           glaring class-distinctions.
 Crema-       The burial rite was not uniform. In groups 1, 3, and 4
tion and cremation according to a very strict rite was the sole mode of
inhuma- sepulture in the period under review, though in most of these
      tion cemeteries there are one or two inhumation graves, dating
           apparently from an earlier epoch.’ In group 2 both cremation
           and inhumation in the contracted posture were practised. At
           the cemetery of Egyek in group 5 the cremation graves belong
           for the most part to a later period. It is significant that the
           strict cremations all lie along the main trade route; we shall
           see in a subsequent chapter that the same rite was observed
           on the extension of that route up the March and the Upper
           Danube.
 Crema-       The rite was as follows: the body was burned, probably in»
 tionists’ an ustrinum, and the ashes collected and deposited in clay
    ritual ossuaries.  Gifts of weapons were unknown, and even orna-
           ments were sparingly entrusted to the pyre. The urn with
           accessory vases containing food and unguents was then buried
             in the earth. The vessel was covered with a dish, but, at least
             in group 1,7 a hole was frequently bored in the walls of the
             ossuary. It is supposed that the aim was to let the soul escape,
The See-     and German archaeologists term the aperture a soul-hole (See-
  lenloch    lenloch). The urn-graves constitute regular cemeteries termed
            - urnfields.
Leading     The industry of Hungary in this and the immediately pre-
  bronze ceding phase is characterized by a variety of specialized types
    typeswhich, owing to the parsimony of funerary gifts, cannot be
         assigned to specific groups.
   Celts    The flat celt continued in use throughout the pure Bronze
    rare
         Agein Hungaryasachisel. Perhapsthe normal axe-head was the
         single-bladed implement with an eyelet for the shaft, described
         below. At the same time the Bohemian palstav was freely im-
         ported, and is found as far south as Serbia;3 in North Hungary
         and Slovakia it was quite common. ‘The ‘winged’ prototypes
         are found occasionally, especially west of the Danube.‘
Weapons     Hungarian warriors were armed with a battle-axe and a sword
         or, more often, a spear. The battle-axe was the distinctive
         weapon and may have been used particularly by horsemen.
             ™ p. 266 above.                         4 But there is one from Temes Nagy-
             ? Lovasberény (AE. xvii, pp. 315 f.).   fal in the Banat. Note that Hampel
             Examples from Vatya, Izsak, &c., at     in his statistics (iii, p. 41) does not
             Kecskemét.                              distinguish between Bohemian pal-
             3 Starinar, 1906, p. 94 (Vinéa).        stavs and winged celts of series B.
Fic. 148.°a-b Type Az, d A3, c B, e C3. Hungarian Battle-axes. $
          272        THE URNFIELD          CULTURES        OF HUNGARY
Battle-      The most distinctive type has a disk for the butt (Figs. 147,2,
   axes   148b). This hammer-axe is clearlya native form derived imme-
          diately from the copper axes of Period III-IV. The earlier
          types have a rounded convex butt. Later a spike is developed
          which grows longer with time until in phase D we have a flat
          (A3, Fig. 148 d) form with a spike growing from it.* The centre
          of manufacture was apparently North Hungary,” but the type
          is distributed widely over the whole plain down to Serbia. In
          Transylvania it is rare,3 and beyond the Danube, too. A minia-
          ture type, Aa, with a knobbed butt (Fig. 145, 4), was deposited
          in graves‘ of group 3.                                    é
             From Hungary type A2 was exported to Upper Austria and
          Bavaria,’ Silesia,° Pomerania,’ Galicia,® and across the Ukraine
       to the Dniepr.2 The later variety is found in barrows in
       Lower Austria’ and Bohemia." Association with early swords
       at Zenta and HajdG Samson show that the type goes back
       probably to phase B, but the later varieties belong to Period VI.”
Type B    The second type of battle-axe has a very narrow blade and
       a fan-shaped butt (Figs. 148 b and 147,3). The narrow blade
       is reminiscent of Mesopotamian and Syrian forms and must be
       inspired from that quarter. ‘The type is met at Vattina in the
       Banat, in County Pest, and on the Upper Tisza. Outside
       Hungary it has been found at two sites in Moravia, three in
          Bohemia, and one each in Lower Austria, Bavaria,                      Silesia,
         and Mecklenburg-Strelitz.3 The early date of the type is
         proved by its context in hoards at HajdG Samson and Kiténov,
         and in a late Aunjetitz grave near Retz."
Single-     Single-bladed axes (Fig. 147, 5-12) are common east of the
  bladed Tisza, whence 54 out of 64 specimens come. The prototype
   axes

          t von Richthofen, p. 94. Association      another from Hall in Upper Austria,
          with an octagonal hilted sword in the     Theuer, p. 39.
          depot of Tachlovice (PA. xviii, p. 248)   6 von Richthofen, pl. 25, k-m.
          gives phase C2 as upper limit for the     7 Baltische Studien, 1901, pl. 1.
          late type.                                8 PZ. x, p. 160 (Stefkovo hoard).
          2 Early specimens from Nagy Ikléd         9 'Tallgren, Pontide, p. 173.
          (Szolnok-Doboka) near Szamosujvar         t0 Winklarn.
          (AE. xvii, p. 105, fig. 57) and County    t Richly, pl. L11; Schranil, Bohmen,
          Torda (AE. xxiv, p. 206).                 pl. xxvI, 13.
          3 No moulds have been found, accord-       2 Rakos Palota and Alsé Nemedi may
          ing to Gétze, because the type was        be B or C; Stefkovo in Galicia, C or
          cast by the cire perdue process, Real.    D; Domahida, D or later.
          li, p. 154.                                73 von Richthofen, p. 97.
          4 Milleker, Vattina, pl.1,4. There is     ™ Richly, pl. x11; Schranil, J.c., pl.
          another from the urnfield of Suréin in    XxVI, 14; MAGW. lvii, p. 205.
           Syrmia.                                   15 AE. xxxiii, p. 306.
          5 AuhV. i, pt. IV. 11, 12. There is
            THE URNFIELD          CULTURES           OF HUNGARY                2°73
might be seen in the copper axe described in Chapter XI
(Fig. 113). But despite their material and early associations,
these axes are not as a whole necessarily older than the Bronze
Age type under discussion here. The bronze axes were certainly
manufactured at Tdészeg, Pécska, and Vattina; moulds have
been found at all these sites, in the first-named as late as
level E, but at Tszeg low down in C. Some of the bronze
specimens, e.g. Fig. 147, are reminiscent of Asiatic models.’
A remarkable Transylvanian type with an extension at the
back looks like a bad imitation of the Syrian axe with a spring
back, in use during the second millennium, but actually it
seems to belong to a much later context than the class just
described.
   Swords of early type are rare in Hungary. Rapiers with four Rarity of
rivets have been found together with battle-axes in inhuma- swords
tion graves at Zenta and Vattina (Fig. 145). These are the
only early warrior graves with swords from the plain known
to the writer. Perhaps the rapiers are modelled on the
Minoan types current in the sixteenth century B.c.2, On the Leaf-
other hand, the earliest known leaf-shaped sword is that from shaped
Hajdi Samson (Fig. 147). Its decoration shows it to be a sword
native type, but the form recurs in Denmark.
   An alternative to the rapier would be the spear with socketed Spear
bronze head. The blade is always a simple leaf-shape. An
early specimen was included in the finds from Mezoberény.
In this shape again Aegean influences may be recognized.
   The bow seems to have played only a secondary part during
the Middle Bronze Age, but that is perhaps because the arrows
were tipped with bone points which have perished.
   Despite the great wealth of bronzes, implements and weapons Persis-
of stone, flint, horn, bone, and boars’ tusk are found in profu- tence of
                                                                 stone
sion in all settlements and even in graves all over Hungary.     tools
   A great variety of ornaments of gold or bronze were     worn
in Hungary both by men and women. The neck was         encircled Orna-
by necklaces of beads and pendants, and occasionally by torques. ments
The arms were weighted with penannular bracelets and arm-
coils of hammered metal. Rings adorned the fingers, the
leather girdle was studded with metal buttons and tutuli, while
girdles of hammered bronze were soon to be made. Even the
: The agreement extends to small de-          tine in the British Museum. and
tails such as the reinforced back with        Antiquity, ii (1928), pl. Iv.
ornamental rivets, the cut-away shaft         7 But cf. the weapon from an Early
tube, and the ridges bordering it. Cf.        Helladic ‘pyre’ on Levkas, Dérpfeld,
specimens from Nineveh and Pales-              Alt-Ithaka, B. 62, 3.
  3443                                   Nn
         274         THE URNFIELD             CULTURES        OF HUNGARY
          legs were decked with anklets and cylinders. Pins served to
          hold the garments in place and to adorn the hair. Ear-rings
          were hung from the ears, and other pendants twisted in the
          locks. Hungarian apparel must have had a thoroughly bar-
          baric look; similar trappings are worn in Africa or Borneo
          to-day. But the Hungarian objects often have a distinct
          aesthetic merit.
             Since all the main types of ornament current during the
          Middle Bronze Age in Central Europe are represented in
          Hungary, and many originated there, a summary of the chief
          types may be given here.
Bracelets    Bracelet Cz is characteristically Hungarian‘ but was exported
          to Lower Austria and Bavaria. C2 is a cheaper variant made
          (Plate 8) of thin ribbon, convex on the outside. In Hungary it 1s
          common in urnfields of groups 1, 3,4, and 5. It was exported to
          Bosnia,? Lower Austria,3 Bohemia,* Oberpfalz,5 and Upper
          Bavaria.’ Its association in the latter area with a wheel pen-
          dant shows its relative lateness. C3 has similar connexions.
          Bx has prototypes in the Aunjetitz industry. In Hungary it
          occurs in urnfields of group 1, in the hoard of Rakos-Palota,
          and elsewhere. In Moravia it still occurs in Late Bronze Age
          hoards. Bz characterizes the urnfields of groups 3-4, and was
          exported over the same area as C2. In South Germany Kraft
          assigns it to phase D.? D1 occurs in the hoard of Rakos-
          Palota. There are many specimens from Moravia,* Silesia,
          and Poland, some of which are certainly Late Bronze Age.
          Probably these heavy rings were worn on the upper arm or on
          the ankles; they are always found in pairs.
              Heavy coils of thick rectangular wire with a loop at one end
          and a spiral disk at the other (D 4) (Fig. 209) are peculiar to
           Hungary.? Their use is uncertain, though they have a certain
           likeness to the bracelet last described. Perhaps the arm was
           slipped through the loopand the spiral was brought over to cover
           the breast,” for the objects generally go in pairs. They belong
           to the end of the Bronze Age, and were most popular in the
           north and west.
Cylinders     Cylinders, terminating in spirals, were another Hungarian
          * Closed finds; Bijelo brdo       (grave),   7 Bronzezeit, p. 73.
         Racs-Egres, Rakos-Palota.                     8 FfA. i, pl.Iv, 1; JZK. 1906, p. 256;
         2 WMBH. vi, p. 60.                            von Richthofen, p. 86; Beltz, p. 186.
         3 Amstetten XI.                               9 There is one from a hoard found at
         49 PICS Alsaplenilsy yee SenecC.              Stockerau in Lower Austria.
         5 Brunn I.                                    0 I owe this suggestion to Dr. Polak,
         ° PBI. 1895, p. 51; Naue,OB.,p.185.           Keeper of the KoSice Museum.
           THE    URNFIELD       CULTURES        OF HUNGARY                275
 speciality exported to Oberpfalz, Poland,’ Central and North-
 East Germany.’ The association in Poland with a flanged celt
 with only rudimentary stop-ridge suggests a relatively early
 upper limit for the type. No Hungarian examples come from
 graves; most have been found in the area of groups 1 and 5.
     The knot-headed pin Ar (Pl. 10), introduced before the Pins
 beginning of the Bronze Age, lasted in use into the urnfield
 period in group 2, but principally in the variant Br.
     A4 appears in the B settlement at Tdszeg, and it, or its
 variants, remained in use all through the Urnfield period. We
 have met the type in the Early Bronze Age of Bohemia, but it
 may be a native Hungarian form derived from the Syrian
 globe-headed pin with an eyelet in the neck.t B5 seems a
  Hungarian variant on the same type though there are analogues
  in bone from Danish passage-graves.’ It is native to Western
~Hungary.® B7 is a development of the foregoing. The eyelet
  is formed by a projecting spur meeting the head. The majority
  of specimens belong to the Late Bronze Age of North Hun-
  gary? when gigantic specimens occur. An allied form B6 occurs
  in Moravia and the Bohemian tumuli, and again in West
  Hungary. Of the remaining pins Bq is a variant on a well-
  known Aunjetitz form; A6 is also paralleled in the Aunjetitz
  area; B2 occurs in urnfields of groups 1 and 4 and in Aunjetitz
  graves; B11 is peculiar to groups 2 and 3 save for one example
  from Lower Austria. The author only knows one (plain) ex-
  ample of the Swabian pin, C3, in Hungary; it comes from a
  grave at Vattina, where the ossuary was a corded amphora.
      In default of amber, gold® was often used for beads, and a Pendants
  variety of bronze pendants were worn on necklaces; a selection
  of types is shown in Fig. 149. Of these 18 is the most distinc-
  tive; for it is represented in many hoards and almost every
  cemetery; moulds for its manufacture have been found at
   Felsé Kubin in Northern Slovakia.’ A variant in gold is known
  from North Serbia2° The form is Mycenaean in origin, being
  a bad copy of the Minoan sacred ivy-leaf,™ but it soon became
 t Verh. OP. lv, p. 229; Ix, p. 146.      7 Dated by the grave-finds at Zagy-
 2 Mannus, viii, pls. 1x-x.               vapalfalva, AE. xl (1925-6), p. 67,
 3 ¥ST. viii, fig. 26; Kossinna, DV.      fig. 24.
 fig. 132; Balt. Studien, 1901, p. 9      8 Note among the shapes the four-
 (Rosow near Stettin), &c.                pointed star, Starinar, 1907, p. 103,
 4 Cf. p. 235.                            figs. 2-3.
 5 Lissauer, ZfE. xxxix (1907), p. 794-   9 AE. ii (1882), p. 279.
 6 Regelsbrunn (in Burgenland), Rakos-     10 Starinar, 1907, pl. I.
 Palota near Pest, Bijelo brdo in Sla-    11 Evans-Festschrift, pp. 2 f.
 vonia, &c.
             276         THE URNFIELD           CULTURES       OF HUNGARY
  Minoan    naturalized in the Middle Danube basin and spread thence
  origin by trade up the river to Bohemia,’ Upper Austria,” Upper
         of
       type Bavaria,3 Wurtemberg,‘ and even Alsace5
               In Hungary specimens have been found with early rapiers
            or axes in the graves of Vattina and in hoards, but it lasts in
          use to the end of the Bronze Age.° The Bavarian specimens
          from Asenkofen are dated by an associated rapier to Reinecke’s
          C1, but Schaeffer assigns the Alsatian examples toa later stage.
          The closed variant (Fig. 151 a) belongs likewise to the Urnfield
          period and is no older? than the open-work model.
             The pectiform pendant, no. 28, is perhaps represented
          among the trinkets hanging down the back of the Klicevac
          idol. A mould for its manufacture was certainly found at
          Lengyel.? Matz 9 notes that the pattern incised on a Thessa-
          lian B2—neolithic—sherd was inspired by a similar object.
    Tutu     Among the ornaments designed for wearing on the girdle
          we must note tutulus A2, whose previous history lies in Upper
          Bavaria, if Kraft’ is right in regarding the form A1 from the
          Early Bronze Age graves of Straubing as its prototype. Aegean,
          on the other hand, are the hollow buttons of gold or bronze, Ao.”
Technique    The Hungarian bronze-workers had attained a high degree
             of technical excellence. ‘The manufacture of shaft-hole axes,
           going back to the beginning of the period, presupposes fami-
           liarity with the art of core-casting.
    Use of    The majority of Hungarian bronzes were certainly cast.
  hammer Hoernes * denies the use of the hammer as a formative tool
           altogether. It is nevertheless clear that this implement was
           employed in shaping gold disks, and very likely the common
           ornamental bronze plaques, and perhaps even the broad ribbons
           of cylinders and girdles, were beaten into shape."
     ‘En-     Weapons and ornaments alike were often gorgeously deco-
  graved’ rated. The finest specimens of Hungarian art are the weapons
decoration
             t Pié, ii, pl. 1x, 9; other examples in   8 Wosinski, Lengyel, pl. xxxv1, 286.
             Plzen Museum.        Cf. Schranil, Boh-   9 Friithkretische Siegel, p. 232. His
             men, p. 21.                               conclusion that the Vattina culture is
             2 Ratishof, Inntal, N.H. Museum,          partly contemporary with the Second
             Vienna, Theuer, p. 40.                    Period in Thessaly is plainly impos-
             3 Asenkofen E.                            sible. The sherd cited really discloses
             4 Kraft, Bronzezeit, pl. Xxxtll, 2.       the existence of an otherwise unsus-
             5 Schaeffer, Haguenau, fig. 38, s.        pected south-eastern prototype for the
             § Proved by its discovery in the urn-     ornament.
             field of Zagyvapalfalva, AE. xl, pp.      10 TOP SCL. DQ Se
             61 f., figs. 19, 23, 24, and 25.          a . Xanthudides, op. cit., pl. tvu,
             7 As Reinecke (AE. xix) and von           486.
             Miské (AfA. xv) have erroneously          12 Urgeschichte, p. 392.
             suggested.                                3 Cf. Gotze, Real. ii, p. 172.
Fic. 149.   Hoard of pendants and pins from Nagy Hangos, after AH.   #
         278          THE    URNFIELD         CULTURES        OF HUNGARY
          produced in the northern‘ industrial province, with their grace-
          ful curvilinear patterns (Fig. 147). The bronze-worker had no
          hardened steel tool to engrave with. It is hardly conceivable
          that these wonderful sweeping curves could have been pro-
          duced with punch and hammer.? Hence we incline to Gétze’s?
          view that the objects in question were manufactured by the
          cire perdue process and that the patterns were incised in the
          wax model.
             Hoernes‘ calls this style ‘Mycenaeanizing’, and Vassits> has
          shown how some of the motives have Mycenaean pedigrees.
          The writer, while admitting the fructifying influence of the
          Aegean on its evolution, regards it as essentially rooted in the
          Danubian tradition. In any case Reinecke’s comparison with
          the curvilinear patterns on bronze vessels belonging to the end
          of the local Bronze Age in Scandinavia is somewhat wide of
          the mark.
Embossing    For the ornamentation of bronze ribbons and plaques or
          thin gold disks a rough sort of embossing with a punch was
          resorted to as in the Early Bronze Age. The patterns are,
         however, now, as arule, curvilinear.              The circular plaques from
         Ottlaka (County Arad)° are fine examples of the style current
         in the south-eastern province at a later date.
            We may now examine the several groups in greater detail.
                                    Il. THE      LOCAL     GROUPS
          1. Lovasberény—Vatya Group.
          Group 1 extends from the northern slopes of the Bakony across
          the Danube at least as far as the ‘Tisza, occupying Fejer and Pest
          Counties. The most important cemeteries are at Lovasberény,’
          Dunakeszi,’ Ocsa,? Soroksar,” Vatya, Izsak,* Démséd,% and
          Dunapentele.* To these should probably be added urnfields
          listed by Wosinki*s as yielding Pannonian ware, such as Duna-
          Almas (Komaron), Bakony-Romand, and Boélcske (‘Tolna).
 The urns    The distinctive urns are pitcher-forms with relatively long
          t Zoltai, Man, xxvi. 84.                     8 Nagy, Budapest, pp. 130f.        The
          2 Hoernes, l.c., p. 392.                     types here look distinctly late.
          3 Real. ii, p. 154; the stone moulds         9 AEF. xvii, p. 259, close to Alsd
          found in the settlements would on            Nemedi.
          this view be designed only for forming       ' Wosinski, Ink. Ker., pl. txvu.
          the wax models.                              11 AF. xxix, pp. 125 ff.
          4 op. cit., p. 403.                          ™ M. Kecskemét.
          5 Starinar, 1906, pp. ro f.                  13 Excavated in May 1928.
          6 AE. xxix (1909), pp. 409 ff.                4 PZ. xi, pp. 118 fi.
          7 AE. xvii, pp. 305 f.; xvili, pp. 320 ff.    +5 Ink. Ker., pp. 45, 46, and 50.
           THE     URNFIELD      CULTURES      OF HUNGARY             279
trumpet-like necks (Fig. 150). They are provided with one,
two, or even more handles, either joining neck and shoulder,
sitting on the shoulder, or, more rarely, on the belly. ‘They




                 Fic. 150. Urns from Lovasberény, after AE. 4

may be decorated with grooved patterns, with a plastic rope
ornament round the belly, and by roughening the lower half.
The ancestry of the pitchers that stand at the head of the Descended
series is disclosed in the large jar recently discovered in the from
Early Bronze Age settlement at Oszentivan (Fig. 127).’          Early
« It reproduces not only the form        the plastic rope ornament and the yee
                                         roughened base: cf. p. 221 above.  ge types
(especially the trumpet neck) but also
         280        “THE URNFIELD            CULTURES      OF HUNGARY
            A rarer form, represented at Lovasberény,’ Izsak, and else-
         where, has an ovoid body and a short trumpet neck. It is very
         common in the crusted ware of Tolna County” where diminu-
         tive specimens (Fig. 153 a) were manufactured.              ‘The same type
         occurs sporadically even north of the Bakony. It, too, goes
         back to local types current in the Early Bronze Age—in this
         case the ovoid amphora represented in TdszegA. At Soroksar3
         one ossuary was a pillar urn of hour-glass form, like that from
         Suréin shown in Fig. 155. Here we have a development of the
         Gata mug influenced by the larger vessels just described.
         Finally, urns belonging to group 2, exactly like Fig. 156f in
         shape but ornamented in the excised style of group 1 (as at
         Harcz), were used as ossuaries at Izsak.
 Cover      The urns were covered with various sorts of dishes and
  dishes bowls. The most distinctive was deep, with a distinct neck and
         wide brim: it may be decorated with radial grooves* or in
         Pannonian style as in group 2.5 It is certainly derived from
         the analogous dishes of the Perjamos, Tészeg B, and Bell-
         beaker cultures. Another form is a crater with two vertical
         handles reminiscent of Mycenaean and Cypro-Mycenaean
         types (Fig. 150c),° but traceable to the same local prototypes.
         In the cemeteries round Kecskemét, Tészeg dishes with wart
         ornament (like Fig. 163) were also used occasionally. The
         same cemeteries and Dunakeszi have yielded broad-rimmed
         oval dishes such as occur very frequently at Egyek on the
         Upper Tisza. ‘These are ultimately descended from the Early
         Bronze Age dish found at Nagy Rév.?
Panno-      Accessory vases are very varied. ‘The most interesting belong
  nian   to the fabric termed Pannonian ware.                Outside the urnfields,
  ware   this fabric is found in great abundance in the settlements of
         Tolna County, notably Harcz, Kélesd, Lengyel, and Szekszard,
         and it seems to have been manufactured in that region. But
         it was diffused right over the Little Alféld too. Imported vases
         of the same fabric have been found east of the Tisza at Szele-
         vény and Szentes,® in the C levels of Tészeg,? at Mohi Puszta
         and Szihalom on the Slovakian border, near Detva in Slovakia
         (Zvolen),” and in the Lausitz urnfield of Bélov in Moravia.”
         1 AE. xvii, p. 313, fig. 25.               7 p. 217 above.
         ? Wosinski, Ink. Ker., pls. XLv1, XLviI,   8 Wosinski, op. cit., pl. LXxIII.
         LV, LVI.                                   9 Felentés a M.N. Muz. 1907 évi, p.
         3 Hampel, pl. -xxvu, 1.                     179, fig. 26, 2.
         4 Lovasberény, Vatya.                       170 M. Turé. Sv. Martin.
         5 Dunakeszi, Soroksér.                     ™ Verbal information from Dr. Cer-
         ° Forsdyke, Cat., pl. x1, A 874.           vinka.
            THE URNFIELD           CULTURES             OF HUNGARY                281
   Pannonian ware is one of the finest of prehistoric pot fabrics. Techni-
The surface is generally slipped, its colour varying from orange que
to black. Apart from the urns which are found in all sizes,
the curious waisted jugs and cups are the most distinctive Shapes
shapes. In the jugs (Fig. 153 b) the band handle starts from
the rim and is often indented at the junction. The form is
obviously derived from the Slovakian group of Early Bronze
Age mugs represented at Veselé where the omphalos base al-
ready occurs (Fig. 141); an intermediate form is represented
in the inhumation grave at Bene near Kecskemét. ‘The shal- Triple
lower cup with the handle bridging the waist (Fig. 154.) can vases
just as easily be derived from Gata forms. In addition multiple Rattles
vases (Fig. 154), rattles, theriomorphs, and various quaint
shapes were manufactured in Pannonian ware.
   The decoration of Pannonian ware is still more distinctive Orna-
than the shapes; it is effected by fine furrowing, excision, and ‘ment
impression, all used side by side. Groups of concentric circles
linked by incised lines play a prominent part in the decoration.
 In these schemes the influence of metal-work may easily be
recognized,' though the concentric circle had already made its
appearance on the bell-beakers from'T6k6l. Another important
motive specially popular in Tolna County was the W figure; it
recurs, combined with concentric circles, in Period VI at Maria
Rast in Styria.2 With the stamped and incised motives were
combined broad, excised bands. This technique, the Harcz
style, must be directly descended from the Slavonian ware that
had flourished a little farther south.3_ The incised lines, stamped
circles, and excised strips + were all heavily incrusted with a
white substance, shown by Wosinski’s analyses 5 to consist of
burnt bone.
   In addition to the Pannonian ware the urnfields of Dunapen- Cord or-
tele and Vatya contained cord-ornamented cups. Finally, fluted nament
cups (like Fig. 185 b below) from a few graves confirm the im-
pression created -by the Hallstatt analogies to Pannonian mo-
tives that the urnfields in question lasted in use into phase D.
   The metal furniture is relatively poor, and looks extra- Daggers
ordinarily primitive. The only weapons® detected are some
« Very close parallels are to be seen            4 The bottoms of these were specially
on Hallstatt girdle plates, e.g. PBI.            prepared by rubbing, to receive the
 1891, pl. I.                                    white mass.
a Much, Kunsthistor. Atlas, pl. xt,              5 Ink. Ker., p. 24.
 10.                                             6 G. Nagy illustrates a socketed celt
3 Behrens alone has clearly recognized           as coming from the urnfield of Duna-
this generic kinship, PZ. xi-xii, p.123.         _keszi (op. cit., p. 136).
   3443                                    Ooo
        282        THE URNFIELD        CULTURES        OF HUNGARY
        primitive flat daggers of types Ax, Bz, and Ba, from Vatya."
        Battle-axes are never found in graves, and are exceptional in the
        whole area occupied by cemeteries of group I.
   Pins    Ornaments were more plentiful. The pins are mostly Early
        Bronze Age in type. Ao is found everywhere; the primitive
        knot-headed pin, B1, at Vatya (twice),’ B4 at Lovasberény*
        and Dunapentele;3 As at Lovasberény, Dunakeszi, Dunapen-
        tele, and Vatya; B2 at Lovasberény and Izsak. But the really




                  Fic. 151. Belt from Erczi reconstructed after Hampel.       +

          typical pin at all sites was A4 and variations thereon, e.g. B3.
          All these types can be paralleled more or less exactly in the
          Aunjetitz graves of the Early Bronze Age. However, Vatya has
          yielded examples of C3 and B6.4
Pendants     As pendants Bo,5 B2,5° Br,° and B37 were worn. Spirals
          of forms D1 and D5 were stuck in the ears. The arms
Bracelets might be decked with bracelets B17 and C2.°          One person
          buried at Lovasberény must have worn an ingot torque (A1).
   Girdle The girdle was studded with hollow bronze or gold® buttons
    orna- or tutuli like Ao,° but a narrow girdle of hammered bronze
    ments comes from Lovasberény.*      Everywhere plaques of thin bronze-
          leaf rolled up at each end were freely used for hanging on
          girdles or on necklaces; the probable arrangement is shown in
          Fig. 151. For the latter purpose precious substances were
          imported from afar; the Baltic or Transylvania supplied
         * None of the Vatya bronzes have       4 Also at Dunakeszi.
         been published; they are to be seen   ‘5 Dunapentele.
         at Kecskemét.                          6 Vatya.
         2 The bronzes from Lovasberény are     7 Lovasberény.
         illustrated in AE. xviii, p. 329.      8 AE. xvii, p. 304, fig. 1.
         Bae ZpOxt tos
           THE URNFIELD            CULTURES       OF HUNGARY                  283
amber ;' the Eastern Mediterranean small beads of bluish green Amber
fayence, cylindrical or in the shape of a four-pointed star,” and Paste
marine mussel shells.3 Bored teeth were also worn.                beads
   It is uncertain whether the beehive pit-dwelli ngs from  Leng- Dwellings
yel belong to this phase. More probably they were dug by
Hallstatt people in the Sub-Atlantic epoch. And most of the
horn-shaped firedogs ‘+ must belong to that period. But some
may be truly ‘Bronze Age’, and so constitute links between the
earlier specimens from Kovacshalom and the Late Bronze Age




              Fic. 152.   Fire dog from Lengyel, after Wosinski. 4+ o




 series from the Upper Danube and Switzerland; typologically
 Fig. 152 shows an early form.
    Kossinna would derive the culture just described from that Affinities:
 of Aunjetitz, pointing to the agreement of the bronzes.> It sinna’s
                                                                  Kos-
 would be possible to supplement his arguments by citing the theory
 cups which may be attached to Aunjetitz, or rather Gata and
 Veselé, types. His conclusion is none the less false. The cul-
 ture just described is a development of the native Early Bronze
 Age culture, the remains of which are still insufficiently known
 locally, but which, as we saw, rested on the same foundation as
 the contemporary civilizations of Bohemia and Moravia.
 t Large spherical beads found at Vat-      Civ., pl. xL1x; 73 A. In clay the form
 ya; Béleske in Tolna (Wosinski, Ink.       appeared with painted pottery at
 Ker., p. 50; TT., p. 396).                 Satoraljatijhely (cf. p. 106 above), and
 2 Found at Vatya and in the settle-        gold examples were found with the cups
 ment of Kemenytété near Tiszaug.           of fig.206in the Late Bronze Age hoard
 The star is about o°5 cm. from point       of Buda-Pest-Angyalféld. Cf. the Ser-
 to point: the colour is very pale, and     bian gold beads cited on p. 275,n. 8.
 no glaze remains. Four-pointed beads       3 Dunapentele, PZ. xi, p. 120 (species
                                            not determined).
 of stone from the cist graves of Naxos
  and others in fayence from Helladic       4 Wosinski, Lengyel, figs. 206-9.
                                            5 ZfE. xxxiv (1902), Pp. 211.
 cists at Sesklo are in Athens (Nos. 6203
  and 5908). Cf. also, Brunton, Badarian
            284         THE URNFIELD          CULTURES       OF HUNGARY
Origin in      The proof of this derivation is afforded in the first instance
Hungary     by the urns; no possible prototype for these exists within the
            sphere of the Aunjetitz culture, whereas the lucky find at
            Be nan reveals their immediate ancestry. Secondly, the
            decoration is essentially native to the Middle Danube plain.
            The bronzes, derived from the common oriental heritage of
            the two groups (the daggers, the pin Ar, the torque Ar, the
            pendant spiral Ax), all represent ‘Hungarian’ developments
            thereof.’
            2. Byelo brdo Group.
     Urns   Group 2 occupies the adjacent territory on both sides of the
            Danube and the Save. The characteristic urn is the two-
            storied form shown in Fig. 156f, and may be regarded as a
            specialized variant of that current in group 3. It may be
            covered with a dish similar in form to that used in group I
            but decorated in the native style. The other forms are allied
            to Pannonian shapes (Fig. 156 a).
               The decoration resembles that current farther north in the
            use of finely furrowed lines and concentric circles, but the
            lines are sometimes curved, and neither excision nor W figures
            were employed.
               Urns like Fig. 156f are characteristic of the cemeteries of
            Szeremle,3 Kiskészeg,t Maria Almas, and Voérésmart‘ in
            Dunantul, Erdut,5 and Bijelo brdo © in eastern Slavonia and
            Temes Kubin? and Dubovac in the Banat, and occur even
          below the Iron Gates.’ An analogous form, but decorated by
          excision, served as the ossuary in one grave at Izsak.? The dis-
          tinctive lid is found in many of the cemeteries of group 4
          round Vrgac and as far north as Soroksar in a cemetery of
          group 1. At Surcin in Syrmia an urn of Soroksar type (Fig.
          155) was found.
 Casesof     ‘The urns do not always contain cremated remains; in one
 inhuma- grave at Bijelo brdo and generally at Szeremle * they accom-
     tion panied contracted skeletons.
            * Among the Trojan pithoi are many        4 Naturhistor. Museum, Vienna.
            varieties that may be connected with      5 Vjes HAD. vi, p. 185.
            our urns; e.g. SS. Nos. 2489, 2491,       © Ibid. vii, p. 63.
            2497, 2508.     Remoter parallels from    7 Wosinski, op. cit., pl. xct.
            the Minoan world (e.g. HS. xliv,          8 At Balta-Verdenear Turnu-Severin;
            p. 17, fig. 19) might be multiplied       Dacia, i, p. 294, fig. 260.
            indefinitely. But note especially Dérp-   9 M. Kecskemét.
            feld, Alt-Ithaka, Beilage 67 (E.H.).      10 Wosinski, ibid., pl. Lxvit. 2.
            2 Cf. p. 235 above.                       it Ibid, (p. 155
            3 Wosinski, Ink. Ker., pls. txvit f.
          a                 “b                       Cc




      Fic. 155. Urn of Soroksar type from Surtin.   M. Zagreb.




aay
                                    Fe
Fic. 156. Furniture of cremation grave from
                                            Temes-Kubin.   M. Szombathely
          THE URNFIELD         CULTURES       OF HUNGARY                 285
  Stone celts and axes are quite common in settlements of this                 Stone
group, and at Temes Kubin a finely-polished stone celt was                     celts
actually deposited in a grave (Fig. 156). However, a bronze axe Weapons
of type A2 was found at Kiskdszeg (? in a grave). Arrows were
sometimes tipped with triangular metal points fastened to the
shaft by thongs passing through slits.1_ Judging from the furni- Orna-
ture of grave 121 at Bijelo brdo pin Bs and bracelet C1 were ments
characteristic of this group; the usual spiral ear-rings of gold
or bronze were also worn.’ Perhaps the authors of this group,
like their neighbours farther east, manufactured clay models of Clay
women    and animals; the Babska statuette? was found in the models
area and a figurine is included in the furniture of the grave at
Temes Kubin. Theriomorphic rattles were found at Soroksar
and elsewhere.
3. The Klitevac Group.
To the east group 2 passes over almost insensibly into the
Kligevac group. Types of both groups are actually mingled
at Temes Kubin, e.g. in the grave group illustrated in Fig. 156.
The type site is the urnfield of Kli¢evac in North Serbia.> But
the same ware is represented in the upper strata at Vinca and
in the settlements of Kurvin Grad+ and Zhuto brdo$ in the
same region, on the north bank of the Danube in the cemeteries
of Temes Kubin, Palanka, and Dubovac, and at Gradac in
the Morava valley.’ Thence it extends below the Iron Gates to
Orsova and Vidin.’
    The urns in group 3 are globular and equipped with four Urns
handles on the belly (Fig. 157,aandc). The type, like the more
piriform variant noted in group 1,might be derived from the jars
found in Tészeg A, but the influence of the Banat corded urns and
 of Minoan metal vases is discernible. The cover-dishes resemble
 those of groups 1 and 2 (Fig. 157, b and d). Hollow ring-stands
 with crinkled rims (Fig. 156d) are very distinctive. A jar in
 the Nemzeti Muzeum has interesting Hercynian analogues.
    The technique employed for the decoration of these vases
is the same as in group 2. But the stamped circles are rather
larger and the furrowed lines are grouped together to form
                                                         mes
 ribbons; fretwork is not unknown, and red matter someti
 takes the place of white in the incrustation.
 t Bijelo brdo, Grave 121; Dawn,       ‘4 Cf. map in Starinar, 1910, pl. 1.
 fig. 95.                               s Starinar, 1907, pp. 1 ff.
 2 Hoernes, Urgeschichte, p. 409, 1.    6 Casson, Macedoma, De ko.
 3 Rev. Arch. 1902, pp. 172 ff.         1 e.g. Dacia, i, pp. 280 f.
             286         THE    URNFIELD       CULTURES          OF HUNGARY
   Spiral    The ribbons often form ‘spiral or maeander figures; the
      and stamped circles are grouped to form stars or rosettes. A con-
maeander  stantly recurring theme is the heraldic group (Fig. 157). Be-
 patterns hind the conventionalization lies some Aegean motive—the
Heraldic Mycenaean pillar with its guardian deities or the Potnia Théron
   groups and her attendants.’   On the jar in the Nemzeti Muzeum we
          see a human face on the neck and a curious pectiform sign on
          the body. Sherds from Klicevac and Zhuto brdo present a
          degraded version of the Late Mycenaean lily,? a motive that
          was also engraved on battle-axes. Even to-day it appears in
          an identical form on peasant embroideries. But if many designs
          presuppose textile models, a sherd from Zhuto brdo,3 adorned
          with a row of stamped SS, is an instance of copying metal work
          that only a Middle Minoan potter could rival.4
     Clay    Clay statuettes5 are very common on sites of group 3 as
figurines well as on some adjacent sites of groups 2 and 4. The goddess
          is always now represented clothed in a bodice and wearing a
            bell-shaped flounced skirt, reminiscent of Minoan                            fashions,
            and decked with bangles and pendants.° The patterns woven
            in the stuff of the skirt are faithfully reproduced and include
            the swastika? and other symbols. But the artist has paid little
            attention to the human form behind these trappings. The
            features are undistinguishable and the bust is little better than
            a concave disk. Below the Iron Gates at Orsova® the con-
            ventional flattening has produced a type that has been wrongly
            compared to the Cycladic ‘frying-pans’, but does really re-
            semble the Maltese figures of the Bronze Age.’
   Other       In addition to the figurines, model thrones,” clay models of
  models    battle-axes," and other ‘ritual’ objects were manufactured and
            often deposited in the graves.
  Metal        Apart from an ogival dagger of type B2 from Kligevac” no
            metal objects have been identified from graves of this group.
            Chance finds include a battle-axe of type A2, spiral lock-rings
             * Vassits, Rev. Arch. 1902, p. 185.      figurine a necklace of heart-shaped
            ? Vassits, Starinar, 1906, pp. 10 f.       pendants is indicated.
            3 Starinar, 1910, pl. 11, 9.              7 Wosinski, Ink. Ker., pl. xcit.
            4 Cf. Evans, Palace, fig. 182, 6.         8 Hoernes, Urgesch., p. 411; Wosin-
            5 The finest is that from Kligevac, so     ski, Ink. Ker., pl. ct.
            often reproduced, e.g. Wosinski, Ink.     9 Archaeologia, \xvii (1916), pl. xvii.
            Ker., pls. crv and cv; Hoernes, Urg.,      70 Rev. Arch. 1902, figs. 19-22 (Klite-
            p. 409; Childe, Dawn, fig. 94. Cf.        vac).
            Starinar, 1924, pl. 1, for a new speci-   1car
            men from the Banat.                                       gto, pl.pl. v1, vi, 4242 ((Kurvin
                                                          Starinar, 1910,
            6 'The concentric circles may repre-      1 Starinar, 1906, p. 19, fig. 8.
            sent tutuli of type A2: in the Babska
           THE URNFIELD          CULTURES       OF HUNGARY                287
of type 2, and fragments of iron from Zhuto brdo, a celt of
type C2 from Vinéa, and the mould for a socketed celt C4
from Kurvin Grad.* Stone celts and axes were not uncommon.
Very interesting are two stray fibulae from Vinéa, one of the
simplest violin-bow type, the other the Mycenaean form with
flat leaf-shaped bow. Both must have come from the Aegean
up the Vardar.
 _ In the civilization of group 3 the old Danubian substratum ‘Danu-
lives on more distinctly than anywhere else. The spiral orna- bian’
                                                              survivals
ment, the figurines, and the ritual models are all descended
from neolithic stocks. The analogy of the Klicevac spirals
and maeanders and the shape of the typical urn to those
from pre-Mycenaean levels in the Vardar valley* suggests
that the culture from which Klitevac is sprung occupied
the whole Central Balkan area. Its southern extension was
perhaps already overlaid with a veneer of Mycenaean culture.
North of the Balkans only reflexions thereof appear. But the
fibula from Vinéa confirms inferences based upon patterns
and costumes: Aegean influence was still coming down the
Morava. North Serbia was still fulfilling its old role in Aegean-
Danubian commerce.
4. The Vattina Culture.
The fourth group is represented by the settlements and ceme-
teries of Vattina and the allied sites of Vr8ac, Tolvadia, ‘Temes
Nagyfali, and Munar Szt. Petre. Provisionally the Nagy Sanc
near Pécska may be attached to this group as well as Sur¢éin in
Syrmia. Here the material from the settlements has at least
been collected and published, however imperfect the excava-
tion. We thus get a fuller picture of the whole culture. But
we must recall that Vattina was a long-lived settlement, like
Toszeg and Nagy Sanc, but not stratigraphically excavated.
   The most distinctive urn here was the corded amphora                           Urns

described on p. 266, Fig. 146,c. In the later specimens the
normal horizontal cord-impression gives place to incrusted
curvilinear motives joining the handles and little pot-hook
spirals between them. Possibly this developed cord-ornament
reacted on the evolution of the Klitevac technique, but the
t Starinar, 1910, p.3, and pl. Ill, 12.   Cretan ritual vessels as in FHS. xlv
It may well be later than the urns.       (1925), p. 17, figs. 19-20. Note that
2 Heurtley, Ant. #. vii (1927), P- 47°    analogous forms recur at Lovasberény
note the urns of fig. 6 from Varda-       and elsewhere in group 1 (AE. xviii,
rovtsa Ic. In the formation of the         p. 321, fig. 6).
type we recognized the influence of
            288         THE URNFIELD           CULTURES        OF HUNGARY
           new patterns are inspired by the southern group. The later
           Vattina urns may have developed out of the corded amphorae
           (Fig. 146,a). Parallel series evolved from the same roots at
           Suréin.! Bijelo brdo urns were also used in the VrSac district
           and lids of group 2 were quite common.
   Trojan     In the domestic pottery from Vattina and Pécska many
 survivals types are reminiscent of ‘Troy and the Aegean. Most remark-
            able are lids like Fig. 161, c,? the pyxides with arc ornamentation
            on the shoulder3 and their broad-rimmed, cylindrical lids,‘
            candlesticks, theriomorphs representing swine,’ and twin vases
            (Fig. 161,a). There are also some fine pedestalled bowls to
          show the survival of Danubian II traditions. The ornament in-
          cludes little spiral figures with Danubian antecedents but ‘Tro-
          jan and Macedonian analogues.’ The variant of the Perjamos
          jug with the handles rising above the rim shown in Fig. 159
          would be characteristic of the C levels at Pécska on the Maros.
Figurines    Figurines were rare,’ but a clay phallos * with parallels in
          Bulgaria, Anatolia, and Crete should be noted.
Continu-     Pécska and Vattina were villages where trade and industry
 ed use of flourished.      Stone celts, axes, and mace-heads                 were indeed
    stone   still made;? and horn was used for mattocks and many smaller
            utensils, while flint and obsidian were imported for the manu-
   Metal- facture of knives and scrapers. But metal was worked locally,
      lurgy as the moulds from Vattina and Pécska prove. Flat chisels,
 Tools and celts of types Er’? and C1," single-bladed axes of type C2 and
  weapons round-backed knives served as tools. The warrior used ogival
            daggers of type B1-2," battle-axes of type A1™3 and Az2,™
            socketed spear-heads with leaf-blades,5 and arrows with
            barbless bone points.
Harpoons       The fishermen caught their prey with horn harpoon-heads
       Bits of 'Tészeg type. The horse was domesticated and controlled
            by bits fixed into horn cheek-pieces as at Tészeg (Fig. 160).
       Pins    The distinctive pin of group 4 was Br1, found both at
            Vattina and Sur¢in, but B2 (as in group 1), Bs (as in group 2),
            t Material at Zagreb.                      doine, pl. xxI, 2.
            2 Vattina, pl. x1, 8-9; Dolgozatok, iii,   7 Vattina, pl. xx, 1; cf. pl. tv, 6.
            fig. 24; cf. SS., no. 1962 and p. 234      8 Vattina, pl. Xxttl, 1.
            above.                                     9 Ibid., pl. 111, 2-4.
            3 Vattina, pl. xu, 1: Dolgozatok, fig.     %0 Vr8ac, Arch. Kézl. xx, pl. 1, 4.
            18; cf. Ilios, p. 403, no. 303.            ™ Temes Nagyfalti hoard.
            4 Dolgozatok, figs. 32 and 43; Vattina,    ™ Arch: Kozl., pl. 1, x.
            pl. xu, 3; cf. SS., no. 2356.              13 Ibid., pl.1, 12; another in the hoard
            5 Vattina, pl. x1x, 5.                     of Temes Nagyfalu.
            6 Vattina, pl. xx, 2: Ink. Ker., pl.       ™ Vattina and Sur¢éin.
            LxxxIv; cf. SS., no. 2470; Rey, Macé-      5 Vattina, pl. 11, 4.
                                           Scns




Fic. 159. Tankard from Pécska.   M. Arad
           THE URNFIELD           CULTURES            OF HUNGARY                   289
C3, and B6 were also worn. The bracelets picked up in the
urnfields include F1, B2 (very common), and C2. In the hoard
at Temes Nagyfali D4 also occurred. On the necklace and
girdle were hung pendants Ao, B3,’ and B4, tutuli Az2,* and
Bs, together with amber beads3 and shells, including cowries. Amber
  Perforated laminae from boars’ tusks are common at Vattina ?Helmets
and Pécska, and may have fallen from a helmet. A bone disk ofboars’
                                                                                           tusks




                    Fic. 160.   Horn cheek-piece from a bit,
                                  Tiszafiired. 3

from Vattina‘ recalls the bosses that surmounted such helmets
from the Shaft Graves of Mycenae.                  |
   Finally, the inhabitants of Vattina   may   have   possessed the Writing
rudiments of writing, to judge   by  the script-li ke  signs incised
on a spindle whorl.} |
   The Vattina culture is essentially the offspring of the Danu-
bian and Perjamos cultures dominated by Corded Ware ele-
ments. The numerous and startling parallels from Troy are
not so much due to direct contact as to the Anatolian elements
in the first-named constituent. At the same time the metal
 1 Arch. Kézl., l.c., pl. 1, 19, 25, 26;        be Transylvanian, not Baltic, Fuhrer,
 Vattina, pl. 11, 6.                            p. 14.
 2 Vattina, pl. u, 7 (in a form that            4 Milleker, Vattina, pl.11. Cf. Reichel,
 Kraft would designate very early).             Homerische Waffen, fig. 42.
 3 Milleker considers this amber to             ‘5 Vattina, pl. XXII, 5.
    3443                                   Pp
         290         THE    URNFIELD       CULTURES      OF HUNGARY
         forms and the cowrie shells show that trade connexion existed
         between Vattina and the Aegean. On the other hand, the celts
         and possibly the amber beads were imports from the-north.
         5. The Toszeg-Egyek Culture.’
         The last cultural group in Hungary occupied the Upper Tisza,
         and is best studied in the C layers of Tészeg. But some of the
         graves from the great cemeteries of Egyek in County Hajdu
         certainly, and possibly also the earliest interments in the urn-
         fields on the flanks of the metalliferous Matra Mountains—
         Hatvan, Kisterrene, and Pilin—belong to this epoch; in any
         case the exploitation of North Hungarian copper was in pro-
         gress before the invasion from the north that terminates our
           eriod.
  Wart-     The distinctive feature of the later Tészeg pottery is revival
   orna- of decoration by means of smooth conical warts—a motive
mented borrowed from the goldsmith and implying the existence of
pottery metal vessels.t The most characteristic form is the dish (Fig.
 Toszeg 163). Such are found at Egyek in inhumation graves,’ but
    dish also (perhaps in a later form) as covers for cinerary urns. We
         might assign to the same epoch the oval Egyek dishes with
         broad rims and peaked handles that were exported to Central
         Hungary, as well as two-handled cups that occur not only at
         Pilin3 but as far west as Dunakeszi‘ in an urnfield of group 1.
         The dishes with peaked rims standing on an open-work foot
         from Egyek, Pilin, Dunakeszi, and Gemeinlebarn are also found
         with skeletons. ‘To the same context as Tdészeg belong the
         long shallow pans generally termed fish-dishes (Fig. 158), the
         first ansa lunata vases, the importations of Pannonian ware, and
         the ‘brush’ decoration.‘
Models      Besides vases these levels at 'Tészeg contain models of cattle
      of and horses. Similar models were found in large numbers at
animals
         Pilin.© Clay models of axes and pintaderas were collected at
 Pinta- the latter site. It is less certain whether the bronze miniature
  deras
         celts of types D2 and E6, of swords like Co, socketed spear-
         aoe      button sickles and bracelets? from the same site are
         as old.” 07
            Apart from the miniatures, little positive information is
         available as to the metallurgy of phase C at Tészeg.
         * Cf. p. 219 above, and p. 330 below.    5% Made by dabbing the end of        a
         a Jelentés Debreczen. 1907 évi, p. 36.   bunch of straws into the wet clay.
         SR PIC: ili,Toot 5s                      6 Hampel, pl. Lxx1.
         4 Nagy ‘Budapest’, p. 133.               7 Ibid., pl. uxx.
    Fic. 163.   Dish, Tdészeg Cc. AM.   Nemzeti Muzeum




~
             THE    URNFIELD        CULTURES       OF HUNGARY                291
    A very distinctive fishing implement belongs to this phase. Harpoons
 It is a hollowed antler-tip trimmed to form a spike and per-
 forated for pegging or tying on to the shaft.
    A few amber beads and star-shaped beads of blue paste show Amber
 that Toszeg shared in the same trade as group I.               and glass
    Toszeg belongs to a chain of similarly situated stations on paste
 the Upper Tisza and its tributaries (Szihalom, Tiszafiired,
 Egyek, &c.), the exploration of which has seldom been alto-
 gether satisfactory. Nor have the cemeteries belonging to
 Tészeg been discovered.! However, at Egyek it is certain that
 the Tészeg dishes and allied types were found with contracted
       oe: the great urnfield belongs on the whole to a later
- date.
    III.   CHRONOLOGY           AND ORIGIN        OF THE     URNFIELD
                                  CULTURES
 The chronology of the Hungarian urnfields has occasioned
 fierce controversy. Baron von Miské has assigned all the urn-
 fields to his Late Bronze Age. Reinecke} placed the incrusted
 Pannonian ware in his fourth period. Milleker ¢ boldly de-
 clares that Vattina belongs to the Hallstatt period, and Vassits °
 inclines to an equally late dating for the Klicevac cultures.
 PAarvan ° accepts this view as far as Serbia and the Banat are
 concerned, but admits that the finest Pannonian ware goes back
 to the Middle Bronze Age.’                                   |
    Plenty of cogent arguments     can  be   adduced  in support  of Argu-
                                Gerjen,    there  are no  connected  ments for
 the low dating. Except at                                           late
 remains west of the Danube apart from the settlements of dating
 groups 1 and 2till the mature Hallstatt culture appears at Paucity
 Tamasi, Kisk6szeg, and Dalya; indeed, at Lengyel Hallstatt of Late
  C pins and Pannonian vases are alike found, though not Bronze
  demonstrably in association. In the Banat, though a later Age
  phase of culture than that here described can be interpolated, material
  the Early Iron Age is represented only by a minimal number of
  Scythian objects and some specifically late gold ornaments.
  Vassits holds that the Bronze Age strata at Vinéa cover the
  whole period prior to the Celtic occupation. In North-Eastern
  Hungary the majority of the large cemeteries have admittedly
  : Anurnof group 1 type was,however,        types appear!
  discovered in the vicinity by a peasant.   3 AE. xix (1899).
  a AfA. xv (1916), pp. 283 ff., but he      4 Vattina, p. 67.
  has perversely made an Early Bronze        : PZ iit, pv 1313 BSA, xiv, p. 340.
  Age group out of Simontornya where           Getica, p. 303.
                                             7 Ibid., pp. 347, 768.
  Pannonian ware and Lovasberény
            292       THE URNFIELD CULTURES OF HUNGARY
           to be assigned to the latter half of Period VI, though they
           usually contain bronzes just as primitive as those from Vatya
           or Bijelo brdo.
Parallels     Then the actual material from the urnfields has many analo-
  in Iron gies in Iron Age deposits to the north-west. Theriomorphs,
      Age triple vases, and some cups extraordinarily like Pannonian
  pottery shapes,’ belong to the Seger’s fourth phase of the Silesian urn-
of Silesia field culture. And in the same context appear first swastikas and
       an
Hallstatt
           other patterns that occur on the idols of Temes Kubin. We
           have already noted the similarity between ceramic designs from
           Bijelo brdo and those on Hallstatt girdle plates. So the Klice-
           vac-VrSac spirals recall those on Hallstatt C vases from Wies
           in Styria,? and the Pannonian W motive is found, onlyalittle
           earlier, in the cemetery of Maria Rast. Again, the bordered
           lozenge motif common at Kliéevac recurs on a hollow bronze
           armlet of Iron Age type found at Kostolac in North Serbia.
Iron Age      The amber trade-route along the March, with which the
   amber    beads from Bélcske, Vatya, Toszeg, and Pécska could most
    trade    naturally be connected, was only in regular use during the Iron
             Age. And the star-shaped paste beads, despite ‘neolithic’
             prototypes, have analogies at the end of Period VI (Hallstatt A)
 Iron Age at Angyalféld.5 Near the urnfields or settlements themselves
 objects tn we have noticed objects of uncontestably Iron Age date though
  the urn- such have never been found in a closed deposit, while the stray
      fields finds of gold objects belonging to the Dalya-Fokoru-Michalkovo
             series attest a certain population on the Lower Maros and in
             Syrmia during the first Iron Age. On this line of reasoning
             the urnfields just described would begin near the end of our
             Period VI and last from 1000 to 600 B.C.
     Argu-      On the other hand, Behrens® has assigned characteristic
 ments for graves of our group I to the “altere Bronzezeit’ (our Period V),
early date and Menghin’ refers the Vattina culture as a whole to Mon-
   Hunga- telius’ II. The typological arguments on which both rely are
  rian ex- indeed of little value. Still we shall in fact find that products
   ports in of Hungarian industry were reaching Silesia and South-West
    Middle
    Bronze
             Germany during Period V, and the craftsmen who made them
   Age de-   must   surely have been our urnfield folk.
      posits    The   Aegean connexions, moreover, are scarcely compatible
            with the low chronology of Milleker, Vassits, and Parvan.           As
            t SV. viii, fig. 17.                  included 226 amber beads; Hampel,
            * MAGW. xv (1885), pl. 1x, 1.         iii, pl. ccxiit.
            3 Starinar, 1906, pp. 1f., fig. 3;    5 p. 283 above.
            MAGW. xxxvii, p. (47).                6 PZ. xi-xii, p.. 123.
            4 The late hoard from Kurd in Tolna   7 Urg., p. 825.
           THE URNFIELD          CULTURES      OF HUNGARY                  293
mentioned above, the pottery from 'Tdészeg D appears in Mace- Aegean
donia intrusively in the eleventh century. The synchronism con-
thus indicated between Upper Toszeg and the later group of nexions:
urnfields on the one hand and Macedonia in the sub-Mycen- Mace-
aean Age on the other is quite in harmony with the Aegean donia
connexions revealed in the earlier urnfields that we equate
with Tdészeg C. The Klicevac form of ossuary has very close
parallels in the pre-Mycenaean levels of Vardaroftsa on the
Vardar, and the Klicevac spirals and maeanders too are very
like those of the Macedonian Bronze Age ware.* So in Rey’s
‘incised ware class 2’ we have just the same swastikas” as on
the figure from Temes Kubin, high-handled cups precisely
like our Fig. 159,3 and little spirals thoroughly in the spirit of
Vattina.t ‘These analogies imply relations, which were not
altogether one-sided, along the Morava—Vardar corridor during
the fourteenth century, and the Mycenaean fibulae from Vin¢a ~
confirm that conclusion.
    These relations did not stop short at the mouth of the Var- Anatolia
 dar. In the fourteenth-century Hittite pottery from Boghaz
 Keui which, according to Frankfort,’ shows influences from
Macedonia, we find a whole series of motives identical with
those current in the Banat. Such agreements cannot be written
off altogether as chronologically worthless. And when we recall
the Trojan parallels to Vattina lids and the Minoan features
in Kligevac dress, we shall be less inclined to make Silesian or
Styrian analogies a criterion of date.
   It must be rather admitted that on the Middle Danube the Hungary
compound vases and theriomorphs that had enjoyed a long reveals
popularity in Anatolia, Cyprus, and the Aegean, like the swas- proto-              types not
tikas, were on their way up-stream, and appeared in the northern copies
urnfields at a later date. We should in this    case regard the  of Hall-
Kligevac culture as continuous and contemporary with the statt
native civilization ruling in Macedonia in Late Minoan times. pottery
Tészeg C and the earlier urnfields would thus go back to the
fourteenth century, while Tészeg D and the later urnfields
would begin at the same time as the culture represented in
them burst into Macedonia in the eleventh century.
   The scheme based on the Aegean connexions, however, in- Italian
volves serious difficulties when relations with Italy come to be con-              nexions
t Heurtley, Ant. ¥. vii (1927), p-47-   5 Studies, ii, p. 171.
2 Rey, Macédoine, ii, fig. 29.          6 Ibid., fig. 19a;     swastika: all the
3 Tbid., pl. iv, 1-3:                   figures painted on the jug of pl. Ix, 2,
4 Ibid., pl. xxl, 2.                    can be paralleled in Kligevac ware.
             294          THE URNFIELD             CULTURES        OF HUNGARY
    Biyelo considered.      The Bijelo brdo ossuary, shown by the tomb
 brdo and    group of Fig. 156 to be roughly contemporary with Klicevac,
Villanova    must either reveal the prototype of the Villanova ossuary or be
 ossuaries   copied therefrom. The latter alternative would seem the more
             likely in view of the wide distribution in Central Europe of the
             Italian bronze urns and their clay imitations. And in fact the
             lower half of a bronze vessel, probably of Villanova shape but
             unornamented, has actually come to light at Dalya near Biyelo
             brdo.’' Moreover, in the Banat cemeteries that we regard as
             late and then all along the Maros we shall meet biconical forms
             reminiscent of the Villanova ossuary. But if the Bijelo brdo
             urn copy Italian metal prototypes, the whole complex with
             which it is connected (i.e. groups 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) can hardly
             go back much beyond the eleventh century, i.e. the latter half
             of Period VI!
 Absence        On the other hand, a prominent school of Italian archaeolo-
          of gists holds that the Villanova culture, like that of the terremare,
  Benacci    was intrusive in Italy. Perhaps our group 2, sprung from the
    I types same complex as the terremare, really belonged to proto-Villa-
in S. Hun-
             novans. If the Bijelo brdo ossuary imitated an Italian original,
       pony we should expect to find other unambiguous Italian imports
             of a comparable age along the Drave and in the Banat. But
             just in this part of the plain Benacci I types are absolutely
             missing, though there are plenty on the Upper Tisza.
                At the same time the ossuaries of Figs. 155 and 156f are
             shapes thoroughly in harmony with the remaining Hungarian
             forms, that are certainly native, and carry on (e.g. in the trum-
             pet-mouth) a tradition traceable to the Early Bronze Age. No
             doubt in Syrmia, as in Italy, the pottery has been influenced
             by metal vessels. But though none of these have as yet been
             found, they were almost certainly local. Indeed, though the
             Hungarian pots are as definitely metallic as the Italian, both in
             form and ornament, the style of the decoration presupposes a
    Bronze different material in the two regions. If the Italian potter
  and gold copied bronze models, the finer designs of his Hungarian
  originals frere have been taken over
                                                                            con-
                                             from the art of the goldsmith.
             Hence, with all due reserve, we incline to regard the Bielo
             brdo ossuary as the model rather than a copy of the Villanovan.
            Without disguising the difficulties of such a chronology, diffi-
             culties to which we return later, we assign the urnfields
             t MAGW. xxviii (1898), p. (34); AE.            Prenzlawitz (W.
               ii p. 386, where
             XV,                   ae ably e showsZ the,
                                Reineck                    ally ark as : Prus       at i1s gener 2
                                                                            eed.) that
             striking similarity to the urn from           2 Randall-Maclver, Villanovans, p. 93.
               THE HUNGARIAN       BRONZE   AGE             295
just described on the whole to the epoch between 1400 and
1000 B.C.
   In that case the history of the Middle Danube basin in the Conclu-
Middle Bronze Age would have been somewhat as follows. sion
The urnfield groups would have arisen out of the fusion in dif- History
ferent proportions between the original Danubian II-Vinéa I]
populations, Asiatic and Iberic prospectors, and the several
waves of ‘Nordic’ intruders represented by Corded Ware,
ochre-graves, and Slavonian culture respectively. The urnfield
period seéms to open with a westward movement that pushed
the Slavonian folk southward into Bosnia and northward into
Tolna County (to be absorbed in our group 1), and that may
have already carried terramaricoli into Italy. ‘Then, in Period VI
as we shall see, a considerable incursion from the north would
have caused a readjustment of all boundaries. The sword-
wielding warriors from the Lausitz would have driven the ©
battle-axe overlords of North Hungary into Transylvania, while
others swarmed on to Greece leaving only a weakened remnant
in South Hungary and the Banat. But to understand these
events we must describe the civilizations that had grown up
beyond the Carpathians.
                                          XV
                 THE     TUMULUS           BRONZE       CULTURE
               SECOND great province of Middle and Late Bronze
               Age civilization occupies the upland region from the
        Upper Moldau and the Saale right into Central France. The
        civilization ruling over this wide area exhibits a considerable
        uniformity, the most distinctive common trait being the erec-
        tion of a barrow over the grave. At the same time local
        groups can naturally be distinguished, above all with the aid
        of the pottery and personal ornaments. The most important
        groups are as follows (see map VII): _                      i,
        1. Hercynian group in Western Bohemia and the adjoining
             Oberpfalz and Franconia.
          . Bavarian, principally in Upper Bavaria.
          . Swabian, on the Swabian Alb in Wurtemberg.
          . Upper Rhenish best represented in the ‘Forest of Haguenau’
             in Alsace.
             Middle Rhenish centred in Starkenburg and Hessen.
             Lower Rhenish.
        SI
        WN
        NU.  Thuringian.
            It will be convenient first to summarize the main common
        traits.
            Distribution. The country occupied by the barrows is dis-
        tinctive. They are in no case concentrated in the fertile valleys
        occupied by the Aunjetitz population of the Early Bronze Age
        and the urnfield folk of the Late Bronze Age. Instead, the
        barrows are studded thickly on uplands and on rough country.
        The region where they are thickest would to-day be almost
        entirely buried in forest, save for deliberate clearings. It would
        have been uninhabitable in Atlantic times, and can only have
        become suitable for settlement through the dryness of the
         Subboreal epoch.” At the same time the settlements are con-
         centrated where the water-supply was good.
Econo-      The choice of such stony and inhospitable areas shows that
   mics the barrow-builders were not primarily cultivators.        It is, in
         fact, clear from the grave-goods that they were rather pastoral-
         ists and presumably hunters. Nevertheless, occasional sickles,3
       * Cf. Eisner, PA. xxxiii, pp. 201 f.;   3 Hundersingen (Wurt.), PBI. 1904,
       Kraft, Bronzezeit, pp. 64 f.            p. 50; Labersricht (OP), Abh. Niirn.
       2 Kraft, p. 93; Schaeffer in Rev.       xv, p. 50; Netovice, Schranil, Boh-
       Anthr. 1926, nos. 4-6; BRGK. xii,       men, p. 131.
       Pp. 50.
              THE TUMULUS         BRONZE      CULTURE               297
deposited with the dead, show that they did not neglect agricul-
ture entirely.
   Various trade routes crossed the territory occupied by the               Trade
barrow-builders, and so they were able to obtain foreign pro-
ducts, such as metal, amber, and glass beads; but the settle-
ments are not located deliberately along natural routes or at
the junctions of ways as were those of the Aunjetitz folk.
Hence commerce played only a secondary part in the economy
of our people.’
   The barrows form regular cemeteries but’ generally of a Sepul-
very modest extent. In Bohemia as many as 100 are juxta- tures
posed,” but this is exceptional. On the whole the communities
seem to have been quite small3 and loosely organized. No
extraordinarily rich barrows that could be called royal have
come to light, but there are marked differences in the wealth
of the grave-goods and the elaborateness of the tomb. If there
were no kings, there were at least chiefs.
   Women’s graves are quite as richly furnished as men’s, which Position
justifies the belief that women occupied an honourable social of women
position. Not seldom a man and a woman, both equally richly
attired, lie side by side in the same barrow. Hence monogamy
was the rule.
   Burial rites show certain divergences which are as much
temporal as local. A universal feature was the barrow erected
over the remains of the departed.t No trench was dug to re-
ceive the remains; they were laid on the bare earth or on a
  avement of stone or wood, and a mound of stones or earth
piled over them. Such a method of burial is characteristic of
non-agricultural peoples to whom digging is distasteful.
   Yet great care was taken to protect the remains. Sometimes,
as in Bavaria ° and Bohemia,’ a sort of vault of stones was built
over them; alternatively a rectangular chamber might be built
round the corpse and roofed with wood as at Brunn in Ober-
pfalz.2 The stones for the construction of these protective
devices must often have been brought from a considerable
distance.?                                                    :
   Normally the deceased was laid to rest in the extended posi-
: It is significant that the bronze     monuments were presumably   ceno-
types common in the barrows are          taphs.
never met in hoards.                    5 e.g. in North Africa.
2 Real. ii, p. 82.                      6 Naue, OB., pl. v.
3 Kraft, Bronzezeit, p. 95.             (eRic iis teas
4 Sometimes no trace of a burial is     * Verh. OP. lv, p. 215.
discernible under a barrow.    Such     9 Jbid.; Real. ii, p. 83.
   3443                               Q q
               298              THE TUMULUS               BRONZE    CULTURE
 Inhuma-   tion. One or two instances of the old practice of contracted
  tion and burial* have been reported in the Hercynian group. But cases
cremation  of cremation occur in all groups from the beginning of the
           Middle Bronze Age,” and become much commoner in the Late
           Bronze Age without, however, ousting inhumation altogether.
           The ashes were not placed in urns save in the Late Bronze
           Age barrows of Bohemia and Alsace. Normally they were laid
           on the ground in the same manner as the bones.        _
Single or     As a general rule one barrow covered only a single interment
 multiple or the remains of man and wife. But multiple interments
    inter- under a single barrow are met everywhere at times. In Bohemia
    ments and Oberpfalz six bodies seem a maximum for one barrow.
           In parts of the Alb multiple interment was regularly practised
           by certain groups, as many as forty individuals being buried
              together.3       So, too, at Labersricht,             Wunder      believed that
          each barrow represented a regular cemetery used by the same
          family from the Middle Bronze Age into Hallstatt C. Else-
          where multiple interments would probably belong to poorer
          folk.
  Settle-    Few settlements certainly belonging to the barrow-builders
   ments have been identified.    The multitude of stray sherds scattered
          through the earth of the barrows shows that the dwellings of
          the living were close to those of the dead.’ Some log-cabins,
          built without posts, from Mergentheim may illustrate the house-
          type occupied by the barrow-builders.® And their characteristic
          pottery has been found in caves in Bavaria.
    Tools    The only tools found in the barrows at first are axes—always
          unperforated. Later, knives also appear. Tweezers were used
          for removing the facial hair. In the Late Bronze Age they were
          supplemented by razors in Bohemia, Oberpfalz, and Franconia
          and in Alsace.
Weapons      ‘The warrior would carry a knife-dagger and a lance or rapier,
          and used a round shield of wood, studded with bronze bosses.”
          The bronze shields of the Late Bronze Age probably were
          modelled on these.                               .
             Men and women wore necklaces of amber and glass beads,
              * Real. ii, p. 82; Abh. Niirn. xi, p. 13;    5 Reinecke in WPZ. 1917, pp. 83 f.
              Niirn. Fest., Pp. 224; Verh. OP. lv,         © FbS. xxi (1913), p. 18; xxii, p. 6
              P. 197; Schranil, Béhmen, p. 117.            (but these are probably later).
              * Both rites occur side by side in           7 The outline of such a shield (80 cm.
             Wurtemberg and Bavaria; Kraft, p.             in diam.) in the earth and the rows
              61; BAUB. XVill,    p. 117.                  of bosses, forming a cruciform pattern,
              3 Kraft, Bronzezeit, p. 59.                  could be discerned in barrow 4 at
              4 So in Alsace, Schaeffer, p. 225.           Mehrstetten (Wurt.). PBI. 1906, p. 50.
                 THE TUMULUS            BRONZE         CULTURE                  299
and bronze pendants,' bracelets (men only on the left arm),’
finger rings, and anklets (women only). The robes were girt
with a girdle of leather, studded, in the case of women, with
hollow bronze nobs,3 and sometimes ornamented with spiked
tutuli or wheel pendants.‘ Pins were used to fasten the robes,
and perhaps were stuck in the hair. Men generally used one
pin and women two.>
   Everywhere the barrows begin in the Middle Bronze Age
and last on into the Late Bronze Age and often into the Hall-
statt period. The weapons and tools characterizing the several
phases have been noted above (pp. 246ff.). The evolution of
the ornaments is mainly local but certain general outlines may
be laid down in advance. The early bracelets are generally
 light and ornamented with ‘engraved’ patterns; in the Late
 Bronze Age heavy ribbed forms like E2 are more common.
 So the pins in B are generally graceful in form, engraved, and ~
 pierced with an eyelet in the neck. In C they grow longer,
 ribs replace engraving, and the eyelet becomes atrophied. In
 D extravagantly long types come into fashion in Wurtemberg
and on the Rhine; in Bavaria the turban, vase, and globe-headed
pins appear. The wheel-headed pin, originally a Rhenish type,
enjoyed a wide distribution, apparently in phase CG
   Among the pendants the widespread wheel-shaped type,
with analogues in Italy in the Pianello epoch, is distinctively
Late Bronze Age. It is difficult to see how these can be treated
apart from the wheel-headed pins. Both are doubtless solar
symbols, but of course the symbol was in use in the Aunjetitz
culture.
   The outstanding peculiarities of the several groups must be
described next to fill in this picture.
                           I. HERCYNIAN             GROUP
Two main phases are recognizable in this area. In the Middle
Bronze Age the cemeteries were concentrated along the fringe
of the Frankish Jura in Oberpfalz, round the headwaters of the
Berounka (Plzen group) and on the Upper Moldau (Budweis
group).© ‘There are outposts in Upper and Lower Austria,’
                                            .




 1 This use of the heart-shaped pen-            4 Brunn 23, Verh. OP. lv, pl. x1v.
 dant is shown by its position in Labers-       5 Schaeffer, p. 229.
 richt II, Abh. Niirn. xv, pl. 2.               6 For these see Eisner in PA. xxxiil,
 2 BAUB. xvi, pl. 35.                           pp. 200ff.; Sb. Plzen, vii (1922),
 3 Found in place at Mehrstetten,               1-24; Schranil, Béhmen, pp. 116 te
                                                7 BRGK. xvi (1925-6), p. 20; Theuer,
 PBI. 1906, p. 49, &c. Cf. Naue, OB.,
                                                Oberéster., pp. 10, 38.
 pl. vii; Behrens, p. 217.
     300               THE TUMULUS            BRONZE      CULTURE        ~
      and even Western Slovakia (at Smolenice =Szomolany).’ In-
      humation predominates, but there are instances of cremation
      in Bohemia. The skeletons are generally badly preserved, but
      the extant skulls are brachy- to mesaticephalic.’
Tools    By far the commonest type of celt was the Bohemian palstav
      (C3). Winged celts are rare and generally belong to the variant
      B3. Bx occurs once or twice,t and E3 once in Bohemia A
      stone celt was found in barrow V at Brunn, which is probably
      late. Before the end of the period single-bladed knives with
      an arched back and solid handle begin to appear (type 5).°
      Kraft thinks the type originated in Franconia or Oberpfalz.
         According to Eisner’ the earlier razors (Plate 5; Az)*® belong
      here, but they should perhaps be assigned to phase D. The
      ‘Italian’ indent is visible on the specimen from Labersricht,’
      but at Breitenloh® the blade was semicircular with a straight
      edge. The handle is always cast in one piece with the blade.
      The association of tweezers and a razor in the same grave at
      Breitenloh® is odd. A barrow at Smedroy yieldeda sickle of
      type 1.                                               |
         The usual Middle Bronze Age daggers, B1 and B2, and rapiers
      like Ar and Az are common. But one barrow in the Plzen
      group contained a short sword like AAs, but anticipating sword
      Ao of Keszthely form ; while in three Bohemian barrows" locally
      made bronze-hilted daggers, exactly like our type A5 from
      Wurtemberg, occurred. The hoard of 'Tachlovice” illustrates
      the armament of a warrior at the end of the Middle Bronze
      Age—octagon-hilted sword (also known from barrows), small
      knife-dagger, and Hungarian battle-axe of late form.
         The ornaments are valuable as showing the source of metal-
      lurgy in this area. Hungarian types predominate. We dis-
      tinguish:
      Hungarian types:
           Bracelets C2 and C3.
           Cylinders % (rare and probably late).
           Pins B6 are inspired by Hungarian types.
           Pendants B2 and B3 (very common).
      : Hampel, pls. CCXLII-ccxLv.                8 Netovice, Houstka, Breitenloh, La-
      2 Real. ii, p. 82.                          bersricht.
      3 ZfE. xxxvii, p. 833.                      9 Behrens, fig. 26a (barrow XII, 2).
      4 Behrens, pl. 1x, 27; Sb. Plzen, vii,      © Abh. Niirn. xi, plot, 3.
      pl. 11, 9.                                  ™ Kbely, Chodoun, and Sepikov (Eis-
      5 Schranil, Béhmen, pl. xxvi, 11.           ner, fig. 91, 15).
      ® Eisner, l.c., fig. 91; cf. Geislohe and    ™ PA. XVili, p. 248 ; Schranil, p. 34.
      Brunn XI.                                    13 Verh. OP. lv, p. 229; Ix, p. 149.
      7 PA. xxxiii, p. 229; Schranil, p. 30.
                THE TUMULUS            BRONZE       CULTURE                      301
Native types:
     Bracelets D2 and D3, decorated with hatched ribbons
        like the local pottery (Fig. 164).
Rhenish types:
     Pins C5 and Cs5a (not common).
Bavarian: Pendants.
Swalhian: Pin C3.
Silesian: Pin E4.
Universal types—bracelets Fr and F2, rings type 2, pins
Br, C7, E12, and Bio, and hollow tutuli—also occur.                         Spiked
tutuli are very rare, but wheel-pendants occur.’ Pin A4 is
sometimes found and may rank as a ‘survival’ of the Early
Bronze Age.”
    Gold, chiefly in the form of wire rings, is not uncommon in
the Plzen group. Amber is not abundant, but a hemispherical
bead of that substance is peculiar to Bohemia and Oberpfalz.
    The pottery is slipped and generally dark-faced. The main
shapes are: (i) biconical jars with almost cylindrical necks,
with or without handles, identical in shape with Fig. 164 a;3
 (ii) goblets mounted on a high foot, and provided with a small
 handle (Fig. 164 b),‘ and cups of the same form without feet;
 (iii) wooden-looking urns with two handles (Fig. 165 a);5 (iv)
 cylindrical vessels; (v) bowls with handles under the wide
 rims;6 and (vi) others with the rim turned up into four
 peaks (Fig. 165 c). The handles in types (i) and (ii1) always sit
 upon the shoulder and never join on to the neck.’ Besides the
 native forms, (vii) ‘Illyrian’ jugs are not rare in the Plzen dis-
 trict;’ from Kbely comes (viii) a large jug of Swabian pattern
 quite like Fig. 167; and (ix) a few fretwork vases are found in
  Bohemia and Oberpfalz.? The native pottery is decorated with
 willow-leaf patterns (Fig. 165 a),incised triangles, zigzag ribbons
 reserved on a hatched field or, most often, with hatched ribbons
 forming chevrons, inverted triangles, and lozenges. Twin
 nipples normally sit upon the shoulder of type (i)—a feature
 1 Especially in Oberpfalz, e.g. in         joining shoulder and neck.
 Brunn XXIII, 2. This pendant should        4 PA.,l.c., fig. 88,7; Behrens, pl. x11,
 be Late Bronze Age, but it was asso-        1
 ciated with a wheel-headed pin which       5 PA., l.c., fig. 88,8; Behrens, pl. x1,
 Reinecke would call B. Verh. OP.            15.
 lv, pl. xIv.                                6 PA.,l.c., fig. 88, 17; Behrens, pl.x, 2.
 2 PA.xxxiii, p.15, fig. 2 (Velka Osov).    1 PA., l.c., fig. 88, 19.
 3 PA., l.c., fig. 88, 1-3; Behrens, xii.    8 PA.,, l.c., p. 195.
                                             9 PA., l.c., p. 199; Sb. Plzen, vii, p.5,
 8; WPZ. xi, p. 58. The handles are
                                             fig. 3; Abh. Niirn. xi, pl. Vv, 3-4.
 always sitting on the shoulder, never
302              THE    TUMULUS           BRONZE    CULTURE
common in Aunjetitz pottery farther east. In some pots of
form (iii) the surface of the body has been intentionally
roughened—one might say ruffled.
   The Hercynian culture is particularly important perhaps
because its centres were adjacent to the main source of Central
European tin. Comparatively few of the bronze types are refer-
able to the Aunjetitz culture; the hill folk of Bohemia and
Oberpfalz seem to have learnt metallurgy in the Hungarian
school. Bohemian tin exported to Hungary would perhaps
travel through the Furth gap or up the Moldau; Hungarian
bronze and gold would move in the opposite direction. More-
over, a western branch of the central amber route was opened
in the Middle Bronze Age across Oberpfalz. On the other
hand, some of the ceramic types go back to the Early Bronze
Age culture of Bavaria; the bowls with peaked rims, (vii), are
found in the graves of Straubing, some with slits under the
rim as in the barrows.t At the same time relations with Hun-
gary are suggested by several types of bowl, and a crater like
our Fig. 150, from Oberpfalz.2,_ Even the favourite type (i)
occurs in the Banat.
   But many of the constituents of the cultures are neolithic.
Types (i) and (ii) may be connected with the local Nordic
(Bernburg) cultures3      The willow-leaf pattern might be
descended from the same group,3 whereas the triangle would
belong to corded ware. The pedestalled bowl is Danubian in
origin but had been taken over by the Michelsberg and Aun-
jetitz folk.    Most probably, however,              the tumulus        builders
reached Bohemia already in possession of metal from the
Upper Danube.
   The extension of the Hercynian culture to embrace Lower
Austria might be justified by the bronze types, bracelets, F1,
C2, and C3, pins Cr1, and rings type 2 from the barrows near
Winklarn,* and a footed bowl of type (ii) from Gross-Weikers-
dorf.s But the only vase from the Winklarn barrows is
reminiscent of the urns from Hungarian cemeteries of group tf.
From the barrows of Smolenice® in Slovakia come peaked
bowls (v), and ‘Illyrian’ jugs,’ and rings of type 2, which only
occurs farther south in the Late Bronze Age. But the skele-
tons at Smolenice were buried in the contracted position, so
* Eisner, PA. xxxiii, p. 32, fig. 7.       4 MPK. i, pp. 132 ff.
* Behrens, pl. xu, 1.                      5 FKZ. i (1903), p. 36, fig. 53.
3 Eisner, l.c.; but there are Aunjetitz    6 Hampel, pls. ccxxu f.
analogies too.                             7 Pié, i, figs,
                                            LeStany.   Narodni Museum
Fic. 165. Jar, cup, and dish from barrow at
304           THE TUMULUS             BRONZE   CULTURE
   In Upper Bavaria the contrast_between Middle and Late
Bronze Age is particularly clear. In the former period Naue*
recognized only inhumations, but cremation 1s certainly at-
tested.2 The bronzes represent varied traditions:
Tools:
      Celts C2.
      Knives 5.3
      Sickles, (i) (Unter-Fohring I).
      Stone celts and flint knives.
Weapons:
      Ogival daggers, rapiers of type Ar, Az, and C1, rarely
       bronze-hilted forms such as B1, B2, and B3.
Ornaments:
  In Phase B—
     Bracelets F1, (?) C2, (?) C3, and Br.
     Pins C3, B8
     Rings, type 2.
     Spiked tutuli.
  In Phase C—
     Bracelets B2, D3, and D1.
     Anklets D1 (very thin wire version).°
     Pins (?) B6,5 C7,° C3 (without eyelet or ornament).
     Pendants B4.°
     Spiked tutuli.
  Amber was at no time rare, but gold is only represented by
a few tiny wire helices. Stray beads of translucent blue glass
were occasionally imported.
   The graves were not richly furnished with vases. The main
forms are: (i)7 and (ii), like Fig. 164 a—b, as in the Hercynian
group; (iii) wart-ornamented urns (like Fig. 167, a);® and (iv)
jugs (like Fig. 168 b),9 corresponding precisely to the Swabian
types; (v) shallow carinated cups with the handles joining rim
and keel (Fig. 166); (vi) trumpet-mouthed jugs; and (vii)
hemispherical bowls.
   The Hercynian and Swabian types are decorated in the
appropriate styles. ‘The native cup, (v), is plain, but the jug, (vii),
t OB., p. 48.                           pl. vul, 2.
2 BAUB. xvi, p. 115; xviii, p. 117.     8 Asenkofen G, Unterféhring 3.
3 Naue, OB., p. 101.                    9 BAUB. xvi, pl. 38, 8; cf. Kraft, pl.
4 BAUB. xvi, p. 97.                     XEDOG
5 Goggenhéfen.                          to Naue, OB. pl. xxxvitl, 2; Behrens,
6 Asenkofen E.:                         fig. 24, i.
7 BAUB. xvi, pl. 37, 1; Behrens,
               THE TUMULUS            BRONZE       CULTURE       305
is ornamented with rows of fretwork triangles. These are
usually executed with a stamp in Bavaria,‘ and not truly ex-
cised. ‘The same technique had already been employed locally
in the decoration of bell beakers.
   The authors of this culture would be largely descended from
the Corded Ware folk whose barrows have been found in the
centres of Middle Bronze Age settlement (p. 151 above). The
rise of a local metallurgy among this folk is to be connected
with the amber traffic which crossed their homeland on the
way to the Brenner, but the inspiration was mainly Hungarian.
   In the Late Bronze Age barrows cremation prevails, but the
ashes are only exceptionally placed in urns.’
   Celts no longer occur in graves. The leading bronze types
are swords of types B3 (with swelling hilt), C3, and B4, knife-




                   Fic. 166. Bavarian Cup, Abensburg.
                             After Behrens. +

daggers like B4, and single-bladed knives like 15 and 12,
vase- and globe-headed pins, heavily ribbed bracelets, E2 and
E3, and twisted types, F3, wire spirals, spectacle spirals,
wheel pendants (often of white metal), bronze tubes, and girdle-
plates. The last-named objects} are often richly ornamented
with engraved spirals.
   The pottery of the epoch is graceful and often very fine.
The fine ware is frequently ornamented with flutings and em-
bellished by graphite polishing. Conical warts still adorn
graphited ware,‘ and fretwork remains in use, but is combined
with stamped cireles obviously inspired by metal work.’ In
larger vessels the body is often rough while the neck is polished
(Fig. 192).
   In the furniture of the Late Bronze Age barrows the influ-
ence of the contemporary urnfields is patent; the metal types
indeed correspond exactly, save that fibulae and razors are
absent. The pottery, too, has many parallels in the urnfields.
1 Mannus, xviii, p. 23.                    v, pl. 38.
2 Naue, OB., p. 53.                        4 Riegsee 23. _
3 Naue, OB., pls. xxiv, xxv1; AuhV.        5 Unterséchering 1.
  3443                                Rr
306               THE TUMULUS              BRONZE    CULTURE
The mutual relations of the two cultural groups will be dis-
cussed in Chapter XVII.
                             Ill.   WURTEMBERG
The most important group in Wurtemberg is constituted by
the countless barrows on the Swabian Alb.  Kraft, who has
devoted an exhaustive monograph to their study, recognizes
four phases, B, C, D, and E, of which E corresponds to
Reinecke’s Hallstatt A. The burial rites remained constant
throughout, but exhibit local divergences; on the Lauter a
single barrow was regularly used to cover a large number of
corpses, in contrast to the individual interments prevalent
elsewhere. Cremation and inhumation occur side by side
everywhere. In one case a corpse was fettered. He wore on
his legs a pair of anklets like Fig. 170, 3, connected together
bya fine chain.’
   According to Schliz* three distinct physical types are repre-
sented in the barrows of Wurtemberg, viz. Nordic dolicho-
cephals, Dinaric brachycephals, and a cross between the two.
   Kraft groups the bronzes as follows:
Phase B. Celts Br (and Bz).
           Ogival daggers.
           Rapiers Ai and Br.
           Bracelets Fr.
           Anklets 1 (body of thin wire).
           Pins C3 (? A6).3
           Spiked tutuli.4
Phase C. Celts Ba.
           Rapiers, transition forms between Ar and A2.
           Bracelets F1.
           Anklets 2.
           ie C3 (long and plain, with and without eyelet),
                   ve
         Wheel pendants.
         Spiked tutuli.
Phase D. Celts B3.
         Rapiers A2.
         Bracelets Ba.
         Anklets 3.
         Pins iC 50.0:
Eulogy. 1902, p. 38.                        simple forms with flat disk, decorated
2 AFA. ix, p. 229.                          only with concentric ridges, to stepped
3 ZfE. xxxvi, p. 581.            :          forms, ornamented with bosses (phase
4 Kraft, p. 35, traces an evolution from    D).
               THE TUMULUS          BRONZE     CULTURE                     oy
Phase E. Celts(?).
         Rapiers A3.
         Bracelets D3, Gr.
           Pins B8, B.
            Tutuli (buttons) with a loop on the back.
  Arrow-heads, spear-heads, and tweezers are found                      at all
periods, but razors and single-bladed knives are missing, and
sickles extremely rare. The extreme slenderness of the celts
has been noted by Kraft‘ who terms them ‘grave-axes’; these
are never encountered in hoards or stray. Important is the
bronze-hilted dagger, Plate 1, A5, identical with three Bohemian
specimens.’ Bronze-hilted swords are rare in the barrows.
    Of the ornaments the beautiful girdle-clasps with leaf-shaped
plates (Plate 13, 2) are native to Wurtemberg. Thence they
were exported to Bavaria and Switzerland. There was a pretty,
 local type of bracelet B1, with open-work slits instead of ribs.‘
