         lowing account is based on indica-         9 Reinerth, Chron., pl. x1, 12.
         tions given by Reinerth in Chron.          10 Schweiz., fig. 55.
                 THE PILE-DWELLING           CULTURES                  167
hofen ware). Finally, deep jars' suggest comparison with the
Danordic funnel-necked beakers.
  The most distinctive decoration consists of zig-zag ribbons,
reserved ina belt of furrowed hatchingsas in Miinchshéfen ware.
And milled rims are common as in that fabric. Finally, knobs
and plastic strips, sometimes ‘arcaded’ belowthe rim, were used.
  We are allowed to infer from Reinerth’s report that the small Stone
trapezoid celts with rectangular cross-section, described as wmple-
characteristic of the ‘Nordic’ province, occur in this settlement,           ments
and the shoe-last chisels of late Hinkelstein form are expressly
mentioned. -Bored implements are represented by Danubian
axe-hammers like Fig. 22d, and symmetrical hammer-axes like
Fig. 56.
   Of tools of flint and bone, ornaments, animal remains, or Affinities :
grains found in this village nothing has so far been published.              Reinerth’s
   Reinerth? has described this culture as the result of a mix-              v1ew
ture between Danubian and Nordic elements. The latter would
be due to the Corded Ware folk and would be represented
above all by the megaron house, the celts with rectangular
cross-section, the hammer-axes,          and certain elements in the
ceramic forms and ornaments.            However, the megaron house           Criticism
is not Nordic, but was derived from the south-east; the rect-
angular section of the celts is conditioned by the method of
manufacture, sawing, and has, therefore, nothing in common
with the Scandinavian flint celts that Reinerth takes to be the
model;3 even the hammer-axes can be paralleled in such
purely Danubian stations as Butmir, and the pottery, as we saw,
is essentially Danubian II.4 Influence from Corded Ware is
theoretically possible, but remains to be demonstrated. Hence
we regard the neolithic elements in Aichbiihl I as essentially Aichbihl
Danubian, and the site as an outpost of Danubian II culture,5 Its Danu-
such as Reinecke suggested we should find, over ten years ago.° bian
But we may be prepared to admit that the Danubian culture
was here blended with another from which the idea of pile-
dwellings was derived, and that this second culture was
‘epipalaeolithic’ in origin.
t Chron., pl. XI, 10 and 22.            5 The identity of Aichbihl I and
2 Chron., pp. 28, 57.                   Danubian    II   (Jordansmiihl and
s/C£. Vouga, WPZ. xi, p. 21, and        Miinchshéfen) pottery has at last
Reinerth’s reply, Schweiz., p. 176.     been clearly recognized by Bremer
4 Reinerth does not admit a Danubian    in a posthumous paper, Real. viii,
II at all, and so labels Miinchshéfen   pp. 237 and 332.
ware ‘altere Aichbihler Keramuik’,      6 RGKBI. xi (1916), p. 72.
Chron., pp. 32 and 89.
             168             THE PILE-DWELLING          CULTURES
Extension       It is clear that Aichbiihl I does not stand alone. An identical
   to East   type of pile house was inhabited on Wauwil Moor (Schétz De
 Switzer-    That settlement as well as others on the Lake of Constance, at
      land   Moosseedorf, Steckborn, Greng, and even Guévaux on the
             Lake of Geneva, have yielded ‘older Aichbiihl’ pottery.’
             We have already noted the distribution of the shoe-last chisels
             and Danubian hammer-axes over the same area. So now
             we see that the lakes and swamps of Eastern Switzerland as
             well as Wurtemberg were colonized first by a people possessed
             of an essentially Danubian culture. It would of course be
             these who introduced the cultivation of T7iticum monococcum.
                The relative date of this colonization is given by the Danu-
             bian connexions; it cannot be earlier than an advanced phase
             of our Period II.
    Flood      On the Federsee Aichbiithl I was overwhelmed by a flood.
 Aichbiihl  Its place was eventually taken by a Moor-village, Aichbihl IJ,
         II after the ruins of the first settlement had already been overlaid
            with peat and when the lake had shrunk substantially. ‘The
            new village consisted of two-roomed houses smaller than those
            of Aichbiihl I; the trunks and planks forming the floors were
            laid directly on the peat which was evidently now practically
            dry. The houses were arranged along regular streets which
            were not corduroyed.
Schussen-      The pottery in this settlement included obvious descendants
       ried of Aichbiihl I ware and apparently the typical Schussenried
   pottery pottery.    The principal types of the latter are cups and jugs,
            conical and hemispherical dishes, and large jars all closely
            resembling the Michelsberg forms described below, together
            with ladles with solid handles. Tulip beakers and one or two
            other Michelsberg shapes are missing.
  Decora-      The characteristic feature of this pottery is its decoration,
       tion always executed in furrowed technique.          The designs are
            arranged in panels, the favourite patterns being a zig-zag band
            reserved on a hatched field (Fig. 96). Rayed circles also appear.
           Warts and plastic mouldings were used as in standard Michels-
           berg ware. The associated implements are in no way distinctive.
Distribu-     This culture is represented in six settlements from Cann-
      tion statt on the Neckar to the Lake of Constance.3       Sherds of
           Schussenried ware also occur in lake-dwellings and on Michels-
              * Schweiz., p. 79, fig. 13.          most various elements under this
              ? Ibid., p.232;itmust beremembered   unhappy term.
             that Reinerth tends to confuse the    3 Paret in Germania, 1924, pp. 60 f.
                 THE PILE-DWELLING               CULTURES                     169
berg. Rather similar fabrics are met in Bohemia where they
are rightly assigned by Stocky' to the Jordansmiihl group.
Indeed the Schussenried jug is just a variant of the Bohemian Affinities
Jordansmiihl form, while the Schussenried ornament is ob-
viously derived from that of Aichbithl I. The whole culture may
then be regarded as a continuation of that civilization, with the
Danubian element recessive and the epipalaeolithic dominant.
Reinerth,* however, would recognize in Aichbiihl II a western
element, represented first in the pottery of the Lake of Con-
stance and then also in the Michelsberg culture to be described
below. It is time, therefore, to turn to Western Switzerland,
whence the western element would ultimately be derived.
  III.   THE   LOWER     NEOLITHIC           OF THE     WESTERN       LAKES
Fortunately, we are well documented as to the beginnings of Stratifi-
civilized life in Western       Switzerland, thanks to the careful cation on
excavations of Dr. Paul Vouga on the shores of Lake Neuchatel.                      L. Neu-
From stratigraphical observations at four stations, Auvernier,                      chatel
Bevaix, Cortaillod, and Port Conty, he was able to distinguish
four successive phases of culture3 which he terms Lower,
Middle, and Upper Neolithic, and Chalcolithic respectively.
Sterile strata, apparently due to floods, intervened between
Lower and Middle and again between Middle and Upper.
   In opening up the Lower Neolithic level at Auvernier‘4 Lower
Vouga revealed a civilization, hitherto virtually unknown and Neolithic
even unsuspected, that obviously represents the oldest neolithic
civilization in Western Switzerland.5
   The Lower Neolithic pottery is remarkably fine, admirably Pottery
fired, smooth, and often polished, and grey or black in colour.
The fragments seem to belong to round-bottomed bowls or
biconical jars with flat bases. Perforated lugs, generally at-
tached at the keel, are the only handles. Ornaments are limited
to bosses or plastic strips applied horizontally, save that linear
incisions were observed on one sherd and stripes of pitch on
another.             -
   The celts are small and not really typical, though some have Celts
 7) PZC., pl. LVI, 22.                      fatal to his typology. Instead of the
 2 Chron., p. 39.                           admirably excavated and promptly
 3 All are represented at Auvernier,        published finds of Vouga from four
 the first two only at Cortaillod and       sites, he prefers to accept results
Port Conty, and the last three at           obtained, but never published, at
 Bevaix, AsAg. iv, p. 278.                  Treytel, where only two strata were
4, AsA. 1921 and 1922.                      discovered, the uppermost obviously
5 Reinerth denies this because it is        Chalcolithic, WPZ. xi, p. 102.
  3443                                  Z
          170              THE PILE-DWELLING           CULTURES
          squared small sides.' But their makers already displayed a
          preference for greenstones such as ‘jadeite’.* No bored axes
          were encountered.
  Horn        The celts were fixed into horn sleeves of two types.3 One
     hafts is the ‘perforating haft’, designed to be fitted through the shaft
           and kept in position by a transverse peg; the other type 1s
           short and blunt but not trimmed to a heel. Perforated horn
           picks and axes also occurred and might be armed with a stone
            blade.
   Flints     The flint, a translucent variety not known native in the
           vicinity, was worked into simple blades and end-scrapers with
           a minimum amount of unilateral retouching. A triangular chip
 Arrow- might have been an arrow-head, and the transverse arrow-head
    heads (petit tranchet)4 is also represented.     Rounded bone-points,
           sharpened at each end, may also have served as tips for darts
           or arrows.
 Textiles     Among other industrial products was a bone comb. This, like
           certain clay loom weights, implies an acquaintance with weaving
           though ‘spindle whorls’ were absent. Basketry is illustrated by
           an excellent coiled basket.
Animals       All the domestic animals enumerated in the text on p. 163
           were represented.5       The local wild animals included Bos
           primigenius and the weasel (Mustela martes). Fish remains were
           almost absent. The animals must have been cut up off the
           platforms on which the houses stood, for the bones found be-
           tween the piles belong to the edible portions only. Among this
  Canni- culinary refuse were found stray human bones split, like the
 balism   animal bones, to extract the marrow.  Moreover, ‘cranian amu-
         lets’—small, perforated disks cut from the human skull—were
         found at Porty Conty. So perhaps the first neolithic Swiss
         varied their diet with human flesh!
  Orna-     Besides the ‘cranian amulets’, perforated boars’ tusks and
   ments bone pendants, notched      or perforated, and sometimes en-
         graved with linear patterns were worn. The person was painted
         with red ochre.
Painted     A curious discovery was a series of oval pebbles, each 1 to
 pebbles 3 cm. long, encased in a tube made from the fibrous sheath of a
         reed. When discovered the pebbles exhibited traces of paint-
         ing. ‘They have been compared to the celebrated pebbles
         from Mas d’Azil and Birsek near Basel.
          * According    to  Reinerth   predo-   3 Dawn, fig. 122, A and B.
          minantly late Nordic types!            4 Antiquity, ii, p. 406, K.
          2 WPZ. xi, p. 21.                      5 AsAg. iv, pp. 252 ff.
               THE PILE-DWELLING          CULTURES             P71
   We may sum up the outstanding features of the complex as
follows:
   Its authors were essentially agriculturalists and pastoralists, Summary
engaged also in hunting, but averse toa fish diet, and related by
only casual commercial links to the outside world.
   Their social solidarity is implied in their mode of life.
   As possible revelations of their spiritual life we can only
point to the painted pebbles, the cranian amulets, and the
traces of cannibalism.
   Art found expression on pottery only in simple plastic
decoration. -
   Weaving and basketry were practised, and the potter had
attained no mean level of skill.
   The Lower Neolithic settlements on Lake Neuchatel appa- Middle
rently perished in flames. Above their ashes lies a sterile layer Neolithic
of lacustrine sand and slime, believed to have been formed in
an epoch of high waters. Only after the water had again sunk
were the same old sites reoccupied.
   The new culture is different from and in some respects
inferior to its predecessor, and conforms rather to the type
recognized by older investigators as ‘early neolithic’. ‘The
new huts rested on oak piles, normally split, in contrast to the
unhewn stems previously in vogue. The celts show no change, Heeled
but the old perforating horn haft has been discarded entirely, hafts
and the other type has been improved by trimming to produce
a regular heel. Rough perforated stone axe-hammers of late Bored
Danubian type like Fig. 56a appear. ‘The translucent imported axes
flint of the Lower Neolithic is replaced by a local opaque
variety. Though the flaking is still crude, triangular arrow-
heads, sometimes with a concave base and others with a rudi-
mentary tang, were now manufactured. A horn ‘boomerang’ Boomer-
was also found. The pottery, on the other hand, is far inferior rang
to the older ware. It is now the typical rough, gritty fabric,
badly fired and unpolished, that has usually been regarded
as the earliest Swiss earthenware. Handles are still represented
only by pierced lugs below the rim, and ornamentation 1s
limited to applied plastic strips. Intercourse with the south is Imports
perhaps indicated by a fragment of white coral.
   The animal remains from the Middle Neolithic levels show Increase
a much higher proportion of game than in the Lower. Hunting im game
was gaining ground at the expense of stock raising.
   It is now possible to inquire what was the origin of the first
                        t AsA. 1922, p. 13.
             172              THE PILE-DWELLING             CULTURES
Origin of neolithic civilization of Western Switzerland.    Was it primarily
 western inspired from the Danube valley as the author suggested," or
neolithic did it come from the west as Reinerth contends ?
Chrono-      The sequence just established in the first place provides the
     logy basis for a chronological comparison between West Swiss
          cultures and those of the Danube basin. The axe from the
          Middle Neolithic layer is a type that we should expect in
          Danubian II deposits, but that might survive into Period III.
          It is at any rate the first unambiguously Danubian object from
          Lake Neuchatel. The flood levels afford other links. Reinerth *
          identifies that intervening between Lower and Middle Neo-
          lithic with that separating Aichbiihl I and IT; in that case Lower
          Neolithic equals Danubian II. Vouga,3 whom we follow, on
             the other hand, holds that the Aichbihl flood coincides with
   Lower that interposed between Middle and Upper Neolithic. In that
Neolithic case Lower Neolithic is to be equated (very roughly) with our
 Period I Period I, the next phase falling in Period II as the axe-hammer
             suggests.4
  Epipa-       Let us next consider the traits revealed by our analysis of
laeolithic   Lower Neolithic civilization. Certain features might be desig-
    traits   nated epipalaeolithic. ‘The painted pebbles are suggestive of
             the Azilian; the habitations, the horn-work, and the suspicion
             of cannibalism point to Maglemose.
  French     But the agreements with the cave culture of South France5
analogies are surprisingly numerous and significant. The pebble celts,
             the transverse arrow-head, the double-pointed bone tip, the
             cranian amulets, the boars’ tusk pendants all recur in that com-
             plex and some are peculiar to it. On the other hand the pottery
Danubian looks Danubian, though, in view of our sad ignorance of South
  features French ceramics, it is possible that a similar technique
             flourished there too.
                Unpleasant though it be to have to appeal to the unknown,
             it really looks, then, as if this Lower Neolithic civilization was
             in truth western as Reinerth says (though in a very different
             sense). Tempting though it would be to derive, in the name
             of economy, the truly neolithic elements in West Swiss civiliza-
             tion from the Danube basin, nothing obliges us to do so, and
             the stratigraphical evidence is definitely against it. It is after
              * Dawn, p.247. A form like Antiquity,    |South-West Germany,Lower Neolithic
              ii, p. 400 D, is distinctly Danubian.     need not begin before Period II. Cf.
              2 Chron., p02.                            chronological table.
              3 WPZ. ix, p. 23.                         5 Cf. Bosch-Gimpera in Real. iv, pp.
              4 In view, however, of the marked         22, 45.
              retardation of all Danubian culture in
                THE PILE-DWELLING            CULTURES                    173
all intrinsically probable that secondary centres of culture
should have arisen on the shores of the Gulf of Lyons, and that
radiations thence should have travelled up the Rhéne. As
South French culture would, like the Danubian, be in the last
resort inspired from the Aegean, the similarity of Lower Lower
Neolithic pottery to Danubian would not be surprising. We Neolithic
therefore conclude that the neolithic civilization of West western
Switzerland was western in origin though grafted on a vigor- in origin
ous epipalaeolithic substratum.
_ As to Middle Neolithic culture we should probably see in Danubian
it a mixture between the original western and secondary elements
‘northern’, i.e. Danubian elements. By the time of its rise in Middle
the area east of the Aar would have been occupied by those Neolithic
settlers from the Danube basin whose expansion was traced in
a previous paragraph. Even beyond the frontier stream the
Western culture would have absorbed some Danubian elements.
    However, in that area affairs had been complicated by the Cham-
 intrusion of new ethnic elements from the south whose in- blandes
 fluence is expressed on Lake Neuchatel by the coral beads and culture
 which are perhaps partly responsible for the decline of culture
 observed in the period. The path of the intruders is marked
 by the cist graves of the Chamblandes culture,’ so named from
 the type site near Lausanne. The graves in question are small, Graves
 rectangular or trapezoid cists, walled and covered with thin
 stone slabs, and measuring as a rule I m. x0-50 m. xo'50 m.
 Normally each contained a single corpse, but in some cases two
 or more bodies were deposited in the same tomb either simul-
 taneously or at different times. Graves of this type are found”
along the Aar as far north as Basel, on the Upper Rhone, and
then on the other side of the Great Saint Bernard in the Aosta
valley, and elsewhere in Upper Italy.
   According to Schenk 3 three racial types—all dolichocephalic Physical
—are met in the graves of Chamblandes. ‘These he describes as types
(i) the Baumes—Chaud-Cré-Magnon race, (ii) the Grimaldi
race (i.e. a type akin to Verneau’s negroids), and (iii) a Nordic
stock. The latter is alleged to be represented only by two
secondary‘ interments. ‘The first two types were compara-
tively short (1-58 m.) but muscular. In adjacent cemeteries
brachycephals were also met.                   |
t Tschumi, ‘Die steinzeitlichen Héck-  3 Suisse préh., pp. 546-8: cf. Schliz,
ergraber der Schweiz’; AsA. 1920 and = AfA. vii, p. 254.
1921.                                  4 Schenk, p. 460.
2 See map in AsA. 1920, p. 75.
           rags              THE PILE-DWELLING CULTURES
Trepana-     In a corresponding cemetery at Villeneuve in the Aosta
     tion valley one skull had been trepanned,' and cranian amulets were
            found at Chamblandes.”
   Orna-       The furniture of these graves is regrettably poor. Lumps of
    ments red or yellow ochre were regularly supplied to the departed.
            Other ornaments were perforated boars’ tusks, a conical stone
            button with V perforation, Mediterranean shells (Tritomum,
            Buccinum & Pectunculus), bits of red coral, and small jet?
            beads.
Bored axe      Apart from quite atypical flakes the only implements or
            weapons discovered were a wedge-shaped stone axe, beauti-
            fully polished, flaked celts and lance-heads of flint, so rough
   Flaked that they have been called ‘Acheulean’, and a flint celt ground
      celts only at the edge, found together with flint lance- and arrow-
            heads. One of the latter had a concave base. Rough sherds
           were sometimes found, and a layer of ashes and burnt bones, or,
           in other cases, fine sand regularly covered the floor of the
           tombs. A curious plaque of calcareous schist lay under the
           thorax of one individual. It was 14 cm. long and 1 cm. thick,
           and bore a cross incised on a projection at one end.!
    Date      Schenk, Schliz, Tschumi, and Ischer inclined to regard these
           graves as in part epipalaeolithic or in any casevery early. Heierli
           considered them relatively late, and Reinerth has come to the
           same conclusion.’ Its correctness is proved by the button
           from an undisturbed grave at Glis. The axe-head is compar-
           able to one from the Middle Neolithic on Lake Neuchatel, but
           came from a ‘re-used’ tomb. It is further highly unlikely that
           the Great Saint Bernard could be used in early neolithic times.
           Hence we conclude that, as far as a precise date is assignable
           to the Chamblandes culture, it should be ranked as Middle
           Neolithic.
  Origin      Graves of the Chamblandes type do not belong to the Lake-
           dwellers; there is no sort of correlation between the cemeteries
           and lake villages,’ and the skeletons contained in the tombs
           were quite unlike those found in the settlements. The culture
           was rather due to an intrusive and semi-nomadic tribe of very
           primitive people who came, to judge by the Mediterranean
           shells and many parallels south of the Alps, from North Italy.
           r FSGU. xvi (1924), p. 45.            6 Schenk, p. 462; Forel, Le Léman,
           2 Schenk, lic.) Da479¢                iii, p. 468. Reinerth disagrees.
           3 Ibid., p. 456.                      7 Barocelli would reverse the move-
           4 FSGU. xvii (1925), p. 46, fig. 6.   ment; see FSGU. xvi, p. 36; BSPA.
           5 Schweiz., p. 211.                   viii, 73. Note, however, that a flint cul-
                   THE PILE-DWELLING CULTURES                                        175
          IV.   UPPER     NEOLITHIC        AND    CHALCOLITHIC
The     civilization     of the      Upper     Neolithic     levels    on     Lake         Upper
Neuchatel is far less dissimilar from the Middle than the latter Neolithic
was from the Lower Neolithic. Yet it was preceded by a flood
that interrupted the continuity of settlement, and two of the
sites were not reoccupied. The distinguishing features of the
Upper Neolithic are the emergence of two new types of horn
sleeve, one with an elongated spur and the other with a split
or morticed spur,’ and the appearance of true battle-axes (Fig.
95a). The latter, judging by the single specimen found n situ
(at Bevaix),? were still rather rude, with a cylindrical butt
growing directly out of the swelling that re-enforces the shaft-
hole.




   Fic. 95. Upper Neolithic } and chalcolithic } battle-axes, L. Neuchatel


   The Chalcolithic culture is admittedly continuous with Chalco-
the foregoing. The most important innovations are the lithic
appearance of sherds ornamented with cord impressions, the
importation of Grand Pressigny flint from Western France,
and the production of fine flint points and arrow-heads by
pressure-flaking. A battle-axe from this level at Auvernier
was more graceful than that found lower down at Bevaix,
the butt being separated from the body by a distinct neck
        Ue
   The civilization represented in these two levels is fairly Uniform-
                                                                               sit
evenly distributed all over Switzerland; the contrast between ity of
east and west is now far less sharp, though it still persists. Swoss cul-
Apparently the two original cultures had come to a mutual “re at
accommodation.          But outside Lake Neuchatel, it is still im- “5 @ate
possible to divide up the material more precisely.
   The continuation of the native civilization is disclosed in the Pottery
pottery that is now everywhere the coarse and gritty fabric

ture of Campignyan aspect flourished       from that of the lake-dwellings.
in Italy as in North France. Reinerth,     * Childe, Dawn, fig. 122, C-D.
too, refuses to distinguish this culture   7? AsAg. iv, p. 281, pl. 11, i.
            176                THE PILE-DWELLING              CULTURES
            long regarded as typical of the lake-dwellings.‘. Many of the
            forms? are reminiscent of the Michelsberg culture, described
            in the next section, whereas others illustrate the foreign rela-
            tions which must now be discussed.
  Corded       In the first place it is clear that Switzerland was at this
    Ware    period overrun by the nomadic makers of Corded Ware.3 ‘The
 imvasion   barrows that are the characteristic funeral monuments of such
            tribes have been found, as we saw,‘ at Sch6fflisdorf, Zigiholz,
 Beakers and elsewhere.   Moreover, characteristic cord-ornamented
    from beakers have been found in many lake villages from the Lake
     lake of Constance to Lake Neuchatel and the Lake of Geneva.’
  villages And the stone battle-axes which we find in many settlements
  Battle-   are obviously due to the presence of these intruders. ‘The same
     axes   factor must account for the changes in head-form in the
            direction of dolichocephaly recorded by all the anthropome-
            trists. From the documents collected from the lake villages
            themselves, we must infer that the incursion of corded ware
            makers was more than a mere incident. Some of the battle-axe
            folk must have established themselves as overlords among the
            lacustrine peasants. ‘This conquest may, indeed, have accele-
            rated the unification of Swiss culture alluded to above. The
            date of the invasion is a little vague; a battle-axe from one of
            the barrows at Schéfflisdorf corresponds to that found in the
            Upper Neolithic level at Bevaix,® but corded pottery appears
            first in the overlying strata on Lake Neuchatel.
Relations      At the same time, or even earlier, influence from the other
     with   Battle-axe folk of Danordic affinities, living in the Eastern
 Altheim    Alps, is attested by the occurrence of polygonal battle-axes
    group   (like Fig. 77)7 in the eastern area. Even flint sickles, similar
Polygonal to those found farther east from Volhynia to Bavaria, are
   battle-
       axes
            found in lake-dwellings as far west as Lake Neuchatel and
     Flint the Lake of Geneva.’ Possibly some of the copper objects,
    sickles noted below, reached Switzerland from the same quarter.
            I VASAG. AV, Pa2zol, Dialsats               Chron., p. 39). Vouga’s excavations
            2 Reinerth, Schweiz., fig. 59, 3 and 19     supply the refutation.
            (jugs like our Fig. 96), 12 (bowls like     4 p. 151 above.
            Dawn, fig. 126, 13), and fig. 60, 2 (like   5 List of sites in Reinerth, Schweiz.,
            our fig. 99d). °                            Deesee
            3 Reinerth, ignoring the stratigraphi-      6 In view of the tendency of this
            cal evidence, still confuses this incur-    industry to degenerate, too much re-
            sion with the much earlier Danubian         liance should not be laid on the
            invasion; the Danubian Aichbiihl ware       sequence noted by Vouga.
            is for him the domestic pottery of          7 Reinerth, Schweiz., p. 258, and fig.
            the battle-axe folk ((Gebrauchskeramik      79.
            der Schnurkeramiker,’ Schweiz.,p.149;       8 Ibid., p. 205, fig. 83, cf. p. 122 above.
     Fic. 96. Schiissenried jug, Canstatt.   M. Stuttgart.   oe




Fic. 97. Tulip beaker, dipper and baking plate, Weiher.      After
                        Sulzberger. 4
                    THE PILE-DWELLING                   CULTURES                      177,
   Relations with the west were particularly lively at this epoch. Western
They are illustrated in the first place by actual imports of relations
Grand Pressigny flint (the material was brought in raw and Grand
worked locally)," and then by the stone celts with pointed Pressigny
butts which have such familiar analogues in Brittany. At flint
Liischerz a symbolic double-axe of copper, with a hole too Double-
small to take a genuine shaft (like Fig. 107), was found,? and axes
the form was imitated in stone (Fig. 98b) at Liischerz and else-
where.3 This type too reached Switzerland across France, and
so it is possible that some of the copper implements, particu-
larly the triangular daggers that have early parallels in Savoy,
were brought to Switzerland from the south-west up the
Rhéne. Finally, certain ceramic types, notably polypod bowls Polypod
from Greng and Morigen,‘ correspond exactly to a form cur- bowls
rent in South France during the Bell-beaker period.°
   Southern influence, transmitted probably either up the Copper
Rhéne or across the Alps from Upper Italy, is revealed in the
quite numerous copper implements that now begin to appear.
Most common are knife-daggers, either kite-shaped without Daggers
rivets or triangular with two or three rivet-holes in a straight
line. These copper daggers were then imitated in stone? like
the double-axes. The Cypriote dagger found stray in the
Zihl vailey, on the other hand, must have come from the east,
since it represents an extension of a well-marked trade route up
the Danube, as we shall see. The heavy fighting hammer-axe Battle-
of copper from Bremgarten,? too, is an eastern type to be con- axes
nected with that from LuZice in Moravia. Finally, bone pins Pins
with crutched, disk- or ring-heads® were being manufactured
at this time, and evidently imitate Early Bronze Age metal pins
current in Bohemia, Hungary, Italy, or South France.™
   The composite civilization in which these elements were Chrono-
fused apparently lasted a long time. Taking the Corded Ware logy
invasion as its upper limit it can scarcely have begun much
before the middle of our Period III. The celts with pointed
butts belong to the end of that period, but the Chalcolithic
 t Reinerth, Schweiz., p. 106.                    5 Reinerth, Schweiz., figs. 59, 18.
 2 Ischer, fig. 22, 1.                            6 Cf. Dawn, fig.135; Real. iv, pl. 32.
 3 These are termed by Reinerth,                  7 Cf. Dawn, fig. 124, d.
 Schweiz.,p.188,‘WestischeStreitaxte’:            8 Ischer, fig.22, 15; cf. p. 218, below.
 they are western in that the proto-              9 Jbid., fig. 22, 2; cf. fig. 128,a.
 types reached Switzerland from the               ‘ Some are illustrated by Ischer, fig.
west.                                             23, I-5, 9-10.
 4 Déchelette, ii, pp. 134 ff. and fig.60,        ™ Dawn, fig. 136, a.
 3. Real. iv, p. 56.
   3443                                      Aa
178               THE PILE-DWELLING               CULTURES
culture of Switzerland may have lasted much longer. Though
bronze implements are rarely found, the stray examples that
are forthcoming and, still more, the imitations in bone of bronze
pins that do not belong to the earliest phase of our Period IV,
show that the same old lake-dwellings were occupied by a
stone-using folk long after bronze was in regular use in the
Danube valley. In fact, the Bronze Age on the lakes only begins
in our Period VI.
                  V.   THE MICHELSBERG              CULTURE
  In the Rhine valley and in the highland zone between the
Rhine and the Danube, the mixed civilization of the Upper




              Fic. 98. Aichbihl hammer-axe and Western battle-
                             axe, after Reinerth. 4


Neolithic and Chalcolithic periods in Switzerland has a
counterpart in the so-called Michelsberg culture together with
that of Schiissenried (already described) which is just a special
form of it. It takes its name from a hill or rather a projecting
spur, overlooking the plain of the Rhine above Unter-Grom-
« Cf. p. 354 below and reference there       Lake-dwellers, Chamblandes folk, or
given.                                       corded ware makers with any confi-
ADDITIONAL NOTE.        During the last      dence. Reinerth would abandon alto-
phase of the Swiss Stone Age the grow-       gether the old distinction between
ing dryness, with the decay of the forest    land-settlements and lake villages in
that it entailed, rendered possible the      so far as ethnological conclusions were
occupation of various sites away from        based thereon. 'The material needs no
the lake-shores; and so we find settle-      special description, but it may be
ments in cave or on hills apparently         noted that the peculiar points (borers)
 dating from this period. From the           from Dickenbannli near Olten are not,
 rough sherds, celts, and flint-chips that   as some have thought, epipalaecolithic.
 have been collected in them it is not       Reinerth, Schweiz., p. 207.
 possible to assign such settlements to
                  THE PILE-DWELLING           CULTURES                  179
bach, some twelve miles north of Carlsruhe.                 The material
from the type station may be matched at a multitude of sites in
the valleys of the Rhine and its tributaries from Belgium to the
Lake of Constance, with outliers on the Upper Danube, near
 Salzburg, in Bohemia, and on the Saale.
   The best pottery is closely allied to the ware of Aichbiihl I— Pottery
grey or black and nicely polished. The coarse ware, used for
large vessels, is, on the other hand, gritty and badly fired.
The characteristic shapes are the tulip beakers (Fig. 97a),
jars like Fig. 99a but often with pointed bottoms, the tall pots
  with arcaded rims (Fig. 99d), the squat jugs (Fig. 96), the deep,
  slightly keeled dishes, dippers with broad tongues projecting
  to serve as handles (Fig. g7b),and flat clay disks used apparently
  for baking (Fig. 97c). On the west bank of the Rhine we have
  in addition very large globular jars with trumpet-like necks.!
  Decoration is virtually limited to plastic strips with finger-tip
  impressions and nipple-like bosses, especially on the jugs. In-
  cised decoration, always deeply furrowed, is exceptional.
  We have chequer patterns and hatched ribbons at Michelsberg
  and in Alsace,? and herring-bone motives on the shores of the
  Lake of Constance.
     The inventory of stone implements is not very instructive. Celts
  Small pebble celts were used, greenstones being preferred.
  In some settlements, however, fine implements, often of green-
  stone, with pointed butts and oval or pointed-oval cross-section
  have been found.3 ‘The small celts were sometimes hafted with Horn
  the aid of horn sleeves (Fig. 100).4 Some of these were trimmed hafts
  to produce a rudimentary heel (as in Dawn, Fig. 122,c).
- Perforated stone axes are rare and are usually restricted to the
  simple wedge-shaped axe-hammers common in the Danubian
  cultures, but the polygonal battle-axe occurred at the Gold-
  berg, perhaps as an intruder. Barbed flint arrow-heads, bone
  tips, a wrist-guard, and even two bows of yew attest the
  practice of archery. Antler axes and picks, so primitive as to Horn-
  recall Kitchen-midden types, were in general use. Metal work
  was almost certainly current. Flat celts and an awl of copper Copper
  were found at Weiher,® copper and amber beads at Alten-
  bamburg in the Rhenish Palatinate.? A copper double-axe
 t Forrer, op. cit., p. 24 and fig. 21,   (Alsace), Forrer,  p. 26; Weiher,
 e-g.                                     MAGZ. xxix, pl. XII, 4.
 2 Forrer, op. cit., pl. tv a—d.          5 MAGZ., l.c., p. 168.
 3 Schliz, Kbl. f. Anthr. 1908, 9-12,     °© MAGZ. xxix, pl. xu, 7.
 p. 4; Reinerth, Chron., p. 45.           7 Information from Dr. Sprater.
 4 Goldberg, M. Stuttgart; Achenheim
            180              THE PILE-DWELLING            CULTURES
            (like Fig. 107) was picked up in the immediate vicinity of the
            settlement near Kottenheim, north of Mayen,’ and a copper
            flat celt was associated in a hoard? with the pointed-butted
            implements that belong to the period.
 Textiles         Though spindle whorls were rare, we have from Weiher re-
           mains of woven fabrics in flax and bast as well as bits of plaited
           straw. The baking plates often exhibit on one side the im-
           pression of straw mats (Fig. 98).
   Grains      The Michelsberg folk cultivated emmer and barley, using
           the ‘Egyptian’ sickle armed with serrated flints.
 Animals       Their domestic animals included cattle of both Bos brachy-
           ceros and Bos primigenius stocks, sheep (Ovis aries palustris),
           swine (Sus scrofa palustris), goats, and dogs (Canis palustris).
           Horse bones are rare, and almost certainly belong to the wild
           horse.3
Harpoons       It is nevertheless clear from the numerous bones of game
           found in all settlements that the Michelsberg folk were great
           hunters. Horn harpoons found at Weiher and in Alsace+*
           show that they engaged in fishing.
     Pile-     Three types of settlement are known. The pile-villages on
  villages the shores of the Lake of Constance have yielded a typical
           series of Michelsberg vases—tulip beakers, round-bottomed
           jars, squat jugs, carinated bowls, and dippers.’ Reinerth assigns
           this group to a peculiarly early position for reasons that are far
           from convincing. ‘There are remains of pile-dwellings in the
           beds of the Rhine (especially near Mainz) and of the Ill. No
           pottery has been found in them, but they are closely related to
           land stations of Michelsberg type and may be the earlier
           homes of the people who built the latter.
   Moor-       The second type of settlement is illustrated by the Moor-
  villages village of Weiher near Thayngen® in North Switzerland.
           The village (or rather the two successive villages) lay on a low,
           peat-covered island rising in the middle of a one-time lake,
           and spread out beyond the islet on to the bog surface. The
           huts on the island have perished and only refuse-pits or silos
            remain. The peat has preserved the marginal huts. They
            stood on a ‘raft’ of birch logs laid directly on the peat. The
            floor proper consisted of split oak-trunks, some 0-45 m. thick,
            covered with a layer of mud plaster. Posts of birch wood,
            * BF. 123, Beilage, p.105;127,p.109.      5 Reinerth, Chron., pls. 1v-v; cf.
            2, BRGK. x, p. 156.                       Menghin, Urgesch., p. 721.
            3 Paret; WW, p.i30.                       6 Sulzbe      MAGZ. xxix.
                                                                        rgerin   pp. 163ff.
            4 MAGZ., l.c.; Forrer, op. cit., p. 22.
   Fic. 99. Large jars, Weiher, after Sulzberger.   34




Fic. 100.   Celt in horn sleeve, Weiher, after Sulzberger.   }
                 THE PILE-DWELLING         CULTURES                       181
pointed at one end, were driven into the subsoil to keep the
‘rafts’ in place and support the house walls of wattle and daub.
These platforms had needed several renewals owing to gradual
sinking and perhaps to a catastrophic flood. ‘The houses
themselves were divided into two rooms, with a hearth in the
front room as at Aichbiihl. One house measured 8 x 4 m’.,
another 6x4m?.        The houses stood at intervals of 24 to
3 m., with log-paved streets connecting them and log forecourts
in front. A moat surrounded the village, and outside it ran
a timbered way. Outside this again stood a defensive palisade.
  The forest of oaks, willows, beeches, Norway maples, and
ash came down to the very edge of the little marshy lake and
the village that rested on it.
   The majority of the Michelsberg settlements were, however, Hill forts
built on dry land and preferably on hills or defensible spurs.
Besides the type station we should note the Goldberg near
Boppingen in Wurtemberg, the Wartberg and Hexenberg
above Heilbronn, and the heights near Mayen and Urmitz'
on the Lower Rhine. The land villages were very frequently
fortified.   The first line of defence was represented by a broad,
shallow trench.2, At Mayen a palisade was erected within the
circle of the trench and 25 m. from it for additional security.
At Urmitz the moat was duplicated, an earth rampart rose
between the two ditches, and inside the inner trench ran a
palisade of stakes. The whole belt of fortifications was 26 m.
wide. The causeways across the trenches and the space be-
tween the gaps in the wall and the palisade respectively had
apparently been fenced in on either side by some wooden
structure producing a narrow passage through which invaders
would have to pass (Fig. 101).
   The actual dwelling places, found within these camps or Houses
isolated, were of two types. Most common are irregular pit-
dwellings, partly sunk in the earth as at Michelsberg itself. On
the Goldberg and at Mayen, on the contrary, men lived in small
rectangular houses on the ground level.3 ‘The walls were sup-
ported by stout posts, there was a door on the short side and
a fixed hearth. The area of these huts varied from 4-7 x 3-4 m’.
to 7-3 x 5°5 m’.                                               :
   At least on Michelsberg the huts were regularly arranged in
rows on either side of distinct streets (Fig. 102).
   The usual burial rite was inhumation; the deceased was Graves
t Mannus, xvii (1925), pp. 161 ff.   3 BF. 127, pp. 108 f., figs. 26-7.
  PZ Ail. ppt tts                    4 Schumacher, op. cit., p. 26.
       182                    THE PILE-DWELLING             CULTURES
       interred, generally contracted, sitting or lying, with deliberately
       broken furniture. The grave was often dug in the dead man’s
       hut which was then destroyed.’                     In Belgium, however, the
       regular rite observed was cremation.’
        Pe ~~   ee, ;          fe
                                 See          toned
                                                    ee                   pallisade
                                                                             a sents M oat


                Seems  oy                                ia
        ie |            Pa ceases carey i oo) pee                           Br} aiiillt
                    ™
                      er
                       eS                                Tuy    nN   meg         MOM is

                                                URMITZ




                                                                                             ¢--------


                    Fic. 101. Plan of Urmitz fortifications, after Schumacher.

Physical    ‘The skulls belong to a distinct type regarded by Schliz as
     type due to a cross between Alpine and Nordic stocks. They are
          mesati- to dolicho-cephalic.
    Date     The relative position of the Michelsberg culture in our
          chronological system is perfectly plain. Despite the patent
          resemblances in its pottery and horn-work to the culture of the
          Shell Mounds,3 the Michelsberg culture cannot be placed
         « Forrer, ‘Rites funéraires en Alsace’,         % BSA. Brux. xxxi (1924), 150 ff.
        BSPF. 1922, pp. 147 ff.                          3 Emphasized by Reinecke, MZ.1908.
                    THE PILE-DWELLING                              CULTURES                                         183
earlier than our Period III. The discoveries at Weiher and
Aichbiihl II show that it already belongs to a distinctly dry
phase. At the last-named site, moreover, a culture of Danubian
II origin preceded the foundation of Aichbiihl II. On Gold-
berg the houses of the Michelsberg settlers overlie the pit-
dwellings containing Réssen pottery, though at Michelsberg and
                        i Present surface _
                                                   ‘Virgin
                                           sorl
                                      Metres
                                   o7        4                 5


                N                                                                       o        O 6

                                                        ceOo                  °O
                                                                                  ac of           5°                  a

                                                         Oo            Oo °             O°                           ite
                                                                   °                                                 a
                            Congo                  i aoe x)                        iS                                is
                                oaths         O           0000                                                    Me4
                                    ‘Oo    0.9%                                                              oe

       @.@                                                                                              is
           °                                  oe   O°                                                  ese


                        O
                            °             00009
                                                                                                  ge
                                                                                                 Ze
                                          °
 oO
                                                    P® C00 HO                 a    es

eee                                                            eee                      =
RPS    Eee      —   —                                   Seas                                7.
               ge ae                               ae                                            %
               Metres
      Oo          50               100                                        0 Huts                   ® Graves
      Ll

               Fic. 102. Plan of Michelsberg, after Schumacher.

at Urmitz stray Rossen sherds were apparently found in the
settlements. The upper limit of our culture is therefore clearly
the latest phase of Period II.
   The lower limit is rather more vague. Corded vases were
found at Vaihingen (Wurtemberg) ‘ and Urmitz.” Conversely,
Michelsberg pots and baking-disks occurred in late Corded
Ware barrows near Heilbronn. A synchronism between the
Michelsberg and late Corded Ware cultures is thus established,
quite apart from the typological arguments adduced by
           t Fb. Schw. xvii, p. 7-               2 Mannus, xvii, p. 169.
                         3 ZfE. xxxviii, pp. 317 and 343.
             184               THE PILE-DWELLING         CULTURES
             Reinerth. The discoveries of celts with pointed butt indicates
             a still later date ; for in South-West Germany they belong to the
             Zoned-beaker phase, while in Savoy and the Jura they occur
             in Early Bronze Age graves.’ In point of fact several zoned
             beakers were dug up inside the walls of the Urmitz fortifica-
             tions.2 We may therefore conclude that the Michelsberg
             culture occupies Period III, and probably lasts into Period IV.
             It is in fact strictly parallel in time to the Upper Neolithic and
             Chalcolithic phases in Switzerland.          _
Distribu-       The culture just described was obviously at home on the
      tion   Upper and Middle Rhine and on the Neckar.                        Thence it
 Belgium spread as far west as Brabant 3 and into part of France,* always
          with typical tulip beakers. To the east we find the same type
Bohemia   near Salzburg5 and in isolated hut-foundations® or graves on
          the Eger and the Moldau in Bohemia, and there is a tulip
Thuringia beaker from Auleben in Thuringia? and a dipper from
          Zweyman in Saxony.* Reminiscences of Michelsberg types
          may be seen in the pottery from cremation graves at Flieth and
          Dedelow in the Uckermark. Whatever the last-named similari-
          ties may indicate, the occurrence of regular Michelsberg types,
          collocated in distinct huts or graves on the Upper Meuse and
          in the Elbe basin, can only indicate a real expansion of the
          people who made them. But this expansion was not the gradual
          spread of the agricultural Danubians, but rather the result of the
          wanderings of isolated groups of semi-nomadic hunters; for all
          the solidity of their fortifications the Michelsberg folk remained
          largely savage hunters.
Summary      Economically the Michelsberg culture rested on agriculture,
          stock-breeding,and hunting, supplemented by fishing, Though
          some sort of barter is attested, trade did not play an integral
          part in the Michelsberg economy.
             Socially, the regular planning of the villages and the heavy
          communal labour expended on their construction and defence
          disclose a solid political organization.
             In the religious domain only the tendence of the dead is
          revealed to us. Burial was regularly individual, generally
          inhumation in a contracted attitude.
                   The arts of the weaver, the carpenter, and the potter were

             x Déchelette, ii, p. 136.              6 OAM., p._ 34; Stocky, BAP., pl.
             2 Mannus, xvii, p. 169.                xxxvil; PZG., pl. cvit; Schranil, Boh-
             3 BSA. Brux. xxxix. 1924, pp. 150ff.   men, p. 80; Menghin, Béhmen, p. 27.
             4 Unpublished.                         1 VAT., pl. 1x, 144:
             5 Germania, 1926, p. 10.               8 Richter, Fiihrer, Leipzig, pl. u1, 8.
                  THE PILE-DWELLING                 CULTURES                    185
well developed. But stone was seldom bored, and metal was
not worked locally, though occasionally imported.
   The distinctive implements are:
   (1) Small pebble axes mounted in horn sleeves, (2) rare
bored axes of stone, (3) picks, axes, and hafts of deers’ horn,
perforated for shafting, (4) horn harpoons.
   The main weapon was the (5) bow, supplemented at times by
(6) the spheroid mace.
   As the normal house we must recognize (7) the gabled
structure reminiscent of the megaron. 'The choice of moors for
settlements, and the use of (g) fortifications must rank as inte-
gral features of the complex. (10) The pot forms are apparently
tensile, imitating leather. (11) Handles are freely used. (12)
The technique is by no means primitive.
    Analysing this culture, we first note the ‘epipalaeolithic’
elements already remarked by P. Reinecke. In addition to the
horn implements and the pot shapes which he compared to
Danish Shell-mound types, we note the method of hafting the
axes, and the harpoons. And in the Maglemose culture and its
descendant at Brabrant we see the same preference for lake-
banks and perhaps even anticipations of the wooden substruc-
ture. We incline therefore to recognize a substantial “epipalaeo-
lithic’ element in the Michelsberg culture.
    Of the distinctively neolithic traits the ceramic technique
and a few forms such as the jug (a descendant of the Bohemian
variant of the Jordansmiihl amphora), the keeled bowl and the
bell-shaped jar, the bored stone implements and the rectangu-
lar gabled house are Danubian (including under that heading
 Aichbihl I). The deep craters like Fig. g9b, as well as the
 polygonal battle-axes, suggest Danordic influence.
    There remain several traits, most notably the pebble celts and
 perhaps also the art of fortification,’ that do not seem at home
 in either the Danubian or Nordic complex, but have western
 analogues. Indeed, in 1923 Reinerth 3 treated the Michelsberg
 culture simply as 4 branch of his Western complex that would
 have been brought up the Rhéne gap from South France. In
 his later work he has virtually abandoned this position; on the
 strength of the blunt-butted celts, indeed, he assumes a
: It illustrates Schuchhardt’s ‘Beutel-        parently before the advent of the
stil’ most admirably; cf. PZ. ii,p.145;        Beaker folk from the Rhine. But of
Alteuropa, p. 51.                              course there were fortifications, un-
a Fortifications similar in plan to Ur-        dated, at Lengyel.
mitz were being built in England ap-           3 Chron., p. 18.
  3443                                    Bb
186               THE PILE-DWELLING            CULTURES
western element on the Bodensee,’ but assigns thereto no
pottery or other recognizable neolithic traits. ‘The presence of
a western element must then be regarded as questionable.
The facts can perhaps be adequately explained on the assump-
tion that an epipalaeolithic folk, accustomed                  to the use   of
leather vessels, through contact with the Rhenish Danubians
learned to bake clay, to till the soil, and to breed stock.?
   A survey of the cultures of the Alpine zone has shown that
they are due, in the main, to descendants of epipalaeolithic
stocks who adopted the chief elements of civilization from
Danubian invaders in Wurtemberg and the Rhine valley. In
Western Switzerland, however, the neolithic civilization would
have come from the south-west. We can now better under-
stand the phenomena we observed at Altheim and on the
Mondsee.3? Here, too, we may suspect an epipalaeolithic sub-
stratum showing through the Danordic dress.
1 Schweiz., p. 158; cf. ‘Zeittafel’,     mestic animals, &c.    Of course, now
col. 3.                                  that we know that the Danubians had
2 Schumacher, Rheinlande, p. 28, was     been living side by side with our
coming to a similar conclusion, but,     supposed ‘epipalaeolithic survivors’
thinking that the Michelsberg culture    throughout Period II his difficulty
was the oldest in the Rhine valley, he   disappears.
was puzzled by the sudden increase       3 p. 126 above.
of population and emergence of do-
                                GaUVTIOO




                                ‘SAXV-ALLLV




                                TVNODAIOd




                                JO
                                NOILLAGIMLS




                   prmossnys5
     POTDSOY
qouobhyoy
   xv
                                  THHOIN
                                   FYOLTINO
                                   ‘SHSVTA
                                   OWddS
                                   GNV


        Brqbunn,                “AI
                                FW
                                          X
                            THE BELL BEAKERS
             LG the end of the ‘neolithic’ phase Central Europe was
                 overrun by a curious nomadic population known almost
           exclusively from isolated graves. ‘This people, of a very uni-
           tary physical stock, have been christened the Bell-beaker folk
Distribu- from their characteristic funerary vessels. Their pottery, and
      tion probably the people themselves, were not confined to Central
          Europe, but appeared also in Spain, Brittany, South France,
             Sardinia, Sicily, and Upper Italy. In our area bell beakers
            are met principally in the valleys. They occur at some seventy
            sites in Moravia and at fifty sites in Bohemia. Then there are
            some thirty-one groups from Thuringia,’ some thirty sites on
            the Rhine and its tributaries above Cologne, and eleven in the
            Upper Danube basin in Bavaria. Outliers are found at three
            sites in Silesia, one in Lower Austria,” at two adjacent sites on
            the Middle Danube just below Buda-Pest, and near Szentes
            on the Tisza.3
   Pottery     The pottery throughout this wide area is extraordinarily
            uniform; such diversities as occur are quite secondary and
            seem for the most part due to chronological rather than local
Technique factors. The standard ware in which the best beakers are
            manufactured isa fine fabric covered with a brilliant red slip
            and nicely burnished. It thus marks a complete break with all
            Danubian traditions.
  Decora-      The most characteristic form manufactured in this fabric
       tion is the bell-shaped beaker. The vessel varies greatly in size, but
            in the majority of good and early specimens the ratio of height
            to the maximum diameter lies close about unity. The curves
            of the profile are always graceful and flowing in the oldest
            examples. Often a dimple in the base ensures stability.
               For the decoration of standard beakers a special implement
            —a fine-toothed comb-like stamp or a little cogwheel—was
            impressed on or rolled over the wet clay.4 It thus left a short
            line of dots so closely set that they merge into one another.
         This is the typical beaker ornament, and the purest beakers
         exhibit zones, hatched with such milled lines, alternating with
         1 FSD: viii, pp. 1 ff.; xiv, pp. 36 ff.   4 All the beakers studied by Niklas-
         2 MAGW. Wvii (1927), p. 51.               sen, JST. xiv, p. 37, show comb-
         3 See maps in Real. iv, pl. 145 and       stamp impressions; cf. Abercromby,
         del Castillo, Cultura.                    1, Dp; 10.
                           THE BELL BEAKERS                                   189
plain zones. Still, even in the purest beakers the comb-hatched
zone is often combined with one of simply incised or stamped
impressions. A zone of chevrons was quite popular even on Incised
early beakers.   In Moravia, Thuringia, Bohemia, and Bavaria? patterns
a belt of impressed or excised triangles is sometimes used
instead (Fig. 10). And on a fine beaker from the vicinity of
Buda-Pest 3 series of stamped circles alternate with the hatched
zones. ‘The last example marks already a distinct step away
from the ‘standard’ form deduced from the pan-European
types mentioned below and their Esparto-grass ancestors as
represented in modern parallels. A zone of lozenges on Bo-
hemian beakers‘ or a bar-chevron band5 ora series of tri-
angles, even though executed in milled line technique, are
equally deviations from the severe norm, although quite pos-
sible basketry patterns, and not unknown south of the Alps.
   Then a stage of further specialization begins, even on tech-
nically fine and shapely beakers, and in Moravia and Bohemia.
The zones themselves become the vehicles for independent
designs, and consequently are divided vertically into panels or
metopes (Fig.104). Blank panels alternate with others filled with
incised chevrons,5 or hatched squares,° or groups of lozenges,’
or saltires.2 The system of panelling, utterly foreign to the
Mediterranean groups, dominates the decoration of Thuringian
beakers and their descendants onthe Mainandin Holland. ‘These
more specialized types often exhibit other signs of senescence—
the technique is inferior, the outlines more angular, the deco-
ration less fine. On the Rhine the standard form is relatively
rare; though several beakers exhibit excellent workmanship°
even these are rather taller and at the base more angular than
the best specimens farther east; the rest must simply be classed
as zoned beakers. Yet the degeneration must have set in here
before the tendency to metopic arrangement had become en-
grained, since on the Middle Rhine panelling is by no means
so common as in Thuringia or Holland.
   Various types of vase are associated with the bell beaker. Associa-
The bell-shaped mug (Fig. 105b-c) is just a beaker with a ted vases:
                                                                                  Mugs
« e.g. Stocky, BAP., pl. xLu1, 5, XLIi,   ° Pravék, 1909, pl. vi, 2; 1927, pl. 1,
251A 5S                                   12; Gottwald, p. 37, 4 (all Moravian) ;
2 Medlanky, M. Brno; Turovice,M.          JST. xiv, pl. x11, 1; Abercromby, i,
Olomouc;    Kolin, Stocky, PZC., pl.      pl. 1, 28*, 29*, and pl. Iv.
cxv, 6; Real. iv, pl. 151; MAGW. liv,     7 BAP. xl. 2.
p. 100, fig. 1.                           8 Pravék,1909,pl.VI, 2; 1927, pl.11, 12.
3 Wosinski, Ink. Keram. \xxvii. 3.        9 Abercromby, i, pl. 1, 32*; del
4 BAP. xl. 6; Gottwald, p. 37, 5.         Castillo, Cultura, pls. CLXxxtl, I-2,
5 BAP. xliii. 3.                          CLXXXIV, 2; CLXXXVI, 3.
         190                       THE    BELL    BEAKERS
         handle. The majority of mugs are plain though often of ex-
         cellent technique. The form is exceedingly common in Mora-
         via and Bohemia and not rare in Hungary, Silesia,’ Saxo-
         Thuringia,’ and Bavaria.3 With the exception of the mug from
         Forchheim‘ on the Peignitz, far away in Franconia, and pre-
         sumably connected with the Bohemian series, the type is foreign
         to the Rhine basin,’ and it is unknown west of the Alps.
         Nevertheless, mugs occur already in association with quite good
         beakers ° in Moravia and Bohemia.
Dishes      More widespread are deep open dishes, either in the form of
         a truncated cone or the flattened segment of a sphere. The
         broad rim is often decorated in milled line technique, and little
         ledge-like handles, vertically pierced, sit just under it. These
         vessels, too, are exceptional on the Rhine, but have parallels in
         the Iberian Peninsula and in the Mediterranean                      area.’    A
         favourite variant in Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia stands on
        four (or even five)* feet—a pattern also known in Sardinia.
        The Moravian settlements have further yielded large jars.
Copper     Bell beakers are accompanied by a no less distinctive set of
daggers weapons and ornaments. Axes were not buried with the dead.
        Stabbing weapons are represented by very small copper dag-
        gers with a broad tang and no rivets. The tang is generally
        flanged, and the bone or wooden hilt had a semicircular
        indent where it met the blade as in early Egyptian daggers
        (Fig. 106). ‘This type is represented at three sites in Moravia,
         and two in Bohemia, at Holmstedt, Eisleben, and Buttelstedt
         in Thuringia,” and at Munich in Bavaria." Graves at Bresovice
         near Prosnitz in Moravia and Cou’ in Bohemia yielded round-
         heeled triangular daggers with rivet-holes for the attachment
         of the hilt.” In each type the hilt—presumably of wood—has
 ‘Auls   left a semicircular indent where it met              the blade.3         Quad-
         rangular copper awls—perhaps tattooing needles—are com-
         paratively common in Moravia and Bohemia.
         t e.g. Woischwitz, Dawn, fig. 85.        or Woischwitz in Silesia.
         eIST, <aveipl. X11, 3,5.                 7 Aberg, Iberic, pp. 61 and 124.
         3 e.g. Munich, Reinerth, Chron., pl.     8 Stocky, BAP. xli. 4 and 6.
         XIv. 8,                                  9 Dawn, fig. 105.
         4 Hock, ‘Steinzeitliche Funde von        70 MAGW. lvii (1927), p. (88).
         Forchheim’,    Erlanger  Heimatbuch,      1 Ibid. liv, p. 102; del Castillo, pl.
          1925.                                   CXXX,
         5 A cup of dark-faced ware ornament      1 A similar dagger was found with a
         with cogwheel zones from Worms           hybrid beaker in a tomb at Heides-
         (M. Worms) is clearly akin to the        heim near Mainz on the Rhine (Beh-
         group.                                   rens, fig. 21, p. 81).
         ° e.g. in Grave I at Neméice on the      3 Real. ii, p. 68; MAGW. Wii, p.
         Hana, Pravék, 1926, p. 6, pl. 11, 1-3,   (88).
               Fic. 103.   Bell-beaker, Turovice.   M. Olomouc.   ¢




Fic. 104.   Zoned beakers, Bad-Durkheim and Heidesheim.       M. Durkheim and
                                 M. Speier. ¢




            Fic. 10s. Beakers from Forschheim.      M. Forschheim.    +
                            THE BELL BEAKERS                                       19!
   The flint-work indicates a complete revolution, for the blades                        Fiint-
are shaped by fine pressure-flaking. The weapon from                                     work
Forchheim may be an imitation of the copper daggers.
More common are arrow-heads with concave bases. The bow                                  Bow
was evidently the main weapon of the Bell-beaker folk. With                              Bracers
its use are to be connected plaques of stone, concave
on one side and perforated at the corners. ‘They were certainly
worn on the wrist * and may have served as a protection against
the recoil of the bow-string. A strip of gold leaf of the same Gold
general shape as the stone plaques and similarly perforated,
from Bilany (Bohemia),? probably served the same purpose.
These ‘wrist-guards’ are universally associated with bell
beakers throughout our area.3
   Moravian and Bohemian graves have yielded a wealth of Orna-
ornaments. Most typical are buttons with V perforations, ring ments.

                                           :                          :
                                                                      ‘




                Fic. 106   Ciempozuelos dagger, Bohemia, after
                                   Schranil. $

pendants ‘ of bone, small rings or ear-rings of gold 5 or copper
wire, the latter already recoiled® as in Plate 14, D 4. Acurious
anchor-shaped ornament of bone was found in one Bavarian
grave, and a spindle-shaped pendant of horn was found with a
very fine beaker at Flamborn near Worms.
   Amber already occurs in Bohemia with bell beakers, and Amber
gold is found there and in Moravia and Bavaria too.
   The regular burial rite in Bell-beaker graves was interment Graves
in the contracted attitude, the corpse lying on the left or right
side. No regular orientation was observed, and the tomb was
generally a simple pit, though one Moravian grave was lined
with stone slabs forming a cist.? The great majority of sepul-
chres are quite isolated or form at best small clusters of three
1 Pravék, 1926; Schranil, Bohmen,              él in the Hungarian National Mu-
p. 85.                                         seum, No. 44% 52.           :
2 Stocky, BAP., pl. xtv1, 13; Dawn,            + Jitin (Bohemia), BAP. xliv. 11.
fig. 86, 5. Bits of gold leaf were found       5 Turovice in Moravia, Real. ii, p. 69.
among the graves at Grossmehring,                Gottwald, PSPP., p. 37 (DrZovice,
Bavaria, MAGW. liv, p. tor.                    Moravia).
3 There is a fine specimen from Té-            7 Real. ii, p. 67.
            192                      THE    BELL    BEAKERS
            or four. Only in Moravia, and to a lesser extent in Bohemia,
            do we encounter extensive cemeteries of twenty or thirty graves *
            obviously belonging to a regular settlement.
Interment      Besides these flat graves, two other rites were observed. In
    under   Eastern Moravia” the remains were sometimes interred (often
  barrows   after cremation) under a barrow. Cremation is well attested
  Crema- in several other Moravian graves.3 ‘The pottery in these gener-
       tion ally has a late look. Parallels to both phenomena are to be
            found in the mixed culture of the Lower Rhine described
            below.
 Cranio-       The people interred in the normal graves represent a unitary
       logy physical type: they are all markedly brachycephalic, with a
            skull which Schliz terms purse-shaped. The eyebrow ridges
Trepana- are comparatively prominent. It is important to note that in-
      tions stances of trepanation occur.‘
               The beakers and allied vases were essentially funerary pot-
            tery. Perhaps they replaced in the tomb the real Esparto-grass
            vessels that they most certainly imitate.
   Settle-     Only in Moravia is anything like a settlement of Beaker folk
     ments known, but stray sherds occur in certain Bavarian villages 5—
    excep- notably at Karlstein and Altheim—always in circular hut-
    tional foundations, partly excavated in the soil to a depth of as much
            as one metre.
  Hoards      Besides the grave-finds we may probably connect with the
            Bell-beaker folk the earliest ‘hoards’ which we meet in Central
            Europe. They seem to represent the stock-in-trade of wander-
            ing merchants. 'T’o our group belongs almost certainly a hoard
           found at Svodobne Dvory near Hradec Kralove (K6niggratz) °;
           for it included thirteen gold spirals like those found in Bell-
           beaker graves, together with amber beads and copper trinkets.
           It marks the beginning of the amber trade with the north,
           where similar gold spirals occur in Danish passage-graves.
Hoards of     To the same people Schumacher would assign some of the
     celts hoards of stone celts found in Western Germany. The leading
           type represented in these hoards is the flat celt with pointed
            butt, often of greenstone. In one case a copper flat celt was
            associated .with such stone implements. Stone celts of the
            same form and material are extremely common in Brittany,
            and the distribution of hoards containing them may very likely
            * Slavkov, Neméice. Near      Munich    p. 82.
            there were at least seven.              4 Schranil, p. 85 f.; Cervinka, MS.,
            2 Cervinka, MS., pp. 202-9.             p. 215.°
            3 Palliardi, WPZ. vi, pp. 41 f.; Cer-   5 MAGW. l.c., p. 104.
            vinka, Pravék,1926;Schranil,Bohmen,     © Schranil, Studie, p. 23.
                                           THE BELL BEAKERS                                                193
mark an early east and west trade route. Perhaps it was along West-
the same trade route that the famous symbolic double-axes of East
copper with a hole too small to take a real shaft were diffused trade
(Fig. 107). They are thought to mark the spread of an Aegean
type’ from the Atlantic coasts across France to the Saale valley.
   As already noted, the Central European bell beakers are Affinities
only a branch of a ceramic family dispersed all over the Western
Mediterranean and along the Atlantic coasts. Technically and
stylistically the best and earliest of our beakers correspond
closely to typical specimens from Brittany, Central Spain, or
Sardinia; particularly close resemblances in ornament exist
between the North Italian and Bohemian groups.?_ The asso-
ciated vases have also parallels beyond the Alps. Here again
the Bohemian—Moravian group, with its polypod bowls, is most
directly connected with the West Mediterranean group.


                     GETS             :<                          3Z         SOMATA)                   :
          ed          x AAA           >                                      ate
    KER     aan eS                    g                                            UEU   ITN   apy 7


                      yee ps tte
            aeppaweSONS
                   oS            ek



          Fic. 107. Symbolic double-axe of copper, Rhein, after Behrens.                         }

   The other grave-goods likewise accord well with those found
beyond the Alps. The copper daggers are exactly paralleled in
the Bell-beaker graves of Ciempozuelos near Madrid, and
belong to a family represented in a similar context in Sardinia,
Upper Italy, and South Spain, as well as Brittany and South
France. The arrow-heads are inferior to the best western pro-
ducts, but recur unaltered in Upper Italy. Wrist-guards are
not certainly found with bell beakers in Spain,3? but appear
sporadically in South France, Brittany, and Sardinia. Even
the gold leaf from Bohemia can be paralleled at Mané Lud in
Brittany, at La Halliade in the Hautes-Pyrénées,‘ and near
Arles.5 Buttons with V-perforation are common in Spain and
Sardinia.
   It looks, too, as if the same brachycephalic stock was respon-
sible for the Bell-beaker culture on both sides of the Alps.
1 Cf. p. 177; and ZfE, xxxvii, p. 525.                 3 But cf. del Castillo, pls. v, 1-2; lv,
2 Note particularly the bands oflozen-                 7-8.
ges on the beakers of Kralupy (Stocky,                 4 Afat. 1881, pp. 522 f.
BAP. xl. 6; Abercromby, pl. 1v;_\                      5 Cazalis de Fondouce, Allées cou-
Aberg, Iberic, fig. 233).                              vertes de Provence.
   3443                                           ce
      194                        THE BELL BEAKERS
       The people buried at Ciempozuelos were markedly round-
       headed, and the same type appears, with others, in Catalonia,
       Sardinia, and Upper Italy. The natural conclusion is that the
       bell beakers were diffused by a specific people.
Origin    In Central Europe the bell beakers with their red ware,
       their milled ornament, and the associated fine flint-flaking,
       copper daggers, and wrist-guards, are all innovations presum-
       ably introduced by intruders. The beaker itself plainly imitates
       a grass-basket, the material for which must be sought in Spain
       and North Africa.’ It is generally agreed to-day that Spain
       was the immediate centre of diffusion for the culture in Europe,
       though certain kindred vases from predynastic Egypt* and
       Mesopotamia; suggest that Spain was just an outpost of a
       great North African province. But the thesis that the diffusers
       of the beaker came from Spain raises difficulties on the anthro-
       pological side which both Bosch-Gimpera and Leeds have
       noticed;+ for the population of Spain is supposed to have
       been essentially Mediterranean and dolichocephalic,> so that
       the Ciempozuelos skulls look like the remains of intruders.
       But in Central Europe the culture and its authors seem equally
       alien. Still it is true that Trauwitz-Hellweg® cannot distin-
       guish the Bavarian Bell-beaker skulls from ordinary neolithic
       Alpines. Moreover, already by the end of Danubian I, some-
       thing very like a bell beaker in form and ornament (but not in
       technique) was being manufactured in Bohemia;’ the Danu-
       bian II b ware of Moravia is red; and copper daggers and
        buttons with a sort of V-boring occur in Danubian II cemeteries
       in Hungary. These phenomena, however, remain isolated, and
        do not coalesce to form a genuine complex from which the
        individual Bell-beaker culture might have evolved. Nor are its
        wider presuppositions available here.
           If we turn east we soon loose its tracks. The decoration
        executed by means of a comb on a very coarse ware current in
        Finland and in North and Central Russia is often reminiscent
        of that of the bell beaker, and the ovoid pots on which it occurs
        might theoretically have evolved into bell beakers. There is
       « Vide the fine example illustrated by    as responsible for the Central Euro-
       Schuchhardt in PZ. i (1909), p. 42,       pean and Western cultures. Real. iv,
       fig. 1. Cf. Abercromby, p. 11.            p. 358. Cf. Arch. \xx, pp. 225 f.
       2 From Badari, Childe, Most Ancient       5 The skulls found with bell beakers
       East, fig. 15.                            near Arles are also dolichocephalic.
       3 abid., pl. xv, b.                       6 MAGW. liii, p. 263.
       4 Bosch-Gimpera rejects altogether        7 Above, fig. 24c.
       the idea of a single ‘Bell-beaker’ folk
                            THE   BELL   BEAKERS                          195
nothing to show, however, that they ever did; the culture to
which they belong was extremely backward, and in all prob-
ability the ceramic style in question is later than our beakers.!
    Professor Tallgren? has called attention to the resemblance
between basket-shaped vases found in ‘neolithic’ kurgans near
Kiev 3 and the western beaker. It should be remembered that
Sir Arthur Keith would like to derive the English beaker folk
from a group represented‘ by undated skulls found in the
same region. ‘Tallgren, however, regards the Ukrainian vases
as at best influenced by the Central European: other significant
links are wanting, and it is a sheer appeal to the unknown to
attempt to derive the beaker culture from the east. The simi-
larities may indeed indicate nothing more than a dependence
 on basketry.
    The south-east is admittedly hopeless.’ Only the west is
 left.                                                              |
    Assuming, then, that the Bell-beaker folk reached Central Route of
 Europe from the west, by what route did they travel ? Three Beaker
 theories are in the field. Schumacher ® holds that the invaders folk
 came across Central France through the Eifel to the Rhineland From
 and thence spread to the south-east. Hock and Bosch-Gimpera Central
 have adopted the same view. The absence of intermediate France
 finds in Central France is admitted, but Schumacher cites the
 greenstone celts, supposed to belong to the Bell-beaker period on
 the Rheinland, as evidence of western connexions. Their Breton
 parallels must indeed be recognized, but they are probably later
 than the first beakers, and belong to the phase represented by
 the Early Bronze Age graves of Savoy which are in fact fur-
 nished with greenstone celts of the form in question.
    Aberg proposed as an alternative route to the Rhine the Rhéne
 Belfort gap. In this direction there was at least one possible route
 link at Cranves near Geneva.’ But Bosch-Gimpera has insisted
 rightly on the differences between the South French and Rhen-
 ish cultures. The latter was, moreover, centred on the Middle
  Rhine; in Baden and Alsace beakers are very rare (see Map V).
     Both these theories assume a priority of the earlier Rhenish
. beakers over the corresponding Central European. That as-
 sumption does not, however, seem to be correct.                    Though a
 couple of beakers from the Middle Rhine stand close to Spanish
 : Aberg, Iberic, p. 204.                5 But the red ware and some of its
 2 La Pontide préscythique, p. 119.      patterns have quite a Cypriote look.
 3 Dawn, fig. 66 b.                      6 Rheinland, i, p. 49, &c.
 4 JRAI. xlv (1915), p- 19.              7 Aberg, Iberic, fig. 303 A.
           196                        THE BELL        BEAKERS
           and still more to Breton varieties, more numerous parallels
           could be unearthed in the museums of Bohemia and Moravia.
           The latter come nearest to the Esparto-grass ancestor. And it
           is in these lands that the whole culture is most fully and
           characteristically developed; they have yielded other good
           ‘Spanish’ forms, such as broad-rimmed bowls, missing on the
           Rhine.                              ’
 Brenner      A third route, also suggested by Aberg and now supported
   route   by Trauwitz-Hellweg,’ brings the Beaker folk across the Bren-
           ner from Upper Italy. Actually this theory has much to com-
           mend it. Some Sardinian and Italian beakers * are ornamented
           with zones of lozenges as in the beaker from Kralupy. The
           polypod bowls, so common in Central Europe, likewise point
           to the Italian—Sardinian area. Mugs, too, are found in Sar-
           dinia. Direct intercourse across the Brenner must, in fact, be
           admitted, especially as, besides the West European tanged
           dagger, the Italian round-heeled type (A1) appears in some
           Beaker graves. Still the late type of most Bavarian beakers
           is a valid objection to bringing the Beaker folk from Italy
           across the Brenner, since their route to Bohemia                        must     lie
           through Bavaria. The present writer, despite this objection
           and the weight of authority on the other side, prefers the
           Brenner route. Taken as a whole, the Central European beakers
           with their variety of associated types, most of which can be
           paralleled beyond the Alps, are earlier and nearer the origin
           than the Rhenish or Thuringian groups that are poor in
           secondary forms.3
No mass       It is, however, wrong to make the alternatives too exclusive.
migration The diffusion of bell beakers is due neither to a mass migration
           nor to mere cultural borrowing. It results from the movements
           of small groups of people quite evidently guided bya taste for
           gold, amber, copper, and kindred substances. Their acquisi-
           tiveness was partly satisfied by ‘trade’. If some of them settled
           down in Moravia or the Rhineland, that does not mean a total
           fixation. On the contrary, they would have moved to and fro
           along the routes they had discovered and along others they
           were exploring. We must compare their activities to those of
           Arab traders in Africa rather than to the migrations of the
           Bantu.
              In Bavaria, Bohemia, and Silesia the Bell-beaker folk, or
           t MAGW-. liv, p. 106.                      Spain (zbid., fig. 154), and there is one
           2 Aberg, op. cit., fig. 233; but similar   Breton example.
           patterns are not unknown in South          3 See supplementary note on p. 2o1.
                            THE    BELL    BEAKERS                           197
their culture, was eventually absorbed by the pre-existing
populations—Danubian IT, Nordic, and ‘Thuringian’. On the
Rhine they succeeded better in retaining their identity, them-
selves ‘absorbing’ the Corded Ware folk. ‘The process is marked
by the formation of mixed styles in the pottery which soon
take us into the Bronze Age.
                           ZONED     BEAKER     GROUP
There is an extensive class of beakers that are easily confused Pottery
with bell beakers but are distinguished therefrom by their
tallness, angularity, and coarseness. They may be comprised
under the general heading of zoned beakers. The height nearly
always exceeds the greatest diameter, and the smoothness of
the curve in the bell beaker has been lost. The ornament is
still arranged in zones, and most of the motives illustrated on
bell beakers persist. But besides the usual milled lines, simple
incisions, raised ridges (Fig. 108b), and cord-impressions are
found. Among the incised patterns the horizontal bands of
herring-boning are interesting. The cord impressions are also Influence
arranged horizontally, but, in contradistinction to the corded of Corded
beaker, cover the body as well as the neck which is never cylin- Ware
drical. In both cases the influence of Corded Ware is clear.
   Zoned beakers are found as far east as Bohemia,’ but the
majority come from the Rhine valley.
   The influence of the Corded Ware group is further attested
by the burial rites associated with zoned beakers there.
   On both banks of the Rhine degenerate beakers are some- Barrows
times found in graves under barrows.” Schumacher 3 assigns
to the same group a number of fortified settlements to the
west of the Rhine, but the evidence is inconclusive. Still,
beaker graves have been found in the immediate vicinity of
several hill stations or shore villages as at Oberolm, Monsheim,
Heidersheim, and Frankenthal—sites well adapted to com-
mand the fords or passes. And within the great fortified neo- Fortified
lithic refuge near Urmitz several characteristic zoned beakers camps
were discovered.* It is therefore certain that if the Zoned-
beaker folk did not themselves build fortifications, they made
use of those erected by the Michelsberg people.
t Stocky, BAP. xli. 1.                    3 p. 50. Several sites in Southern Al-
2 Schumacher, op. cit., p.49; on west     sace are included, though no Beaker
bank at Schifferstadt in the Palatinate   graves are found in that area.
according to information kindly sup-      4 Mannus, xvii, p. 169.
plied by Dr. Sprater.
         198                        THE    BELL     BEAKERS
Dutch       The same culture, more markedly tinged with Corded Ware
 tombs   influence, is well represented on the Lower Rhine below
 Wood Cologne,’ and then in Holland, principally in Gelderland,’
 circles with outliers as far north as Groningen.3 Many barrows in
         this area cover peculiar wooden structures that apparently
         served to support the mound of loose earth. The earliest form,
         according to Rademacher, was a polygon of horizontal logs
         which Holwerda‘ has reconstructed, probably wrongly,’ as a
         wooden ‘tholos’. Later this was replaced by a ring of vertical]
         posts. In the barrow at Harendermolen in Groningen both
         types of construction occur; two concentric rings of uprights
         were here encircled by a polygon of horizontal logs apparently
         with gaps at intervals (Fig. 111).° The corpse itself normally
         lay in a trench in the virgin soil at the centre of the mound.
 Dutch       The shallower beakers are often decorated with complicated
beakers incised and moulded patterns, among which the saltire is
         prominent, the taller specimens with horizontal cord-impres-
         sions covering the whole surface. With the beakers occur
         wrist-guards, shale or amber beads with V-perforations, and
          once a degenerate battle-axe of stone. The flints include, on
          the one hand, rough daggers and points of Nordic form and
         material, on the cther, ‘double points’, the broad faces of which
         have been polished, a peculiarity of the west.? With a so-called
         klokyrne, that resembles a very large beaker but may have
         served as a cinerary urn, a bronze celt and a dagger with mid-
         rib and large holes for rivets are said to have been found?
         Traces of red ochre have been observed in several graves,’ and
         a horse’s skull was found in one.
            It is usual to regard the Zoned-beaker culture as a hybrid
         between those characterized by bell beakers and corded ware
         respectively: the use of cord impression and the adoption of
         the barrow-building habit and the battle-axe would all be due
         to the latter. This mixture may have taken place either on the
         Rhine or in Holland or independently in both areas. The
         Netherlands had certainly been occupied by Battle-axe folk
          * Rademacher in Mannus, Ergdénzungs-      fig.3; Van Giffen, ‘Bouwstoffen’, 1928,
          band iv, pp. 119 ff.                      Pp. 7-25.
          2 Aberg, Niederland, pp. 44 ff., gives    7 Mannus, Ergdénzungsband iv, pp.
          a list of finds with figures. Cf. Aber-   107 ff. and pl. vit.
          cromby, i, pl. 111, 48*-53*.              8 Real. v, p. 344; Holwerda, Neder-
          3 PZ. xv, pp. 52 ff.                      lands, pp. 24 and 96, and pl. x11, 19,
          4 PZ. i, pp. 374 ff.; iv, pp. 368 f.      255
          SIP Ze XV epaS an                         9 Oudh. Meded. 1923, p.26 (Ermelo);
          6 Ibid., pl. 1b, and reconstruction,      Rademacher, I. c.
 Fic. 108.     Beakers from Frankenthal.      M. Frankenthal.     4




   Fic. 109.    Beakers from Schifferstadt.     M. Speier.   BI




Fic. 110.    Pottery from Eiersheimer Mithle.      M. Speier.     +
v




                               THE BELL BEAKERS                                    199
    akin to those of Jutland. The priority of the graves with true
    corded beakers is proved by barrow E at Uddelermeer, where
    the grave containing a zoned beaker overlay one furnished with




     SLR RAT I
     See
       LEK
    4 we RY RO
                 K

     COREE




                                                                     ROR
                                                 SOON             ZORA SOR   SAE
                                                     PRN
                                                   LERL
                                                      LILES,    ERP
                                                               ROOT OS Sa
                                                                   ERS




         Fic. 111. Plan of barrow at Harendermolen, Drenthe, after van Giffen.

    a corded beaker and a battle-axe. A similar relation for Hessen
    is suggested by a barrow near Fulda; a dolichocephalic skeleton,
    accompanied by a corded beaker and an amphora, was squat-
    ting in a pit-grave; on the ground level lay a brachycephalic
    corpse accompanied by an undecorated bell beaker.’
       In Holland the Rhenish beaker culture came into contact Beakersin
    with that of the Nordic megalith graves. Zoned beakers were Ee                       omos
                      « Aberg, Niederland, figs. 19-20.
                      2 Schriften des Fulddéer Geschichtsvereins, vi.
         200                        THE    BELL     BEAKERS
          found in a passage-grave near Drouwen in the Province of
          Drenthe. Analogous finds are reported from North-West
          Germany and even Denmark. A fine beaker, decorated in
          milled line technique with the patterns arranged in metopes,
          was unearthed in the upper layers of the great passage-grave
          at Bigum.! Wrist-guards have also been noted in Danish
          graves.                                              ;
   Fters-    A sort of reflex of this contact may be seen at Eiersheimer
  heimer Miihle in the Palatinate and at Ziischen in Hessen.      In hut-
  Miihle foundations at the former site cups of the zoned beaker class,
          like Fig. 109 b, were seemingly associated with collared flasks,
          and a curious ware (Fig. 110)? ornamented with deep strokes
         in a manner reminiscent, as Sprater remarks, of Danubian I b.
            Reinerth assigns it to his ‘Aichbiihl’ group.3 In the long stone
            cist of Ziischen a fragment of a tall beaker occurred side by
            side with collared flasks.
 Place in      These facts prove contact between the evolved Bell-beaker
    Mon- culture and the megalithic culture of the north in the middle
    telius’ or late phase of the Passage-grave epoch and accordingly allow
  chrono- of the fixation of the Beaker episode within the Nordic chrono-
      logy logical framework.     It belongs to the later half but not the
            very end of Montelius 3.
Relations      The peculiar interest of the zoned beakers lies, however, in
      with their paternal relation to the oldest British pottery of the
    Great Bronze Age, first demonstrated by Lord Abercromby.* His
  Britain type B beakers agree very closely with the Rhenish series.
            Some are so fine that they might be classed as bell beakers.
            And the beads with V-perforation, wrist-guards, and flat-tanged
            daggers associated with them (exclusively in the case of the
            daggers 5) must belong to that group. Only the beakers deco-
            rated with cord-impressions °® and the barrows over the graves
            disclose the presence in this group of that Corded Ware element
            detected in the Zoned-beaker group on the Middle Rhine.’
            In beakers of type A with their longer, more cylindrical necks,
            the Corded Ware element is more pronounced, as Abercromby
            pointed out in 1902. The association of battle-axes with the
            type A to the exclusion of type B confirms his conclusion. At
            the same time the prominence of the saltire in their decoration
          connects them with Central Germany where that motive is so
          * Nord. Fort. ii, p. 117.                 5 Abercromby, i, p. 54.
          2 Mitt. Hist.Vereins der Pfalz(Speyer),   © Abercromby, i. 25, 26, 196, 201, &c.
          31 (1911), pp. 34-5.                      7 Even so it must be remembered that
          3 Chron., p. 28.                          cord impression was not unknown in
          4 FRAIL. xxxii, pp. 373 ff.               Brittany nor even in South France.
                          THE    BELL    BEAKERS                            201
common. Judging by the round-heeled daggers that go with
them, type A is later than type B. Finally, the shallower
Batavian beakers stand very close to British specimens, espe-
cially to type C, but are scarcely in the direct line of descent.
   It is, therefore, still most probable‘ that the British beakers Types A
were introduced by invaders from Central Europe who al- and B
ready included Bell-beaker and Corded Ware elements. But denote
the relations must have been very complex. Beakers of type B distinct
are scattered over Great Britain very evenly, and some Scottish move-
                                                                   ments
specimens” agree so closely with the Rhenish ones that they
cannot be regarded as late degeneration products. The
bringers of type B at least did not spread slowly northwards,
but landed at widely separated points. Perhaps they prepared
the way for a more extensive colonization that introduced
type A or its prototypes. In the second group of colonists it is
tempting to assume the incorporation of reinforcements of
Battle-axe folk3 perhaps belonging to the wave that spread
from Jutland to Holland.
   Relations between Britain and the Continent were, however, Recipro-
not one-sided. Jet, presumably derived from Yorkshire, was city of the
 found with the beakers near Drouwen and elsewhere. The relations
 Dutch bronzes may likewise be British. And the curious wooden
 structure at Harendermolen is most likely an imitation in wood
 of stone monuments such as are common in Scotland *¢but are
‘quite foreign to Central Europe. We might then infer that
type B was brought to Britain in the course of exploratory
journeys similar to those that diffused the Continental bell
 beakers, rather than by a regular colonization. Some of the
 Danish beakers were probably left by the same process.
    Whatever were the details of the activity of Beaker folk its
consequence is clear: it brought to Britain the cultural tradition
of the Western Mediterranean enriched by south-eastern ele-
ments transmitted up the Danube, and others derived from the
battle-axe cultures of the north and east.

t Bremer, Real. iv, p. 550, would as-    Supplementary note to p. 196. A. del
sign priority to the British culture,    Castillo (Cultura, p. 179) very plau-
and some beakers from South England      sibly argues for a dual invasion. ‘The
may still be connected with Brittany.    Rhenish beakers would be due to a
2 e.g. Abercromby, 195 and 196.          current from South France while the
3 The long, probably Nordic, skulls      rest would be connected by the Bren-
found with some beakers would belong     ner with the Mediterranean-Italian
to these; cf. Abercromby, i, p. 66.      groups. Both currents would have
4 e.g. at Broomend of Crichie near       met in Thuringia.
Inverurie, Aberdeenshire.
  3443                              pd
style
geot:
of




Bello zoned
      Rhenish
      beakers
       ©
   Inferior
beakers
 e




                BELL-B
                OF
                DISTRI
                 V.
                 Map
                              XI
           THE “COPPER AGE’ IN HUNGARY
i. the last four chapters the emphasis has been upon the
   reaction of autochthonous elements on its borders to the
southern stimuli transmitted up the Danube corridor, or upon
the crossing of the Danubian current by others from the east
or west. Now, we must insist that the permeation of Central
Europe by civilizing influences coming up the Danube had not
been arrested in Period III.
   We have already noticed incidentally south-eastern elements
in the ‘Nordic’ culture. As such may be cited the spools of
Trojan type and certain accidental ceramic forms such as the
fluted ware.   Moreover, Pectunculus shells must without ques-
tion have come from the south-east ; the copper objects found in
association with Nordic and corded wares most probably came
up the Danube too.      Indisputable evidence of contact with
the intermediate area of the Middle Danube is, however, pro-
vided by certain copper axes of specifically Hungarian type
met in Lower Austria, Moravia, Bohemia, and even Silesia and
Thuringia. (These are attributed to Period III because they
are never associated in those areas with objects characteristic
of the succeeding epoch.) At the same time counter currents,
perhaps even invasions, from the north are discernable in
Hungary itself. We must, therefore, now examine in detail the
course of events in the Hungarian plain.
   Unfortunately the course of events in the Middle Danube
plain is far from clear. While certain intrusive cultures can be
recognized here, as farther north, there was no abrupt and uni-
versal break in the old tradition such as occurred in Moravia,
Silesia, or Bohemia. As in the kindred province of ‘Thessaly
the third and fourth periods are only distinguished by acci-
dental traits (importations of Urfirms and Minyan ware re-
spectively), so in many parts of Hungary the old Danubian II Continua-
culture persisted well into Period II]. We have already indi- tion of
cated in discussing the cemeteries of Danubian II type that a Danubian
part at least of the graves should in reality probably be assigned wed
to Period III. That was very likely the case with the great
cemetery at Lengyel in Western Hungary.
   More positive evidence is available from the eastern area. Maros-
Mention has already been made of primitive copper axes from décse
Lucska, Csdka, and Tordos. A more advanced type of copper
         204              THE ‘COPPER AGE’ IN HUNGARY
         axe belonging to the same family has recently been discovered’
         in a cemetery of Danubian II type at Marosdécse in Transyl-
         vania. The skeletons, buried in the contracted attitude, showed
         traces of red colouration.       They were regularly provided with
         flint knives or lances, and decked with necklaces of Unio shell
           disks and copper helices. But one skeleton was armed with an
           axe-adze of the type just indicated, another with a flat stone
           mace-head with four projections, while a third wore an ‘ingot
           torque’ of Early Bronze Age type.
Oszenti-      Similar indications are afforded by the cemetery of Oszenti-
      van van recently excavated by Dr. Banner.         Here, among graves
           belonging as a whole to the end of Period III and the beginning
           of IV, was one interment accompanied by a pedestalled bowl
           descended from the Danubian II type (Fig. 126, b).? It is thus
           clear that a part of the extensive Danubian II material from
           Hungary must be assigned in fact to Period III.
    Axe-      Of the innovations noticed in the period the most striking
    adzes is the copper axe-adze already nientioned.         The distinctive
           feature of the implement is that the two blades are at right
           angles to one another. The simplest type is smooth on both
           faces; in later specimens there isa little tubular support round
           the shaft-hole (Fig. 112). According to Pulszky the shaft-
           hole was not cast, but punched through the red-hot metal.
Distribu-     The majority of such axe-adzes have been found east of
      tion the Tisza in North Hungary and Transylvania.3 ‘Thence they
           extend southwards and westwards to Bulgaria, Old Serbia5
           (29 specimens), Slavonia (13 specimens),° Bosnia,’ Albania,5
           and Dalmatia.’ West of the Tisza they spread across the sandy
           country of North Hungary to the Matra mountains and the
           Danube valley near Buda-Pest. Farther west there are several
           specimens from Moravia,’ two from Silesia, nine from Bo-
           hemia,® two from the State of Saxony,’ two from Saxo-Thu-
           ringia, and one from Lower Austria." East of the Carpathians
           there are typical specimens from Horodnica in East Galicia
         1 AE. xlii (1928), p. 50.                figures are incomplete).
         2 Dolgozatok, 1927, p. 96, 10. So,       4 Real. ii, pl. 99.
         too, at least one grave at Kovacshalom   5 WMBH. xi, p. 52.
         (AE. xxxiii, p. 131, fig. 10) seems to   6 Vjes. HAD. vi (1902), p. 65.
         have contained an ‘Early Bronze Age’     7 Pravék, 1903, pp. 4ff.
         mug.                                     ‘Schranil, Studie, p. 25; Bohmen, p.
         3 There are 19 specimens in Transyl-        Q.
         vania, 9 in County Temes, 6 each in      9 Real. vii, p. 186.
         Counties Bihar and Szabolcs, 2 in         TOS euxent) luexe
         Szatmar, and 24 west of the Tisza;        11 MAGW. xxxviii (1908), p. (22).
         AE. xxxiii (1913), pp. 306 f. (these
                 THE ‘COPPER AGE’ IN HUNGARY                              205
and from the Upper Dniepr;' then there is an analogous axe
with a pointed, instead of an adze, butt from Veremie, a
Tripolye A site near Kiev,” and finally specimens from barrows
near Maikop on the Kuban 3 and Asterabad in North Persia.‘
   Axe-adzes of this type in several cases cluster round metalli- Relation
ferous regions; that is perfectly obvious in Serbia, and is sug- to ores
gested by the distributions in Transylvania, North Hungary,
and Slovakia (see Map VI).5 This does not mean that the
axe-adze was used principally as a tool. Though some variants
may have served as miners’ picks, others were surely battle-axes
(e.g. those from Lucska and Marosdécse).
   The origin of the type is not certain. In its simplest form, Origin
as the finds from Lucska (Fig. 56, a—b) reveal, the axe-adze Local

                                              \N\ We WE
                                               ty   we   Nay ‘  N
                                                                \
                                                         Lin,




        Fic. 112.   Axe-adzes, Hajduhadhaz and Pocsaj after Zoltai. 4

comes very close to the stone axe-hammer that had been used
by Danubians from time immemorial. Hence a local Hungarian
origin is theoretically possible. However, G. Nagy® points out
that axe-adzes are not specially common round the Matra
mountains where native copper was available.
   An Aegean origin is quite possible since axe-adzes (albeit of Aegean
rather different form) are traceable in Crete from E.M. II,’
and recur in the Cyclades ® and at Troy.’
   On the other hand G. Nagy ® has suggested that axe-adzes Or
                                                                                  Eastern
1 Uvarov, Sd’ornik m’elkich trudov’, ii,   8 B.M. Bronze, fig. 174.
pl. xxi, 62; MZK. xiv, p. xcii; Tall-      9) PZ. Av, PP. 22 £-
gren, Pontide, fig. 99, 6.                 10 AR. xxxili, pp. 310 and 390. He
2 Tallgren, Pontide, fig. 98, 8.           contends that the axe-adzes were in-
3 Childe, Dawn, fig. 61.                   troduced by the people known to
4 JEA. vi, pl. U1.                         Greek mythology as Centaurs, and
5 In the map both true axe-adzes and       would first appear, in the Lucska
the allied axe-hammers, like fig. 56b,     form, in the fourteenth century. It
have been included.                        must be admitted that the copper im-
6 AE. xxxili, p. 295.                      plements are very like certain iron
7 Evans, Palace, i, p. 193, 0. 3.          axes found in ‘Scythian’ graves.
         206            THE ‘COPPER AGE’ IN HUNGARY
         were introduced from the east. by precursors of the Scyths.
         In fact, in Hungary the type does spread very much along the
         same lines as Scythian objects at a later date. A satisfying
         explanation of the peculiar form would be to regard it as the
         combination of the two types of axe current in Sumer from
         the middle of the fourth millennium—a combination which
         has actually been effected in the specimen from Maikop.* ‘The
         connexion between the axe-adze and a type of torque, regarded
         by Frankfort? and Hubert3 as Caucasian, suggested by dis-
         coveries at Marosdécse, would support this view. In that case
         the copper axe-adzes in Hungary would bea parallel to the
         stone battle-axes of Central Germany; both would be due to
         an invasion from the east if the theory advanced on p. 159 be
         accepted. Among the intrusive cultures to be next examined
         we actually find very clear evidence of connexions with South
         Russia.
                 I. INTRUSIVE      CULTURES         EAST    OF THE      TISZA
         In the battle-axe province east of the 'Tisza the following intru-
         sive cultural groups appear in Periods III-IV side by side with
         survivals of Danubian II.
 Ochre      Barrows covering contracted skeletons that had either been
graves   stained red or were accompanied by lumps of red ochre are
         found on the Upper Tisza, especially in County Hajdu,‘ and
         perhaps as far south as Szarvas in Békés.5 In one such mound
         an axe-adze, a quadrangular awl, a clay figurine, and a bowl
         ornamented rather in the style of Biikk B ware were apparently
         discovered.°
            Such barrows occur in just the regions where Scythian kur-
         gans were subsequently erected. And the burial rite finds its
         nearest parallels in the Copper Age ochre-graves of the South
         Russian steppes. If we regard the barrows in question as
         monuments of nomad invaders from the east who introduced
         the copper battle-axe (axe-adze), we should have to assume
         that the use of large quantities of red ochre noted in some
         graves of Danubian II type east of the Tisza was due to these
         invaders. But, of course, the process is reversible. Neverthe-
         less the barrows in question do indubitably attest relations
         between the Hungarian plain and South Russia across the
         1 Childe, Aryans, p. 189.               5 Dolgozatok, 1927, p. 88, but here the
         2 Studies, ii, p. 149.                  mound seems to have been   justa settle-
         3 Syria, 1925, p. 25.                   ment, not a barrow; cf. AEF. xxxv,
         4 Dolgozatok, 1927, pp: 86, 89;   cf.   p. 13.
         p. 76, and AE. xxxv, p. 208.            6 Letter from Dr. Zoltai.
                                               ip)         “.
                                              Sassu lh 0


Fic. 113. Hoard of copper axes and flat celts from Tolna County.   3
           208             THE   ‘COPPER AGE’ IN HUNGARY
         Carpathians one way or the other. The Scythian analogues
         would favour the east to west direction.
Transyl-    In Transylvania there are other barrows in the valleys of the
  vanian Alt and the Maros covering contracted skeletons.    ‘These con-
barrows    tained stone celts, flint flakes, and pots ornamented with fur-
           rowed patterns filled with white paste.* One corpse, however,
           at Vladhaza was provided with a girdle clasp of copper wire in
           the form of a spectacle spiral.3 ‘Two clay models of animals
           were found in another barrow of the same group. Perhaps
           these interments are related to the ochre graves along the
           Tisza.
 Corded       Possibly the invasion of Corded Ware is to be connected
   ware    with the same movement. Two genuine corded beakers were
           found at Buj in County Szabolcs.4 Sherds of corded ware were,
           together with an axe-adze, found in the strata overlying Erésd,°
           and elsewhere in the Alt valley and along the Maros.® Faceted
           battle-axes occur in the same regions. Dr. Roska concludes that
           corded ware entered Hungary both from the north-west and
           from the east across the Carpathians. Despite the exiguous
           traces it has left, this incursion had a profound effect upon
           the development of culture in the Middle Danube basin, as the
           discoveries in the Middle Bronze Age urnfields show.
              Lastly, we must regard as trans-Carpathian in origin the
           culture of Danordic affinities from the Alt valley and Western
           Transylvania described in Chapter VII. All these remains,
           derived from the axe-adze area, indicate intrusions from the
           north or east that resulted in the incorporation of Hungary in
           the great battle-axe province.
                               II. WESTERN       INCURSIONS
           From the north-west two lines of intrusion can be traced. The
           Beaker folk, as we saw, made their way as far as Szentes.
   Bell-      Numerous graves near T6k617 on the Csepely Island and
 beaker    on the left bank of the Danube at Démséd ® attest a substantial
Culture    settlement of the same folk in the country just south of Buda-
           Pest. Besides very fine beakers, some with handles and others
           ornamented. with concentric circles, the graves yielded wrist-
           guards of the classical shape. But at T6k6l there are indica-
           tions of a fusion of the Bell-beaker culture with other elements;
           * Dolgozatok, 1927, pp. 75, 76, 78;   5 PZ. xvi, p. 85; AE. xlii, p. 49.
           AE. XXXiV, Pp. 387.                   ° Dolgozatok, vi, pp. 1 ff.; x, p. 147.
           * Wosinski, Ink. Ker., pl. v.         7 AE. 1879, pp. 47 ff.; Wosinski,
           3 ZfE. 1896, p. 8o, fig. 46.          Ink. Ker., pls. LXXvItI—-Lxxx.
           4 Dolgozatok, v (1914), p. 418.       8 Dolgozatok, v (1914), pp. 437 ff.
                THE ‘COPPER AGE’ IN HUNGARY                             209
the square foot of the bowl, figured by Wosinski on Plate
LXXIX, 1S quite reminiscent of our cross-footed vases and their
descendants at Tdészeg. Moreover, among the skeletons the
usual brachycephalic type was poorly represented: of the ten
skulls measured six were long-headed and four mesaticephalic;
no round heads were preserved.
_ Farther west we have obscure and uncertain traces of other
incursions, this time apparently of Alpine folk accustomed to
living in pile-villages or fortified hill stations.
   On the Alpine slopes there are traces of a pile-dwelling cul- Lake-
ture seemingly derived from farther north. From Neusied- dwellings
lersee come a few remains that cannot be dated at all.» On the Laibach:
former peat bog called Laibach Moor (Ljubljansko Blat) in Notranje
 Carniola there are more extensive remains. The settlement at gorice
Notranje gorice 3 certainly goes back to Period III. The village
was built on piles‘+ far out on the moor and connected to the
 shore by a sort of bridge.
    The pottery was the usual coarse Alpine ware. Practically
 no vessels were reconstructed, but it was clear that the only
 handles in use were very small and indeed little better than
 string-hole lugs. Perforations in the vase wall were very com-
 mon. The normal ornament was provided by the already
 familiar plastic strips with finger-tip impressions. In addition
 knobs and incised lines occur.
    One complete vase was a shallow corded beaker decorated Cord or-
 with the customary horizontal cord-impressions round the neck, nament
 at the base of which sat two horizontally pierced string-hole
 handles.
    The celts were flat on the faces, with straight sides. Wedge- Celts
 shaped hammer-axes were not uncommon. Numerous thin Hammer-      axes
 plaques of chert and sandstone, perforated at one end just
like whetstones, were discovered.
  Arrow-heads with rudimentary tangs, saws, and knives were                    Flint
made of flint. One fragment seems to belong to the half-moon                   sickles
type of sickle so common in the Mondsee.
   Bored teeth of swine (tame and wild), wolves, and bears, Orna-
and beads of wood were worn as ornaments. A thick tubular                      ments

bead of clay divided into segments by incisions was also found,
as well as a piece of red colouring matter (Bolus armeniacus).
Clay whorls were common.
1 MAGW. Wii, p. (128).                  4 Of oak, alder, poplar, and rarely,
2 Munro, Lake-dwellings, p. 164.        pine.
3 FfA. iv, pp. 92-103.
  3443                             Ee
             210               THE ‘COPPER        AGE’ IN HUNGARY
  Animal           The bones of turbary cattle (sic), turbary swine, a domesti-
    bones    cated variety of local wild pig," goat, and sheep illustrate the
             stock raised.
  Absence       No grains were noticed, but querns were found. The fallow
          and roe deer, urus, wolf, badger, and boar were hunted.
    grain   The approximate date of the settlement, late in Period III,
    Date is given by the flint knives and the corded beakers. An even
             later date is possible since the whetstones belie the neolithic
             appearance of the remaining industry. The clay bead with
             incised rings is interesting for its southern analogues. The
             best parallel is a stone bead from Early Hittite graves in North
             Syria,” but the well-known bird’s-leg beads from Malta 3 might
             also be mentioned.
                For the rest the whole complex may be just an extension of
             that already discovered in Wurtemberg and Upper Austria,
             with a corded-ware tinge. At the same time there are doubtless
             present here elements derived from the early neolithic cave cul-
             tures of circum-Mediterranean character, already alluded to.
Slavonian       Later there appears another civilization with Danordic and
   culture   East Alpine affinities in which many south-eastern elements
             have also been absorbed. Their reflexion is to be seen most
             distinctly in the so-called Slavonian culture of the Lower
             Drave which is generally assigned to the “Copper Age’. Its
             remains are found at Sarvas, Vucedol, and Erdut, all near
             Osijek, while analogous material has been collected near Pécs 4
             in South Hungary and at Hrtkov¢éi on the Save. The excava-
             tions on these sites are far from satisfactory, and no really clear
             picture of this culture can be recreated.
Hammer-         All Slavonian sites® have yielded an abundance of horn,
     axes    bone, flint, and stone implements including polished celts—
             none, however, of the shoe-last type. Hammer-axes, some with
             knobbed heads, have also been found. Several sites are said
             to have been defended by a moat, and graves with contracted
             skeletons were found in the vicinity.’
  Pottery       The culture which concerns us is defined by one distinctive
             class of pottery, though other wares—some certainly Late
             Bronze Age—were present at the same sites. Slavonian pottery
             : Antonius, p. 240.                      p. 178.
             2 LAAA. vi, pl. xxi, b.                  7 It is not clear whether the graves
             3 Archaeologia, \xvii, pl. xvi, 3, 2.    from Vukovar, described in Vjes.
             4 Material at Belgrade.                  HAD. vi, pp. 60 ff., belong here. They
             5 Material at Zagreb.                    contained wire spirals, bracelets, and
             * MPK.      i901, pp. 4f.; MAGW.         long strips of (?) copper and beads and
             xxvii, pp. [78] f.; Vjes. HAD.v(1901),   bracelets made from Spondylus shell.
Fic. 114.     Slavonian ware, keeled cup,                                     Fic. 115.     Slavonian ware pedestalled
            Vuéedol. M. Zagreb                                                            cup. M. Zagreb. }




                       Lp
                       9| a   2   | WW   o   co© A   >   5 <a =   a ° < bate)at     © Be eeoS
                                                                                          ce    oe




                     Fic. 117. Model table, Vukovar.                              M. Osijek. 4
Fic. 118. Laibach amphora.    M. Ljubljana.   ole      Fic. 119.   Laibach jug.   M. Ljubljana.   4




                  Fic. 120,    Cross-footed dish, Laibach.   M. Ljubljana.    4




                         Fic. 121.   Tunnel handles.    M. Ljubljana
                  THE ‘COPPER AGE’ IN HUNGARY                                211
is slipped and polished, orange red or,morerarely, black in colour.
Among the most distinctive shapes are bowls with a very broad
rim, cups, often very big, with a handle on the keel (Fig. 115),
 dishes divided into two compartments, goblets with a cruciform
 foot (like Fig. 120), pedestalled cups (Fig. 114), and ring flasks."
   Besides these vessels there are numerous models—tables like Model
 Fig. 117, and huts shaped like an oval beehive sectioned verti- huts
 cally near the minor axis.
    The decoration is for the most part ‘excised’ in bold style, Fretwork
 that is to say, the designs are formed by cutting or scooping ornament
 slices out of the clay before firing. Wide strips are often carved
 out leaving reserved patterns in relief. The hollows are in all
_cases filled with a white mass. The same effect was sometimes
 obtained by the use of a triangular stamp. The motives used
are fretted triangles, lozenges, circles, stars, and crosses.  Ser-
rated outlines are characteristic, and there is a visible tendency
to metopic arrangement of the design.
   The technique employed for the decoration of Slavonian Influence
ware, and to some extent the forms of the pots themselves,’ are of wood-
obviously borrowed from another craft—that of the wood- carving
carver. German terminology well expresses this relation by
the designation ‘fretwork ornament’ (Kerbschnitt) for the
excised decoration. The dependence of the Slavonian orna-
ment on products of a non-ceramic industry must of course
diminish the value of ceramic parallels in tracing the origin of
the culture; the transference of the wood-carver’s procedure to
clay might well have happened independently in several locali-
ties. Yet we may well recall that analogous ornamental pro-
cesses were employed to produce similar patterns in the
Cyclades (where the influence of wood-work was felt early *)
and in the Copper Age ells of Bulgaria; in the latter region
some Slavonian shapes also recur.’ On the other hand, the
recognition of the wooden prototypes for the technique at
once rules out the perverse attempts of Schliz® and Schuch-
hardt7 to bring Slavonian ware into the Nordic province by
confusing the process employed in its decoration with the
Nordic system of “furrowing’.         >




t Wosinski, Ink. Ker., pl. xviit;          Bronze Age, p. 60.
Hoernes-Menghin, p. 275, 6-7.              4 Forsdyke, BM. Cat., pp. xxix, xxxii.
2 Note the legs of the table, fig. 117,    5 e.g. Real. ii, pl. 95,b
and the handle of the mug.                 6 PZ, il; Ps 120;
3 °Ed. ’Apy., 1899, pl. 1x; cf. Frank-     7 Alteuropa, p. 137.
fort, Studies, ii, p. 50, Dorpfeld, Alt-   * But, of course, furrowed ornament
Ithaka, B. 66a, 1, and Hall, Aegean in     does occur in some cases.
            212                THE ‘COPPER AGE’ IN HUNGARY
 Chrono-       The dating of Slavonian culture is very debatable. The cul-
     logy   ture is usually assigned to the Copper Age (our Period III).
            But the exact parallelism between the form of the carinated
            cups and Bohemian vases of Period IV suggests a later date.
            Moreover, the Slavonian culture seems to be continuous with
           that of the Hungarian urnfields of Period V; it is the Bijelo
           brdo culture that takes its place on the Save and the Drave,
           and the Middle Bronze Age Pannonian ware of 'Tolna County
           definitely carries on the Slavonian tradition.”
Affinities    In Slavonian ware diverse elements are apparently blended.
  Nordic Menghin,” like Schuchhardt, classes Slavonian ware in the
 elements Nordic group, and in view of the polygonal battle-axes asso-
            ciated with it, we must admit that a ‘Danordic’ element, come .
            from either Upper Austria or Moravia, lay at the base of the
            complex. On the other hand, the same author admits powerful
            influence from Hither Asia, and herein he is certainly right.
 Cypriote Myres 3 and Hoernes +‘ had long ago drawn attention to the
  parallels remarkable parallels to Slavonian motives that occur in the
            Bronze Age pottery of Cyprus. They cannot be accidental;
            though neither Cypriote colonists nor Cypriote pots need be
            postulated to explain the agreements, we must at least assume
            that trade-goods, perhaps textiles and wood-carvings, from
            that quarter had found their way to the mouth of the Drave.
  Relation It is highly suggestive that traces of the same influence can be
to copper- recognized along two lines that radiate from Syrmia in the
   bearing direction of metalliferous mountains. We have already noted
      areas
            the occurrence in the Mondsee pottery of Cypriote motives,
            and the Mondsee could have been reached up the Drave.
            We must now pursue similar vestiges up the Save and the
            Bosna, where regular extensions of Slavonian ware or an allied
            complex are to be detected.
 Carniola      Thesitesare the pile-dwelling of Briinndorf on Laibach Moor,’
 and Bos- C ungar on the Una,’ and Debelo brdo near Sarajevo at the head
        nia
            of the Bosna.? ‘The material here gathered is not identical with
            that from Syrmia, but partly supplements our knowledge of it.
            ™ Cf. p. 281 below.                         supplied by the Bikkégl near Wildon
            2 Urgeschichte, p. 764.                     (Styria) on the Mur, a hill settlement
            3 FRAT. 1898, p. 174.                       where furrowed pottery, reminiscent
            + Urgeschichte, p. 341; cf. Stocky,         of Laibach and the Mondsee, has been
            PZC., p. 120.                               found. The material is at Graz.
            5 They occur already on ‘red polished       7 The best account is still that of
            ware II’, but ring flasks, quite like the   Munro, Lake-dwellings, pp. 1609 ff.
            Syrmian specimen, belong to ‘red po-        8 WMBH. iv, p. 73.
            lished ware IV’, Gjerstad, p. 126, 12.      9 abid. iv, p. 38; V, p. 124; Vi, p. 129 ff.
            6 p. 127 above. A possible link is
                  THE ‘COPPER AGE’ IN HUNGARY                               213
   The classical Laibach pottery, that recurs also with Slavo- Laibach
nian ware at Zlok near Pécs, is a fine black polished ware. ware
Typical forms are amphorae with shoulder handles (Fig. 118), forms
ribbon-handled jugs rather similar to those from the Mondsee
or Michelsberg, but sometimes with an almost square body
(Fig. 119), bowls with cruciform feet (Fig. 120), and strange
lung-shaped vases.’ A notable feature of the Laibach pottery Tunnel
is the tunnel handle, a tube on the inside of the vase joining handles
two openings in the wall, that is here always horizontal as in
Malta (Fig. 121, nos. 1901, 1924). The same handle is found
at Debelo brdo.”
   The designs are executed partly by furrowing, partly in Ornament
fretwork, as in Slavonia, and the motifs—squares, stars, cross
in circles, &c.—are often the same. In Bosnia the curvilinear
motifs seem to be absent. At Laibach big round bosses were
also used decoratively.
   In addition to vases, clay figurines were manufactured at Figurines
Laibach. They generally represent a clothed personage.
   Stone celts were very rare and of poor workmanship at Lai- Stone
bach. At Debelo brdo there were only two, both very rough, celts rare
but polygonal battle-axes and finely worked flint arrow-heads
were found.3 Axes, picks, borers, and other implements of Battle-
horn and bone were, however, quite common at all sites.                            axes
   The comparative rarity of stone implements is to be ex- Copper
plained by the fact that the inhabitants of these stations already
possessed metal. The Bosnian sites are admittedly Bronze
Age, and at Laibach not only several flat celts of (7) copper,
but also the mould for an axe of ‘Copper Age’ type was
found. Axes of precisely the same type are quite common in Copper
the area occupied by Slavonian culture‘ and its extensions axes
towards Carniola and Bosnia,’ so we may identify their users
with the authors of the culture under discussion. The axes
sometimes occur in hoards, associated with flat celts (Fig. 113),°
and spread from the Danube valley into the South ‘Tyrol,’ and
Dalmatia.°>
   Munro assigns to the Laibach culture certain objects of Middle
much later type said to have been found in the Moor. ‘These Bronze Age
include a winged celt of type B3,*a dirk of Italian pattern like                   types
: The best illustration is in Reinerth,   ° WMBH.,/.c., pls.x1v,xv. Note that
Chron., pl. XU, 14.                       the celts have very mature expanding
2 WMBH. v (1897), p. 125, pl. L1, 8       blades. —
and Io.           3 WMBH. iv, p.54.       7 fA. vi (1912), p. 72, fig. 19.
4 Vjes. HAD. vi (1902), pp. 39, 60 ff.    8 For the ‘types’ see plates at end of
5 WMBH. xi, pp. 43, 54-                   volume.
              214               THE ‘COPPER         AGE’ IN HUNGARY
          Az, and aslashing sword of type C3. All these objects belong
          typologically to the Middle Bronze Age, and their presence
          seriously complicates the question of the date of the Laibach
          culture.
 Chrono-     All recent writers have assigned it to the Copper Age on the
     logy strength of Mondsee parallels, Menghin admitting a survival
          into the Early Bronze Age as possible." It is not so clear that
          the late-looking bronzes should really be ignored. If the Lai-
          bach pottery has analogues in the Mondsee (the Copper Age
          date of which is not beyond suspicion), it has no less real
          affinities with the Middle Bronze Age fretwork pottery of the
          South-West German Tumulus culture. And, despite the typo-
          logically early company in which the shaft-hole axes are found
          and the absence of tin from such as have been analysed, we
          shall see that a very similar form was being manufactured
          beyond the Tisza even in the Late Bronze Age. We therefore
          suspect that Period IV should be regarded as the upper limit
              for the mature Laibach culture, and that a survival to a much
              later date is by no means excluded.
 Affinities      In the constitution of the Laibach culture the south-eastern
              element, detectable         in Syrmia, is even           more    obvious;        for
 Cypriote Laibach pottery exhibits not only Cypriote motifs but also
pot shapes    Cypriote forms.’
   Eastern          The copper axe, too, is in a sense eastern, but, though there
 elements:    are a few specimens from Bulgaria,3 it is not an Aegean type.
   the axes   On the other hand, a rather similar axe was, as noted above,
            manufactured beyond the Tisza, but the real home of the type
            seems to lie beyond the Carpathians. G. Nagy‘ assigns it to
            a second wave of nomads from the steppes who had followed
            the axe-adze folk, and certainly there are very many similar
            axes in South Russia.> Curiously enough the closest parallel
            to the Laibach figurines comes from a barrow in the same
            area.
 Relations     In the Laibach culture relations with Italy and the Western
       with Mediterranean are also discernible. The late bronzes are un-
      Italy mistakable Italian types, but, as their context is suspect, they
            cannot be used as guides to the origin of the Laibach culture.
            A real link with the Adriatic region is, however, provided by
               t Urgeschichte, p. 764.                    morphic origin of these shapes        re-
               2 Most notably the lung-shaped as-         duces their significance.
               kos (Gjerstad, p. 146, 1), then the        3 Casson, Macedonia, p. 170.
               amphorae with shoulder handles (ibid.,     4 AE. xxxiii, p. 315.
               p. 136), and the jug (ibid., p. 146, 7),   5 Tallgren, Pontide, pp. 167 ff.
               all in black slip ware; but the skeuo-     © Jbid., fig. 66, 2-4 (Ul, Kuban).
                 THE ‘COPPER        AGE’ IN HUNGARY                           215
a vase standing on a cruciform foot from Vlaséa Jama in Istria."
And then the tunnel handles from Laibach and Debelo brdo
are exactly like those from Malta? and Sardinia.3 It is difficult
to say in this case in which direction the influence went. Istria
was certainly affected from the Danube basin, not vice versa.
But, though Menghin would derive the horizontal tunnel
handles of Laibach from the vertical ones of Baden and Stary
Zamek, it is difficult to regard them as older than the ‘neo-
lithic’ specimens from Malta, uncertain though the chronology
of the Maltese ‘Stone Age’ be. In any case it is clear that the
Save valley was already, as in Roman times, serving as a way
of intercourse between the west and the Danube valley; and
that Briinndorf was the forerunner of Nauportus.
   The substratum of the culture of Slavonia and Laibach is
doubtless Danubian, and in its formation an intense influence
from the Aegean had played a prominent part. But if Sla-
vonia were the focus from which that influence was transmitted
northwards to the Austrian Alps, we must none the less affirm
that a counter current in the opposite direction brought Nordic
battle-axes and presumably Nordic warriors * to the Save.
These must have played their part in opening up communica-
tions up-stream with Italy, while in Bosnia it was the advent
of this composite stock that put an end to the belated Danubian
culture of Butmir.
   We must thus imagine the plain occupied by a multiplicity
of distinct ethnic groups as the dryness of the Subboreal epoch
made itself felt; Danubian peasants, prospectors from beyond
the Alps, pastoralist nomads from the eastern steppes, and
warlike highland tribes under Nordic chiefs all jostled one
another. And there was yet another ethnic element.
 Ill.   THE AEGEAN        INFLUENCE         ON THE MIDDLE            DANUBE
Of far greater significance either than the intrusions of new
ethnic elements from the north-east and north-west, or even
t MAGW. xliii, p. 100.                     two areas is more than a mere case
2 Arch. \xvii, pl. xxv, 2; LAAA.    iii,   of convergence.’
pl. xvi, 7, 13, &c.                        5 Some skeletons were found in Lai-
SBP, xi. p. 102.                           bach Moor: according to von Luschan,
4 Stocky, who assigns a very, promi-       they were negroids;Ugo Vram classed
nent role to Laibach, writes, PZC.,        them as Eurafrican, while Schliz as-
p. 120: ‘the development (of the Lai-      signed the skulls to his Pfahlbautypus.
bach style) may perhaps be traced in       The indices were 72.8, 75.5, and 76.5
the Danube valley. In my opinion it        respectively: see Zupanit, ‘Les pre-
is the last outpost of the Bandkeramik,    miers Habitants des pays Yougoslaves’
but, if not genetically related to Cy-     in Rev. Anthr. 1919, p. 28.
prus, the similarity of patterns in the
            216               THE ‘COPPER        AGE’ IN HUNGARY
            the Oriental ‘influences’ on the Save and Drave, was the con-
          tinued percolation of the Danube valley proper by Aegean or
          Anatolian influences that now ultimately reached Bohemia.
          In Period III intercourse with the south-east was brisker than
          ever. It resulted in the course of the period in the foundation,
          along the great waterways, of a quite new series of cultures in
          which native Danubian II survivals and ill-defined ‘Nordic’
          intruders are entirely absorbed in elements derived from the
          victorious East, and in which the Bronze Age civilization of
          Central Europe is directly rooted.
The Tisza    The monuments of the new composite civilization are two
cultures of series of fresh settlements, founded            on the auriferous rivers
      therising in the Transylvanian goldfields—the Lower ‘Tisza, the
  Bronze Aranka, and the Maros—and on the approaches to the metal-
     Age liferous mountains of Slovakia.        Analogous settlements at
         favourable points on the Middle Danube are likewise to be
         expected, and can be demonstrated at one point at least—the so-
         called terramara of Gerjen in 'Tolna County.
Perjamos    The sites of these settlements all lie along the high terraces
         running parallel to the great rivers, at points raised above the
         level of any normal flood. The first group is represented by
         Perjamos on the Aranka * together with the first settlement at
         the Nagy Sanc of Pécska* on the Maros, the village and
         cemetery of Oszentivan near the confluence of the Maros and
         the Tisza,3 and the graves of O Beba.* The type stations of
  Toszeg the second group are the lowest level at Tdészeg near Szolnok,5
         the newly discovered site at Nagy Rev a little farther south,
         together with a few ill-explored stations farther north such as
         Tiszafiired and Szihalom in County Borsod,°’ and very probably
         Vadasz in Abauj.7
 Pottery    The pottery from both groups is very similar in technique
         and ornamentation. The standard ware is always slipped and
         polished save in a class of large vessels, the lower half of which
         is left rough or even roughened intentionally as in the Jaispitz
         ware of Moravia.      Its colour is either a sooty black or a
            t Marton Roska, ‘Fouilles aux rem-        Felentés a Magyar Nemezeti Muzeum
            parts de Perjamos’, reprinted from         1907 évi, p. 178. Dr. Marton has
            Féldrajzi Kézlemények, xxxix.             kindly supplemented this with much
            2 Dolgozatok, iii (1912), pp. 1 ff.       fresh information verbally.
            3 Dolgozatok, 1927, pp. 94 ff.; 1928,     6 CIA. 1877, ‘Résultats généraux’,
            pp. 148-243.                              pp. 37-8.
            4 AE. xxiv, pp. 85 f.; AfA. xv (1917),    7 ‘There is an amphora like the Tészeg
            p. 273 (von Miské), Dolgozatok, 1927,     form 7 from here in the Poprad Mu-
            p. 83.                                    seum.
            5 'The best account yet published is in
                  THE ‘COPPER AGE’ IN HUNGARY                              217
reddish orange according to the firing; often the surface is
mottled red and black. Decoration, when present, is practi-
cally confined to an incised or grooved line round the shoulder
from which hang fillets, grooved or in relief, but large jars are
encircled with plastic rope ornaments. Small nipples, generally
in pairs, are not uncommon in the Tészeg group, while at
Perjamos the grooved lines are sometimes set off by dots.
Exceptionally the vases are incised—at Perjamos with hatched
arcs,’ at ‘['észeg with crosses in panels.2 One class of dishes
from Nagy Rév bears a cross, painted in dark brown, on the
bottom. Inside an urn from Oszentivan was a swastika in
relief.3
    In each group of settlements the commonest vase was a Forms
small jug with a long neck, generally separated from the globu-
lar body by a marked shoulder. The typical Perjamos jug is Jugs
provided with two handles, starting from the rim, and so is
hour-glass shaped (Fig. 122); the base is either concave or
pointed. At Toszeg and Nagy Rév there is only one handle,
attached half way down the neck (Fig. 124). Many of the jugs
in the 'Tdészeg group are provided with a round pedestal or a
curious square base to stand upon (shown inverted in Fig. 123).
An important feature is the duplication of the neck in some Double-
specimens (Fig. 125).!                                            necked
    Other forms shade into insignificance beside the super- flasks
abundance of small jugs found at each site. None the less the
following shapes may be noticed:
 1. Lids, either flat with a loop on the top> or conical with a
     button handle (Fig. 126 a)—common to both groups.
2. Rough vase-stands with a flat base and low cylindrical walls
     perforated with large holes °—common to both groups.
3. Wide dishes with a small handle under the broad rim—
     Perjamos (Fig. 126 d).
4. Conical dishes with flat projections, serving as handles, on
     a level with the rim—Nagy Rév.
5. Very large jars with flaring trumpet necks, and handles on
    the shoulder—Oszentivan (Fig. 127).
6. Ovoid amphorae with small handles on the belly, ornamented
   by roughening the lower part of the belly—Toszeg.
7, A few globular or carinated pots (? pyxides) were found in
t ‘Perjamos’, figs. 22 and 42.             5 ‘Perjamos’, fig. 30.
2 Felentés, l.c., fig. 25, 6.          6 Jbid., fig. 43 (wrongly described as a
3 Dolgozatok, 1928, figs. 22, 3 and __ lid).
67, I.                                     7 WPZ. xv (1928), p. 22.
4 AE. xxix (1909), p. 156 f.
   3443                               Ff
         218              THE ‘COPPER        AGE’ IN HUNGARY
             the lowest levels at Tészeg. Dr. Marton rightly compares
             them to ‘neolithic’ (Biikk) types, but of course similar forms
             were current at Troy in the Bronze Age.
         8. Grave 10 at Oszentivan contained a pedestalled bow] of the
             usual Danubian II type and degenerate Polgar beakers (Fig.
             126 b-c)’—precious links with the older civilization of the
             region.
  Imple-    Stone implements were still used by the inhabitants of these
   ments stations.   The lowest levels at Tészeg have yielded several
         celts, including one or two of shoe-last type”; at Perjamos celts
         were rarer. In addition, all sites yielded scrapers, knives, and
         sickle-teeth of flint. Bone was used for the manufacture of
         chisels, awls, and very neat needles.            Picks and hammers         of
           deers’ horn were particularly plentiful everywhere.
 Bronzes      As weapons we must class several stone hammer-axes from
           Perjamos—some with a distinct knob head and expanding blade?
           —and simpler bored axes from Tészeg. Apart from shapeless
           scraps, metal has only been found at Perjamos and Pécska.
     Ingot The finds include hollow gold disks, perforated for sewing on
   torques garments,‘ (?) bronze pins of type Ar, and an ‘ingot torque’
           (Fig. 128). This most important object was unearthed in the
           upper stratum at Perjamos.5
Graves of     If the settlements so far explored are poor in metal, all the
  O Beba more importance attaches to the graves of O Beba, if they
           really belong to this epoch. In this cemetery articles of impor-
    Knot- tation and exportation were significantly juxtaposed. Mediter-
   headed ranean shells (Pectunculus and Cardium), a stone ring, perhaps
      pins knot-headed pins of bronze (type A1), and ingot torques were
           associated with gold ear-rings with flattened ends, a gold disk
           with a punctured geometric pattern, and perforated boars’ tusks.
 Cypriote     To the same cultural complex we should assign a hoard of
  daggers Cypriote daggers discovered at Csorvas near Arad, as well as
           other daggers of the same family from O Szény on the Danube
           in County Komarom,° Stillfried on the March, and Switzer-
           land. So too certain thin gold disks, designed for sewing on
           garments, from Hungary and Lower Austria,’ reveal Oriental
           influence. ‘They are ornamented with three conical bosses.
           The hammered cones are to be regarded as barbaric versions
           of the coiled wire cones soldered on to rings from ‘proto-
         * Dolgozatok, 1927, p. 96. Another        4 Dolgozatok, 1912, fig. 7.
         peculiarity of this grave was that the   ‘5 op. cit., fig. 33, 4.
         skeleton lay on its stomach.              6 Antiquity, 1927, p. 88 and fig. d:
         > felentés, p. 178.                       Pulszky, Rezkor, p. 63.
         3 ‘Perjamos’, fig. 32.                    7 Hampel, pl. xivit.
          Fic. 122.   Perjamos jugs, Oszentivan.     University Museum, Szeged.       33;




Fic. 123. Square-footed pot,                                     Fic. 125.
                                                                éaree  A AeTwo-necked
                                                                                Nemzeli jug.
                                                                                         NE
Toszeg A. AM.NemzetiM. 4

                                     Fic. 124. Tdészeg A jug.
                                       AM. Nemzeti M. 2




                a          b          é              d                      e
          Fic. 126. Lids, dishes and Polgar forms from Oszentivan.      University
                                      Museum, Szeged.    75




                               ome



          Fic. 127.   Pithos from Oszentivan.      University Museum, Szeged.     7
                   THE ‘COPPER AGE’ IN HUNGARY                               219
 historic’ graves at Ur. They reveal at the same time the source
 of a motive which was later taken over from the goldsmith by
 the potter.
    The habitations of the Early Bronze Age folk of the Tisza Dwellings
valley appear to fall into two classes. At Perjamos and Oszen-
 tivan, though two or three layers of burnt clay-plaster,' hearths,
 and a few irregular groups of post-holes were identified,
 neither Dr. Roska nor Dr. Banner succeeded in plotting the




       Fic. 128.   Cypriote dagger, Csorvas, 4, and ingot torque, Gata, 4
                                 After Antiquity.


 outline of any regular house on the ground level.” On the
 other hand, they found bell-shaped pits cut, in the léss, two ‘Pit-
 or three metres deep, and one or two metres in diameter at dwellings’
 the base, like those illustrated in Fig. 140. These contained
 sherds, including complete vases, loom weights, implements,
 and kitchen refuse. The mouth of one such pit was encircled
 with post-holes. Dr. Roska interprets the bell-shaped excava-
 tions as winter dwellings, but the author prefers to regard
 them as silos; it is impossible to understand how any one
 could sleep in such a confined space.
    At Tészeg and Nagy Rév, as probably at Pécska, the houses Rectangu-
                                                                                    lar houses
 t Forming adepositsome6o0cm.deep.        burnt clay Roska infers that the houses
 2 From the shape of the layers of        at Perjamos were oval.
         220               THE ‘COPPER        AGE’ IN HUNGARY
           were all admittedly on the ground level. They were roughly
           rectangular structures reminiscent of the megaron type.
              It is possible that Tészeg, Nagy Rév, and Perjamos were
           protected, even at this date, by moats. Recent investigations,
           however, suggest that the ‘ditches’ at Tészeg were really the
           arms of an old brook on the delta of which the village would
           have been planted.
   Graves     The only graves yet identified as certainly belonging to the
           people under discussion are those of Oszentivan. Here burial
           in the contracted posture in trench-graves was the rule, the
           corpse generally lying on its right side. The same rite was
           observed at O Beba, but the rarity of ceramic remains makes
           the attribution of the burials to the Perjamos culture a little
           dubious.’
              The dwellers along the Tisza possessed domestic animals,
           especially swine, and cultivated grains. Fish and mussels
           played a prominent part in their diet. They also hunted game,
           including the red deer and the wild boar. The abundant re-
           mains of these forest animals show that the plain on both
           banks of the Tisza was still wooded even in the Subboreal
           era. ‘The presence of considerable forests must have been one
           factor in dictating the choice of river banks and the shores of
           lagoons as sites for habitation. At the same time the distribu-
           tion of the settlements reveals clearly enough the importance
           of trade to their inhabitants.
  Chrono-     The dating of the Perj4amos culture to the latter half of
      logy Period III and the beginning of IV rests, in the first place, on
           typological considerations suggested by the Early Bronze Age
           ingot torque from the upper levels. It is confirmed by the
           whole stratigraphy of the mound of Tészeg, which we shall
           describe in Chapter XIV, and by the connexion with the Lengyel
           culture so obvious at Oszentivan.
Danubian      The civilization revealed in these settlements along the Tisza
 survivals and the Maros is in one sense a continuation of the old Danu-
           bian II culture which, as we saw, lasted in this region into
           Period III. So, for instance, the square base of the Tészeg jug
           is just a development of the cruciform foot of Obessenyé.
           The most conclusive proof of the continuity of culture is, how-
           ever, the pedestalled bowl from Oszentivan. Anticipations of
           Perjamos forms in Danubian II deposits (jugs of type G)
           point the same way.
         « It is in any case certain that graves   Miské has confused the furniture ac-
         of later date occurred at the site; von   companying the various interments.
                 THE ‘COPPER AGE’ IN HUNGARY                                221
  But the fundamental change in the form and technique of Trojan
the pottery indicates the victorious impact of a new influence. parallels
The ceramic evidence marks the new element unambiguously
as Anatolian. The hour-glass Perjamos jug is a characteristic
Trojan form.’ No less essentially Anatolian are the two-necked
flasks from Tészeg.? The pointéd bases are again at home in
Cyprus and Anatolia.3 With the supports, type 2, we may
compare Schliemann Sammlung no. 2441; with the jar of
Fig. 127, no. 2310; with the Tészeg jugs, pithoi like no. 2491.
So, too, the system of ornamentation employed both at Perjamos
and ‘Tdészeg is in its essence Hubert Schmidt’s ‘neck and
shoulder’ style from Troy II.4 And the cross, painted on the
base of the Nagy Rév dishes, is a favourite Trojan device and
there, too, is sometimes painted in dark brown (? varnish) on
buff clay> on the bottom of dishes (but inside). The fabric of
the Tisza wares, with their variations in tint from black to red
and mottling, is no less characteristic of Anatolian ceramics.
   The bronze objects, either certainly imported, as the Cy- Astatic
priote daggers from Csorvas, or of West Asiatic type, like the bronzes
ingot torque from Perjamos and the pins and ear-rings from
O Beba, are the natural complements to these ceramic finds.
Indeed, so intensive was the Anatolian influence all along the
Tisza, that one might be tempted to ascribe the foundation of
the new villages to actual settlements of Asiatic traders and
metallurgists among the native population. In view of the
evident relations with the east enumerated in section I of this
chapter and the importance of allied forms in the developed
Bronze Age, we must indeed recognize other elements. But
there can be no doubt that the Hungarian Bronze Age was
inspired primarily by Western Anatolia and the Aegean.
   That the culture just described was not confined to the Gerjen
Tisza basin is proved by a stray jug with square pedestalled
foot of Tészeg type found by Wosinski deep down in the
mound of Gerjen.° The settlement lies on the bank of the
: SS., no. 1880 is the most exact        combined with a shoulder nipple pre-
parallel.                                cisely in the Tészeg style. The form
2 Such flasks are very common both       is that of our fig. 123.
at Troy and in Cyprus; but there is a    5 SS., nos. 1902, ff. Cf. Rey, Macé-
specimen from Tsangli VI (Thessaly,      doine, pl. xxv, 5 for a more exact
Period III) (W. & T-., fig. 59,c) even   parallel.
more like that illustrated here. Cf.     6-TT., p. 423 and pl. civ, 16. ‘The
also Gjerstad, p. 98, 12.                vessel was found at a depth of 1.70 m.,
3 Gjerstad, p. 111, Jug 1-2.             the lowest point reached by the trench
4 A very striking instance is seen in    in question.
SS. 2347, where the ornamentation is
222               THE    ‘COPPER AGE’ IN HUNGARY
Danube north-east of Szekszard, and seems to have resembled
Tészeg and Pécska in its location and structure; but unfor-
tunately the good father paid little attention to stratification or
to unornamented sherds. A double-necked flask has also been
found in Tolna County,’ and it may be suspected that one
cemetery at Lengyel belongs to this period.
   Though the evidence is still incomplete, sherds of Tdszeg
ware from Lonté (Hont County)? suggest that the Tdszeg—
Perjamos culture had reached the copper-bearing mountains
of Slovakia.3 We must now see how it spread to the stanni-
ferous region of Bohemia.
* Wosinski, Ink. Ker., pl. L; AE. xix,   Slovakia is only intelligible on the as-
p. 158, fig. 7.                          sumption that copper was being mined
2 In the City Museum, Bratislava,        there. One was actually found at
nos. 720-1.                              Neusohl (Bati Bystrica), AE. xxxiii,
3 The distribution of the axe-adzes in   Pp. 407.
                                     XII
                  THE EARLY              BRONZE          AGE
   ae extension of the current just described, along ways
     which were already being opened up towards the end of
Period II, resulted in the rise of the first independent bronze-
using civilization in continental Europe; perhaps in the begin-
ning of the Bronze Age sensu stricto itself. In Northern Bohemia
open léss patches extend right to the foot of the stanniferous
mountains, and the streams flowing through them may well
have carried alluvial tin in ancient times.t And here in Bo-
hemia the first centre of the Early Bronze Age culture was to
arise. Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia had already been satu-
rated with foreign elements—Nordic, Corded Ware, and Bell-
beaker folk before the end of Period III. The fusion of these
extraneous elements with the old Danubian substratum under
the reinforced influence from the south-east led to the rise of
a new composite culture along the main trade routes.
   The resultant complex forms the immediate prelude to the Proto-.
Aunjetitz culture of the Early Bronze Age and has, therefore, Aunjetitz
been appropriately christened the proto-Aunjetitz culture. A Marsch-
local variant of it, in which the Corded Ware element is par- wits
ticularly prominent, is the Marschwitz culture of Silesia and culture
the adjacent parts of Bohemia. The proto-Aunjetitz culture is Burial
represented by extensive cemeteries in Silesia, Thuringia, Bo- rites
hemia, and Moravia. The dead were almost always buried *
in the contracted attitude; in some few cases the grave was
surmounted by a barrow; 3 exceptionally in Silesia skulls were
interred alone apart from the trunk,‘ as at Ofnet in epipalaeo-
lithic times and in chalcolithic graves in Bulgaria. In Bohemia
a relatively large number of the skulls from proto-Aunjetitz
graves have been trepanned.*> The skulls are dolichocephalic,
but their conformation suggests to Schliz an admixture of
Bell-beaker folk in the population.
   Metal grave-goods were still extremely rare and were limited Metal
to simple pins, awls, and thin wire rings or bracelets which,
none the less, at times contain a small percentage                       of tin.®
t Birkner in MAGW.    lvii (1927), pp.     3 Real. ii, p. 70.
(156) f.                                   4 SV. vii, p. 72 and fig. 279.
2 Though isolated cremations are re-       5 PA. xxx, pp. 78 ff.: WPZ. ii, p. 67.
ported from North Bohemia (Real. i,        ° 6 per cent at Marschwitz, SV. iii,
p. 262).                                   p. 38: cf. ZfA. i, p. 185. Gold is rare.
            224                     THE    EARLY        BRONZE    AGE
            Besides these simple types graves at Velka Ves in Bohemia’
            and Opatovice in Moravia” contained knot-headed pins (A1)
            of true bronze. Spiral pendants of gold occur, but rarely. On
            the other hand, implements of stone are still common. In the
   Battle- Marschwitz graves of Silesia we find very fine stone hammer-
       axes axes with a semicircular cross-section and overhanging butt-
            end (Fig. 129 a), plainly a contribution from the Corded Ware
            culture. The same type of axe is met in the tumuli of East
            Moravia; and at Hissarlik,t while analogous types are spread
      Flint all over Russia. In Silesia good flint daggers (Fig. 129b),
   daggers imitating the Ciempozuelos type, and stone wrist-guards, as in
    Wrist- Bell-beaker graves, were also deposited with the corpses. Wrist-
    guards guards also occur in early graves in Bavaria, but here already
            with triangular daggers.5 ‘The corresponding graves in Bohe-
Flint celts mia and Moravia contain in general only flint celts of Nordic
            type,° horn axes with a rectangular shaft-hole, atypical flint
             knives, and arrow-heads of bone or flint.
  Pottery      All the tombs of this group contain an abundant ceramic
            furniture. The most characteristic and widely distributed
  _ Forms   form is the pouched jug and the deep cup formed on the same
            pattern (Fig. 135).7. The rim is regularly everted. Common,
            too, is a three-footed bowl;° it might be compared to the form
            sometimes associated with bell beakers, but the latter type never
            has three feet. The Marschwitz graves of Silesia contain in
            addition flower-pot and ledge-handled beakers of Lower Oder
            types like Fig. 94. In Bohemia and Moravia open bowls with
            wide brims drawn out into four points and with handles below
            the brim are not uncommon (cf. Fig. 142).
Ornament       Proto-Aunjetitz pottery is relatively rough, but often shows
            simple linear ornamentation. The distinction between Marsch-
            witz pottery in the narrower sense and proto-Aunjetitz” is
            only one of degeneration; for in the former ware (in Silesia
            and more rarely in Bohemia") the designs are formed by the
            impression of a cord. They include chevron patterns (Fig.
            135). Horizontal bands and hanging fillets (sometimes com-
            bined with shoulder warts) are more generally characteristic
             *Schranil, Studie, p. ot.                   groove like the Aunjetitz vases of fig.
             > Real. ii, p. 71.                          139. Cf. WPZ. iii, p. 35, 1-3.
             3 Cervinka, Mor. St., pp. 152 ff., figs.    *Stocky, BAP., pl. xtix, 3; WPZ.
             84, 89, 90.                                 iii, p. 36, fig. 6, 7.
             4 Man. XXiv (1924), 51.                     IWFZ., lcs, fet, 6:
             ’MAGW. liv, p. 113 and fig. ro.                Cf. Winckler, Mannus, Biblio.      22
             ‘ PA. XXXll, Pp. 213, perhaps already       pp. 135 f.                                 ;
            Aunjetitz.                                   * Stocky, op. cit., xlvii, 1 and 5.
             7In Moravia they show a shoulder
                       THE EARLY          BRONZE        AGE                     225
of proto-Aunjetitz ware.’ Dr. Seger has recently published?
a very handsome jug from Silesia with ornamentation radiating
from the base in the style of some Bell-beaker decoration.
   The position of the settlements and the extensive cemeteries                        Summary
suggests higher agriculture combined with fairly regular trade.
    War’ was obviously not infrequent.
   The dead were buried with ornaments and weapons.
  ‘Though metal was not altogether scarce it was almost cer-
tainly not worked within the groups, but obtained by barter.
The local medicine-men could successfully perform the opera-
tion of trepannation.




                          Hic) 129.

     Battle-axe and flint dagger from Marschwitz graves,
                    Silesia, after Seger. 4




   Flint and stone celts remain the characteristic tools, but horn
implements, including perforated axes, are plentiful.
   The bow, the dagger, and the battle-axe alike are used as
weapons.
   Rings, bracelets, and pins of copper or bronze and rare gold
trinkets are worn as ornaments.
   These traits reveal the constitution of the culture. The flint Origin
celts afford a certain link with the Nordic groups and some
ceramic types may be connected with the Bernburg series.’
Even more obvious is the affiliation with the Battle-axe cul-
tures attested by the weapons and confirmed in some areas by
the decoration of the pottery and the occurrence of Lower
Oder vase forms. The daggers and the bracers have been taken
« Stocky, BAP. xlvii. 2, xlviii. 9.           PA. xxxiv (1925), p. 326, fig. 136.
2 Altschl. i (1926), pp. 214f. and pl.        3 Niklassen, AST. xiii; Winckler, in
xxxilI. Seger’s dating is confirmed by        Mannus-Bibl. 22, pl. 1x; Cerny, WPZ.
the discovery of a similarly decorated        v, pp. 52 f.; these authors exaggerate
cup in a grave at Sany near Podebrad,         the N ordic elements.
  3443                                   Gg
          226                  THE   EARLY      BRONZE     AGE
          over from the Bell-beaker folk. Their influence is likewise
          seen in the decoration of a few isolated vases.
             The south-eastern element, however, is not only revealed in
          the gold pendants and Cypriote ‘knot-headed’ pins, but abso-
          lutely dominates the pottery. The curious pouch-shaped jug
          which characterizes our culture and for which various unlikely
          derivations have been proposed, becomes intelligible as soon
          as the pottery from Tészeg I be taken into account; there we
          get in a still more classic shape the everted lip, the little ring
          handle, the elongated form, and the decorative band with hang-
          ing fillets encircling the neck. The shallower type of pouched
          mug can be exactly paralleled at Oszentivan as noted on p. 217.
          No less distinctive of the same settlement is the ruffling of the
          lower surface observable on some proto-Aunjetitz vases. The
          dishes with handles under the rim again have parallels at Per-
          jamos and Oszentivan (Fig. 126 d), while the variety with a
          hollow foot may be regarded as a survival from Danubian IJ,
          such as was observed at the last-named site.
             The proto-Aunjetitz culture is thus a complex hybrid; Nor-
          dic, Corded Ware, Bell-beaker, Danubian, and south-eastern
          elements were blended in it; it will be easier to estimate their
          relative importance when its younger development and con-
          tinuation, the Aunjetitz culture proper, has been described.

                            I. THE AUNJETITZ          CULTURE
          In the Early Bronze Age, on the basis of the proto-Aunjetitz
          culture just described, several local groups arose, clustering
          in the main along the trade routes connecting the amber de-
          posits of Jutland with the Adriatic and Upper Italy, and the
          Bohemian tin with Slovakian copper lodes. ‘The most original
          and distinctive of these groups is the Aunjetitz' culture itself
          which appears in a pure form in Bohemia, with colonies in
          Silesia and Thuringia, and in Moravia and Lower Austria,
          in a variant in which the Bohemian influence reacted on a
          proto-Aunjetitz substratum. In these regions the Aunjetitz
          culture developed peaceably for a long time. It was the work
          of a race of traders, industrialists, and agriculturalists who had
          appropriated the secrets of metallurgy taught by Bell-beaker
Settle-   folk and Trojan explorers. Their settlements are generally
 ments    situated in the valleys, sometimes on hills.» The huts were
          « So called after
                         alarge cemeterysouth    + Sarka, Slanska Hora, Hradek near
          of Prague. Czech: Unétice.             Caslau; Seger, Real. i, p. 2623 ii; 72.
                        THE EARLY        BRONZE     AGE                      227
sometimes round ‘pit-dwellings’, at other times rectangular
houses."
   The dwellings of the departed are far better known. The Burials
graves constitute regular cemeteries, comprising in one case
ninety-nine graves. ‘The corpse was normally interred in the
contracted attitude facing southwards, on the right side, often
protected by slabs of stone. One grave at Vepiek in Bohemia,? Pithos
                                                                                    Burials




               Fic. 131.    Bronze Axe, Kamyk, after Schranil.    4

and possibly one from Leuna near Merseburg in Thuringia,}
were burials in jars as at Yortan, Orchomenos, and El Argar.
Multiple intermentsand even megalithic cists are not unknown. Survival
   The Aunjetitz population were an essentially bronze-using of stone
people, yet the settlements yield many implements (even celts)
of stone, bone, and horn. Characteristic are the hammer-
stones ‘ with a groove for binding thongs, a type which is met in
ancient mines in the Iberian peninsula, Britain, and elsewhere °
(Fig. 130).
1 PA. xxxili, p. 335-                      4 e.g. Mor. Star., fig. 24.
2 Real. i, p. 262; Schranil, Bohmen,       5 Cf. Evans, Stone implements of Great
Pp. 93-                    3 M. Halle.    Britain, p. 209.
Fic. 132. Shield and disk-shaped ornaments and racquet pin from Punitz and
                              Stary Bydzov. 4
                       THE EARLY         BRONZE     AGE                         229
  Metal at this stage was always cast, and only finished off by Metal-
hammering when cold. The moulds were often quite elabo- lurgy
rate, consisting of two or even four distinct parts. Perhaps, too,
the cire perdue process was already in use.’
   Of metal tools the graves and settlements contain only flat Tool and
or flanged celts and chisels, triangular knife-daggers, and quad- weapons
rangular awls. In the hoards, celts of Italian pattern with a
nick in the butt and bronze-hilted daggers are also met.
   Hammer-axes        of bronze with a knobbed butt, related to
Hungarian types of Period V, were found in two Bohemian
graves (Fig. 131); * and a Hungarian axe of type B was found
in a late grave at Retz in Lower Austria.3




         Fic. 133.   Amber necklace, &c., Aunjetitz.    a,c, d,e4; b%

   Metal was more freely used for ornaments. The graves                                Orna-
contain a wealth of pins (of which Az is the most characteris-                         ments
tic), bracelets, torques, ear-rings, plaques,* and even chains.
Gold is now by no means rare, and amber is common in Bo-
hemia and Silesia but exceptional in Moravia.
   Necklaces of triple strings of amber beads are specially                            Amber
characteristic. The same type of centre-piece as that shown
in Fig. 133 is met in Danish passage-graves, suggesting that
the pattern at least was invented in Denmark, if the necklaces
were not actually exported ready made. In addition, bronze
copies of Cardium shells, small unsegmented beads of glass*
paste, boars’ tusks, Dentalium tubes, and bone or (?) ivory disks
were sometimes worn.
t Real. ii, p. 155.                       los (Schranil, pls. 1v. 1, and vil. 1), or
2 Schranil, Studie, fig. 12, 2 (Kamyk)    shield-shaped (Seger, Altschl. i. 1924,
and 4 (Slanska Hora); Béhmen, pl.         pp. 76 f.).
MXIT                                      5 Segmented beads of this material
3 MAGW. lvii, p. 203.                     have been found in one Polish grave,
  -Disk-shaped with a central ompha-      Koztowski. Bronzu, p. 27.
          230                   THE    EARLY        BRONZE    AGE
             The bronzes’ provide a basis for the division of the period
          into at least two phases; while the daggers found in graves
          show no development and the only change in the celts is the
          formation of a rudimentary stop ridge in late specimens, the
   Pins   pins and bracelets exhibit much greater variety. The knot-
          headed pin, At, lasts throughout the period, its later forms
          being represented by Bi with separate spirals. The distinctive
          pin that at once marks any deposit where it occurs as Aunje-
          titz is Az, the result, as Lissauer? says, of forming the knot-
          headed Cypriote pin by casting in a mould. Equally early are
          bulb-headed pins with vertical perforation through the head,
          A4, also imitated in Danish passage-graves, but possibly of
          Hungarian origin; later specimens have hollow and decorated
          heads and often a twisted rectangular shaft.3                 Early, too, are
          those with a simple ring head—a cast variant of Ar. To a
          rather later phase in Bohemia belong the various types with a
          wide flattened head, A5, A6, and Ba, derived from a variant of
          Ao in which the head has been hammered out flat (Cr).
            All these pins are provided with an eyelet, loop, or tube,
          through which a thread was probably passed in order to keep
          them in place on the woollen or linen garments they were
          designed to fasten. A bronze chain replaces this thread in
  Fibulae some late examples.‘     This striving for security seems ulti-
          mately to have led to the invention, or at least the adoption, of
          the safety pin; two very primitive violin-bow fibulae have been
          found in ‘Aunjetitz’ graves at Gemeinlebarn in Lower Austria,°
          and a fragment has recently come to light in a similar grave in
          Bohemia.
Bracelets    Wire bracelets of type A4 go back, like the torques A1, to
          the proto-Aunjetitz phase.           Of the ‘manchette’          armlets, A2,
          Schranil® considers the smooth type the older; those with
          horizontal ribs are later. Massive penannular bangles, A3, are
          commoner in the northern outposts than in the central region.
             Professor Kossinna’s7 attempt to base a chronology on the
          percentage of tin employed has not led to convincing results;
          in areas remote from the centre of tin production typologically
          t The ‘types’ referred to here and'in_     p. 75.
          the subsequent pages are illustrated       4 e.g. SV. iv, p. 12, fig. 6 (Gandau in
          on plates at the end of the book.          Silesia); Schranil, Studie, pl. v, 8
          2 ZfE. xxxix, p. 791; Kossinna claims      (Obora in Bohemia); cf. Real. i, p. 264.
          it as an imitation of the bone pins of     5 Schranil, Béhmen, p. tot.
          identical form found in Danish jpas-       6 Studie, p. 9.
          sage-graves; ZfE. xxxiv (1902), p. 197.    7 ZfE. 1902, p. 161; Mannus, iii, pp.
          3 Schranil, J. c.; cf. von Richthofen,     316 ff.; cf. Schranil, Studie, p. 93.
                      THE EARLY         BRONZE    AGE                     231
late objects are found to be very poor in tin.’ It is, however, White
likely that the objects of ‘white metal’—an alloy of copper metal
with as much as 17 per cent. of tin—which were manufactured
on a large scale in Bohemia are generally later than those con-
taining Io per cent. of tin or less.
   Aunjetitz pottery is generally dark-faced or mottled, slipped, Pottery
and polished. ‘The most common and distinctive funerary form Forms:
is the carinated mug with the handle springing from the keel. the mug
The earlier forms are roughly biconical, but the neck is often
separated from the body by a distinct shoulder groove, a feature
characteristic of Aunjetitz ware in general (Figs. 137, 138),
and especially prevalent in the easterly groups. The rim is




                  Fic. 134. Manchette armlet (type Az). 4
                   a, Berelice (Mor.); 6, Noutonice (Boh.).

 always everted, and the base shows a dimple or low omphalos
 (Fig. 136a). This type of mug is plainly just an angular version
 of the pouched jug of proto-Aunjetitz type. At the same time
 precise parallels in Toészeg Br (where the shoulder groove is
 also common) and in Slavonia (Fig. 115) show that the evolu-
 tion did not take place without southern stimulus.
    Then in the mature Aunjetitz phase the original body is
 entirely suppressed, leaving the classical form shown in Fig.
 136b. This second stage in the evolution of the Aunjetitz mug
 was first completed in Bohemia. In peripheral regions like Mo-
 ravia biconical and even globular forms, like Fig. 137a (a type
 also known in Tészeg B), lingered on much longer; the Bo-
 hemian form only filtered in gradually as a result of trade, to
 be modified in the conformation of the rim in the south.
« In Silesia a winged celt contained     cent. Cu. (SV. 1897, pp. 349 f.); an
92 per cent. Cu., no Sn., and only       arm cylinder from Stollhof in Lower
0-3 per cent. Sb.; and a flanged celt    Austria was made of pure copper
with rudimentary stop-ridge, 98-6 per    (Montelius, AfA. 1899, p. 474).
            232                    THE   EARLY       BRONZE    AGE
              Fig. 137d shows another type of mug with cylindrical body
            and three little feet—a Troadic feature !—regularly used in
            Moravian, Austrian, and Slovakian cemeteries.
  ‘Stone’    The Aunjetitz cemeteries further yield an interesting series
    types of squat pots ' which Reinecke * long ago proposed to connect
          with Aegean stone vases. The imitation of stone work is par-
          ticularly obvious in the cylindrical pyxis with undercut rim,
          and the round bowl from Charvaty near Olomouc shown in
          Fig. 137 b-c.3
   Dishes    The dishes, often found in graves, generally have broad rims
          just under which a loop handle is often attached, precisely as
          at Perjamos and in Tészeg B (cf. Fig. 126d). A more unusual
          form stands on a low pedestal,* and is evidently due to a sur-
