were food producers. No grains have so far been studied, but ture
saddle querns have been reported from Erésd and prove the
existence of some sort of agriculture. The flint saws, already
mentioned, were doubtless mounted as sickle-teeth as in Egypt
and elsewhere. The animal bones from Priesterhiigel reveal the Animals
presence of domestic cattle (apparently related to the Primi-
genius stock), sheep (possibly ‘mouflon’), swine, and the Bezoar
goat (Capra aegagrus).
   Animals of the chase included stag (Cervus elaphus), roe deer
(Capreolus), chamoix (Rupicapra), wild boars, bears, lynxes,
foxes, wolves, and wild cats.
   Numerous round or pyramidal lumps of baked clay, care- Weaving
fully perforated, may have served as loom weights just as small
clay disks are usually described as spindle-whorls.
   No graves or skeletal remains have been found in connexion Graves
with any of the twenty-six stations along the Upper Alt.
   Settlements with painted pottery of the Erésd type cluster Distribu-
thickly along the Upper Alt above the Kronstadt elbow and tion, Alt
                                                                                 Valley
x Laszlé, Dacia, i, p. 27, considers that it is just an accident that the five
stamps all lay in the bottom stratum.
            104                      PAINTED POTTERY
            along the Feketeitigy (Schwarzbach) that flows in about this
            point. The concentration of settlement in these two valleys is
            doubtless to be explained by the presence here of strips of
            elevated and open léss country. Otherwise, apart from copper
            lodes at the source of the Alt, there is no particular attraction
            in this region unless it be the sulphur springs. The upper
            reaches, where alone settlement is attested, do not even lead
            anywhere.                                                 ;
               Physiographically the two valleys in question are quite as
            closely related to the léss and black-earth region of Moldavia
Extension   and Bukowina as to the Middle or Lower Danube Valley. One
 to Maros   unmistakable outpost of the same civilization has, however, been
           detected farther west at Marosvasarhely (Map III, E) on the
           Upper Maros. Two prehistoric huts, excavated on the outskirts
           of the modern town, yielded characteristic ladle-handles,
           painted in Erésd style, beakers similar to those from Oltszem, a
            fragmentary female figurine, a stone adze of the usual pattern,
           a copper awl, and obsidian chips.t The huts were excavated in
           the soil to a depth of 1-40 m. On the very floor of one was
           found a bowl decorated with a very regular key pattern, left
           reserved between fine incised cross-hatchings (negative Bukk
           ware). Intermediate links between the Maros and the Alt
            remain to be discovered.
  Further      Though the Upper Maros at present constitutes the western-
 parallels most outpost of the Erésd culture proper, genuine painted
            pottery and other objects, often reminiscent of the Alt settle-
            ments, are met much farther west. The facts may be summar-
            ized briefly. Down the Maros we meet painted sherds at
   Tordos . Tordos,? probably above the deposit containing Vinéa I pottery
            (and therefore presumably associated with Oscsanad ware).
            The designs are mainly composed of narrow stripes, occasion-
            ally forming spiraliform patterns but more often rectilinear, of
            reddish or warm brown paint on buff clay, generally slipped
            and often polished. Shallow jars with a straight neck rising
            from a low convex shoulder and straight-rimmed bowls with
            a distinct keel can be discerned among the fragments at Cluj.
            Bone spatulae,similar to those from the Alt stations, may belong
            to the same complex.
 Starcevo      On the Danube at Staréevo, nearly opposite Vinéa (Map III,
            F), a settlement has recently come to light where painted sherds,
            bone spatulae, and celts, allied to those described above, and
            * Dolgozatok, vi (1915), pp. 230f.      * ZfE.xxxv(1903), pp. 448 f., figs. 28-
            (summary on p. 303), with figs. 2-16.   30.
                             PAINTED   POTTERY                          105
obsidian chips occur.’ Three styles of painting are represented :
(a) thin white on red, (5) black on red, and (c) warm black ona
buff slip. The designs include chequers patterns in style (),
the alternate squares being cross-hatched exactly as on some
Dimini sherds? and double spirals in style (c). Corded sherds
have been picked up at the same site.
   From Babska in Slavonia comes one cylindrical vase of Babska
coarse reddish ware, showing faint vestiges of maeanders,
painted, probably, in warm black paint.
   A few very coarse sherds, painted with running spirals on a Lengyel
bluff slip, have been found at Lengyel too.
   On the KGros line we have more material. The cave of Caves in
Devencze near Rév in the Bihar massif yielded, inter alia, a Bihar
very flat shoe-last celt and many sherds painted in black or massif
reddish brown or both on red clay or on a grey clay, covered
with a whitish slip. Good spirals occur and also a pattern of
beaded lines. Cups with concave bases seem common. Coarse
wares with finger-nail ornament or rough incisions were col-
lected from the same site.#
   Farther west, diggings in Guttmann’s brickworks on the K6ros Grosswer-
at Grosswerdein (Oradia Mare) have produced large masses of dein
painted sherds as well as other fabrics. The material is
probably derived fromastratified settlement, but no scientific
excavation is recorded. The painted wares show warm brown
paint on buff or red clay, sometimes slipped; occasionally
white paint was used. The designs are purely rectilinear. On
one fragment a white triangle, outlined in black and with three
black dots on it, may be intended to suggest a human face as on
certain Tripolye vases. The only discernible shape is a footed
bowl like Fig. 33. The same site has yielded black-topped
ware and square-mouthed vases as at Tordos.
   From the site of Szent Andras in the same region come some
sherds ornamented with spiraliform patterns in black on red,
slipped ware.
   The lowest stratum at Herpaly near Berettyé Ujfalu was a Berettyo
regular settlement of vase-painters. In and under a dense Ujfalu
layer of burnt-red clay, such as we saw at Erésd, lay abundant
sherds of buff ware painted with simple rectilinear designs in
warm black paint. The commonest form was the high-
footed bowl like Fig. 33. Above the stratum of burnt clay
came an almost sterile layer in which only a few fragments of
 « In Belgrade (unpublished).              3 M. Zagreb (unpublished).
-2 Tsountas, 42, pl. 8, 2.                 4 M. Cluj (unpublished).
   3443                                P
             106                         PAINTED       POTTERY
             pedestalled bowls and other vases in typical Danubian II
             monochrome black ware were found. Then after a period of
             desertion the site was reoccupied towards the end of the Bronze
             Age.
               The painted pottery from the Upper Tisza, though obviously
             closely akin to that of the Alt, cannot be derived directly there-
             from. It belongs to a sister culture sprung from the same root.
             The chief sites are:
  Lucska       Lucska, one footed bowl like Fig. 33, with rectilinear designs
             in warm black or brown, from the site of the Danubian                      II
             cemetery.’
 Sdtora-     Satoralyatjhely,” on the frontier of Slovakia, many sherds
lyaujhely of greyish ware with designs in black and red on a light slip.
             The motives include spiraliform figures and wavy lines. The
             painted patterns are often identical with those incised on typi-
             cal Biikk sherds: such have been collected at the same site.
             The settlement has also yielded a fragmentary figurine, clay
             beads in the shape of a four-pointed star, and much obsidian,
             including some very large blades.
                Gava (Katohalom),3 near the Tisza, sherds painted in red
             and black on buff with rectilinear motives. The same site has
             yielded Biuikk ware.
                Rakamaz-Timar‘ has yielded similar material to the above,
             some of the painted sherds showing curvilinear motives.
                Bodrogkeresztur. A few sherds from this site are painted in
             brown on buff with rectilinear motives. These, like some from
             Rakamaz 'Timar, have sometimes been incised after the paint-
             ing. Probably the painted sherds here were associated with
             the Biikk wares, and are therefore older than the Danubian II
        graves.
Summary    Our picture of the little communities living in the Alt valley
        on the narrow strips of léss among the forests at the foot of the
        Transylvanian Alps is unusually vivid. Their culture was a
        rich one.
                   Its authors are agriculturalists, stock-breeders, hunters, and
             fishers; probably Hobhouse and Ginsberg would term them
             higher agriculturalists, for they evidently engaged in some sort
             of commerce.
                They live in small villages which they defend with trenches
             and ramparts. They worship a Mother Goddess, like the
             1 p. 81, n. 1, above.                     4 Jésa, Szabolcsvarmegyet   Muzeum,
             2 AE. xxxii, p. 247 (material at Cluj).    1899, p. 35.
           ' 3 p. 60 above.
                        PAINTED     POTTERY                          107
Danubians,   but their burial rites are unknown.           The models
of animals and household utensils (ovens) may, however, have
a mortuary or ritual use.
   Aesthetic impulses demand expression in coloured ornament
both on vases and within the houses. Even the human body is
decorated in the same style. The spiral is used, but in the
form of a horizontal S, never elaborated into the running
Danubian belt.
   The arts of the weaver and the potter are well developed,
but stone boring is not attested. Gold andcopper were certainly
used before the settlements were deserted; possibly they were
worked locally.
   The leading tools are stone, and perhaps also copper, axes
and adzes hafted in deer-horn sleeves, horn axes and mattocks
                                                       or obsidian
with a hole for the shaft, bone spatulae, flint, copper,
blades, sickles, armed with serrated flints, and horn or copper
fish-hooks. The only specialized weapon is the bow, the arrows
being tipped with triangular flint-heads.
   Copper and gold beads and helices, disks of Unio-shell and
marble, boars’ tusks and stags’ teeth are strung together as
necklaces, while plaques cut from boars’ tusks are sewn on the
garments.
   The houses are substantial constructions of the megaron type
with gabled roofs.
   The pottery, essentially a red ware, is kiln-baked. The
vases, though still rather primitive, have genuine pot forms.
Theriomorphs occur. Handles, however, are absent.
   To the east, the culture of Cucuteni A, a fortified village Relations.
near Iassy, reproduces many of these traits, and indeed direct Tripolye
intercourse is attested by the Cucuteni figurines from Erésd culture
itself.   Cucuteni   A, in turn, is connected with the earlier
Tripolye culture on the Dnieper, which is, however, less like
Eroésd.
                                                                  culture Thessaly
   Even closer affinities connect Erésd with the Dimini
of Eastern Thessaly. The agreement in the hafting of type             the
celts, the horn axes, the   use   of  gold  for  ornam  ents,   the
of house, and above all in the technique and ornam‘There       entation
                                t   almos t  to  identi ty.           can
of the pottery, indeed amoun                                 same com-
be no doubt that we are dealing with one and theclear that in
plex in Transylvania and     Greec   e. It   is, equal ly
                                                              it is more
Greece the complex is intrusive; 1n Transylvania
at home.                                               4
                                                      Thrace, Thrace
   In the intermediate region of Eastern Bulgaria and
          108                            PAINTED         POTTERY
          many Erésd traits" recur. But the whole ‘copper age’ culture
          of this region has a specialized and later aspect. It might have
          grown out of the Erésd complex, but is not identical with it.
  Danube     The western relations are equally clear but more ambiguous.
   Valley The coincidences           between the Polgar culture and Erésd are
          indeed numerous.            Among the essential features of the former
          the love of colour, several types of tool—notably horn axes
          and stone adzes of more or less shoe-last type, the use of
          marble for beads, the oven in which the pots were fired, cera-
             mic shapes such as beakers and pedestalled bowls,” the figurines
             and miniature objects—all agree with Erésd. Often this agree-
             ment extends to details. We may instance red maeanders
             bordered with white at Polgar (ware A), red patterns reserved
             between white incrustations (in B), and the manufacture of
             figurines in two vertical sections. And of course the pintaderas
             recur as an accidental trait in Moravia.
Theory of | A temptingly simple explanation of the relationship between
 a deriva- the two cultures would be to regard Polgar with its primitive
  tion from crusting as the ancestor of Erésd and the allied cultures in which
 Danubian genuine painting occurs.        Indeed that is in effect the thesis
          TP
             maintained by Hubert Schmidt in several papers ;3 the culture
             of ‘Transylvania would be just an eastward extension of Danu-
             bian culture where painting, invented spontaneously, has re-
             placed incision.
Schroller’s     A more philosophical version of the same thesis has recently
    chrono- been advanced by Schroller.4 The origin of ‘painting’ in the
        logy Danube basin would be due to the ‘influence’ of Menghin’s
             ‘vorderasiatischer Kulturkreis’,   which would also be responsible
             for idols, pintaderas, and other innovations noted in our Danu-
             bian II. ‘Thessaly I (Sesklo) is invoked as the mediator, and
             represented as an outpost of the Susa-el’Obeid province of
             ‘textile design’.s A partial synchronism between the painted
             pottery of Thessaly I and the crusted wares of Danubian II is
             postulated. On the other hand Erésd I is equated with
             Palliardi’s latest phase of the Polgdr culture in Moravia: for
             the pintaderas (confined to the oldest village at Erésd) 7 and
          * Hornaxes, the use of ‘pintaderas’, the       3 ZLE. 1904, pp. 637 ff.; 1907, pp. 121
          rectangular house, the S-spiral, therio-
          morphic and miniature vases, and figu-          ff.; 1911, p. 597; 1924, p. 139.
                                                          4 MAGW. Wii (1927), pp. (153) ff.
          rines.                                          :See, too, Hubert Schmidt, ZfE. 1924,
          * The rough pot figured by Lészlé,               nC
           1911, fig. 20, can be exactly paralleled at    6 Cf. The Thessalian sherds from
          Lucska, Bodrogkeresztur, and Tisza-             Stfelice II and Raigern.
          dob.                                            7 Menghin, WPZ. xiv (1927), p. 54,
                               PAINTED        POTTERY                            109
celts with rectangular cross-section appear in Moravia first
in phase C. Hence the Transylvanian culture and, a fortiori,
those of Moldavia and the Ukraine would as a whole be later
than the Danubian II culture with crusted ware.’ A dependent
position for the former would naturally follow as a corollary
of this dating.
   Several considerations             would, however,         encourage      us to Objections
look for a different explanation. Technically the carboniferous
Danubian wares reveal a tradition quite opposed to the red
ware of Erésd; the artistic principles inspiring the decoration
of the two groups are no less divergent;? at Erésd we have
dishes and pedestals as well as the pedestalled dishes that
alone occur farther west. The absence from Erésd of such
characteristic Danubian (at least Danubian II) elements as the
perforated celt would be hard to explain if Erésd were but an
outpost of Danubian culture. And Schroller’s chronological
scheme is not without difficulty.
   In Thessaly Erésd is to be equated with period II (Dimini); Erésd,
crusted ware of Danubian II style appears first in the succeed- Dimini,
ing period III. So, too, the painted pottery on the Upper and
Tisza at Bodrogkeresztur and Berettyé Ujfalu is older than Danubian
the dark-faced Danubian II wares.3          On the Alt socketed II
ladles that appear at the beginning of Period II in Moravia are
only found in the hill-stations of the local ‘Nordic’ culture that
succeeded painted ware at Erésd.4
   The author therefore suggested in 1925 that Erésd and its Supposed
congeners should be regarded as outposts of one of the Oriental Oriental
cultures that flourished in the fourth millennium or earlier. imspira-
Many of the vase forms, notably the pedestalled dishes and the tion
hollow supports, have precise parallels in the oldest layers of
Ur, Kish, and Assur, while Thessaly I offers no intermediate
forms.     The models of women, animals, and objects and the
miniature vases tell the same tale. May not the Erésd culture
be due at least to the action of the high civilizations of Mesopo-
tamia on a substratum akin to Danubian I? In other words, to
Oriental trading posts or exploratory expeditions in regions
seeks to confirm this relative dating         3 But it must 3 be admitted
                                                                      i   that on the
on   stylistic grounds;        the Erésd      Tisza Danubian II is less sharply
motives would result from the dis-            defined below than in Moravia; it
integration of the Lengyel spirals.           lasts well into Period III. The nega-
Frankfort, op. cit., pp. 24 f., has refuted   tive Biikk vase from Marosvasarhely
this contention in advance.                   is ambiguous.
Zest Ch: Pp. 103, -N. 1.                      4 $b. Biirzenlind. Mus., i, pl. Iv, 5
2 Frankfort, loc. cit.                        (Schneckenberg near Kronstadt).
          110                       PAINTED        POTTERY
             inhabited by descendants of the Mezine folk?’ ‘The Pontic
             steppe, the Moldavian léss and the Dniester provide possible
             ways from the Black Sea coasts to the Central European El
              Dorado.
       Con-     Frankly, many steps have to be interpolated between Meso-
    nex10ns potamia and Erésd or Berettyé Ujfalu, steps in which the
   between mace and other distinctive Asiatic traits would have been dis-
 .Tripolye carded. Researches on the Tripolye culture, published since
        and
              1925, give grounds for the expectation that some missing steps
     Sumer
             may be recovered in the Ukraine. Peculiarly suggestive is the
             comparison, instituted by Shcherbakivski,3 between the plosh-
             chadki of the Kiev Government and the ‘incineration necropolis’
             at Surghul, described by Koldeway. The same author has
             drawn attention to other Oriental traits in the Tripolye culture,
             such as the occurrence of camel-bones.
                If we admit the existence of a secondary or even tertiary
             focus of Oriental culture in the Ukraine, we might regard the
             Transylvanian and Hungarian (Tisza) cultures, described in
             this chapter, as parallel emanations therefrom. And in that
             case Danubian II would be the result of the second current
             acting on the Danubian I-Biikk foundation already existing
             along the Tisza: the daubs of the Polgar culture would be
             the results of the attempt to apply Oriental polychromy to the
             native dark-faced fabrics.‘
  Difficul-     At the moment such speculations are not very profitable.
   ties of a Let us merely remark that the shorter chronology of Schroller
 high date possesses positive advantages, inasmuch asa really appalling
for Erésd hiatus in ‘Transylvania can only be avoided by minimizing the
             antiquity of Erésd. In addition to the desirability of producing
             some sort of continuity, positive evidence from Moldavia tends
             to lower the dates of painted ware there. At Cucuteni, Minyan
             ware was found in the B settlement 5 that succeeded that partly
             contemporary with Erdésd. Since the occupation of Cucuteni
             B therefore falls within the limits 1800-1500 B.C., it is difficult
             to push the previous settlement® and, with it, Erésd far into
             the third millennium.
                It is for our Ukrainian and Szekler colleagues to find the
         ™ There are plenty of ‘epipalaeolithic’   Kiev, 1926.
         remains in the Ukraine and Crimea,        3 Ibid., pp. 120 ff.; résumé, pp. 203 f.
         and at Erésd itself we have reminis-      4 Frankfort, op. cit., p. 27.
         cences of epipalaeolithic bone- and       5 Fb. d. Inst. A.A., 1923-4, p. 351.
         horn-work.                                6 Frankfort (op. cit., p. 20), in opposi-
         ? TpuninbcKa KynbTypa Ha Yxpaini          tion to the excavator, postulates a gap
         —La Culture de Tripolie en Ukraine, i,    between Cucuteni A and B.
                               PAINTED          POTTERY                        III
evidence which shall confirm one thesis or the other. We con-
tent ourselves with tabulating the two alternatives as follows:
        Danube Valley.           Alt Valley.      Moldavia.       Thessaly.
        Danubian     I        = _ Erésd 1                     =      II       2500
            Period                               Cucuteni A
Te                                Erésd     2         an
  ane                Il                                       =     Ill       2250
         Period     III            Nordic
            _        IV                          Cucuteni B   =     IV        1750

        Danubian      I              —                —_—            I        3000
           Period
              :           :                                                       .
                     II b
Short                   c=         Krésd I                           II       2500
                    Ill           Erésd II       Cucuteni A —
                    IV                           transition         Ill       2250
                     V                           Cucuteni B         IV        1750

   Any one who examines the two schemes impartially must
prefer the latter. Despite the objections urged against it, it
gives the more consistent view: if it be accepted, it will follow
that Erésd and Polgar are the parallel results of the action of
Thessaly I on Tordos (Vinéa I) and Biikk respectively. Since
we have direct evidence of interrelation between Thessaly I
and the Danube basin at the beginning of Period II, such
results will be less surprising.                We shall be, then, inclined to
see in the painted wares of the Tisza the firstfruits of the
Thessalian reaction rather than degraded descendants of
Erésd. ‘There would then be no Oriental inspiration affecting
the Danube basin at the beginning of Period II;* on the con-
trary, the Danube would be the channel by which the culture
of the South-East was transmitted to the Ukraine.
                  1 Steppe influences, however, soon appear.
                                              Vil
              THE      NORDIC        CULTURES IN THE                 DANUBE
                                       CORRIDOR
               URING Periods II and ITI the current of civilization was
               flowing steadily up the Danube corridor. In Period III
          we discern counter-currents set up by the reaction of epipalaeo-
          lithic elements to the southern influences, and the interaction
          of other streams of culture flowing along the Atlantic coasts
          and across the South Russian steppes. Period III takes us
          into the full Subboreal Epoch when there was space for move-
          ment and free intercourse.
                I. SUMMARY        OF SCANDINAVIAN            DEVELOPMENTS
          An account of Scandinavian prehistory lies outside the scope
          of the present work. But since a very fine chronological scheme
          has been worked out for Scandinavia, and since it has been
            applied by many authors to our area also, a very brief summary
            of the cultures identified on the Baltic coasts and their succes-
            sion must be inserted here to make the sequel intelligible.
               In Denmark and Southern Sweden a vigorous neolithic
            civilization arose among the descendants of the epipalaeolithic
            Shell Mound and Maglemose folk, with one centre round the
            amber deposits of Jutland.
Montelius’     Montelius divided the northern Stone Age into four typo-
   chrono- logical phases characterized by the types of celts and tombs.
       logy His scheme is as follows:
            1. Polished flint celts with pointed butts.
            2. Thin-butted celts, Dolmens (small megalithic chambers of
                three or five uprights and one capstone).
          3. Thick-butted flint celts, stone battle-axes, Passage Graves
               (large megalithic chambers, generally oval, with a covered
               passage leading into them).
           4. ‘Thick-butted flint celts, flint daggers, Long Stone Cists
               (oblong megalithic chambers generally sunk in the earth).
  Monte-      Doubt  * has been cast upon the reality of phase 1. In any
    lius 1 case, though Sophus Miiller? treats as pre-dolmen certain
           implements never found in dolmens or later tombs, nothing
           can be predicated of the supposed period. Actually the Shell-
           Mound culture lasted into Dolmen times.
          * Knut Stjerna, ‘Fore Hiallkisttiden’     + MSAN. 1914-19, pp. 58 f.
          (in Ant. Tids. Sv. xix), p. 60.           3 Franz, MAGW. Ivii, p. 22.
  THE NORDIC       CULTURES      IN THE DANUBE      CORRIDOR     113
  In Montelius’ 2 three distinct civilizations can be recognized. Monte-
A. The Dolmen culture proper, restricted to the coasts and lius 2
   islands. It was created by a maritime and probably a com-
   mercial folk. Besides fishing they tilled the ground and
   bred domestic animals. Their chief grain was probably
   emmer.
      They practised collective burial in megalithic tombs.
      As weapons they perhaps used polygonal battle-axes (cf.
   Fig. 77 below).
      Amber was used for beads.
      The leading ceramic types were collared flasks, funnel-
   necked beakers,and amphorae rather like those of Figs.67,2.
B. In the interior of Jutland, in South Sweden, and on certain
    islands are found remains of a warlike people who buried
    their dead individually in trench graves under barrows.
       The artifacts are as in group A; save that beakers orna-
    mented with cord-impression occur.
C. Outside the sphere of these cultures in Norway and inner
    Sweden an epipalaeolithic culture continued.
   Period 2 still falls within the Atlantic Epoch. The southern
limits of the Nordic culture as marked by the distribution of
thin-butted flint celts lie essentially along a line from Bremen
to Stettin.?
   It is admitted that all these civilizations were partly con-
tinuous with the epipalaeolithic cultures that preceded them,
but that the idea of megalithic architecture was introduced
from the west by sea. Sophus Miiller would recognize in
addition a current from the south-east that introduced the
collared flasks and their kindred, and, presumably, the poly-
gonal battle-axes.                                     .
   All three groups persisted in a modified form into the next Monte-
period.                                                          lus 3
   (A) The megalithic civilization remains essentially commer-
cial with wider connexions both to the south and the west
than before.                                         '      ;
   The size of the Passage Graves, involving inconceivable
labour in their construction, as well as the number of corpses
they contain, implies the existence of substantial communities
inhabiting the same district for several centuries. ‘The furni-
ture found in the tombs can be distributed between at least
two phases:
(3a) By panes double battle-axe like Fig. 82, and disk-shaped
         t MSAN., l.c., p. 62.         2 Aberg, Nordic, p. 11.
  3443                            Q
114   THE      NORDIC        CULTURES      IN THE DANUBE          CORRIDOR
       mace of stone, and bow with transverse arrow-heads or
       arrow-heads with a triangular cross-section.
       Ornaments: amber necklaces often consisting of three
       strings of beads linked by triply bored centre-pieces
       (cf. Fig. 133,a) and particularly axe-shaped beads of
       amber.
       Pottery:Angular vases, often with handles, recalling bas-
       ketry forms. The decoration is at first arranged vertically
       and executed with a braid of cords, later a horizontal
      arrangement prevails and the decoration is effected with
      the edge of a Cardium shell or a comb-like implement of
      bone.
      Pedestalled bowls and socketed ladles disclose contact
      with the Danubian area.
      The improvement in funerary architecture, on the other
      hand, can only be due to continued intercourse with the
      west. Moreover the current decoration can be paralleled
      best in Sardinia and Spain.
(3b) Weapons: Flint daggers gradually replace battle-axes, fine
      barbed arrow-heads‘* come into use.
      Ornaments: amber is rare. Instead slate pendants and
      shell disks are worn. Bone pins clearly imitating bronze
      models are used to fasten the garments.”
      Pottery: more rounded forms, hanging vases, gradual
      degeneration of the ornament, use of oculi and rayed
      circles.
      As foreign elements zoned beakers 3 appear.
   Besides the zoned beakers, the above-mentioned bone pins
unambiguously attest intercourse between Denmark and the
Danubian area; the prototypes were current in Bohemia during
the Early Bronze Age (our Period IV).
   In Denmark the Passage Grave culture remained essentially
coastal. But at the end of the Dolmen Period the megalithic
culture had expanded inland into North Germany and as far
as Holland.          Both the tombs and their contents, however,
diverge from the Danish standard. In North-Eastern Germany
the dolmen did not grow into a passage-grave but just sank
underground. On the North Sea coasts the passage grave is
represented bya long chamber with a short gallery opening
into the long side (as in Fig. 84). Such tombs contain rare
thin-butted celts and collared flasks as well as thick-butted
" As in Miiller,r, Ordn., 3 178, , 181 ;    3 Ibid., ., fifig. 81 (upper stratum   at
? Nord. Fort. ii, figs. 49 and 54.          Bigum); cf. p. 200 below.
 THE   NORDIC   CULTURES       IN THE   DANUBE   CORRIDOR    115
celts and pottery more or less reminiscent of Danish Passage
Grave ware.
   (B) In Inner Jutland the civilization of the separate graves
continues. Its authors were definitely warlike.
   The main weapon is the battle-axe supplemented by a
spheroid mace.
   The amber ornaments are different from those of the col-
lective tombs; large disk-shaped beads are most characteristic.
Necklaces of animals’ teeth are also worn. ‘The typical vase is
a beaker, ornamented at first with cord impressions, later with
herring-bone bands round the neck.
    The same barrow often contains a plurality of interments.
The oldest, termed Bottom Graves, are trenches in virgin soil.
Later come Ground Graves on the ground level. The latest
class, Upper Graves, laid in the mound itself, belong to Mon-
telius’ period 4. A steady degeneration is observable alike in
the pottery and the battle-axes throughout this series.
    (C) Various cultures, preserving epipalaeolithic traditions,
 though increasingly influenced by groups (A) and (B), persist,
 but outside our area.
    In period 3 a Subboreal climate was already ruling.
    In period 4 the distinction between the three groups is dis- Monte-
 appearing. Though collective burial in Long Stone Cists and lus 4.
 individual interment in Upper Graves subsist side by side, the
 furniture of the two classes of sepulchre is indistinguishable.
 The two groups are fusing into a single community, preserving
 the traditions of both.
    The main weapon is now the flint dagger, often wonderfully
 worked with ripple flaking, but degenerate battle-axes are still
 used.
     Slate pendants and shells serve as ornaments. The pottery
 is poor, the main type being a vase like a ‘flower pot’.
     From Bohemia gold spirals like Pl. 14, D 4 and bronze pins
 were occasionally imported.
     On the strength of the links with the Danube area cited
 above Montelius’ periods can be approximately equated with
  ours as follows:
                Montelius 2    =   Period II
                Montelius 3a   = _ Period III
                Montelius 3b\ _ _ period IV
                          ns
                                                              an
   Most German and Swedish authorities would reject suchsal
 equation, believing that ‘neolithic’ is a conce pt of univer
           116   THE     NORDIC    CULTURES        IN THE            DANUBE   CORRIDOR
           validity like pleiocene. Their chronologies would be somewhat
           as follows:
                                                       Danubian
                               North.                      period.
                             Montelius   1             :
                             Montelius 2           ;
                             Montelius 3a          II (Lengyel-Jordansmiihl)
                                        3b        III (Nordic culture)
                             Montelius 4      il
                                              tot IV (Aunjetitz)

           Il. THE     ‘DANORDIC’        CULTURE           IN EAST     CENTRAL   EUROPE
           In the valleys of the Oder, the March, and the Upper Elbe the
           pure Danubian cultures were succeeded by a far less homo-
           geneous group to which the general name Nordic has been
           given by Silesian and Czech archaeologists. ‘The term is cer-
           tainly justified in the sense that the new civilization exhibits
           relations with those of Scandinavia and the Baltic coasts that
  Break    cannot be detected in Danubian I or II. Several leading vase
with the   forms, certain types of ceramic decoration, the use of flint for
    past   celts, a taste for amber beads and other features, are common
           to the Danubian regions at this epoch and to the Baltic coasts
           in the days of the earlier megalithic tombs. Moreover, the new
           culture seems intrusive in the lands previously occupied by
           Danubians.      Its authors, unlike the Danubian peasants, were
           great hunters; they sometimes occupy strategic positions on
           hill tops instead of the fertile valleys ; they manufacture weapons
           —hbattle-axes, arrow-heads, and maces—in                      abundance; they
           introduce new varieties of domestic animals and cultivated
           plants. Hence the new culture marks a breach with the older
           tradition. To avoid prejudicing the theory of its derivation
           from the Scandinavian-Baltic megalith-culture we shall adopt
           the term Danordic to designate the specialized ‘Nordic’ culture
           of our authorities.
Distribu-     The Danordic culture inthis sense has a wide distribution east
      tion of the Elbe that only partially coincides with that of the preced-
           ing Danubian.       Its local variations are, however, much greater.
           In Silesia it is represented ina classic form at Nosswitz near
           Glogau’ and then again in huts and graves*at Jordansmihl..
           Farther east there are many groups of allied finds, constituting
           Koztowski’s* ‘Great Polish” culture,.from points lying quite
           off the léss in Poznania and Great Poland and at ‘camping
           places’ on the sand-dunes of Little Poland.3 In hut-foundations
           ™ Seger, SV. vii (1916), pp. 27 ff.         3 Kozlowski, Mtodsa, pp. 60, 163, and
           2 Mtodsa, pp. 26 f., Map 1 and pl. v.       pl. xiv.
                                                            o




   THE   NORDIC     CULTURES       IN THE    DANUBE     CORRIDOR       107
 on the ldss hills round Miechow, Pinczow, and Sandomierz,
 and in cemeteries along the Vistula? (Zastow near Krakow and
 Nalenczow near Lublin) pottery and implements more akin to
 the Silesian are the rule. On the Moravian léss lands we find
 many settlements and also cemeteries, notably round Pross-
 nitz 3 (Pro&tejov), but the classic site is the Stary Zamek (Old
 Castle) near JeveSovice. At this hill station the Danordic culture
 was encountered in the lower level in a deposit thick enough
 to allow of the recognition of two ceramic phases. The same
 culture spread down the Elbe to the vicinity of Prague and
 eventually into Saxo-Thuringia. Westward an allied complex
 appears in Bavaria and Upper Austria.
    The fine ware at least corresponds closely to Danubian II Pottery
 fabrics in technique, being evenly fired, polished, and often technique
 slipped. The colour varies from deep brown to black. Some
 of the large jars are naturally rougher in workmanship and
 more gritty in texture.
   Very often, save on the Middle Oder, the pottery is deco-                 Ornamen-
 rated only by knobs or plastic strips. Where ornamentation is tation
 present, it is usually deeply incised by the so-called ‘furrowing’ Furrow-
 process‘ as described on p. 52. Various combinations of ing
 deep strokes or jabs with the furrowed line were also employed ;
 for instance, sideways jabs might alternate with the regular
 progressive movements. At Nosswitz a double braid of cord
 was sometimes impressed in the clay, as in Danish Passage
 Grave ware, but the aid of a stamp was never invoked. Simple
 cord impressions are by no means rare; in Silesia and in Poland
 such grow into a regular mixed style. One object in all these
 devices was of course to give a firm grip for the white filling.
 The favourite arrangements for the linear patterns are hori-
 zontal zigzag bands and hanging fillets. Decoration in this
 style is best represented at Nosswitz. It is also fairly widely
 diffused in the area of the Great Polish culture, but is rare at
  Jordansmiihl and in the Vistula cemeteries. It reappears, how-
_ ever, in the upper strata of Stary Zamek I—here sometimes with
  spiral motives—and then again in the Mondsee pile-villages.
   The forms of the Danordic pottery allow of a finer sub-
 division of the whole culture. A relatively closed group 1s
 constituted by collared flasks (Fig. 67a), funnel-necked beakers Forms
 (Fig. 67c), and amphorae with the handles at the base of the
 Z      1                : Nied. Sb.,   3 Gottwald, PSP., p. 29.
 p Pa Re                                4 For the technique see Seger, SV.
 2 Demetrykiewicz in Wiad NA. iv, 2.    Vii, p. 40.
118     THE   NORDIC CULTURES             IN THE    DANUBE      CORRIDOR
cylindrical neck (Fig. 67b). These three shapes recur together,
albeit much altered, in the Danish Dolmens and contemporary
Separate Graves. Even this group must be subdivided. Kos-
sinna ‘ recognizes, besides the Dolmen vases of Denmark and a
later group in the megalithic tombs of North-West Germany
and Holland, an eastern and a southern group. In the
former the collars of the flasks are milled at the edges while
the body is plain; the funnel-necked beakers are ornamented
with incised zigzags below the rim, the body again being plain.
These types are represented at Nosswitz and Jordansmihl in
Silesia, at isolated sites between the Middle                 Oder and the
Vistula elbow near Tortn and in Great Poland.’
   Farther south in Moravia, Bohemia,3 and Saxo-Thuringia
flasks and beakers are alike unornamented. In revenge a col-
lared flask from Nalenczow on the Vistula and another from
Leitmeritz near the Elbe gorge in Bohemia‘ were provided
with handles, and one from Zastéw stood on four little wart-
like feet. South of the Oder the group seems to become disso-
ciated; at Stary Zamek5 the funnel-necked beakers occurred,
quite properly, in the first settlement, but the collared flask
fragments were found in the overlying strata, with corded
ware.    At Leitmeritz, too, the flasks were said to be associated
with corded ware.® Associated at Zastéw with a collared flask
was a large jug with a broad strap handle widened out into two
ears—this so-called ansa lunata is characteristic of the ‘Nordic’
culture in Bohemia? (Fig. 74). We have already met the type
as a strange intruder at Lucska and Tisza Dada.’ But in
Moravia this type, like the collared flask, belongs to Stary
Zamek II.
   The amphorae keep their shape on the whole very con-
sistently. Aninteresting feature of the groupin Saxo-Thuringia,
however, is the handsome plastic decoration under the handles
(Fig. 68).9 So, too, the Saxo-Thuringian funnel-necked beakers
are sometimes provided with handles (Fig. 69).
* Mannus, xiii, pp. 35 and 148.            5 Other Moravian flasks are isolated
? Koztowski, too, divides the group        specimens from Opava (Troppau),
represented in the léss areas and dunes    Luto, and Cherelice (Real. ii, p. 63).
of Little Poland and in the Vistulan       6 Mannus, ix, p. 218.
cemeteries from the other Polish           7 Schranil (Béhmen, p. 66) connects
types which he assigns to his Great        the type with the fluted ware from the
Polish culture (Kultura Wielkopolska);     south-east; cf. Pravék, 1910, pl. x1.
Mtodsa, pp. 28 f.                          Note the ridges between the ears in
3 From Caslau to Leitmeritz, Stocky,       No. 7 as in our fig. 47, 1.
PZC., p. 98, with map.                     8 p. 81 above.
4 Mannus, xiii, p. 15, fig. 57.            9 Niklassen in Mannus, xii, pp. 3209 f.
           Fic. 68.   Amphora from Réssen, M. Halle.     41




                            beaker, Hohen,   Saalkreis. M. Halle.   +il
Fic. 69.    Funnel-necked
  THE NORDIC           CULTURES          IN THE DANUBE           CORRIDOR         119
  In Silesia, Bohemia, Moravia, and Saxo-Thuringia the other
distinctive forms include piriform jars with three, or more
rarely four, small handles on the shoulder or the belly (Fig. 70)
and various open jars or pithoi. At Stary Zamek a vessel,
tubular throughout and equipped with small handles, was iden-
tified. Such curious objects have been interpreted as drums
(cf. Fig. 81b). They are more often associated with the Bern-
burg culture in Central Germany, but fragments have been
found at Dankowitz and near Troppau (Opava) in Silesia.




                   Fic. 70. Piriform jar, Nosswitz, after Seger. $

                                                      also charac-
 Cups with one comparatively elevated handle are          a handle
 teristic. Some are clearly funnel-necked beakers with a plastic
                                                   with
 added. Finally, large open jars, generally           impressions,
 moulding round the    rim,  arcad ed by finge r-tip
 are common           in Thuringia, Silesia,’ Poland,? and Moravia,>
                                                        levels at Stary
 where they are especially common in the lowerthe East Alpine
                                                  of
_Zamek I. These jars generally are typical            k.
 cultures, but have exact paral lels   in Stary  Zame
                          of  Perio  d  III and  gener ally associated
    Within the framework
                                                ceramic phenomena
 with ‘Danordic’ pottery appear certain             nized as sympto-
 that Menghin‘ and Stocky* have rightly recog
                                                dic, pp. 16 f.                      k
 fC vu. fig). 161.                              4 Urgesch., p. ‘760: ‘Badenerkeramik
                                                                                     .’
                                         Koz-
 2 WA. ix, p. 209, figs. 10-11;                 s PZC., pp. 104, 1473 Schranil, Boéh-
 towsk i, Mtods a,  pls. V,  5  and xiv, 7.
              SV.  vii, p.  32;  Aber g, Nor-   men, p. 65.
 3 Seger   in
     120    THE NORDIC        CULTURES           IN THE DANUBE           CORRIDOR
     matic of a distinct cultural current. These phenomena appear
     most distinctly in the upper stratum of the first settlement on
     Stary Zamek? in company with an elaboration of the ordinary
     ‘Danordic’ black ware and furrowed ware of the Nosswitz style.
        In the first place a new style of decoration appears, the use
     of shallow flutings or groovings—a technique that had long
     been at home farther south (Figs.71and72a). Outside Hungary
     this fluted ware is known in the Danubian II station of Gocsndéd
     in Western Slovakia, at the K6nigshéhle near Baden,? and
     elsewhere in Lower Austria, at several sites in Moravia and
     in Bohemia;3 farther north such ornamentation is rare, but
     it occurs on a few sherds at Nosswitz in Silesia;+ and perhaps
     on some vases from Little Poland.‘
           Near Baden, at Stary Zamek, at Charvaty near Olomouc,
     and elsewhere vases of this fabric are provided with ‘subcu-
     taneous’ or ‘vertical tunnel’ handles; holes in outer wall of the
      vase above and below the widest point are joined by an internal
      tube (Fig. 71).
         To the same complex belong a class of cups with very high
      handles® (Fig. 73). Stocky assigns to the same group the
      wing-handled (ansa lunata) jugs and mugs that in Galician
      tombs accompany collared flasks (Fig. 74).
         In the same context as the fluted ware we find various large
      pithoi—piriform,’ globular; or almost cylindrical. ‘The sur-
      face is often intentionally roughened. And, besides fluting,
      knobbed decoration (Fig. 71d) was in use at Stary Zamek I b
      and allied sites.*®
         Finally, vases with a cruciform foot, derived in the last resort
      from Danubian II types, begin to appear in a Danordic con-
      text both in Bohemia and Lower Austria."
Celts    The stone implements of the Danordic culture are more
      uniform than the pottery. The polished celts, whether of flint
      or stone, are quite unlike those of the previous epochs. The
      faces are practically flat, and even the small sides are squared
      (Fig. 76). ‘The whole implement has therefore a very metallic
     « Palliardi, Chron., pp. 15-16.              xclv, xcvil &c.); Little Poland (Koz-
     2 Kyrle, OKT. xviii, pp. xiii, xix, and      towski, op. cit., pl. x11, 1, 4-6); Silesia
     XXV.                                         (SV. vii, fig. 157).
     3 Stocky (op. cit., fig. 51) gives a map     7 Palliardi, op. cit., figs. 24-5.
     of the distribution.                         8 Stocky, op. cit., pl. c, 14; cf. fig.
     4 SV. vii, p. 43, fig. 172.                  9 ‘The whole evolution may be seen at
     5 Koztowski, Mfodsa, pl. x11, 4, 5, 8.       Obesseny6.
     6 Nyitra County, Slovakia (Stocky,           10 Stocky, op. cit., pl. c, 9.
     PZC., fig. 50); Bohemia (ibid., pls. xct,    ™ MAGW. xliii, p. 100.
    Fic. 71.   Fluted cup with subcutaneous handles, Charvaty,
                          M. Olomouc. #




                                                 M. Brno




                                                                  3
Fic. 73.   High-handled cups from Visoéany, Narodni, M. Prague.
                                                      3
                                                      8




Fic. 75.   Ansa lunata vase, Uholitky.   M. Prague.       4
                                                                  os




  THE NORDIC           CULTURES       IN THE DANUBE          CORRIDOR         121
look.      Flint is frequently used for the material for celts in Use of
Silesia and Poland, and more seldom in Moravia and Bohemia flint
too. It is another innovation. Besides the polished specimens,
that correspond to the thick-butted type of Scandinavian
archaeologists, a rough, flaked variety with a pointed-oval
cross-section (Fig. 75e) was in use. Despite their ‘Cam-




          Fic. 76. Danordic celts f-g ?, whorls and spool, after Seger a-e3

exhibit other features which prevent us assigning them to a
‘Campignyan’ epoch.
   Beer ais. of a wedge-shaped outline with rounded butt- Hammer-
ends, a variant of the later Danubian II type (Fig. 75d), have axes
been found at the settlements of Stary Zamek, Nosswitz, and
Jordansmiihl and elsewhere. Polygonal battle-axes (Fig. 77)
are associated with the collared flasks, beakers, and amphorae
of the cemeteries along the Vistula, and occur in the Nordic
barrows of eastern Moravia. The same type of battle-axe is
said by Sophus Miiller to belong to the Dolmen Period in
Denmark. The distribution of these battle-axes coincides so
                          t Real. vii, p. 53 and pl. 24 B.
   3443                                   R
                                    CULTURES           IN THE     DANUBE         CORRIDOR
       122.   THE NORDIC
                                                                   to the
       closely with that of collared flasks that their attribution with
       Bence culture is unquestionable (map IV); they extend akia
       the latter (but without collared flasks) across Czechoslov
                     ee      SESSS
                          SSE RSS       —

                               4/     “Uy   ee




                     Fic. 78. Flint    sickles,     Bug culture   of Volhynia,    after
                                                  Koztowski. +

         into the Alpine zone. Stocky' assigns spheroid mace-heads
         to the Danordic cultures.
Arrow-      An abundance of triangular or concave based arrow-heads,
   heads borers, knives, and scrapers of flint is again a feature that every-
         where distinguishes the Nordic culture from those that pre-
         cede it.
 Sickles    Crescent-shaped sickles? of stone or flint are met in Mo-
         ravia (Stary Zamek) and in Bohemia (Kamyk).3 Analogous
         = PZG puri.                                     3 Stocky, PZC., p. 113, assigns such
        2 On these see Vayson, L’Anthr.1919,             implements to the Early Bronze Age.
        pp. 413 f.
 THE    NORDIC       CULTURES         IN THE        DANUBE   CORRIDOR         a
implements occur in the ‘mixed culture’ of Ztota in Poland!
and, in still greater numbers, on the Upper Bug in Volhynia.’
Westward they spread into the Alpine zone, together with the
polygonal battle-axes. Related are polished stone knives from
Stary Zamek, and the early Bronze Age sickles? that are
only alittle later in date.
   Bone and horn implements were manufactured on a large Bone and
scale by the ‘Nordic’ people in contradistinction to the Danu- horn
bians. Antler picks, axes, and mattocks with a shaft hole,‘ the
latter squared at Stary Zamek, are notable. Cylindrical bone
points sharpened at each end also occur.’ Phalanges of small
animals were hollowed out, presumably for use as whistles.°
   Finally, copper was not unknown. It is represented by awls Copper
and rings from Stary Zamek and Nosswitz and trinkets from
graves at Jordansmihl, Ohrozine near Pro&téjov, and else-
where. In the East Alpine settlements even flat celts and
daggers of this metal occur. In Sweden a polygonal battle-axe
of the same material was found, and several stray hammer-axes
of copper from Czechoslovakia and Saxo-Thuringia may be
assigned to this culture.
  Amber, in the form of rings, first meets us in the Danordic Amber
graves at Jordansmiihl and in Poland at Nalenczéw and else-
where; in Bohemia Pectunculus shells are common in deposits
of the period.’ Otherwise we find no very distinctive orna-
ments unless the clay spindle whorls and two roughly anthro-
pomorphic pendants carved in bone from Slanska Hora ®
should be so described.
   Spindle whorls, generally flat or even concave on one side
                                                                 Whorls

and convex or conical on the other (Fig. 76f) are   universa lly
encountered in Danordic settlements. In addition pyramidal
‘loom weights’ and clay spools (Fig. 76h) ° occur to attest the
art of weaving.
   Plastic products in clay were not altogether strange to the Clay
Danordic culture.          Models of rams or bulls, of ‘thrones’, of models
phalli, and of perforated axes were picked up at Stary Zamek.
Recently a truly magnificent statuette of a ram,” about one foot
t WA. ix (1925), p. 222.                    7 e.g. at Sarka, Stocky, PZG;, ps 13;
2 Kozlowski, Mitodsa, pp. 85 f., pl.        pl. LXXXVIII; Schranil, Béhmen, p. 68.
XXIII.                                      8 Stocky, op. cit., pl. LXXXV, 30) >
3 Franz, Mondsee, pp. 19 ff.                9 Stary Zamek, Nosswitz (SV. vii,
4 Altschlesien, i, pp. 199 ff.              fig' 130)"
 5 e.g. Stocky, op. cit., pl. LXxXXV, 41.   1 Altschl. i (1926), p. 206 and pl.
6 Stocky, PZC., pl. ct, 55,58; Palli-       xxvii
ardi, Chron., p. 14 (Stary Zamek 1a).
          124     THE   NORDIC      CULTURES         IN THE    DANUBE      CORRIDOR
          high, was found with funnel-necked beakers at Jordansmiuhl.
          Probably the models from Slanska Hora‘ in Bohemia belong
          to the same family.
 Houses      The domestic architecture of this epoch does not seem to
          have been uniform. At Nosswitz the Danordic houses were
          rectangular and built on the ground level, the walls being sup-
          ported by posts. Something of the same sort may be sus-
          pected at Stary Zamek. At Jordansmiihl, in the léss regions of
          Poland, and in Bohemia ‘Nordic’ pottery, like Danubian, was
          found in pit-dwellings, but also in square huts with wattle and
          daub walls supported by a double row of posts.’
 Graves         Burial rites were no more uniform.            At Jordansmihl all the
          dead lay in trench graves, but the tombs containing Danordic
          ware were distinguished from the rest by a border of large
          stones.3 Along the Vistula the tombs were cists of small stone
          slabs, each designed for one contracted skeleton. Cists also
          occur in Saxo-Thuringia.
             The only certain Danordic grave reported from Bohemia
          was a simple pit containing a contracted corpse. Finally, near
          Slatenice and at Kosié and Chrozim near Prostéjov in Mora-
 Crema- via,‘ cremation was the rule.    The ashes were placed beneath
    tions inverted jars, and the grave was marked by a mound.        The
          cinerary urns showed the plastic rim-decoration described by
          Palliardi at Stary Zamek as the ‘Pfahlbautypus’, but with them
          went funnel-necked beakers, collared flasks, three-handled jars,
          fluted cups, and polygonal battle-axes. ‘The comparative rarity
          of pure Danordic graves deserves special notice: no cemetery
          corresponding to the village of Stary Zamek has been located ; at
          Ksiaznice Wielkie near Pinczow in Poland, Zurowski found
          corpses accompanied by Corded Ware buried in ‘niches’ in hut-
          foundations filled with remains of typically Danordic pottery5;
          so too at Ziota the huts contained a sort of Danordic pottery, and
          the tombs corded ware. Hence Antoniewicz and Zurowski
          conclude that ‘Corded Ware’ was just a special funerary fabric,
          manufactured by the ‘Nordic’ villagers.
Physical     The few skeletal remains, indubitably attributable to this
     type group, have been only partly studied. According to Rosiriski7
          the authors of the Little Polish culture belong to Czekanowski’s
          « Pit, Starozitnosti, i, pl. Lxxv.          5 WA. ix, p. 341.
          ? Schranil, op. cit., p. 71, fig. 8.        6 Ibid., p. 243.
          3 Dawn, fig. 83.                            7 Ibid., pp. 41-9; ITA. ii, p. 172. The
          4 Gottwald, PSP., p.
                                  34 and fig.p.32;    cranial indices range from 68-04 to
          Real. vii, p. 54.                           83°05.
                                                                o




   THE NORDIC         CULTURES        IN THE    DANUBE      CORRIDOR          125
 ‘pre-Slav’ race mixed with elements akin to the ‘Grenelle race’
 of French anthropologists. The ‘pile-dwelling’ analogies of
 the Danordic pottery would be due to this latter stock.
    Despite their love of hunting, the authors of the Danordic Domestic
 culture kept domestic animals and cultivated grains. The animals
 domestic animals attested for this epoch are:
                Cattle Bos brachyceros.**3
                       Bos primigenius. 4
                       Bos akeratos.5
               Swine Sus palustris?; Sus scrofa.' 4
                Sheep Ovzis aries palustris.* 4
                Goats Capra hircus palustris.
                Dogs Canis palustris.* 34
                        Canis intermedius.” 4
                        Cants fam. matris optimae.3
    This list reveals the advent of two new types of dog, and the
 survival of domesticated cattle of Urus breed.
    Emmer was cultivated at Jordansmihl ° and Ztota.’                               Grains
    The relative chronological position of the Danordic culture Chrono-
 in the March and Oder valleys is clearly defined. Near Mo- logy
 ravské Budejovice anticipations of Danordic decoration are
 observed in settlements of the latest Danubian II type. At
 Jordansmihl Danordic beakers and flasks were associated with
 a late Danubian II amphora in grave 28. At Nosswitz the
 houses of the Danordic settlement have disturbed those con-
 taining Danubian I linear ware; on the other hand, graves be-
 longing to the end of Period III have disturbed the foundations
 of Danordic huts at this site. Hence, along the Oder-March
 stretch, the Danordic culture appears at the beginning of our
 Period III.
    Two groups, exhibiting many traits characteristic of the Allied
 Danordic complex, and already mentioned incidentally, deserve cultures
 special treatment in view of exceptional anomalies.
    In several     fortified    settlements     in Bavaria,         notably   the Altheim-
. Auhégel near Hammerau ® and Altheim near Landshut,’ and Mondsee
  then on hills round Salzburg ® and in the pile villages of the culture
  t Ziota, WA. ix, 245.                    of grain was found on Nordic vases,
  2 Jordansmiihl, AfA.v (1906), p. 121.    and I presume the emmer is from one
  3 Bohemia, Schrdanil, op. cit., p. 70.   of these.
  4 Braunsdorf (Querfurt, Thur.) Tag-      7 Koztowski, Bull. Acad. Sci. Craco-
 ungsber.d. Anthrop. Ges. 1925, Pp. 39-    vie, 1920, 1-10b, 7 ff. :
  5 Inagrave at Ziota, Bull. Acad. Sci.,   8 BAUB. x, p. 192; Xi, p. 308.
 Cracovie, 1922, 8—10b, pp. 195 ff.        9 BUF. iv (1924), pp. 13 ff.
  6 Letter from Dr. Seger; the impress     10 AfA. xii (1913), p. 50; MAGW.
            126   THE     NORDIC       CULTURES          IN THE    DANUBE       CORRIDOR
             Attersee and Mondsee* we meet the following ‘Danordic’
             types:
             Rather tall ‘funnel-necked beakers’, and pots with arcaded plas-
                   tic ornament.
             Polygonal stone battle-axes; spheroid maces.
             Flint arrow-heads in profusion.
             Crescent-shaped flint sickles.
             An abundance of horn implements including bored axes and
                   mattocks.
             Whorls and loom weights of clay.
             Clay models of animals (Austrian lakes).
Peculiari-      The associated pottery has, however, marked peculiarities.
     ties of he ware is generally coarse and gritty. Among the stranger
   pottery shapes from Altheim we should note deep bowls with two
             string-hole lugs set close together as in the Globular Amphorae
             group, biconical jugs with a strap handle starting just below
             the rim, and biconical jars with four horizontal handles on the
             belly. A pot with a loop-handle inside across the neck, as in a
            basket, stands alone.
 Mondsee       Some of these forms at least recur in the Mondsee, but the
    style peculiarity here is in the decoration; the patterns, executed in
         the Danordic furrow technique, include rayed circles and analo-
         gous motives. Pottery of the same style recurs in the axe-
         factory on the Upper Enns above Steyr,? and in the Salzburg
         district.
Spheroid    The spheroid stone mace-heads again, though not restricted
   mace- to this group, are only common in the west of the Danordic
    heads province.
   Metal     Metal was commoner than farther east. From Altheim
          comes aflat celt of copper; the Austrian lakes have yielded in
          addition kite-shaped daggers with rivet-holes and a rudimen-
          tary midrib, fish hooks, and quadrangular awls. From the
          Mondsee came further a globe-headed pin of poor bronze.
          Among the remains from the Attersee in Vienna are pins with
          swollen and perforated necks and leaf-shaped girdle-clasps,
          both seemingly Middle Bronze Age types.
    Local    Some ladles from the Mondsee had undoubtedly been used
   metal- for smelting copper.    Grooved hammer stones, like Fig. 130
    lurgy
            xlviii (1919), pp. 212 f.; li, pp. 34 ff.,    Mat.z. Urgesch. Osterreichs, iii (1927).
            195ff. eee                                   2 WPZ.v, pp. 19 ff. A ‘bronze’ dagger
               Franz, ‘Die Funde aus den prahis-         was found here.
            torischen Pfahlbauten im Mondsee”,           3 Much, Kupferzeit.
                                                            a




  THE NORDIC        CULTURES       IN THE DANUBE        CORRIDOR        127
from the same site, are likewise generally metal-workers’ tools.
A local metallurgical industry is thus attested. Whether it
utilized local ores—which are abundant—is doubtful. A sample
of copper on analysis was found to differ materially in its nickel
content from the best known local ore exploited in prehistoric
times.*
   Marble buttons with V-perforation are characteristic of the Buttons
Altheim—Mondsee group.
   The chief peculiarity of the East Alpine complex as con- Fortifica-
trasted with the Danordic culture in general is the type of tions
settlement. Altheim was a tiny, fortified hamlet on a hill
overlooking the Isar. An area some 40 m. in diameter had
been enclosed within a series of three concentric trenches
separated by palisades of stakes and traversed by more than
one causeway. The village had, nevertheless, been stormed
and burned; sling-stones and used arrow-heads, mingled with
broken human bones in the moats, bear witness to the stub-
bornness of the unavailing defence. The other land sites in
Bavaria and Austria were similarly situated and probably also
fortified.
   On the Attersee and Mondsee the villages were built on Pile vil-
piles as on the Swiss lakes. No associated graves are known. lages
   The Mondsee villagers cultivated emmer and common Bones of
wheat, barley, beans, and apples, but no ‘flax’.            Dogs, swine,       horse
cattle, sheep, and goats were domesticated. The Auhégel has
yielded the bones of a small type of horse too.
   We get the impression from the foregoing analysis that at
Altheim and the Mondsee the Danordic culture has been
superimposed upon a substratum to which, perhaps, fortifica-
tions and pile dwellings belong. In this substratum we shall
learn in the next chapter to recognize epipalaeolithic elements
blended with others that reappear in Aichbithl and Michels-
berg. At the same time some of the patterns on the Mondsee
pottery, with their close similarity to Laibach and Slavonian
motifs, suggest the possibility that a cultural current from the
south-east was already reaching the metalliferous regions where
the sites cluster. Franz has very plausibly argued that the
Austrian lake villages were stations for the export of copper
                                                            have
by water to the Danube. In that case the Mondsee might
t Kyrlein MAGW. xlii (1912), p-206;     anda flanged celt were found as well
CE. YA. vi, p.90. SoatHellbrunner       as Bronze Age ware. MAGW. li,
Hill near     Salzburg ‘chalcolithic’   p. 35-
pottery, and a polygonal battle-axe
       128   THE NORDIC         CULTURES           IN THE DANUBE     CORRIDOR
       become a secondary focus of civilization that would react on
       the development of Danordic culture farther east.
          Unfortunately, the chronology of the group is very vague.
       The bronze pin from the Mondsee, and still more the pins and
       clasps from the sister lake," warn us against assigning too high
       an antiquity to the group. It is certainly later than Period EI.
       On account of the absence of obvious borrowings from the




         Fic. 79. Artifacts from Steinbruchhiigel, near Kronstadt, after Teutsch.   }

        Bell Beaker and Aunjetitz cultures which occupied the same
        area in Bavaria, Reinecke holds that the Altheim culture must
         be older than either. It would accordingly be contemporary
         with the Danordic cultures in Silesia.
Transyl-    The still little-known hill-stations of Eastern Transylvania ?
   vania again agree with the regular Nordic group in many points.
         The remains found on them correspond roughly with those in
         the strata covering the ruins of Erésd II. Hence they postdate
         the painted pottery in the same region. The pottery with
         furrowed decoration from caves and hill-stations in Western
         Transylvania 3 may belong to the same complex.
        * But of course the position of these is    * MAGW. xxx, pp. 192 ff.; MPK. i,
        not fixed stratigraphically; the settle-    pp. 392 ff.
        ments may have been inhabited as            3Examples figured in ZfE. 1903,
        long as those on L. Neuchatel, p.169,       p. 456, figs. 36 ff.
        below.
 THE NORDIC        CULTURES       IN THE DANUBE                CORRIDOR        129
   Agreement with the Nordic cultures is evinced by the fol-
lowing traits:
Plastic and furrowed decoration on the pottery.
Stone battle-axes with knobbed butts.t (The copper axe-adze
      from Erésd belongs here too.)
Many stemless flint arrow-heads (Fig. 7gb-e).
Sandstone knives (Fig. 79l-m).
Clay models of animals (probably rams) and also of axe-
      hammers (as at Stary Zamek). (Fig. 79a).
Abundant whorls (of precisely the Danordic hollow-cone type),
      and loom weights.
  Peculiar, however, is the form of the plastic ornament on
the pots which occasionally assumes spiraliform shapes re-
sembling Prince of Wales’ feathers. Sherds with cord orna-
ment, too, apparently belong to this level. Among the forms
were square-mouthed vases and cups with ribbon handles.
   A cult object to which Stary Zamek offers possible parallels
is the clay phallos. Curiously enough socketed ladles, a Danu-
bian II type farther west, appear on the Alt first in this complex.”
   Among the numerous horn and bone implements are fish-
spears. Pendants were also made of bone.
   The ‘Nordic’ culture marks a clean break with Danubian Summary
traditions.3
   Pastoralism is now the basis of life, and probably sheep are
more important than kine or pigs. A reflex of this change is
the appearance of the sheep-dog and perhaps the swift Asiatic
horse (Auhégel). At the same time agriculture and hunting
remain very important. Trade has probably risen to be of
economic importance, and a certain industrial specialization
may be inferred from the factory sites in the Austrian Alps.
   A martial character is prominent, though not predominant.
Besides weapons of the chase specialized arms (battle-axes) are
manufactured which may also be badges of rank. The villages
are small but sometimes occupied for a long time. Fortifica-
tions may be an accidental trait on the western frontier.
   The cult of the mother goddess has disappeared completely,
but models of animals (rams) and other objects may have a
ritual significance. Burial rites vary—in the north-east con-
tracted interment in stone-lined trenches, in the south-east the
1 MPK. l.c., fig. 167. The grooved           3 Ldszlé6 has pointed out in Dacia, i,
decoration is curious.                       p. 3, certain elements of continuity
2 Teutsch in $b. Biirzenlind. Mus. i,        with Erésd.
p. 116.
  3443                                  Ss
         130   THE NORDIC     CULTURES      IN THE DANUBE        CORRIDOR
         burial of cremated remains under a barrow prevail. In each
         case the tomb is individual, and well furnished with arms,
         ornaments, and vessels.              ;
            Art is purely geometric, and aims at contrasts obtained by
         mouldings or furrowed decoration.
            Weaving and pottery flourish. Metal is used everywhere
         occasionally and worked at least on the Alpine fringe. Its
         influence on stonework is betrayed by the flat stone celts with
         squared small sides and perhaps by the battle-axes. The stone-
         borer now certainly uses the hollow drill. Flint, as well as
         rock, is used for the manufacture of axe-heads.
            The distinctive tools are the flat celt of stone, flint, or copper,
         the perforated axe-hammer with rounded butts, the crescent-
         shaped sickle of flint or stone, horn axes and picks, and bone
         awls.
            The bow, the sling, and the stone battle-axe (in the Alpine
         and Bohemia area, also the mace) serve as weapons.
            Amber beads, bored tusks, and copper rings are worn as
         ornaments.
            Rectangular houses and pit-dwellings are alike inhabited.
            The pots are everywhere provided with handles, and the
         vessels show a well marked distinction between neck and body.
         Leading forms are the collared flask, the funnel-necked beaker,
         the amphora with handles at the base of the neck, and piriform
         or biconical jars with handles low down on the shoulder or
         even on the belly.
            Few of these traits are attested for the whole area of the
         Danordic culture. It may well be that our complex is really the
         resultant of several distinct but continuously interrelated cul-
         tures. The isolation of these cannot, however, be satisfactorily
           achieved on the data now at our disposal. But we may at least
           recognize that our ‘culture’ may have more than one origin: it
           is indeed essentially a complex.
    Origin    If we analyse the ‘Nordic’ culture, we find in the first place
           elements derived from the previous epoch. As before settle-
           ments are concentrated on the léss in Silesia and Galicia; the
           axe-hammers, the horn hammers, the clay plastic, the tech-
           nique of the pottery, the furrowed (Réssen) and plastic (Puszta
           Istvanhaza) ornaments, all have precursors in Danubian II or
Danubian Jate Danubian I contexts.       True handles again were intro-
 survivals duced with Danubian II. Even such ceramic forms as the
           funnel-necked beaker may be derived from dishes like Fig. 40,2.
           A counterpart to the Danubian survivals in the Upper Danube—
  THE NORDIC         CULTURES       IN THE DANUBE          CORRIDOR        131
ao         ae is provided by survivals from the Erésd cul-
              “spears, clay plastic, &c.—in Transylvania. We
must thus admit a large survival of truly Danubian elements.
 Stocky, indeed, goes so far as to treat the Danordic culture
as essentially a development of Danubian II; the great change
in the manner of life which we have recorded would be due
primarily to climatic events.’ The great floods that interrupted
the growing dryness during the early centuries of the Subboreal
epoch would have driven the peasants from the valleys to the
uplands that were now apt to serve as pastures. Contact with
c        aie Ware folk would accelerate the change in manner
of life.
   But many “Danordic’ traits recur in Scandinavia in the Dol-                   Scandina-
men Period; such are the flint celt, the polygonal battle-axe,                   vian
the use of amber, the funnel-necked beaker, the collared flask, parallels
and the amphora, probably also the cultivation of emmer.
Other features of the Scandinavian culture are indeed missing—
megalithic architecture, collective burial, the transverse arrow-
head. Moreover, the collared-flask pottery is accompanied by
the thin-butted celts of Montelius’ period 2 in Denmark, by
thick-butted types of Montelius’ period 3 in Silesia.
   Kossinna? and his school explain the agreements with Den- Depen-
mark by postulating an emigration thence at the end of the dence on
Dolmen Period. The migrant hordes would have proceeded Denmark
up the Vistula to Tortin and thence across Poznania to the
Upper Oder. There they would have divided, moving some
into Galicia, some across Bohemia into Thuringia. ‘The land-
marks of this movement would of course be primarily the
collared-flasks and kindred vases, and secondly the flint celts.
   The recognition of the Danubian survivals in the Danordic
complex 3 of course disposes of the view that it is just an exten-
sion southward of Scandinavian culture. Even the view that
Scandinavia supplied the new factor that differentiates the
‘Danordic’ from the Danubian cultures can only be admitted
with reserve; for the genesis of those elements in the Dolmen
civilization of Denmark that are common to it and our complex
requires explanation. Except perhaps for the emmer, none of
them belong to the western province from which the idea of
1 PZC., p. 151.                           nus, Xili.
2 Mannus, i; DV. &c. The idea of          3 Note     that in North   Germany
deriving our ‘Nordic’ culture from        (Brandenburg) many of our Nordic
that of the North-West German mega-       forms (amphorae, &c.) are attributed
lithic graves advanced in Mannus, i-ii,   by Sprockhoff to southern influence
has been definitely abandoned in Man-     (op. cit., pp. 116 ff.).
              THE NORDIC         CULTURES          IN THE DANUBE         CORRIDOR
        132
                                                                       ,
        the dolmen was immediately derived. In fact, as is well known
        Sophus Miiller * revers es Kossin na’s proces s, and derive s the
                                                                                       is
        Danish collared flasks, &c., from the south-east.
Eastern      As a matter of fact, there are specifically eastern elements 1n
elements our complex and those of a vital character. The pastor
                                                                          alism
          that characterizes the    Nordic    cultur e  in so high a  degree  is
          really proper to  the  steppe s  of  the  east.  The  sheep -dog  and
          the small Asiatic horse were bred or tamed very early at Anau.
          The battle-axe is a very ancient Mesopotamian weapon; it
          early crossed the Caucasus, assuming a form that might well
          be the model for the ‘Nordic’ stone battle-axe. The flint sickles
          are most numerous on the Upper Bug on the eastern frontiers
          of Poland, and might be derived from the Mesopotamian
          copper sickles. In the same region a “Campignyan’ culture
          using flint axes? flourished for a long time. The collared flask
          can be paralleled in metal on the Kuban; the funnel-necked
          beaker and the amphora?in the Tripolye culture of the Ukraine
          and Galicia.‘
             It would therefore be tempting to postulate a wave of pas-
          toralists coming in from South Russia and mixing alike with
          the earlier inhabitants of Denmark and Central Europe and
          even Transylvania. These might be identified with the Corded
          Ware folk described in the next chapter.5
 Aegean       At the same time southern and western traits are detectable.
influence As Stocky® rightly says, ‘influences from the south-east had
          not ceased’ in Period III. Eloquent testimony to the main-
          tenance of intercourse with the Mediterranean is indeed sup-
          plied by the Pectunculus shells from Danordic settlements and
          no less by the copper objects and their imitations. Indeed, the
          whole ceramic group represented by Menghin’s Baden type has
           south-eastern affinities. The fluted decoration has a long his-
           tory on the Middle Danube from Vinéa I onwards. We shall
           meet tunnel-handles again in Carniola and Bosnia together
           with curvilinear motives that appear in Stary Zamek Ib. The
           roughened jars have parallels to Tészeg and O Bessenyé. But
           the high-handled cups above all have unmistakable affinities
           in the metal work and pottery of Troy II. And spools pre-
         t MSAN. 1913-14, pp. 64, 100 ff.           derive  the ‘drum’ from the same
         2 Mtodsa, pp. 82, 156; L’Anthr.            quarter. Sprockhoff, Mark-Branden-
         XXXVi (1926), pp. 65 f.                    burg, p. 9, suggests that the southern
         3 Antoniewicz (WA. ix, p. 245) notes       ‘funnel-necked beakers’ may be de-
         these similarities asevidencefor Nordic    rived from Michelsberg types.
         influence on the painted pottery.          5 Cf. p. 131, note 1.
         4 Stocky (Nied. Sb., p. 212) would         6 PZG es palAaoe
   THE NORDIC        CULTURES      IN THE DANUBE         CORRIDOR       133
 cisely like those from Silesia, Moravia, and Transylvania come
 from the same city.‘ All this denotes a continuance of that
 trade along the Danube that created Danubian II and its ex-
 tension towards the tin lodes of Bohemia. In a later chapter
 we must consider whether that traffic did not also reach the
 copper bearing mountains of the Austrian Alps.
    Several traits are shared by the Danordic culture with the Italy
 Remedello culture of Upper Italy—notably tunnel-handles,
 battle-axes with knobbed butts, copper flat celts, and awls and
 bored horn axes. For the Althetrm—Mondsee group the list
 might be extended by the addition of copper daggers, spheroid
 mace-heads, and buttons with V-perforation. ‘The agreement
 suffices to prove contact with the lands round the head of the
 Adriatic, but the influences were mutual. If the daggers and
 perhaps the mace-heads reached Austria from Italy,” the per-
 forated horn and bone axes certainly travelled in the opposite
 direction.
    Finally, we should recall that the Nordic culture in Poland Epipa-
 embraced within its bounds the haunts of epipalaeolithic sur- laeolithic
 vivors. Such must have been incorporated within it. Indeed, survivals
 Koztowski makes them the bearers of the Great Polish culture
 which would only have borrowed certain elements from Scan-
 dinavia.
    On the whole the Nordic culture seems to have acquired its
 individuality through the superposition of a pastoralist layer
 upon various autochthonous groups. Differences in the sub-
 stratum account for the diversities in the several areas. But
 these diversities were accentuated by external relations with
 the Lower Danube and Upper Italy respectively.
        III.   THE   WALTERNIENBURG-BERNBURG                GROUP

  Distinct from the ‘Danordic’ culture of the Oder—March—
  Vistula basins was the civilization characterized by the Wal-
  ternienburg and Bernburg pottery. It evolved on the Elbe and >
' Saale, parallel to and in contact with the Danordic culture
 farther east. Five typological phases are recognized by Nik-
 lassen 3 whose monumental monograph we shall follow in the
 description of the material.
 1 SS., No. 8439.                      excluded.—
 2 They come in the last resort from   3 YST. xiii. In the sequel the num-
                                                               site refer to
 Crete; on the Middle Danube apart _ bers in brackets after a
 from Cypriote types daggers are rare, Niklassen’s inventory.
 so that the Danube route may be
           134   THE NORDIC         CULTURES          IN THE DANUBE         CORRIDOR
 Pottery      The pottery is well fired and smooth. The forms at all
           periods favour angular outlines, but the sharpness of the profile
           is softened down in the later phases.
              The five stages of development are termed by Niklassen
           Walternienburg I and II and Bernburg I (III), II (IV), and
           III (V) respectively. The original Walternienburg I forms are
           (i) a cup with band handle, the body being divided abruptly
           into neck, shoulder, and inverted-conical base (Fig. 80b), (11) a
           hanging vase divided in the same manner as the cup (Fig. 80a),
           (iii) a cone-shaped dish with lug handles under the brim. By
           the gradual suppression of the shoulder and softening down of
           the profile the cup becomes oval or even cylindrical in phases
           IV and V (Figs. 80c-e). A collar on some late Bernburg cups
           represents the last survival of the shoulder. ‘The hanging vase
           undergoes a similar process, becoming simply biconical and
           disappearing before phase V.
               In Walternienburg II twin cups with the single band-handle
           attached at the junction of the two compartments appear and
           last to phase IV. In phase II the ‘drum’ (Fig. 84b) was taken
           over by the Walternienburg culture from the Danordic in-
           truders and became acclimatized in Thuringia.' To the same
           epoch belong curious boat shaped ‘pocket-vases’ not unlike
           those of the Eberstadt style farther west.? The early Walter-
           nienburg forms are clearly influenced by basket-work originals
           —the handles in particular are really basket handles in contra-
           distinction to the metallic handles of Danubian culture.
Ornamen-       The decoration, too, is inspired by basketry designs.3 It is
    tation always executed by means of a sharp instrument. In the earlier
           phases this was jabbed into the clay to produce a furrow. In
           phase I the motives are grouped vertically, while later a strictly
           horizontal arrangement was adopted; in Walternienburg I,
           moreover, M figures and ‘pectiform’ signs are prominent; later
           horizontal bands of straight or zigzag lines alone were used.
           The ‘drums’ are ornamented with rayed disks, crosses, and
           other symbols doubtless of ritual significance.
     Celts     In all phases the typical implement associated with this cul-
           ture was a.small polished celt of rectangular cross-section made
           of Wida shale. ‘The material is found in nature on the north
           * Schoetensack,   ZfE. xxv   (1893), p.     the ‘drum’ covered a child’s skeleton.
           165, cites African parallels toshow that    7 Kossinna, DV., pl. Lil,    fig. 462;
           these curious tubular vessels were used     Mannus,    Ergdnzungsband.    iv, pp.
           as drums, the handles serving to re-        52-4, and p. 38, figs. 2-3.
           ceive the strings used to keep the          3 Schuchhardt, PZ. i, pp. 45 ff.
           covering skin taut. At Hornsommern
Fic. 80. Walternienberg-Bernburg vases.                M. Halle.   a and b
                       Cc 2        d ei   e a    i i
                              34     6»     bd
  THE NORDIC          CULTURES           IN THE DANUBE        CORRIDOR        135
slopes of the Hartz. Horn sockets and sleeves were found in Horn
the settlement of Nagelstedt where, however, the pottery at- sockets
tests the presence of Réssen and Danordic as well as Bernburg
cultures. Small double-bladed stone axes (Fig. 81), resembling Battle-
small versions of the Danish Passage Grave form, belong pro- axes
bably to an early phase. The commonest arrow-head is, as in Arrow-
Danish Passage Graves, the transverse type, but tanged and heads
triangular flint tips and bone points sharpened at both ends:
also occur. Wida and other shales were also ground into Knives
knives. Metal is represented only by tubes of copper leaf, Copper
the exact age of which is vague.
   The most important ornaments are the amber beads. These Orna-
took the form of a miniature double-axe (at Schortewitz (69) ments
                                                                                     Amber




            Fic. 81. Stone battle-axe, Walternienburg, after JST.     4


in phase II) or of a double hammer (at Nietleben 3) exactly as
in early Danish Passage Graves. Slate pendants, bored teeth,
and bears’ claws were also worn as well as bone pins with
perforated heads.
   The dwelling places are generally marked by shallow round Houses
or oval hut-foundations, but at Schrapplau (96) the outline
of a rectangular house, excavated 15 cm. in the soil and 4-2 x
3 m*. in area, was traceable.
   The authors of this culture were buried either in separate Graves
graves or in collective tombs of megalithic or semi-megalithic
construction. Trench-graves with contracted skeletons are met Trench-
from one end of the province to the other and often, as at s7aves
Walternienburg itself, constitute large cemeteries in which all
ceramic phases are represented. The collective tombs do not
seem so ancient. Apart from one subterranean chamber con-
taining forty skeletons and a fragmentary cup of the first phase,
i Quedlinburg (30), /,c., fig. 22, 12.      3 Krause, Deutsche Altertumskunde, ii,
2 MAGW. Wii, p. (90).                       pl. Iv.
           THE   NORDIC      CULTURES        IN THE DANUBE           CORR
     136
      at Holzsussra,! the earliest pottery found in collective tombs is
Cists classed by Niklassen as Walternienburg II. The majority of
                                                           the
     the tombs are cists; buried under a barrow or sunk in
     earth. The chambers are never very big; the largest, containing




                 Fic. 82. Cist grave with sculptured slabs, Nietleben, after
                                         Kruse. #51

      Bernburg II-III? pottery, measured 62-3 m*. The cists
      are often divided into compartments by transverse slabs 3 that
      either produce a double chamber, or merely divide the tomb
      proper from a small antechamber,‘ exactly as in the regular
      Long Cists of Scandinavia or the Covered Galleries of the
      Seine area. In one double cist at Baalberg the partition was
      pierced with a round hole, as in some cists with Corded Ware,
      t Niklassen, l.c., p. 109.                3 As at Nietleben or Baalberg.
      2 Schiepzig near Halle (104).             4 Schortewitz (70).
                                                                     -




      THE NORDIC        CULTURES       IN THE DANUBE             CORRIDOR        137
    but one chamber in this tomb contained globular amphorae.
    Finally, in two cists * one of the upright slabs had been carved
    with geometric signs, a phenomenon encountered also in cists
    with Corded Ware in the same region (Fig. 82). The majority Passage
    of the cists in the Saale valley are built of comparatively thin grave
    slabs and resemble the tombs of Montelius’s period 4 in
    Sweden. Still a large tomb at Drosa in Anhalt (Fig. 83), con-
    taining pottery of the second and all later phases, corresponds
    exactly to a sort of passage grave. Some of the tombs built
    of huge blocks in the Altmark, also contained Walternienburg—
    Bernburg ware.
       The culture just described occupied the Saale—Elbe valley Distribu-
    from the Havel to the Unstrut, all phases being evenly dis- tion




                                               C= ee)
                                                <---9
                                                O'S---
                  Fic. 83. Plan of passage grave, Drosa, after FST.

    tributed over this area. The later phases—Bernburg II and
    I{I—are also represented in Bohemia.”
       The Walternienburg culture is closely related to those of
    Scandinavia and North Germany.3 Common to all three groups
    are megalithic sepulchral architecture, transverse arrow-heads,
    double-bladed battle-axes, axe-shaped amber beads, and ‘bas-
    ket’ vases with angular profiles.
_      In its economy the Walternienburg culture combined agri- Summary
    culture, pastoralism, and hunting; trade or barter was carried
    on with the north; warlike traits are not very pronounced.
    Burial rites are exceptionally diversified, as both collective and
    individual interment was practised. The ‘drum’ may be recog-
    nized as a cult object. Art is geometric and uses skeuomorphic
    t Nietleben near Halle and Schkoppau       PZCG., pp. 100 and 147.
    near Merseburg.                            3 Cf. Sprockhoff, Mark Brand., p.29.
    2 Bylan, Pig, i, p. 110, and Stocky,
      3443                                 T
         138     THE NORDIC         CULTURES         IN THE DANUBE          CORRIDOR
         patterns. Weaving is attested, but metal was not used in-
        dustrially.
            The leading archaeological traits are thick-butted shale celts,
         sometimes hafted in horn sleeves, and shale knives as tools,
           the bow and transversely tipped arrow and, as an accident,
           the double battle-axe of stone as weapons, bored tusks and
           imported amber beads as ornaments.
    Origin    The traits just enumerated all serve to connect the Walter-
           nienburg complex with the megalithic cultures of North-West
  Scandi- Germany and Scandinavia, though many of the most vital
navia and analogies are seemingly accidental in our group.        There is
     N.W. further a considerable degree of agreement in the pottery. It
 Germany would therefore be natural to regard our culture as derived
           directly from one of the more northerly groups.
Megaliths     The distribution of thin- and thick-butted celts of Danish
           type shows a real expansion southward and inland of the
           northern culture. A map of megalithic tombs tells the same
           tale. The tomb at Drosa in Anhalt is identical in plan with one
           at Drouwen (Drenthe) in Holland which contained thick- and
           thin-butted celts.
            However, Drosa is the southernmost tomb of true northern
         type. The cists? of slabs, though certainly contemporary with
         the ‘passage-grave’ of Drosa, represents a distinct Central
         German tradition, albeit inspired by similar aims.                        Indeed,
         the new style of architecture spread northward at least to
         Brandenburg,} and perhaps reveals the origin of the Scandi-
         navian cists of Montelius’s period 4.. Moreover, the more usual
         type of grave was the simple trench and not the collective
         tomb at all. These considerations alone suffice to differentiate
         the Walternienburg culture from the Northern Megalithic.
            The pottery, too, of the several groups is distinct. The
         collared flasks and funnel-necked beakers that are found in the
         megalithic tombs of the North Sea coasts are not associated
         with the Walternienburg group. The latter’s pottery approxi-
         mates more closely to that of the Danish passage graves,+ but
         is far from identical therewith. Hence Niklassen concludes that
          t Aberg, Niederland, Dp. 30.                3 Sprockhoff, op. cit., p. 5.
          2 Cf. the Walternienburg I vases from          The nearest parallels to Walternien-
          Wormsleben and Holzsussra; in no            burg I pottery belong to S. Miiller’s
          case can the Central German cists be        “Grand Style’ (Sten. Kunst, Nos. 103,
          synchronized with the Scandinavian.          116, and 119), but similar forms occur
          They correspond rather to an earlier        later   in the Cardium        technique
          part   of   the   Scandinavian   passage    (ibid. 122 and 128), and even in the
          grave epoch as beads and axes prove.        first phase of decadence (ibid. 146-9).
     THE NORDIC         CULTURES         IN THE DANUBE         CORRIDOR       139
    the Danish and the Central German cultures represent distinct
    branches of one common trunk, not yet identified. Shall we
    say it was created by descendants of epipalaeolithic men on the
    Lower Saale, stimulated by contact with the megalith-builders ?
    The horn sleeves provide an interesting link with epipalaeolithic
    times, and we remember that a pottery based on rush-baskets
    is found with ‘epipalaeolithic’ flints in Brandenburg.
       Chronologically the Walternienburg culture should be paral- Chrono-
    lel to the Danordic culture on the Oder. It had already passed logy
    through one phase of evolution before the Danordic drum
    reached it.t On the other hand, its relation locally to Danu-
    bian I is curious. In a settlement at Lésau spiral-maeander
    sherds of the latest style were found in an apparently undis-
    turbed deposit at a higher level than Bernburg I pottery.’
    Kossinna and Barthold had always regarded spiral-maeander
    ware as the oldest pottery of the Saale valley. But a survival
    of Danubian I d elements into Period III is not inconceivable
    though certainly surprising. In any case the evolution of the
    Walternienburg style must have been comparatively rapid in
    view of the uniformity of the implements. In Period IV only
    reminiscences of Bernburg forms are observable in the Aunje-
    titz or proto-Aunjetitz pottery both of Thuringia and Moravia.
                       IV.   THE    GLOBULAR       AMPHORA
    Another Central German group, akin to the foregoing, is that
    named after its most distinctive ceramic form, the Globular
    Amphora (Kugelamphora). The culture is known chiefly from
    grave-finds, and looks like the work of a tribe of armed traders
    who roamed from the Caucasus to the Baltic with wares in one
    hand and weapons in the other.
       The distinctive vase is the amphora with short, cylindrical                   Pottery
    neck, globular body, and two small handles (Fig. 85). East
    of the Oder vases of similar form, but with a flattened base and
    often four handles, may replace the amphora. A regular asso-
4
    ciate of the amphora is the large bowl with distinct neck and
    two lug-handles, always set side by side (Fig. 85 he
       Decoration, when present, is executed with a pointed instru-
    ment, with a Cardium shell, with a stamp, or, rarely, with a
    cord. The ornament is arranged in horizontal bands round
    the neck, supplemented in the amphora by fillets hanging
    « Niklassen, op. cit., pp. 141 and 163.   in Mannus-Bibl. 22; Cerny, WPZ. iii,
    2 Jbid., p.178,and Mannus, xvi,p.237-     P+ 313 V» P- 54.
    3 Niklassen, op. cit., p. 154; Winkler,
          140   THE NORDIC        CULTURES           IN THE DANUBE          CORRIDOR
        down over the shoulder. The favourite patterns! are rows of
        triangles or lozenges, incised or hatched, or composed of U- or
        V-shaped stamp-impressions or dots. In a few instances the
        hatchings have been produced by rolling a stick, wrapped round
        with a cord, over the soft clay.
  Celts    A regular accompaniment of these vases in the tombs is a
        small, well-polished flint celt of thick-butted type. In several
        cases ? banded flint has been used which, according to Kossinna,
        was imported from Galicia.3
Orna-      Another regular element in the grave furniture is amber,
 ments generally in the form of large beads, but at Remlin in Meck-
        lenburg‘ the bead was in the shape of a double-axe as in
        Danish passage graves. The same substance is found with
        globular amphorae as far from its source on the Baltic as
        Bohemia’ and Eastern Galicia.’ In two tombs boars’ tusks
        were met, and bone beads in others. A copper spiral adorned
        the corpse in at least two cases.? The remarkable bone girdle-
          clasps from a tomb at Czarnakonice near Husiatyn, East Galicia,
          probably belonged to this culture.
Houses       Settlements of the folk who used these amphorae are rare.
          The majority come from Bohemia where they are always on
          high places commanding the rivers. It looks as if they were
          trading posts* or the settlements of robbers, dominating the
          commercial routes. ‘The important settlement at Kostelec on
          the Elbe contained no foreign pottery.’ The three globular
          amphorae were found in a pit-dwelling of the usual type.
          Elsewhere fragments of globular amphorae are associated with
          remains of other pottery; at Rivna¢    near Prague, Bernburg
          pottery, an ansa lunata fragment, a phalange whistle, and
          boars’ tusks were the most notable objects. At Kamyk*®       a
          fragment of an amphora occurred in a late Danordic settle-
          ment, with high-handled cups like Fig. 77, warted ware cups,
          striated ware, and a stone knife. Finally, at Giinthersdorf near
         | Leipzig a fragment of an amphora was found in a hut con-
           taining Danubian [a and b sherds.”
          * Tabulated by Stocky, Nied. Sb.,           7 Kalsbrieth    (Saxe-Weimar),  and
          p. 207; Sprockhoff, op. cit., pls. 36-7.    Gr.-Quenstedt near Halberstadt.
          2 Bortewitz in the State of Saxony,         8) So Stocky,-Prubr, ps20:
          Gross-Kreuz (Brandenburg), and at           9 PA. 1909, and pli.45; PZC pl,
          several sites in Poland.                    Lxxxi1; cf. Pravék, 1910, pl. xu (Sarka
          3 Mannus, ix, p. 144; cf. _Kostr-           near Prague).
          zewski, Real. v, p. 182.                    © Both finds noted at Prague.   Stocky,
          4 Beltz, p. 117.                            PZC., pl. Lxxxv.
          5 Nied. Sb., p. 211.                        11 Nabe, pp. 12 ff. and pl. m1, 7.
          6 Koziowski, Mtodsa, p. 186, no. 7.
Fic. 84. Jugs and drum, Opperschéner Mark.    M. Halle.    41




                                                       2
  Fic. 85. Globular amphorae, Sollichau.   M. Halle.   7
     THE NORDIC       CULTURES       IN THE DANUBE          CORRIDOR          141
    We are better documented on burial rites of this folk. The Graves
users of globular amphorae were generally buried in sub-
terranean cists of big stone blocks or thin slabs. The cists are Cists
generally quite small, measuring on an average 1-40 x I-10 m’.
inside, but they usually contained several skeletons though
probably five is a maximum number. In Brandenburg these
cists were sometimes erected above the ground. One large one
(6 x 1-8) was surrounded by big stones and corresponds to the
typical North German ‘Hunnenbett’.2 At Baalberg the cist
was divided by a port-hole slab into two compartments (cf.
p. 136 above). Finally, in Poznania globular amphorae are Trench-
met in Kujavish graves? at Rzeszynek and elsewhere. But graves
nowhere was collective interment the sole rite; flat graves in
the bare earth are almost as common. In Bohemia the globular
 amphorae are met exclusively in trench-graves, and nine graves
 in Brandenburg ‘ were likewise in the free earth. In such cases, Crema-
 and in some at least of the cists, the body was laid to rest con- tion
 tracted, but at Hoppenrade in Osthavelland the bones are said
 to have been burnt. The skulls from some inhumation graves
 in Germany have been examined by Schliz. The majority
 were dolichocephalic, some being described as cocoon-shaped,
 while others are compared to the type associated with corded
 ware. One from Ketzin, however, had an index of 86-75.°
     The vast majority of globular amphorae have been found Distribu-
 along the Saale and Elbe, but the culture spread sporadically tion
 as far north as the Uckermark and Pomerania.’ ‘The southern-
 most finds lie south of Prague. The distribution of the culture to
 the east was much greater. Quite typical vases occur in Eastern
  Galicia? with flint celts of rectangular cross-section, and a
  flat-bottomed variant with characteristic U-stamp decoration
  is met even in Volhynia. But that is not the limit. In shape and
  in the style of their decoration some vases from two ‘dolmens’
  near Tsarevskaya® in the Kuban closely resemble Central
  German types. Since the ‘dolmens’ containing them were each
  divided into two by port-hole slabs, precisely as the cist at
  Baalberg on the Saale, this resemblance cannot be accidental.
     Chronologically the globular amphorae occupy a relatively
  late position in Period III, since they are associated with Bern-
  burg pottery of late styles.
                                          6 Gr. Rambin nr.        Belgrade, Lemke-
 t See especially Sprockhoff, pp.85 ff.
 2 Beltz, pl. 17, 158, and p. 117.        Festschrift, fig. 8.
 3     tun be: PLO:                       7 Koztowski, l.c., xxv. 8, 115 Aberg,
 4 Sprockhoff, p. 84.                     Nordic, figs. 316-17.
 5 AFA. ix, p. 211.                       8 Dawn, figs. 62-3.
          142   THE NORDIC          CULTURES   IN THE DANUBE         CORRIDOR
Summary     The globular-amphorae complex differs from those hitherto
         described in that trade or robbery lies at its very basis. Apart
         from hunting no other economic activity can be detected.
            The social unit must have been of minimal size—perhaps
         not larger than a single family group—but the individual was
         always prepared for battle.                ;
            In the disposal of the dead separate interment is the rule,
         but megalithic chambers are occasionally employed as the
         resting-places for a plurality of corpses. A possibly accidental
         feature is the port-hole stone entry. Plastic art is absent.
         Neither weaving, metallurgy, nor stone-boring were practised.
            The distinctive tool and weapon is the thick-butted flint
         celt, the characteristic ornament amber beads. The pottery
         seems to imitate leather forms.
  Origin    On the classical German theory the culture thus defined is
         a branch of the megalithic culture of Scandinavia, specialized
         in North-East Germany. To Kossinna its spread was due to a
         second wave of Indogerman emigration from Denmark. Two
         characteristic traits—the flint celts and the amber beads—
         belong to the Scandinavian complex. Moreover, it is theo-
         retically possible to connect the eponymous vase itself with
         the long-necked amphora of the Danish dolmens, intermediate
         stages being represented in Uckermark.
            Aberg' and Menghin? accept this view, but Niklassen,3
         Sprockhoff,4 and Stocky5 have pointed out the impossibility
         of deriving our globular amphorae from those of the dolmens.
         The first-named considers that the form is based on bladder
         vessels.
            The issue is complicated by the port-hole slab in the Baal-
         berg tomb. On Elliot Smith’s typology the holed stone is a
         reminiscence of the false door in the Egyptian mastaba and
         should therefore be a mark of antiquity. The device occurs in
         isolated tombs or in small groups in the Western Mediter-
          ranean, South Spain, South France, the West of England, in
          the Seine—Oise—Marne basin, and in Sweden. It is common in
          Thuringia and again in the Caucasus. The author has pro-
          posed ° to bring the holed stone and the globular amphora from
          South Russia, relying especially on the correspondence between
          the Baalberg tomb and its furniture and those of Tsarevskaya.
          The Saale would then have been a secondary centre.
          1 Nordic, p. 170.                    4 Mark Brand., pp. 83 ff.
          2 Urgeschichte, p. 748.              5 Nied. Sb., p. 212.
          Bee Xdit ape TESe                    6 Dawn, p. 234.     ©
  THE NORDIC        CULTURES        IN THE DANUBE           CORRIDOR         143
   It is, however, possible that the culture under discussion,
like the Walternienburg, originated in Central Germany as a
result of an interaction between native epipalaeolithic elements
and traders sailing up the Elbe and Saale. There are impor-
tant deposits of salt in the Saale that have given their names to
the river and to Halle. There is also copper near Halle, and
tin near the head waters of the Saale.t The Elbe would be as
navigable for prehistoric mariners as the Danube, and offered
an attractive waterway to any one who had reached the North
Sea coasts. Perhaps, therefore, in Central Germany the phe-
nomena observable in Denmark were repeated, and early voy-
agers bringing with them the megalithic culture settled down
among savage natives. ‘The process of colonization might have
begun already in the Dolmen period of Scandinavia—our
Period II. The early rise of cultures parallel to, but not de-
rived from, the Scandinavian would thus become intelligible.
The rise of the group using globular amphorae would be but
one episode in this process.
   The future will decide which of these theories is the best
grounded. The one solid fact is the growth along the Saale
valley of a series of vigorous cultures? distinct both from
Danubian and Scandinavian.
   West of the Saale valley megalithic graves are rare in South Rhenish
and Central Germany. In Hesse there is a small group near analogues
Fulda. The tomb at Zuschen was a subterranean cist 20 m.
long, with a port-hole entry and surmounted by a barrow. It
contained numerous skeletons, two collared flasks, thick-butted
celts, and, quite near the top of the deposit, bits of bronze.
Some of the slabs were ornamented with engravings, repre-
senting apparently extremely conventionalized human figures.
A smaller cist nearby at Fritzlar was only 3 m. long, but was
divided into three compartments. One of these contained a
late corded beaker and a sort of shoe-last celt.
   Still farther wést, near         Giessen in the Wetterau,>? some
ruinous megaliths are known. Inside one were cremation
graves with late Danubian I pottery such as are common in
the Wetterau. We can only guess as to the origin of the builders
of these tombs. Did they come from the Saale or up the Weser
t But the copper can hardly have been     group north of our province (PZ. ii,
accessible, and the tin lodes on this    pp. 45,3415 Xlii-xiv, pp. 158ff.; Aberg,
side are shrouded in dense forest.        Nordic, p. 148; Menghin, Urgesch.,
2 The foregoing paragraphs are far        p. 753), and several others.
from exhausting these. There are still    3 PZ.v, p.592.
the Schénfeld type, a small local
144    THE NORDIC        CULTURES    IN THE DANUBE          CORRIDOR
from the North Sea area? Kossinna favours the first alternative.
It may be that the same current reached the Palatinate, since a
collared flask was encountered in the Zoned-beaker village of
Eiersheimer Mihle* and menhirs exist in the same province.
On the other hand, a ruined port-hole cist recently identified at
Niederschworstadt in Baden contained a flint point, a jet
bead, a carved bone amulet, and a copper awl suggesting con-
nexion with the Marne culture of France. Indeed T. D.
Kendrick is inclined to derive the whole series of Central
German cists with their port-hole slabs from this quarter.3
      t Infra, p. 200.             2 Badische Fundberichte, 1927, p.226.
                            3 Axe Age, p. 50
Fic. 86. Beaker and amphora, Peissen, primary interment
                      M. Halle. +




   Fic. 87.   Vases from secondary interment, Peissen.   IE




                                                    1
                                                    4




     Fic. 89. Vases from Stary Zamek II. M. Brno
                                VIII
                         CORDED WARE
ee            the Urals to the Vosges and from the Baltic to the
    Illyrian Alps the remains of a peculiar people distinguished
by their pottery, weapons, and burial rites are scattered about
unevenly. Hardly any settlements attributable exclusively to
this folk are known; the bulk of the material comes from tombs,
either isolated or grouped in small cemeteries. In view of this
fact and considering their vast range, it may be concluded that
the folk in question were essentially nomadic.
   The distinctive pottery is comparatively coarse, rarely Pottery
slipped, and generally pink in colour. The leading forms are a
beaker with long, almost cylindrical neck, and an amphora with
two or four handles on the belly (Fig. 86). Occasionally the
beakers have handles joining neck and shoulder,' but these are
usually very small and sit right at the base of the neck. Rarer
forms are troughs (Fig. 88), oblong or oval bowls with four
feet (known also in wood),? and cylindrical pyxides with lids.3
   The characteristic method of ornamentation is by the im-
pression of a cord. In the simplest style the cord was merely
twisted round the neck of the vase while still wet, leaving
horizontal linear rings. By a more elaborate process, in which
the aid of a cord wrapped round a wooden core must have been
invoked, triangles were produced on the neck and body of the
vase (Figs. 86 and 88). The amphorae might also be orna-
mented with plastic imitations of a rope.
   In late corded ware form and ornament degenerate. The
beakers and amphorae assume a squat shape; the cord-
ornament is omitted altogether or is replaced by incised pat-
terns, generally herring-bone motives (Fig. 87), but sometimes
a mere series of strokes or even pits. The relation of the two
styles is proved by the order of the interments in a barrow at
Peissen4 near Halle (Figs. 86-7). ‘The results there obtained
agree with Sophus Miiller’s observations on the separate-
graves of Jutland.
   In some areas special local styles with new forms arose
which will be described separately below.
1 e.g. Gotze-Festschrift, p. 26 and pl.        3 VAT., pl. 0, 16; also in SW. Ger-
11; Stocky, BAP., pl. xxtt, 5.                 many.
2 Stedten (Thuringia), JST. i, pl.             4 FST. xi, p. 13.
XXIII, 248.
  3443                                    Ue
          146                            CORDED     WARE
Battle-      The one weapon universally associated with corded ware
   axes   is the perforated stone battle-axe. In Saxo-Thuringia and in
          South-west Germany the faceted type ‘ was preferred (Fig. 90).
          Another Thuringian axe has a rectangular cross-section and
          rounded butt-end, and is usually decorated with engraved lines
          and circles.? Rougher axes with cylindrical butts (like Fig.95,1)
          are more common in Bohemia and Switzerland. Another
          series was preferred in the North, the finest specimens coming
          from the earliest separate-graves in Jutland; later but inferior
          forms of this series spread to Holland and Finland. East of
          the Oder a third family with a semi-circular cross-section and
          overhanging butt-end is more common 3 (Fig. 91); the finest




                  Fic. 90. Faceted battle-axe,       Fic. 91. Battle-axe of Eastern type
                          Thuringia. +               Nowy Daromin, after Nied. Sb. 4


        examples come from the later graves with Marschwitz pottery
        in Silesia. Otherwise battle-axes are not altogether common in
        the eastern graves, but the rough type with cylindrical butt is
        met in barrows as far east as Zitota+ and Jackowice 5 near Kiev,
        and even on the Kuban. Possibly the celebrated copper axe
        from Luzice near Géding in Moravia (Fig. 92) and similar axes,
        less richly decorated, from Thuringia and Switzerland belong
        to this culture.
  Celts    Celts are less typical. Both hard rock and flint were used.
        A stone celt from a cist at Stedten in Thuringia was found
        hafted transversely in a split knee-stick, the shaft being
        ornamented with carved herring-bone patterns. The flint
        celts generally have an almond-shaped cross-section like those of
          ‘ For   the   distribution   see Aberg,   4 WA. ix, p. 224, fig. 27.
          Nordic, pp. 98 f.                         5 'Tallgren, Pontide préscyth., p. 114;
          2 Mannus, Bibl. 22, pp. 1-10.             Swiat. vi, figs. 9 and 20.
          3 e.g. Nied. Sb., p. 247, fig. 4b.        ¢ JST. 1, pl. xxi, 250.
                             CORDED WARE                                       147
the “Danordic’ culture in Silesia (Fig. 76). One barrow at
Ober-Farnstedt in Thuringia yielded a spheroid mace-head, Mace-
but the tomb contained no pottery and may not belong to this heads
group. However, the same type of mace-head is common in
the separate-graves of Jutland, and there is a specimen from
grave IX at Bylany in Bohemia. Rough flint lance-heads and
triangular arrow-heads are found, principally in late tombs and


                                      "S POSS Sess
                                         WKS       pe HSI
                                   ) SOY
                                          Rea    SSS55 Klos
                                     Z, DSSISIIIK<K<«««
                                     SSISS
                                          kK
                                       ZZeee
                                         oN KR RISK
                                           Pee
                                                  O> LZ KEELE
                                                          SSSSS
                                                            Le  Ay
                                     SO
                                                   SSAPA   L.




                     Fic. 92. Copper battle-axe, LuZice,
                          Moravia, after Hoernes. 4

in the peripheral regions outside Thuringia. The transverse
arrow-head has not been reported.
   The most characteristic ornaments are necklaces made from Orna-
the teeth of beasts, particularly wolves. Perforated disks of ments
mother of pearl shell (Margarita sinuosa) were worn as orna-
ments in Thuringia' and Bohemia.? They were in all cases
adorned with punctured lines forming a cross. The same
pattern is seen on an amber disk from a tomb at Ziota in Little
Poland. Small amber beads are also met in tombs with corded Amber
ware both in Saxo-Thuringia‘ and Bohemia.5 A stone ring-
t Barrow near Helmsdorf, &c.; Méller,       4 Liitzen   (Merseburg),    Ziegelroda
Weimar-Fiihrer, p. 106.                     (Querfurt), Brogger, p. 265.
2 Zvoletioves with degenerate beakers,      5 Bylany and Zelenice; the pottery
Stocky, PZC., p. 87.                        seems already degenerate.
3 WA. ix, p. 240, fig. 28.
            as                           CORDED WARE
           pendant was found in a tomb at Uthleben (Sangerhausen).
   Metal   Finally, rings or ear-rings of copper wire are not uncommon;
           several instances are recorded in Saxo-Thuringia,? Bohemia,3
           Switzerland,‘ and Poland. In Saxo-Thuringia the tombs con-
           taining these metal objects are not always late if judged by their
           ceramic furniture.’ A pin of real bronze, 12 cm. long, was,
           however, discovered with corded ware in one compartment of
           a cist at Kirchscheidungen in Thuringia.°
    Red      Gifts of red ochre to enable the departed to paint his person
   ochre  have been recorded in Thuringia (Trébsdorf) and Switzerland.
          In South Russian graves the skeleton was laid in a regular
          layer of ochre’ so that the bones are found reddened to-day.
          A like phenomenon was noticed in one barrow with late corded
          ware at Charlottenhéhe in Uckermark.®
Dwellings    Prior to 1926 no settlements of our Battle-axe folk had been
          identified in their home land. Then Herren Amende and Frau-
          endorf excavated an oval depression 1:30 m. deep, 15 m. long,
          and 5-8 m. wide, surrounded at least on the north-west side by
          post-holes, and containing almost pure corded ware.? Outside
          Thuringia a barrow at Haldorf near Melsingen (Hessen)
          covered a cabin of logs, laid horizontally, which may illustrate
          one type of habitation used by the barrow-builders. It
          measured 1-70 x 1:65 m?. and was laid out on the megaron
          plan with an open porch on the short side.
   Tombs     The burial rite was normally interment in the contracted
          position under a barrow, the corpse generally lying on the right
           side. Flat graves, however, are also met in all regions.                 The
          tomb itself might be a large stone cist, a simple trench-grave, or,
    Cists in Poland,achamber-tomb. The large cists are concentrated in
          Saxo-Thuringia, though two cists without ceramic furniture
          from northern Wurtemberg™ may belong to the Corded-
          ware culture. The Thuringian cists, lying principally north
          of the Unstrut,” are of no very imposing dimensions. One
          at Farnstadt measured 3-9 x 1-2 m?., another at Stedten 5 m. x
          1-5 m. The walls and roof were built of thin slabs of sandstone.
           In two cases.near Querfurt a transverse slab, once pierced with
           * Brogger, p. 266.                       73-4. ‘Epipalaeolithic’ parallels are
           ? Mittelhausen and Auleben,M.Halle,      here cited from Schméckwitz near
           both with late pottery.                  Berlin.
           3 Bylany (Stocky BAP., pl.xxv1,5-6).     9 $ST. xiv, pp. 30 f.
           4 Schéfflisdorf in M. Zurich.            10 Real. v, p. 170 and pl. 38a; Ger-
           5 e.g. at Poserna, P.Z. i, p. 188.       mania, vi, p.110. Cf. Mannus, Ergbd.
           6° Mit. Prov. Mus. Halle, 1900, p. 93.   Vi, pp. 202 ff.
           j Cf. p. 160 below.                      ™ Reinerth, Chron., p. 13.
              Schumann, p. 10; Sprockhoff, pp.      ™ Gétze, Gefdassformen, p. 27.
                               CORDED WARE                                     149
a “port-hole’, divided the tomb into two chambers.’ Port-hole
 entry slabs are recorded at Ziegelroda and Allstedt.2. The four
uprights of a cist at Stedten were composed of different col-
oured stones—red sandstone, white limestone, porphyry, and
conglomerate.3 The material must have been brought from
some distance, showing the care bestowed upon the disposal of
the dead, while the variation of the colours may have had an
astronomical significance. The walls of the cist at G6hlitzsch
near Merseburg were painted with very conventionalized pat-
terns, among which a quiver and an axe are recognizable.’
South of the Unstrut two barrows 5 covered complexes of small
chambers built of dry masonry. In each case some chambers
contained corded ware and others Early Bronze Age inter-
ments.
   Trench-graves were far commoner. Particularly notable Shaft-
is the shaft-grave with remains of a wooden lining at Poserna in graves
Thuringia.® Such trench-graves are met throughout the area.
 In Jutland they represent the oldest type of separate-grave;
later the body was laid on the ground level and the mound
heaped over it.
   Chamber-tombs with a stepped pit entry and a niche in the Pit-caves
side as the actual burying place (Fig. 93) are met only in the
léss regions of Little Poland round Sandomierz (Nowy Daro-
min),’ Pinczéw,® and Kielce (Ztota).? ‘The nearest parallels to
the tombs are afforded by the ‘catacomb graves’ of the Don-
Donetz basin” and then by the Early Cycladic tombs (pit-
caves) in Euboea.
   All the types of tomb described normally contain only a single Burials
corpse, but in some of the large Thuringian cists two or even
six persons had been laid to rest. The body was nearly always
buried in the contracted posture, lying or squatting against
the wall, but three exceptional cases of extended burial have
been reported from Thuringia" and others come from Wurtem-
berg. Layers of ashes derived from funerary fires are very
frequently mentioned in the reports.
t FST. i, p. 166; the second tomb is      COP Zi, Pato.
said to have contained a ‘copper          7 Nied. Sb., pp. 253 and 266, and fig.
dagger’ 17:5 cm. long, and remains of      10.
a shield. Both objects are lost.          8 WA. ix (1925), p. 341 (Ksiaznice
2 Kruse, i, 2, pl.1; VAPS. i-ii, p. 73,   Wielkie).
pls. I-11.           SiS 1. 4, Pp. 21S.   9 Ibid., pp. 243 ff.
4 VAPS. i-ii, p. 50 and fig. 36.          to Tallgren, Pontide, p. 28 and fig. 44.
5 Dorndorf (FST. i, p. 92) and Kir-       11 Steinkreutz, Nerkewitz, and Ilbers-
schenscheidigung (MPMH. 1900, p.          dorf: VAPS. i-ii, p. 74.
93).                                      ™ Reinerth, Chron., p. 12.
           150                            CORDED      WARE
 Crema-      In addition to inhumation, cases of cremation have been
    tion   observed in Wurtemberg, Thuringia,’ Poland,’ and Alsace, and
           this rite was alone followed in the Swiss barrows of Schofflisdorf
           and Zigiholz. Schliz3 explains the ritein Wurtemberg as a result
           of the general custom of kindling a funerary fire in the grave-
           pit. The corpse would have come to be cast into the pit before
           the flames were extinguished. Sometimes, in fact, the trench
           was obviously designed for a complete skeleton. While the




                                                 Metres

                            Fic. 93. Plan of a pit-cave, Nowy Daromin,
                                          after Nied. Sb.

          celts and flint points usually show traces of exposure to the
          flames, the battle-axes have never suffered in this way.
Trepana-     Trepanned skulls accompanied by corded ware have been
     tion noted in Saxo-Thuringia and Bohemia.‘
 Cranio-     The majority of the skeletal remains studied by Schliz5
     logy belonged to tall, strongly built individuals, markedly
                                                                   dolicho-
          cephalic and orthognathous. Brachycephalic skulls have, how-
           ever, been recorded in Central Germany, Alsace,° and in the
           * Uthleben (Sangerhausen) with early       3 ZfE. 1906, Pp. 321-3.
           pottery; Lessau (Kruse, 11, 2 and 3,       4 Stocky, PZC., p. 88.
           P- 34).     4            ;                 5 AFA. vii (1908), p. 261; ix, p. 209.
           2 Przeg A. ii, p. 296; with late pottery   6 Forrer, l.c., p. 33; association with
           and battle-axe.                            corded ware very doubtful.
                               CORDED      WARE                             151
‘mixed culture’ of Ztota in Poland. Scheidt assigns most of his
Corded-Ware skulls (including those from later Marschwitz
graves) to his East German long-headed group.
   The only animal remains observed in the barrows are the Horse
bones of horses, identified in two cases. The question of
domestication is unsettled.
   Corded ware occupies such a vast area that local variations Local
are to be expected. In Saxo-Thuringia pottery of all ages as varieties
well as faceted axes is found in an immense number of graves
south of the Hartz and the Bode. Thence it spread south- Rhine
westward to the hill country round Frankfort and Heilbronn. valley
Though faceted battle-axes and pottery of standard type do
occur in this region, the bulk of the material looks late. More-
over Michelsburg pots and celts with pointed butts are found
in some barrows.3 Farther south remains become sporadic in
Baden. Beyond the Rhine only one beaker of late type and
a barrow are known from Alsace,+ but there are important
groups of tumuli with very decadent pottery, battle-axes, and
cremated remains in Switzerland, notably at Schdfflisdorf in
Canton Zurich,’ and Zigiholz near Olten.©                  Corded ware is,
moreover, not uncommon in the pile-villages of the Swiss lakes,
especially on the lakes of Constance, Bienne, and Neuchatel.
   South of the Danube in Bavaria we have a degenerate beaker Bavaria
and faceted battle-axe from a trench-grave near Grafrath on
the Amper,’ and a few sherds, accompanying contracted
skeletons, from barrows at Unter-Eberfing.’ Faceted battle-
axes, scattered over the hill country between the Neckar and
the Upper Rhine and Danube, serve to link up these scattered
outposts in the south with the Main—Neckar group.
   To the south-east corded ware extends directly into Bohemia
Bohemia.” The majority of the pottery has a decadent look,
and the faceted battle-axe is, according to Aberg,” represented
by only sixteen specimens. Farther east pure corded ware is
rare in Moravia,” though twelve rather poor faceted battle-
axes have been recorded. Still farther south there are isolated
 « BRGK. xii, p. 75; Aberg, Nieder-        7 PBI. 1895, p. 87; Auh V.v, pl. 49.
land, p. 49.                               8 Naue, OB., p. 43.
 2 Barthold in 7ST. iv, p. 102.            9 Reinerth, Chron., p. 67, and map
 3 Reinerth, Chron., p. 11, fig.1; RGK-   XXXIII.
Bl. 1909, p. 19.                          10 Stocky, BAP. xx—xxvii.
 Lehorrermaive tie.) 335) ochaetter,      1 Nordic, p. 99.        :
Haguenau, p. 151.                         1 There are beakers from a cremation
 5 AsA.    1919, p. 148; Reinerth,        grave near Olomouc and from Neméice
Schweiz, p. 130.                          on the Hana. Pravék 1926, fig. 33.
6 Reinerth, Schweiz, pp. 144 and 232.     Cf. Schranil, Béhmen, p. 73.
           aD                           CORDED WARE
         beakers from Buj in County Szabolcs in North Hungary,’
         and a squat, very typical specimen from the pile-dwelling at
         Notranje Gorice on Laibach Moor.
  Poland    Pure corded ware has been found in many graves in Ober-
           lausitz? but has not been identified in Silesia, although certain
           globular vessels, associated with the Danordic pottery, approx!-
           mate to the corded amphorae in shape,3 and the Danordic
           vases themselves are not infrequently decorated with cord
           impressions. On the other hand, in Poland, especially on the
           léss round Pinczéw, Miechow, and Kielce,* quite characteristic
           amphorae and beakers occur in graves—often in chamber-
           tombs with a stepped pit entry. But even in these areas forms
           reminiscent of the Lower Oder culture and hybrid Danordic
           types are common. In the hut-foundations which should
           correspond to these tombs and even in the pits giving access
           to the chambers, typical Danordic pottery is found as noted
           on p. 124.
   South      Still farther east vases, reminiscent of corded ware, occur in
  Russia   many South Russian kurgans, especially at Jackowice near Kiev
           and in the Don basin. From the former area comes something
           very like a Thuringian beaker, but the majority of vases both
           at Jackowice and along the Don are ovoid beakers with very
           low necks, decorated with hanging triangles executed by cord
           impressions on the shoulder.’ Even amphorae of the Thurin-
           gian type have been found near Kiev.® Battle-axes occur in the
           same regions, but do not constitute a typical element in the
           grave-goods. An additional link between these graves and those
           lying farther west is furnished by necklaces of bored tusks.
  Scandi-     In the north there is another series of graves, closely allied
   navia— to the Thuringian.        The nearest parallels are the Separate-
North Sea Graves of Jutland.         The beakers from these are precisely
    coasts
           parallel to the Thuringian and undergo the same degeneration,
           herring-bone patterns replacing cord impressions in the
           ground-graves. Amphorae are however absent, save for two
           stray specimens,’ and the forms of the battle-axes are different.
           Between Bremen and Hamburg,’ however, a group of barrows
           has been excavated where amphorae of late ‘Thuringian type
           « Dolgozatok, v, p. 418. Probably the     viii, p. 98; ix, p. 341; Nied. SO.,
           red skeletons from barrows on the         p. 244.
           Upper Tisza plain belong to this cul-     5 Tallgren, Pontide, figs. 36, LOS 4a,
           ture. Cf. p. 206 below.                   5; 69, 3-4.
           ? Mannus, xix, pp. 17 ff.                 6 Ibid., p. 120.
           3 SV. vii, p. 60; Altschles. i, p. 212.   7S. Miller, Stendlders K. figs. 231-2.
           4 Kozlowski, Méodsa, pl.xv; Wiad A        8 Mannus, i, pp. 267 ff.
                             CORDED WARE                                            4
were associated with battle-axes of late Danish type. Appar-
ently from this northern centre beakers and battle-axes of late
form spread westward to Holland. In that country, princi-
pally in Gelderland’ and on the Lower Rhine round Cologne,’
corded beakers with a stand ring are found in trench-graves
under barrows. With them are associated stone battle-axes of
very degenerate form. In some cases the same barrow con-
tains a zoned beaker at a higher level.
   Eastward on the Lower Oder there are numerous groups of The
flat graves and barrows,3 the furniture of which includes poor Lower
beakers with cord or herring-bone ornament,‘ one amphora, Oder
thick-butted flint celts, and degenerate-looking battle-axes.
The distinctive features of the Lower Oder pottery are, how-
ever, the flower-pot vases (Fig. 94, 6-7), and the ledge-
handled beakers (Fig. 94, 2), together with the free use of
a chevron decoration (Fig. 94, 1). Despite its similarities to the
culture of Jutland, the Lower Oder group should probably be
connected rather with the Thuringian centre since the faceted
battle-axe extends from the Saale into its territory. Still
farther to the north-east cord-ornamented beakers and battle-
axes are found in barrows in East Prussia *® and Finland.
   The types of the Lower Oder ware are widespread through-
out Great Poland (Fig. 94), and extend into the dunes of Little
Poland.’
   In Silesia® flower-pot vases and ledge-handled beakers, Silesia
such as we meet on the Lower Oder, are found in Marschwitz
graves, belonging to the very end of Period II* Similarly,
many of the vases and battle-axes found in the tombs of the
Little Polish léss district belong to the Lower Oder family
(Fig. 93).2 The same types with Silesian battle-axes recur in
barrows in Eastern Moravia,” and then in the second settle-
ment at Stary Zamek, where they are associated with ansa
lunata mugs and collared flasks.
   In the léss region of Little Poland a curious and apparently                           Ziota
hybrid culture * arose, best illustrated by the settlement and                            culture

1 Aberg, Niederlanden, pp. 41 ff.             5 So Sprockhoff in Gétze-Fest., p. 46;
2 Mannus, Ergdnzungsband. iv,p.121,           Mark Brand., p. 61.
Dis IX.) AZ.                                  6 Mannus, x, p. 13-
3 Schumann, Uckermark, pls. x1 and            7 Koziowski, Mtodsa, p.34, Map. 111.
                                              § Infra, p. 223.                       ;
xxix; Mannus, vii, pp. 44 ff.; Gétze-
Fesischrift,   pp. 44ff.;  Sprockhoff,        9 e.g. Grave III at Nowy Daromin
Mark Brand., pp. 55 ff., with plates.         Nied. Sb., pp. 247, fig. 4, g and d.; cf.
4 In contradistinction to the Thurin-         Kozlowski, op. cit., p. 64 and pl. xv.
gian, these beakers often have a dis-         °° Cervinka, MS., pp. 150-8.
tinct foot; Kossinna, Mannus,i,p.232.          ™ Koztowski, op. cit.
  3443                                   Xx
154                      -     CORDED WARE
cemetery of Ztota near Kielce. The pottery brought to light by
earlier unscientific excavations exhibits a bizarre mixture of
forms and ornaments. We have vases in the form of Danordic
or globular amphorae decorated in the style of corded
amphorae, and tall funnel-necked beakers adorned with straight
or wavy cord impressions. Conversely, Thuringian amphorae
are ornamented with U or V stamp-impression like globular
amphorae. There are also numerous shallow cups with ansa
lunata. More recent excavations have brought to light purer




      Fic. 94. Lower Oder corded ware, Great Poland, after Kostowski.   4


Nordic types in hut-foundations and more distinctively ‘Thur-
ingian forms in the chamber-tombs.*
   Other elements in the grave-goods were battle-axes of East
European affinities (allied to the Marschwitz type), flint celts
and sickles, bone pendants and amber beads with V boring, and
disks ornamented with a punctured cross. Nordic and brachy-
cephalic types were mixed with representatives of Czekanow-
ski’s ‘pre-Slav type’.                                     j
   In the light of the latest excavations at Ziota, and of Zurow-
ski’s explorations at Ksiaznice Wielkie, it may be inferred that
there was first a stage when Danordic ware was used for profane
purposes, corded ware being reserved for the dead. Later the
           t WA. ix, p. 243.                      2 Ibid., pp. 48 ff.
                             CORDED WARE           —                      155
two styles were blended. Since the Danordic pottery is found in
the pits (? pit-dwellings) from which the sepulchral chambers
open, it might be inferred that corded ware represents the
oldest element in the district.
   The civilization of the last settlement at Stary Zamek near The
JeviSovice in Moravia (called by Menghin the Jaispitz culture) 7evovice
exhibits analogous hybrid traits... Side by side with a series of culture
late Corded Ware types—degenerate amphorae and beakers
(Fig. 89 a), flower-pot beakers of Lower Oder type, and battle-
axes with cylindrical butt-ends, Palliardi found ‘Danordic’
forms—collared flasks? and cups with ansa lunata (Fig. 89 b)—
and elements derived from the south—harrowed pottery
(Fig. 89c), and vases with spikes on the inside as in North
Hungary. Similar material has been collected at the Kéglburg
near Krems in Lower Austria3 and at Hronsky Dama&d on the
Gran (Garom, Hron) in Slovakia.t In these sites, which may
well outlast Period III, we have interesting evidence of the
interaction of two cultural currents from the north and south
respectively.
   The relative date of Corded Ware has long been the subject Chrono-
of hot dispute. While most authorities regard it as the latest /ogy
of ‘neolithic’ wares, Schliz5 and Gétze° have referred the be-
ginnings of the fabric to the earliest phase of the New Stone
Age in the Neckar country and Thuringia respectively. In
point of fact both schools are right. Corded pottery was not
in use everywhere at the same moment. On the other hand, in
some areas, notably Thuringia and Denmark, the culture had
a long life, as the vast number of the barrows, the variety of
ceramic styles, the changes in the axe types, and the divergence
in burial rites clearly indicate. All that is possible in view of its
longevity is to lay down limits within which the ware was
current in several areas.
   In Denmark Sophus Miiller has identified vases, belonging Danish
allegedly to the pre-Dolmen period,’ which have been orna- evidence
mented by a cord impression round the neck and which anti-
cipate the form of the corded beaker. A more characteristic
and better dated vase comes from a separate-grave of Dolmen
Age on Bornholm. The most typical beakers lie, however, in
graves of Montelius’ period 3. Not only the degenerate
t Palliardi, WPZ. i, l.c.               5 ZfE. l.c. xxxviii (1906), p. 342.
2 i.e. pottery the surface of which has 6 VAT., p. xxi.
been roughened by scraping.             7 They almost certainly belong to
3 WPZ. ix, p. 29; MAGW. lii, p.139. | Montelius’ period 2; cf. p. 112, above.
4 M. Bratislava.
           156                            CORDED WARE
             beakers with herring-bone ornament, but even the still later
             flower-pot vases fall within the Passage-grave epoch. We may
             conclude therefore that Corded Ware goes back to Montelius’
             period 2 and reaches maturity in the early part of 3.
In Danu-        For Central Germany and Bohemia the evidence is less con-
     bian I clusive. The earliest indication is a sherd from a pit-dwelling
     settle- belonging to Danubian Ib people at Rez near Klecan* in
      ments Bohemia.      Similarly Nabe found sherds of corded ware in a
             Danubian I settlement near Leipzig,? while elsewhere the
             faceted battle-axe is said to occur in similar settlements.3 On
             the other hand, Amende points out that in the Altenburg East
             Division the distribution of Corded Ware barrows and Danu-
             bian I settlements coincides, and that in one case a grave with
             corded ware had disturbed a hut-foundation of the last named
             group. He accordingly infers that the occupation of the region
             by corded ware makers was subsequent to its desertion by
             Danubian peasants.‘
  Barrows       Multiple interments in the barrows of Baalberg, the Pohls-
  of Baal- burg near Latdorf, and the Derflingerhtigel near Kalbsrieth give
 berg, &c. somewhat ambiguous clues as to the relations between corded
             ware and the globular amphorae and Bernburg pottery
             respectively. In each case Niklassen concludes that the corded
             ware belonged to the latest interment in these barrows. But
             the corded vases in question were of late type, and the same
             author in his latest work assigns the earliest corded ware to his
             Walternienburg II or Bernburg I phase.°
    Helms-      In the great barrow at Helmsdorf a small cist with late
        dorf corded ware was found on the periphery of the huge tumulus,
In Bronze and o:50m. lower down than the main grave of Early Bronze Age
     Age date.     Grdssler thinks, however, that the small cist contained
  barrow   the body of a servitor slain when the chief, reposing in the rich
           central tomb, was laid to rest.             In that case corded ware in
           Thuringia would still have been in use in the Early Bronze Age.
           That conclusion is supported by observations in the compound
           cist at Dorndorf, where two compartments contained Early
           Bronze Age interments and the remaining three skeletons
           accompanied by rather decadent beakers and amphorae.? So
           in Bohemia* corded ware has been found with bell beakers.
           t Stocky, PZC., p. 89.                     5 Mannus, xvi (192            ze
           2 ee               Nabe, op. cit. p. 14,     FSP xii, 20. ee
           pl. 11, 1-2.                               7 JST. i, p. 92 and pl. xi.
           3 PAN pe Zoe:                              8 Stocky, PZC., p. go.
           4 Gétze-Festschrift, p. 32.
                                CORDED WARE                                     157
    Reinecke goes further and contends that the faceted battle-
 axe 1S an imitation of Early Bronze Age metal weapons. But
 though It 1s very possible that copper axes like those from
 Luzice and Vinelz were really the models for the stone
 weapons, these copper types may themselves well go back to
 Period III.
   _We conclude that the roots of corded ware in the Thurin- Corded
 gian highlands may well be referred to Period II, and that the ware
 ware was current throughout Period III and even in the early /asts
 part of Period IV. No reliance can be placed on the typology from 1-
 of the tombs in Central Germany ;' for the several types differ /”
 as much locally as chronologically, and the Danish evidence
 cannot be ignored.
    The conclusions reached for Denmark and Thuringia do not Date on
 necessarily hold good for other regions. Farther west corded the Rhine
 ware probably began rather later than on the Saale, but inde-
 pendant criteria of data are rare. In a barrow near Fulda?
 a grave with corded ware lay at a lower level than a brachyce-
 phalic skeleton accompanied by a plain bell beaker. Similarly,
 in one barrow in Gelderland a corded beaker was demonstrably
 older than a zoned beaker.3            On the other hand, the celts with
  pointed butts found in some barrows in Wurtemberg belong
_ to the epoch of the zoned beakers. Finally, the Middle Bronze
  pottery in Starkenburg and elsewhere in South-West Germany
  is so strongly reminiscent of corded ware that the latter cul-
  ture must be continuous with that of the Tumuli.t Hence
  corded ware reached the Rhine valley before the end of Period
  III and very likely survived in the highlands throughout
  Period IV.
     The upper limit for Corded Ware east of the Elbe is much East of
  harder to determine. The position of the Marschwitz culture the Elbe
  in Silesia and that of Stary Zamek II in Moravia are indeed
  determined stratigraphically; both belong to the very end of
  Period III. A correspondingly low date for the specialized
  culture of the Lower Oder may be inferred from its obvious
  affinities to the Marschwitz culture on the one hand and that
  of the Danish upper-graves on the other. It is not thereby
  demonstrated that the graves with good beakers and amphorae
 t ¥ST. iii, p. 136. The series would be:       Corded ware only occurs in 3a and
    2a ‘Huns’ Beds’.                        below. Cf. Reinerth, Chron., p. 12.
    2b Big chambers of unhewn blocks.       2? Fuldder Geschichtsverein, Schriften,
    3a Big chambers of stone slabs.         vi (cf. Skizze I).
    3b Small stone cists.                   BEPZniv apps 701
    4 Barrows without cists.                4 Infra, p. 314.
         158                          CORDED     WARE
        on the Little Polish léss lands do not go back to a distinctly
        earlier period.                                         ;
Summary    The barrows with corded ware reveal to us a wandering race
        of hunters and pastoralists. They appear as a pre-eminently
        martial folk; yet, whether by plunder or trade,* they were able
        to secure products of distant lands. Their favourite haunts,
        moreover, lay in proximity to natural sources of wealth—the
         amber of Jutland, the salt of the Saale valley, the tin of the
         Bohemian Erzgebirge. Perhaps they took toll on those en-
         gaged in exploiting these resources. On the Neckar, Schliz
         thinks they played the part of over-lords among the Danubian
         peasants, and Reinerth assigns them a similar role with regard
         to the Michelsberg folk. The occurrence of battle-axes and
         corded beakers in the later lake villages of Switzerland
         indicates an actual conquest by the Nordic warriors. ‘These
         conquering battle-axe wielders exerted a profound influence
         wherever they went. We shall see that vital elements in the
         Middle Bronze Age cultures of South-West Germany, Hungary,
         and Poland can be traced back to them.
  Origin    But who were they and whence did they come? To this
         question three answers have been propounded. Kossinna sees
         in the makers of corded ware descendants of the autochthonous
 Scandt- population of Denmark.      The rudiments of their distinctive
   navia pottery go back to pre-Dolmen times.        The separate-graves
         would represent the survival of native funerary customs un-
         contaminated by the western influence that introduced the
         megalithic idea. ‘The stone battle-axes might be derived from
         the flint-armed antler axes of Shell-mound times.            ‘The
         diffusion of Corded Ware would then be ultimately due to the
         expansion of the aboriginal Baltic population either from Jutland
         or from secondary centres in Thuringia or on the Lower Oder.
            This view has been endorsed, to some extent, by Professor
         Menghin, but is to-day losing ground. Whatever may be said
         of the Dolmen       period, Sophus Miller, Nordmann, Stjerna,
          Schwantes,3 and other leading authorities are unanimous in
          regarding the Battle-Axe graves of Montelius’ period 3 in
          Jutland as intrusive.
 Thurin-     As the original home of the invaders many look to Thuringia.
      gia It was here that Corded Ware attained its richest and fullest

        « Sprockhoff suggests that it was this   * I add this last argument; Kossinna
        folk who carried bronzes to East         does not seem to have thought of it.
        Prussia (infra, p. 243) bringing back    3 Volker und Rasse, i, p. 162.
        amber in return.
                             CORDED     WARE                               159
development, and hence migrations in various directions could
conveniently be traced. Now, despite the forest conditions
ruling during the Atlantic epoch, there were probably open
spaces, fit for occupation, in sandy patches. And quasi-
microlithic flints, that may be the work of epipalaeolithic men,
are actually turning up all along the Saale valley‘ and elsewhere.
Given an epipalaeolithic population in this area, it is not in-
conceivable that they should have assimilated some elements of
neolithic culture from the Danubians, especially the Réssen
folk; these did use hammer-axes, and there are real analogies in
form and ornament between Réssen and corded pottery.”
   Such a theory has much to commend it. The main difficulty
is the very exiguous quantity of the evidence for any pre-
neolithic population in our area. And then peculiar originality
must be ascribed to these rather hypothetical survivors if they
initiated the use of barrows and all the very positive traits that
distinguish our culture.
   The remaining theory, proposed by the author, derives the South
battle-axe folk from South Russia. ‘The Danish separate- Russia                   -
graves, the Thuringian barrows, and the Fatyanovo culture of
Central Russia would all be due to movements radiating from
the Pontic steppes. There we have evidence for an epipalaeo-
lithic population, and there the necessary conditions for their
education in neolithic arts as well as the rise of the battle-axe 3
culture are fulfilled. The cultural community between the
barrow builders in Jutland, Thuringia, and South Russia is
undoubted. Recent discoveries have even demonstrated the
spread of elements of culture from South Russia westward in a
manner that does not permit of reversal. ‘The ‘Aegean’ plan of
the chamber-tomb, adopted by the corded ware makers of Little
Poland, can only have been transmitted across South Russia
where the ‘catacomb graves’ of the Don basin provide the
needful link. Moreover Europaeus‘ has identified in the East
Baltic States a series of battle-axes of pure South Russian type.
   There are nevertheless serious objections to such a view.’ The
x Cf. map II.                           millennium   B.c.
2 The reported epipalaeolithic burial   4 FM. xxxi (1924), p. 54.
with red ochre at Schméckwitz would     5 The horse is still regarded as an
provide an additional argument for      eastern steppe animal, but the bones
the local origin of our cultures. Cf.   from Corded Ware barrows in the Rhine
note 8, p. 148 above.                   basin cannot be used in support of the
3 The battle-axe as a weapon seems      South Russian hypothesis until the
native in Hither Asia; in Mesopo-       native European forest horse be ex-
tamia it may be traced to the fourth    cluded by further study of the remains.
160                     CORDED       WARE
whole steppe culture of South Russia has a late look. Corded
ware is only one of its components, restricted to limited areas.
Battle-axes are not typical elements in the furniture of the
steppe graves, and in the Donetz basin they occur principally
in the ‘catacomb graves’,’ whereas the true corded ware is
found only in the earlier trench-graves. ‘The corpse was nearly
always stained with red ochre, a practice attested in only one
German grave though more common in North Hungary. While
it is possible to place the ovoid beakers from South Russia at
either end of a typological series, the vases from intermediate
areas like Poland really look later than the corresponding ones
from Thuringia or Jutland.
   So the question must be left open.
                    ' Tallgren, op. cit., p. 116.
                              IX
         THE PILE-DWELLING CULTURES
    T the foot of the Alps in the valleys of Switzerland and
     along the highland zone between the Rhine and the Elbe
had dwelt in epipalaeolithic times a comparatively substantial
population. Though the highlands were densely wooded
throughout the early neolithic phase, there is no reason why
such folk should have deserted the region, for the forests must
have harboured plentiful game.
                        I. GENERAL       SURVEY
The neolithic civilization of these same regions is that of the
‘Pile-Dwellings’, a term which covers a plurality of distinct
cultures, disparate in character and in age. The most striking
feature common to them is the choice of lake-shores or marshes
as the sites for villages. The practice in question was con-
ditioned by the nature of the country in Atlantic and early Sub-
boreal times. Given a half-civilized population possessed of a
neolithic culture and requiring all the available open spaces for
their crops and their herds, but incapable, for want of efficient
tools, of clearing away the forest, the only suitable sites for
settlement were the open peat-bogs and lake-shores. The
celebrated lake dwellings are just the devices adopted to meet
these conditions.
   ‘Lake Dwellings’ fall into three classes. The most cele- Varieties
brated are those supported on piles. Only the piles survive of lake
to-day, and the reconstructions figured in the text-books are village
pure works of imagination. Each house was a distinct entity, Pile-
connected with the next only by one narrow bridge. The dwellings
ageregation of habitations on a single platform, usually de-
picted, gives quite a false impression. In fact, the village con-
sisted of a series of houses strung out along the lake-shore. The
houses themselves -were rectangular, the average size on the
Lake of Bienne being about 6:50 x 4:50 m?. But in some vil-
lages at least there are traces of one big house near the centre
of the settlement that might measure 7:50 x 6:50 m?. or more.*
These larger structures, like the big house at Aichbiihl, have
been compared to the Melanesian assembly-houses.                   To-day
t The foregoing account is based on _ pile-dwelling architecture   that has
Ischer’s article in AsA. 1926, pp.65ff., been made.      Cf. now   Reinerth,
the first and only objective study of    Schweiz., pp. 70 ff.
  3443                               Y
             162              THE PILE-DWELLING           CULTURES
          the view is gaining ground that the pile-villages were not built
          over the open water but on the muddy margin of the lake.
          Their submergence would be due to the rise of the water level
          since Subboreal times.’ Rudolf Muchand Kyrle have, however,
          very recently adduced pertinent objections to too wide a
          generalization along these lines.”
  Stacked    The second class may be designated ‘Stacked Platform
platforms Dwellings ’ (Packwerkbauten). According to Heierli,> these
          began in log rafts afloat on the edge of the lake and kept in place
          by vertical piles at the corners. The raft gradually becoming
          waterlogged, another layer of logs was laid upon it, and then
          another, till a stack resting on the lake bottom was formed. In
          the classical example of this type at Niederwil‘* (Egelsee) the
          pontoon had been renewed six or eight times. Reinerth, sup-
          ported by Viollier,’ considers these structures identical with
          the Moor-villages. They had been originally, not floating
          rafts, but wooden platform-pavements laid on the peat; these
             had sunk and had, therefore, been renewed.
   Moor-      In the third type the log floors of the houses and the pavings
  villages of the streets and courts were admittedly laid directly upon the
            eat.
Disparity i The exploration of the relics submerged under the waters
 of mate- of the lakes in Switzerland and Wurtemberg, begun in 1853,
 rial col-   has yielded a peculiarly vivid picture of a neolithic civilization.
    lected   But we know to-day that that picture was essentially com-
             posite, blending elements belonging to different epochs and
             disparate cultural groups. Stratigraphical excavations on Lake
             Neuchatel by Dr. Vouga have shown that a given site might
             be occupied for a long period during which culture changed
             materially. There is no guarantee that any other sites, explored
             merely by means of the dredging machine, are any more
             unitary. And the same excavations have shown that the old
             typological criteria for estimating the age of individual objects
             are worthless. Subsequent researches by Dr. Reinerth of
             Tiibingen suggest that the lake-area of Switzerland and
             Wurtemberg was divided into two distinct cultural provinces
             when the full neolithic period opened. But at present only a
             fraction of the material gathered from the lake-dwellings can
             be attributed with any confidence to one or other of these
             * Vouga, L’Anthr. xxx, p. 52; Viol-     * MAGW. \Wvii (1927), pp. (38) ff.
             lier, MAGZ. xxix, p. 152; Reinerth,     3 Urgesch., p. 99.
             Schweiz., pp. 68f.; Antiquity, ii, p.   4 MAGZ. xxii, p. 44; B¥. 127, p. 119.
             404.                                    5 MAGZ, xxixyyp. 1538
                  THE PILE-DWELLING             CULTURES                       163
chronological phases or cultural provinces. The great mass of
the finds can only be treated as a unit, however disparate it
may be in reality. Without trying to repeat familiar descrip-
tions of lake-dwelling civilization, it may be well to recapitu-
late the main traits, before proceeding to a detailed analysis of
the several cultural groups and their evolution in time.
   The inhabitants of the lake villages described on p. 162 were Physical
a race of pastoralists and cultivators. The people themselves type
are known only from the fragmentary remains of individuals
found among the ruins of the settlements; for no cemetery has
been found attached to any lake village, and we simply do not
know how the dead were disposed of.! The existing remains and
fragments reveal a characteristic Alpine type, with short head,
broad face, and wide nose. Besides this type we meet dishar-
monic crania, still brachycephalic, due, according to Schlagin-
haufen,’ to a crossing of the Alpine stock with a dolichocephalic
race. Since inthe Bronze Agethe pure short heads have vanished
and dolichocephals are common, there is much probability in
the doctrine, advanced originally on typological grounds, that
the oldest lake-dwellers were the pure brachycephals. The
intrusive dolichocephalic element is generally identified with
the Nordic intruders whose advent is attested by the archaeo-
 logical evidence from the pile-villages (battle-axes, sherds of
 corded ware), and on the land (barrows with corded ware).
    The animals 3 included in the flocks of the lake-dwellers were: Animals
    Short-horned cattle + (Bos brachyceros).
    The turbary sheep (Ovis aries pal.).
    The turbary pig (Sus palustris).
    The turbary goat (Capra hircus palustris).
    The turbary dog (Canis palustris).
    Remains of horses are exceedingly rare and probably come
 from wild animals.
    The principal grains 5 cultivated were:                         Grains
    Wheats: Triticum monococcum.
              Triticum dicoccum.
              Triticum compactum (in three subspecies).
t Reinerth, Schweiz., p. 125, assigns to   Schenk, op. cit., pp. 266 f.; Reinerth,
the Lake-dwellers the well-known           Schweiz., tabulates the results after
Chamblandes cemeteries which have          pe 227.
in fact no relation to lake villages.      4 A variety of Bos primigenius was also
2 MAGZ. xxix, p. 240; cf. Schenk,          domesticated at a few sites.
La Suisse préh., pp. 531 ff.               5 Neuweiler, MAGZ. l.c., p. 257;
3 Hescheler, MAGZ. 1.c.,p.247; River-      Schenk, op. cit., pp. 294 ff.; Reinerth,
din and Pittard, AsAg. iv, pp. 259 ff.;    Schweiz., p. 225.
             164              THE PILE-DWELLING          CULTURES
               Barleys: Hordeum distichon (rare).
                               9)
                                    polystichon.
                                     hexastichon (in two subspecies).
               Spelt, millet, and oats.
    Fruit          In addition lentils, peas, and broad beans, and two sorts of
             small apple were probably cultivated. Apples seem to have
             been pressed for the manufacture of a sort of cyder.' Traces
             of the vine are occasionally met.
     Flax       Flax was grown for the manufacture of the textiles. The
             variety used was distinct from the modern Linum usitatissimum,
             and probably represents a cultivated form of a local native
             flax.?
Industries      The mud of the lakes has embalmed for us a unique record
             of the handiwork of early man. Some products not assignable
             to any specific period may be mentioned here. The textile 3
             remains attest considerable technical ability, and the netting
             and basketry.is likewise fine.         Wooden      vessels, bows,*+ and
             boomerangs have been preserved, as well as dagger-hilts and
             arrow-shafts. Generally, but not universally, the celt was
             hafted with the aid of an antler sleeve, the elasticity of which
             reduced the shock of the blow and so protected the shaft from
             splitting. Bone and horn were in general very widely used.
Harpoons Horn harpoons, fish-hooks, and fish-spears,5 bone combs and
            ‘forks’, whistles made from the phalanges of swine, and drink-
            ing cups of horn and tortoise-shell deserve mention. Much
            of the bone-work—the harpoons, the phalange whistles, the
            cubital daggers, the antler axes—is frankly reminiscent of
            epipalaeolithic or even palaeolithic forms. The resemblances
            are, however, rather superficial; the harpoons, for instance, are
            more like Danubian I specimens than Azilian or Maglemosean.
Reinerth’s     The celts and the pottery have provided Reinerth with the
classtfica- basis for a division of the Alpine Stone Age, both geographical
       tion and chronological. They reveal in the first place two cultural
            provinces; the one, which Reinerth terms ‘Nordic’, em-
            braces at first Wurtemberg, and Switzerland east of the Aar.
            West of that river begins Reinerth’s ‘Western’ province. He
            further distinguishes four typological stages in the evolution
            of the stone implements, corresponding to four periods. By
            the last of these the frontier between the two provinces had
             t Reinerth, Schweiz., p. 47.           4 All of simple form;     cf. Reinerth,
             2 Neuweiler, J. c.                     p. 36 and fig. 1.
             3 See Heierli’s chapter in Urgesch.,   5 Ibid., figs. 2 and 3.
             pp. 172 ff.
                   THE PILE-DWELLING            CULTURES                    165
virtually disappeared, and the whole highland area was occu-
pied by a comparatively uniform mixed culture.
   In the ‘Nordic’ province the celts generally have a rect- ‘Nordic’
angular cross-section, having been made by sawing out of celts
the original block ;' they are supposed to develop through four
stages, the first of which is only represented in the eastern
area.” In the same province Danubian shoe-last celts, like Shoe-last
the Hinkelstein type of Fig. 22b, are found, especially on the chisels
Lake of Constance, but sporadically as far south as the Lake of
Geneva.3 To the same group belong Danubian axe-hammers
like Fig. 22d, and hammer-axes like Fig. 56d.4 The earlier
of the eastern area is said to be the same as the Aichbiihl ware
to be described below. The whole complex will, in fact, find its
explanation in Wurtemberg.
   The Western celts have a round or oval cross-section, being ‘Western’
made from pebbles. The ‘oldest’ (i.e. the most primitive) celts
type (stage 1) is very plump, with a nearly round cross-section
and a blunt butt. The latest type (stage 4) has a pointed butt
and is nearly flat. Between the two extreme Reinerth inserts
two intermediate stages5 for which neither stratigraphy nor
distributions provide any evidence. Stage 1 is virtually con-
fined to the area west of the Aar, apart from a small group on the
Lake of Constance, while stage 4 is spread evenly over the whole
area. The lateness of the latter type is well attested by its con-
text in Germany where it belongs to the end of our Period III
and the beginning of IV, and in France where it is associated
with bronze daggers.’ On the other hand, the primitive form
is not necessarily old.? To the Western culture would have
belonged originally a series of round- or flat-bottomed vases,
with no handles save lugs, no division into parts, no ornamenta-
tion save plastic ridges, and usually made of coarse paste,
unevenly fired and containing large quartz grits.°
   This Western culture would be entirely distinct from that Contrast
first defined and would have originated in South France. We with
may here note that Reinerth’s Western celts are in truth Danube
t Schweiz., p. 176.                        situ first in the Middle Neolithic of
2 There is absolutely no stratigraphi-     Auvernier, not in the Lower as stated
cal evidence for any such evolution;       by Reinerth on p. 184: cf. WPZ. xi,
indeed the evidence from Vouga’s               aes
excavations is incompatible with its       : Childe, Dawn, fig. 121; Reinerth,
validity, WPZ. xi, p. 20.                  Schweiz., pp. 170 f., fig. 65.
3 Reinerth, Schweiz., pp. 191 and 258,     6 Infra, p. 184.
fig. 77.                                   7 For instance in Thessaly it is com-
4 Ibid., figs. 74, 76, 78, and p. 262.     monest in the Bronze Age.
The   axe-hammer   has been   found   im   8 Reinerth, op. cit., figs. 49-50.
        166               THE PILE-DWELLING              CULTURES
        western qua pebble celts; they belong to a family strange to the
        Danube basin but familiar all along the Mediterranean coasts 1n
         Crete,! South Italy, and Spain, and then all over South France.
         The type with pointed butt finds its finest exponents 1n the
         Breton dolmens.
            The foregoing system provides a convenient framework for
         our further analysis. Fortunately, in each area there are sites
         that have been scientifically excavated, and a description of
         these will help to fill in the details and correct errors.
                    II. EAST     SWITZERLAND:           AICHBUHL I and            II

           The type site for the eastern province is Aichbihl on the
           Federsee Moor, where two superimposed villages, separated
           by the sterile deposit left by a flood, were explored in 1919 by
           the Urgeschichtliches Institut of Tubingen.‘
Aichbihl      The village of Aichbiihl I was erected on the sedgy shores
IT: houses of the Federsee.     The houses were built on log platforms,
           either resting directly on the peat or raised above the sedgy shore
           of the lake by piles. Part of the platform constituted an open
           forecourt in front of the house. The latter was a rectangular
           structure of the megaron type with a gabled roof supported by
           stout posts. The entry was on the small side, and the roofed
           area was divided into two parts—an open porch and a square
           chamber behind. In the porch stood an oven, while there was
           sometimes a hearth in the inner room. A typical house of this
           type measured (3+5) x5 m*. Besides these dwelling houses
           there was a large one-roomed house in the centre of the
           village.‘
   Pottery    The pottery from the older village in its best specimens is a
           fine, polished, black ware corresponding technically to Danu-
           bian II fabrics. And most of the forms illustrated by Reinerth
         recur in that culture at Jordansmiuhl, Réssen, or MiinchshGfen.
         Such are pedestalled bowls,° deep dishes with inturned rims,’
         biconical pots with cylindrical necks and round string-hole
         knobs,® and one-handled cups. Other shapes such as the
         flasks? and keeled bowls’ are reminiscent of the Bavarian
         Réssen pottery (that was partly contemporary with Miinchs-
         t Evans, Palace, fig. 15a, 1.              5 Reinerth,      Wohnbau,      pp.   12 ff.;
         2 Peet, Stone and Bronze, fig. 59.         Chron., pp. 25-6.
         3 Aberg, Western, pp. 51f.                 6 Ibid., pl. x1, 16.
         4 No regular report has appeared de-       7 Ibid. 1.
         spite the lapse of eight years; the fol-   & Ibid. 4, cf. SV. vii, fig. 3.
