 Pin C3 seems native to Wurtemberg; at least it is commoner
 there than anywhere else.
    Amber was freely used, not only for necklaces but also for
 ornamenting girdles. Gold was rare. A Swiss pin of bronze
 with a gilt head, from a barrow at Nehren, is notable.
                                                                    l
    The pottery, not divisable very surely between the severa     red
                                                              ;
 typological phases, was generally black or dark brown large
                            small cups. The  main  forms   are
 ware was preferred for                                       r pro-
 urns with funnel necks (Fig. 167),° jugs of a rather simila Three
 file (Fig. 168 a-b), shallow cups, and bowls (Fig. 168 c). of the
 methods of ornamentation were used: ruffling of part           (Fig.
 surface (Fig. 167 b), the application or extrusion of warts
                                                         of decora-
  167 a), and fretwork (Fig. 168). The latter method
 tion? was particularly widespread in Wurtemberg.ian barrow-
     According to Kraft the pottery reveals the Swab
                                                         nts. The
 builders as a mixture of eastern and western eleme   those of the
 jugs and handled-cups are aptly derived from the same con-
  proto-Aunjetitz group.’ Ruffling was known in fretwork ware
  text, as the vase from Leubingen shows. ‘The
                                         Hungarian group 1, Winklarn provid-
 LD 2 Te
                                         ing a possible intermediate form.
 2 Bottingen II, PBI. 1905, p. 34-       7 See Schumacher in AuhV. v, pp.
 3 PBI. 1891, pl. tv; Behrens, pl. vu,
                                          176 f.; BRGK. x, p. 32; Behrens, p.
 26; AsA. xvii, p. 90, fig. I.           217; Mannus, xviii, pp. 14 ff.
 4 FbSw. xx, p- 11, fig. 5; probably     8 The handled bell-beakers of Fran-
 Late Bronze Age.                        conia, e.g. fig. 165, might equally well
 5 ZfE. xxxix, p. 803.
                                         be invoked.
 6 These might in the last resort be
                                  the
 derived from the pitcher-urns of
308             THE TUMULUS          BRONZE    CULTURE
would be based upon the Bell-beaker tradition. Some of the
urns and jugs, and perhaps the shoulder-warts, might be re-
ferred to the Michelsberg culture. Some small cups and the
funerary use of the urns go back to Corded Ware. From the
same culture came the distinctive burial rite—the use of the
barrow.
   Knowledge of metallurgy must on Kraft’s chronology have
been derived from the Early Bronze Age culture of the valley.
The spiked tutulus can indeed be connected with the wire
type of Straubing (Pl. 14, Ar). The Rhenish types (wheel-pins,
and anklets 3) would only have reached the Alb in Period VI
(D). The Hungarian types appear even later. If Kraft’s divi-
sion, particularly in these points, be at the moment rather
questionable, it at least shows the very low limits that may be
set for the Hungarian Bronze Age. It is at the same time the
great merit of this author’s work that he has established the
continuity of the Tumulus Bronze Age with the Tumulus
Iron Age of Hallstatt C—a continuity plainly revealed in the
pottery.
                  IV.   UPPER    RHENISH PROVINCE
On the Upper Rhine the most important barrows are those in
the Forest of Haguenau (Alsace), described in a superbly pro-
duced monograph by Dr. Schaeffer.! A few barrows go back
to Period IV, the Early Bronze Age,’ the rest belong to Periods
V and VI, lasting on into Hallstatt times.
   Cremation and inhumation were in use at all times simul-
taneously, but at first the former rite was reserved for women
and children.
   With one exception belonging to type B, the celts, none of
which are earlier than phase C, all belong to the West European
group of palstavs. ‘The daggers represent type Bz. Only two
rapiers, both of type A2, and no bronze-hilted daggers, swords,
nor spear-heads were found. Arrow-heads were rare.
   The chief ornaments in use in the Middle Bronze Age were:
      Bracelets (worn only by women): F1 and Aza.
      Anklets, in phase Br; in C, 2 developing into 3. (Fig. 170.)
      Pins, C3 in phase B; wheel-pins(Cs5) and pins like C7 in C.
      Wire girdle clasps (worn by men and women alike).
      Pendants of types B3 and Az were found in one grave.3
 * Les Tumulus de la Forét de Hague-     Daggers like Ar, pins Ar     and   Ca,
 nau, i.                                 torques Ar.
 > op. cit., p. 161, and fig. 31, j-o,   3 Schaeffer, fig. 38, r—s.
k



                 Jugs from Grossengstingen and Gomadingen.       M. Stuttgart.       4
    Fic. 168.




                                            b                         Cc
                  a
                                                                         r.      4
       Fic.     169.   Vases from barrows round Haguenau, after Schaeffe
                THE TUMULUS           BRONZE      CULTURE                       309
     Amber was common,              but Schaeffer! doubts its Baltic
        provenance.
   The pottery includes: (i) urn-like jugs with funnel necks ’
(Fig. 169b); (i1) pedestalled bowls Seitebeaales. very similar
to the Hercynian type ;3 (iii) jugs with funnel necks (the rim 1s
sometimes splayed out but never to a real ‘trumpet-mouth’ as
in Bavaria), shallow cups (Figs. 168, a and c), bowls, and cylin-
drical pyxides. Besides simple incised triangles, the favourite
method of ornamentation was fretwork. The earlier examples
with simple zigzag bands‘+ go back to phase B (Fig. 169 c).
Later, more elaborate designs supplemented by stamped mo-




                         Fic. 170. Anklets, Haguenau.      4

 tives (circles, &c.) (Fig. 169 b) came into use and remain current
 into the Hallstatt period.5
     The pottery contains Zoned-beaker, Michelsberg,® and
 Corded Ware elements. Schaeffer’ expressly recognizes, too,
 that the habit of barrow-building and the rite of cremation
 were introduced by the Corded Ware folk.
     Metallurgy was learned in the Danubian school. Many
 types come from Hungary and Austria, none from Gaul.’ As
 Danubian we may name, beside the pins and torques of the
  earliest barrows, the heart-shaped pendants, certain cups,’ and
  1p. 261; yet the typical ‘Danish’         cal ornament is clearly enough de-
  centre-piece for a necklace of several    scended from vessels such as we find
  strings occurs (zbid., fig. 18)).         at Lingolsheim ; Forrer, op. cit., fig. 21,
  2 Ibid. pl.v,d. This is almost exactly    e and n. Cf., further, Kraft in BY.
  paralleled on the Swabian Alb, Beh-       131, p. 191.
  rens, pl. xIII, 6.                        7 op. cit., p. 215.
  3 Schaeffer, pl. vit.                     8 Schaeffer, p. 200.
  4 op. cit., figs. 56, C-D and 31, A-F.    9 Ibid., pl. x1x, A-c, G. Cf. Kraft in
  5 Ibid., p. 189.                          BF. 131, p. 191.
  6 The urn of plate v, d with its verti-
310             THE TUMULUS              BRONZE    CULTURE
the pedestalled bowls. But this tradition was developed locally,
and the handsome anklets, 3 for example, may rank as a pure
Alsatian type that was exported both to Wurtemberg and France.
   In the Late Bronze Age cremation becomes the usual rite.
Razors of type A4* and knives 3, 12 and dagger B4, turban-
headed pins, fluted pottery,’ and wart-ornamented urns appear.
Evidently the native culture is absorbing elements from the urn-
field group whose advance will be described in Chapter XVIII.
                   V.   MIDDLE      RHENISH       GROUPS
The remaining groups of barrows in the Rhenish province par-
take in a general way of the characters noted in Alsace. On
the Vogelsberg the barrow builders overstepped the bounds of
the heath land and resorted to clearing to render the forest
habitable. In the mature phase the palstav of Lissauer’s West
European type5 is almost the sole celt-form in use. Bronze-
hilted swords are exceptional, and single-bladed knives, razors,
and sickles are not found in barrows.
   Among the ornaments the wheel-headed pin® is the most
characteristic. It was probably invented on the Rhine; moulds
for its manufacture have been found near Mainz. It was ex-
ported to Denmark,’ Poland, and Lower Austria.’ Probably
the wheel-headed pin is just an openwork version of the
disk-headed pins ornamented with an engraved cross (A6) of
the Early Bronze Age; indeed in some specimens the outer
ring is not a simple wire loop, but a broad flat band.
   The date of such a widespread type is important. It is
usually assigned to phase B; but in Wurtemberg Kraft labels
it D, and in Alsace and Denmark? it appears first in phase C.
The latter is probably the correct date.                        :
   Besides the foregoing, some Swabian pins C3, C7, and C8
were imported or transmuted into local types like C4.
   A special type of tutulus with a tang and a loop on the back
was developed in Starkenburg” and exported as far as Alsace™
and Wurtemberg.”
z Schaeffer, fig. 49e.                     Daaks
2 Ibid., pl. vi, L.      gia               7 MSAN. 1908, p. 33.
3 Ibid., fig. 39). Funnily enough a        &% Gemeinlebarn (probably a pendant
diorite celt was deposited in the same     only).
grave !                                    9 =Sophus Miiller       2;     :
4 Wahle, BRGK. xii, p. 50.                 Pw83s fe. 29.         2 ee        eae
5 ZfE. xxxvii, p. 807; but the earlier      © Behrens, pl. xvuit, 12.
type Bi was also used, e.g. Behrens,       1 Schaeffer, fig. 18 a.
pl. xvu1, 6 (Baierseich).                  2 Kraft, Bronzezeit, pl. XVII, 1.
° ZfE. xxxvi (1904), p.587; BRGK. x,
                                   c

            Late Bronze Age vases from barrows round Haguenau, after
Fic. 171.                                   a
                          Schaeffer.  a4,b7,¢%
               THE TUMULUS         BRONZE      CULTURE                      311
  North of the Main in Hessen the well-known ribbed collars*
appear as imports from the Germanic province farther north.
   The western amber route followed the Rhine from the mouth
of the Main as far as the Neckar,” and hence amber is not rare
in the barrows between these rivers. It was through the trade
in this substance that Swabian and even Danubian types




        Fic. 172. Vases from Baierseich, barrows 2 and 4 (grave 3). 7
                               After Behrens.

 reached the Rhineland; the comparative wealth of our area in
 gold is probably also related to this commerce.
    The pottery from the barrows falls into two groups. In
 Starkenburg (Baierseich) a red ware sparingly decorated with
 incised patterns was manufactured (Fig. 172). Most of the
 cups and jugs are patently derived from Adlerberg types, but; ‘
 for some an ancestry in the Aunjetitz culture must be soughtde-
 the big amphora, on the other hand, is no less obviously
 scended from Corded Ware.°
  : Behrens, pp. 207 and 216.           4 BY. 131 (1927), P. 192 (Kraft).
 2 Navarro in Gf. 1925, p. 495.         5 Behrens, p. 219.
 3 AuhV. v, pl. 2, 40-5.
312             THE TUMULUS           BRONZE     CULTURE
      North   of the Main     in Hessen‘       fretwork vases, much in
the Alsatian style but mainly late, occur. Similar vases occur
in flat cremation graves on the Adlerberg near Worms that
belong apparently to phase D (razors, socketed arrow-heads).’
                 VI.   THE   LOWER        RHENISH    GROUP
On the Lower Rhine there is an interesting series of cemeteries
extending from Bonn into Holland} The extensive groups of
barrows are here situated on the terraces bordering the plain
of the Rhine and its tributaries that are to-day covered with
forest or open heath.
   We have already seen that barrows were being erected in
the same area by the Corded Ware and Zoned-beaker peoples,
and that some of these barrows already contained bronze objects.
The ‘late neolithic’ barrows of Periods III and IV form the
nuclei for the later Bronze Age cemeteries; many in fact con-
tain secondary interments of Middle and Late Bronze Age
date. The Lower Rhenish Tumulus Bronze culture is patently
rooted in the local ‘neolithic’. But true “bell barrows’ nowoccur.
   The furniture of the Bronze Age graves is comparatively
poor. We have a few rapiers of type Ai and a slashing sword
of type C2, then palstavs of North German and Western types,
and the usual tweezers. The ornaments include finger-rings
with double spiral ends, and wheel-headed pins. Among the
rare vases is an early fretwork jug, recently discovered.4
    It will be seen from the foregoing summary that the Lower
 Rhenish bronze industry was inspired almost entirely by that
 of South-West Germany; the influence of the ‘Germanic’ pro-
 vince is negligible, even in northern Holland.
    In the Late Bronze Age the south-western connexions were
 reinforced by the intrusion of the urnfield folk from the Upper
 Rhine, who occupied all the lowlands right into South Holland.
 The barrows continued in use on the terraces, but their furni-
 ture now reflects strong influence from the urnfield cultures.
 Cremation replaces inhumation, and vases characteristic of the
 urnfields frequently appear in barrows. The great majority of
 the Lower Rhenish fretwork pottery belongs to this phase;
 many of the vases, indeed, are distinctive urnfield shapes.
 Stampfuss 5 very properly remarks that the fretwork tech-
 * Behrens, pl. xx.                        is much unpublished material from
 4 Ibid., p. 180 and figs. 31-2.           the Province of Drenthe in the
 3 Rademacher gives an excellent ac-       museum at Assen.
 count of these in Mannus, Erganzungs-     4 Rademacher, l.c., pl. 1x, BI.
 band iv, pp. 115 ff., pls. rx-x. There    5 Mamnnus, Erginzungsband v, p. 85.
                THE TUMULUS          BRONZE            CULTURE                 313
nique must have been adopted by the urnfield folk in their
progress down the Rhine.     Here, as in Alsace, the Tumulus
Bronze culture lasted well into the Iron Age.
                          VII.   THURINGIAN            GROUP
Middle Bronze Age barrows are comparatively rare in Thu-
ringia. They appear to cluster along the western amber route
and lie for the most part in the south-west of the province.
In the Saale valley there are only two or three graves of the
Middle Bronze Age.t The southern frontiers of the Germanic
province extended to the Heights of Magdeburg,” and strong
influence from this quarter is detectable in the Thuringian
Bronze Age.
    The corpses were sometimes encased in hollowed oak-trunks
as in Denmark.3 To Germanic influence the following bronze
 types are due: ribbed collars, spiral-ended bracelets like Dr
 but with a flat or pointed-oval body as compared with the
 cylindrical form current in Hungary. Arm cylinders are also
 common.
    We may designate southern the rings of form 2, the ribbed
 bracelets (B1), and the pins Bro.
     From the Rhineland came West European palstavs (the
 commonest celt in Thuringian barrows), the numerous wheel-
 headed pins,° and the type C4.
     Swabian influence is indicated by one winged celt (B2),’ the
  pin C3,° and girdle clasps I.
     A native Thuringian pin has a double-spiral head. Elsewhere
  this type would be called Late Bronze Age, but here it is asso-
  ciated with wheel pins.’
     For the rest the barrows contain daggers, one with a bronze
 hilt,"° rapiers, spear-heads, arrow-heads, and button-sickles.
 Razors are absent. On the other hand, stone battle-axes are
 not rare.”
   The pottery from the Thuringian barrows is practically
unknown. The use of neolithic Corded Ware barrows for
 t Peissen (Pins Bs b, bracelet Bz a)          6 The   Hanoverian   variant with two
 and Kayna, Weissenfels (Pins Bs5 a,           ears is common as at Baierseich in
 bracelet B3, Nordic collar), M. Halle.        Starkenburg.
 2 Cemetery of Havermark (Jerichow) ;          7 Sachsenburg a. d. Unstrut, iii.
 IST. viii, pp. 135 f.                         8 Igelskiippel, Unterbimbach, iii. 3.
 3 ¥ST. v, pp. 35 f.                           9 Schenkenhiigel (Behrens, no. 508),
 4 Kayna, Gerstengrund, Stadtlengs-            Dérrensolz, Oberkatz, Kossinna, DV,
 feld, and Grautschen; cf. Behrens, p.         pl. x11; cf. Behrens, p. 215.
 207.                                           10 Schwarza.
 5. VAT., pl. xin; 148,                         1 VAT., pp. 114, 120.
    3443                                  ss
            314           THE   TUMULUS          BRONZE   CULTURE
            Middle Bronze Age interments’ may well furnish a link be-
            tween the Thuringian barrow-builders of the Bronze Age and
            their neolithic predecessors in the same region. At the same
            time the rarity of Middle Bronze Age barrows on the Saale
            and in Thuringia generally is quite compatible with the rela-
            tively late date assigned to the barrows of the Leubingen group.
            Despite the Early Bronze Age types they covered, they may
            well fall in phase B rather than A.

Conclu-        The foregoing brief survey confirms the essential uniformity
    sion    of the Tumulus Bronze Culture. Despite deep-seated difter-
            ences in pottery, that are more than stylistic, the several local
            ceramic groups melt imperceptibly one into the other. Bavaria
            is linked on the one hand to the Hercynian group, on the other
            to the Swabian and Alsatian. We are therefore unable to follow
            Kossinna? in separating the Hercynian group, which he calls
            ‘Illyrian’, from the rest which he assigns to the Kelts; to which
            group is Upper Bavaria to be assigned?
               Nevertheless the population that erected the barrows was
            neither unitary nor uniform. The barrow-builders were the
            descendants of predominantly pastoralist tribes that had occu-
            pied the several upland regions in late neolithic times, and con-
            tinued to use stone implements while the Early Bronze Age
            civilization was growing up in the valleys. The constitution of
            the local neolithic groups would vary from place to place:
            Schussenried and Nordic folk in Bohemia, Michelsberg and
            Bell-beaker folk in Wurtemberg and the Rhine valley, Altheim
            people in Bavaria and Upper Austria.
               But one common element can be distinguished everywhere—
            the Corded Ware people. From these were derived the barrow,
            the rite of cremation, and various ceramic types. Economically
            and socially too the Bronze Age barrow builders carry on the
            traditions of the Battle-Axe folk. The Tumulus Bronze Age
            began when these learnt the arts of metallurgy or captured
            some smiths, and, by robbery or barter, secured supplies of
            the raw material.                                ;
               Whence was the new knowledge derived ? A comparatively
           ‘small number of types are based directly on the Aunjetitz and
            Adlerberg traditions, while a few more were at home in the
            Alpine ‘Copper Age’. Even on the western frontier of the pro-
            vince native Gaulish types are lacking. Few forms peculiar to
            the Germanic province, despite its extraordinary wealth and
                     t VAPS. i, pls. 1 and 11.             2 DV., p. 62.
                THE TUMULUS          BRONZE      CULTURE                     A05
vigour, reach our area, and none penetrate beyond the Main.
Italian influences first became prominent in the Late Bronze
Age. On the other hand, distinctively Hungarian types extend
to the Rhine and to Thuringia. Even in the pottery a certain
Hungarian influence may be suspected. For instance, trumpet
necks had been in fashion there since the Early Bronze Age.
And fretwork decoration was employed as early on the Save
and the Drave. The orthodox theory indeed is that this system
of ornamentation was introduced into South Germany by the
Bell-beaker folk, since it is used on beakers there as in Moravia.
But one is inclined to assume some direct connexion either
along the Danube with Pannonia or more probably across the
Alps with Carniola, especially as the Laibach jugs are to some
extent akin to the German. Ratishof (near Ranshéfen) in
Upper Austria* might constitute a link. So, too, the simul-
taneous adoption of wart ornament in Bavaria, East Germany,
and North Hungary is best understood by the diffusion of
metal plaques thus ornamented in connexion with the trade in
Slovakian copper. And we shall see that there was an actual
branch of the Tumulus culture south of the Alps in Western
Hungary. Hence, in the creation of the Middle Bronze Age
industry of South-West Germany the main fresh stimulus must
have come from Hungary.
   The Tumulus Bronze Age culture would then have arisen
at a date when the Aunjetitz culture was still flourishing in the
valleys; it would continue to develop long after those valleys
 had been occupied by the urnfield cultures.3
   VIII.   THE TUMULUS         BRONZE CULTURE OF SILESIA AND
                                 POLAND
 East of the Elbe lie a few cemeteries of barrows which seem on
 the whole parallel to the South-West German series, and may
 be described as an appendix here.
    The burial rite in Silesia and Poland‘ was generally, though
 not exclusively, inhumation. Where exact observations have
 been made, the body was interred in the contracted attitude.
 Flat graves also occur. In some cases of cremation the ashes
 lay in a trench large enough for a complete skeleton.
    The metal furniture of the graves is poor but, in contrast to
 : Theuer, pl. Iv, 8.                    see Przeg A. ii (1924), pp- 260 ff., figs.
 2 Cf. p. 330 below.                     4, 14, 17, and 18, and von Richthofen,
 3 Real. ii, p. 96.                      pp. 6 and 144 f.
 4 For the construction of the barrows
316              THE    TUMULUS           BRONZE    CULTURE
the western tumulus area, several contemporary hoards have
been found to enlighten us on the metal types.
   The types current were as follows:
   Celts: In graves Ex only; in hoards and stray Dx and the
Bohemian palstav C3. Three Hungarian battle-axes like Fig.
148 a—b, decorated in characteristic style, have been found
stray in Silesia alone.’
   Ogival daggers, generally of type B2,? are not uncommon.
One grave contained a bronze-hilted example.3 Swords are
represented by only one complete specimen found alone, prob-
ably in a grave, at Dahmsdorf‘+ near Breslau (Pl. 2, C2).
It illustrates Kossinna’s Germanic type. Socketed spear-heads
also occur; arrow-heads are still commoner. In grave 2 at
Massel socketed bronze and barbed flint arrow-heads occurred
side by side.5
   Stone mace-heads, spheroid, vertically ribbed, or oval with
horizontal facets, were still in use.
   The ornaments are mostly of Hungarian form. The brace-
lets belong to types C1,’ C3,° B1,9 and a special variant of
B2 (B3). Cylinders are very common,” both in graves and
hoards; in hoards bracelet D1 is also found and there are many
stray specimens. Hungarian again are girdle plates from Woj-
dal” and Namslau,” with a punched decoration in the style
of Pannonian ware and the plume and star decoration on the
pins (Pl. 12, Er).                                       }
   Western influence is represented by a single wheel-pin from
Mogilno in Poznania® anda gold ear-ring of British type from
the hoard of Wasosz (Szubyn)."
   Besides these foreign types a series of native forms was
created. Many are traceable to Early Bronze Age or Aunjetitz
forms such as the heavy bracelets Er, wire types like A4, and
pins like Ao and Aq.
 * von Richthofen, pl. 25, k—-m.           8 Lahserwitz ; von Richthofen, pl.
? PZ.i, p.56; Przeg A. ii, fig. 17, and    Ove.
p. 281, pleix, 2.                          9 Seschwitz, ibid., pl. 16 c.
3 SV. iv, p.6; von Richthofen, pl.2,g.      © Lahserwitz.
4 SV. iv, p. 8; Mannus, iv, p. 278 >       t Wojdal II, Mannus, viii, p. 246;
cf. SV. v, p. 4 for a later type.          Punitz ; zbid., p. 263; also in hoards as
5 SV. vi, figs. 17-18; the bones had       Rudna and Grodnica (Gostyn), ibid.,
been burnt and the whole grave may         pls. viI—x.
really belong to the Late Bronze Age.
                                           12 Mannus, l.c., pl. v1, 1; von Richt-
° SV. vi, p. 13, fig. 28; von Richt-       hofen, pl. 16.
hofen, pl. 2 i.                            3 Praeg A. ii, p. 173, fig. 45.
7 Kunowo, Dist. of Srem; Przeg A.
                                           4 Real. ii, p. 382; Kostrzewski assigns
ll, p. 199 and figs. 40-2.
                                           this to phase A.
                 THE     TUMULUS         BRONZE       CULTURE                     317
    Pin E4 represents the Silesian solution of the problem of the
eyelet. It maybe derived from A4.* The vertical perforation
is characteristic and survives in the derivative form E5 which
is generally Late Bronze Age, but is found already in an in-
humation grave with a Middle Bronze Age dagger.? Other
pin-forms common beyond the Oder are Er, E3, and Ez. Von
Richthofen further assigns to this period some ‘shepherd’s
crook’ pins—a type assigned by Reinecke in South-West Ger-
many to phase D of the Bronze Age—and pins terminating in
 aspiral.
    Neither spiral-ended finger-rings nor tutuli nor yet heart-
 shaped pendants seem to have been worn in our area. The
 neck of one skeleton was, however, encircled by a torque
 resembling Ar in shape but twisted. Von Richthofen suggests
 that the twisting imitates the effect of the thin wire sometimes
 wound round ingot torques; Amber and gold beads were
 found in one grave.4
     Apart from the proto-Lausitz ware of Silesia, described in
  Chapter XVI, pottery is rare in the barrows east of the Oder.
  In Poland we find deep bowls reminiscent of the Nordic
  funnel-necked beaker,’ tulip beakers recalling Koztowski’s
  ‘neolithic’ Iwno type,® pedestalled bowls,’ and rough pots
  with horizontal handles or vertically pierced ledges just below
  the rim,® and other forms derivable from Aunjetitz shapes.’
  Ornamentation is rare. Interesting is the pattern on a vase
  from Wojdal,® identical with the regular design on Lower Oder
  Corded Ware and Marschwitz vases, and incised hanging loops
  on vases from Jasionna Klekot." Quite exceptional is a rough
  vase from Obrath in Silesia ornamented with a band of stamped
  triangles rather in the manner of fretwork ware.”
     In view of the links with late neolithic cultures afforded by
  the pottery, it may be assumed that the population responsible
  for the Tumulus culture east of the Oder was descended from
 neolithic stocks as in Bavaria and on the Rhine.                     But as there,
 an admixture with the Aunjetitz folk is obvious.
   The new formative influence expressed in the Middle Bronze
 t Seger, PZ. i, pp. 61 f.                     1 Przeg. A. ii, p. 264, fig. 11; von
                                                Richthofen, pl. 2 k.             :
 2 yon Richthofen, pl. 2 (Krehlau).
 3 op. cit., p. 79 and pl. 23.                 8 Przeg A. ii, p. 281, fig. 1 (Jasionna-
 4 SV. vi, p. 12 (Massel).                      Klekot).
 s Przeg A. ii, p. 269, fig. 24 (Krosto-        9 Przeg A. ii, p. 170.
 szyn 35).                                      10 Mannus, viii, p. 247, fig. 4.
 6 Mannus, viii,   p. 246, fig. 5 (Wojdal );     * Praeg A. ii, p. 281, fig. 10.
 cf. Koztowski, Mfodsa, p. 38,    pl. v1,12  ._*   von Richthofen, p. 20 and pl. 3.
318             THE    TUMULUS           BRONZE    CULTURE
Age types obviously came from Hungary.                     It is not certain
that this influence was transmitted across Moravia, for the
particular types in question are rare there. On the other hand,
a series of hoards spreading all across Little Poland to the
Carpathians’ suggest that intercourse with Hungary was main-
tained by way of the San, the Apple Tree Pass, and the Upper
Tisza; in fact it is precisely in North-Eastern Hungary that the
types represented in Poland and East Germany were really at
home. Quite what attracted Hungarian bronzes in this direc-
tion is uncertain; they reach the Lower Oder so that Danish
amber seems a likely commodity for exchange. But only one
amber find has hitherto been recorded in the Middle Bronze
Age. But behind all foreign influence there was of course the
persistence of the local Early Bronze Age tradition.’
* See Kostrzewski’s map in Real. ii,      for massive forms of bracelets; Seger,
pl. 189. ;                                Altschl. i, pp. 10 f.
2 Exemplified, e.g., in the preference
                                    XVI
 THE URNFIELDS                OF LAUSITZ           TYPE EAST OF
                              THE ELBE
                      I. PROTO-LAUSITZ          GROUP
   MONG the older Hungarian urnfields are a few graves
     which do not fit into any of our five geographical groups.
On the other hand, graves with a similar furniture are known
farther north in Lower Austria, Moravia, and Silesia.                  The
interments in question are distinguished by the following
ceramic types :
    1. The urn has a plump body and acylindrical neck with Pottery
two small handles joining neck and shoulder (as opposed to forms
the shoulder-handles of the Hercynian tumuli). This type is
known from Bilisics near Szeged and Apathi Puszta in Tolna
County (Figs. 173, 175). The same type recurs in Silesian
graves” and, with a different ornamentation, in Moravia At
Bilisics another type of urn with cylindrical neck but orna-
mented with plastic ribs was also in use. Parallels can be
 cited from Racs Egres in Tolna County‘ and the urnfield of
 Egyek in Hajdu (Fig. 174).
    2. A regular accessory vase in the two Hungarian sites was
 a small mug with a band handle descending from the rim of
 the funnel-shaped neck (Fig. 175 b). ‘This type of mug is com-
 mon in Southern Moravia, and appears also in the Bohemian
 tumuli where Kossinna calls it the ‘Illyrian jug’.° It has
 many analogues in Silesia.’
     3. A similarly shaped jug, but standing on three wart feet,
                                                               and
 was associated with the foregoing types at Apathi Puszta,
 recurs in a Middle Bronz  e Age  grave at Regel sbrun n in Lower
Austria * (Fig. 176).                                     .
   4. The urns might be covered with various simple dishes h Orna-
   Vases of types 1 and 2 are alway s decor ated with smoot
                                                           by ment
conical warts (in Moravia the warts may be replaced         e
flutings). The same decoration is found on other Middl
1 Finds in museums of Szeged and          found in the same village.
Szekszard. Cf. Wosinski, TT.,p.376.       5 Némiice, Koberice. Cf. Gottwald,
2 yon Richthofen, pls. 9, c-d; 11 a, c.   PSPP., pp. 65 and 68.
3 N&éméice, Pravék, 1926, pl. 111.        6 Schr4nil, Bohmen, pl. XXIV, I, 5.
4 Wosinski, TT., pl. cxvi and p. 493;     7 von Richthofen, pls. 12b, 13e.
there is no evidence of any connexion     8 Volkerkunde, 1926, p. 27, fig. 3.
between these pots and the hoard
           320            THE    URNFIELDS          OF LAUSITZ         TYPE
           Bronze Age vessels from East Central Europe, for instance on
           a pot with cylindrical neck and wide brim from an inhumation
           grave at Leobersdorf in Lower Austria.
 Burial      The    graves in which        the foregoing types occur are not
   rites   uniform in respect of funerary ritual. Bailisics is described
           as an ‘urnfield’. At Apathi Puszta, though the urn was full of
           ashes, there was also a skeleton.’ ‘The corresponding Austrian
           graves contained skeletons. In Moravia cremation was the
           invariable practice, but in Silesia that rite subsisted side by
           side with inhumation in the contracted posture—once under
           a barrow !
 Bronzes      The metal furniture? of the tombs was no more uniform.
           In Hungary the usual Middle Bronze Age types were found
           and the Moravian graves contained a similar inventory. On
           the other hand, the graves of this group in Silesia were furnished
           with the local types of pins and pendants described on p. 316.
           Hence the unity of the group may be questioned. It is men-
           tioned here because the pottery occupies a typological position
           midway between the Early Bronze Age wares of the March—
           Waag region and the Lausitz ceramics that principally concern
           us in this chapter.
 Chrono-      Whether the group really occupies in time the position
      logy assigned to it typologically is less easy to determine. The pin
           Bi from Apathi Puszta is certainly an old type, whereas the
           bracelet Gr from the same grave is, in Wurtemberg, assigned
           by Kraft to his phase E!
Affinities    In any case the pottery may be readily derived from the
           Early Bronze Age wares of Slovakia. The urn is descended
           from the Veselé amphora (Fig. 140f), and the jugs from those
           found at the same site (Fig.140b).3 The three feet of type 3
           may be connected with the cylindrical tripod cups of the same
           group. Technically the two fabrics correspond exactly. The
           wart ornament existed in a rudimentary form in all Aunjetitz
           wares, and even the conical variety that meets us in the Proto-
           Lausitz group is found on some Moravian vases.
           * Wosinski, TT., p. 376, only men-        briinn: pin B4; cylinder Br. Koberice:
           tions two cremation burials, and omits    pin B6; bracelet F1, fragment with
           all reference to the skeleton and         spiral end ; and a socketed arrow-head.
           bronzes exhibited with them in the        Pasohlavky without pottery: pin B4,
           museum.                                   bracelet C1, tutuli Az and Ao.
           ? Apathi Puszta: pins ABz, Br, B4;        3 Cf. Kostrzewski, Przeg A. ii, p. 170,
           bracelets, Br, C1, G1; cylinder Br;
                                                     and figs. 37-8.
           tutulus, A2; and knife, Br. Regels-
                                                     4 Cf. p. 232 above.
   Fic. 173.   Grave at Apati-puszta.     M. Szekszard




Fic. 175.   Accessory vases, Bilisiés.   Varosi M., Szeged
      Fic. 176. Vase from Regelsbrunn.    M. Carnuntum




    Fic. 177.   Cylinder from Regelsbrunn.   M. Carnuntum




Fic. 178.   Lausitz ossuary and accessory vases. Gemeinlebarn,
            Grave 5. Naturhistoriches M., Vienna. 4
                                       321
                    Il. THE LAUSITZ CIVILIZATION
By the end of the Bronze Age the whole area between the Divisions
Elbe and the Vistula, the lowlands of Moravia, and portions of
Lower Austria and Slovakia are covered with urnfields of the
Lausitz type. In the civilization represented therein four main ©
phases can be distinguished, termed by Seger A, B, C, and
D respectively; Seger’s phases correspond to what Czech
archaeologists? term the Earlier and Later Lausitz, Silesian
and Platenice cultures in Bohemia; so in North Germany3
the later phases have been christened after type sites: Aurith,
Goritz, and Billendorf respectively. We are at the moment
concerned only with the two first.
   Of the first phase we know with certainty only the graves Phase A
and their contents. The burial rite was always cremation burials:
with the careful ceremonial that we have already described
in Hungary. The body was burned near the cemetery in Cremation
an ustrinum, marked to-day by an area of ashes a metre or
more square, and sometimes protected by a low wall of dry
masonry. The ashes were carefully purified from charcoal
and cinders and placed in a cinerary urn. As in Hungary,
a hole (Seelenloch) was bored through its walls, generally its
base, to allow the soul to escape. As in Hungary too, the
ossuary was covered with a dish and deposited in the earth
with many accessory vases.
   Normally the grave was dug in the bare earth; more rarely Graves
a cist was built of stone slabs.5 In the Lausitz® and Silesia’ Barrows
the grave might be marked by a barrow. In the former area and flat
the mound was sometimes 14 m. high and might measure 9 m. graves
across. The urns lay in shallow depressions in the natural
soil, protected by a pile of stones. Several such graves might
be covered by the same barrow. But flat graves are quite as
common as tumuli even here. In Bohemia® and Moravia? Barrows
barrows are quite exceptional. It is curious that some Mora-
« SV. viii (1924), pp. 1 ff.; Real. vii,         6 ZfE. xx (1888), pp. (253) f.; Nie-
pp. 251 ff. Note that the phases dis-            derl. Mitt. 1889, p. 305; 1890,
                                                                               p. 440;
tinguished by Jahn at Osswitz (Man-              Mannus, xix (1927), p. 38; Schuch-
nus, Ergénzungsband, iii, pp. 31 ff.) and        hardt, Alteuropa, p. 287.
labelled by him A, B, and C corre-               7 Mertins, Wegweiser durch die Ur-
spond to Seger B, C, and D respec-               geschichte Schlesiens, p. 51. Some-
tively.                                          times older barrows were reused for
2 Buchtela in ¥ZK. iv (1906), pp. 4 ff.          Lausitz interments; cf. SV. v, p. 36.
3 ZfE. xxxv (1903), pp. 161 f.                   8 Pig, iii, p. 10; Schranil, Bohmen,
4 ZfE. xviii, p. (722), &c.                      Pp. 139.
5 Mannus, xix. 1927, p. 31.                      9 Pravék, 1909, p. 121.
   3443                                     Tt
           322            THE URNFIELDS           OF LAUSITZ      TYPE
           vian barrows of Lausitz B type form parts of the late Corded
           Ware or Marschwitz cemeteries !      ti
 Pottery      The chronology and the very definition of the Lausitz cul-
           ture are mainly dependent upon its pottery, which must now
           be described. ‘The fabric is uniformly good, the surface, except
           in pots of types 7 and 8, being slipped and polished. The
           earlier specimens, especially in the Lausitz, are reddish in
           colour; in a few early cemeteries in Bohemia and Silesia dark-
           faced wares occur. The main forms are as follows:
Cinerary    1. The ossuary is biconical in form and, as a rule, about
     urns 22 cm. high (Fig. 178d). The two cones always meet at a
           sharp angle in early specimens. The lower cone may be orna-
           mented by scratched lines radiating from the base. Very rarely
           there is an incised band just above the keel, but normally the
           upper half is plain.
              2. In a less usual type of urn the upper cone has been
           flattened and a short neck super-added (Fig. 179 a).
              3. The urnwas covered with a dish (Fig. 1824) orshallow cup.
Accessory     The most common accessory vases may be divided into
     vases five types.
              4. Large amphorae ornamented with shoulder-warts, and
           patently related to the proto-Lausitz form (Fig. 180c).
              5. Terrines with cylindrical necks and broad rims, orna-
           mented with four or six conical warts on the belly:
              6. Jugs with warts on the belly, resembling in shape those
           of the proto-Lausitz group (Fig. 181 c).
              Forms 4, 5, and 6 often stand on low pedestals.
              7. Tall pots with out-turned rims (Fig. 181 b) and smooth or
              8. roughened bodies.
     Wart     The method of decoration that distinguished early Lausitz
ornament pottery is the use of the large conical warts, rising out of cir-
           cular depressions to sit on the shoulder of vases of types 4 to
           6. With these may be combined flutings or plastic ridges.
  Bronzes     It was at no time the custom of the Lausitz people to deposit
           ornaments or weapons in their graves, and so it is very hard
           to say what forms were in use at the period of the earlier
           Lausitz culture. However, occasionally flint or socketed bronze
           arrow-heads, or celts, perforated axes, and mace-heads of stone?
           have been found in cemeteries.           Ornaments are only slightly
           less rare, but pins E6, E8 (Silesia), E5, D3, and D5 may
           « For the form compare the Aunjetitz    Lower Austria, p. 320.
           shape mentioned in note 8 on p. 232,    ? Cf. e.g. ZfE. xx, p. 200.
           and the pot from Leobersdorf in
                             EAST OF THE ELBE                                       323
belong to this phase,‘ and possibly even one Nordic fibula of
type B2* may be as early.
    The early Lausitz pottery of the type just described is vir- Distribu-
tually confined to the Lausitz and the adjacent part of Silesia. tion
There are, however, outliers extending as far as the Saale west-
ward, northward into Brandenburg, and eastward into Poz-
nania. South of the Sudeten ranges a slightly later phase is
represented in a large number of urnfields in Eastern Bohemia,
while a few graves in Eastern Moravia} contained pottery with
genuine wart ornament which, despite its darker fabric, might
be placed here.
    The late Lausitz culture, represented by pottery of Seger’s Phase B
 class B, seems to be a direct development of the foregoing, but
 has a much wider distribution. Map IX.
    The burial rite remains unchanged, and phase B is primarily
 distinguished by its pottery.
    Pottery of class B is distinguished from its predecessor by a Pottery
 tendency to dark-faced fabrics, the softening down of the
 angular profiles current in phase A, and the replacement of Fluting
 the wart ornament by flutings; the warts survive only as
 inconspicuous nipples in the centres of concentric arcs. In slip  Graphite
 Moravia and Slovakia graphite was coming       into use for dark-
 ening the surfaces of vases. In addition to the flutings, bands
 of incised hatchings, alternating to form erect and inverted
 triangles, often encircle the urns and amphorae.
     South of the Sudeten the simple ossuary 1 tends to give Forms
 place to type 2, which now acquires a rounded outline and
 often an exaggeratedly long neck. The covering dishes have
 broad rims that may sometimes be decorated with flutings
  (turban-dishes) (Fig. 182a).5 The neck of the amphora becomes
  swelling or conical; the handles of the jugs and cups often rise
  above the rims, and may show a V-shaped depression like the
  Hungarian ansa lunata. As new types appear pedestalled bowls
  and, at least in Czechoslovakia, spouted vases ‘the feeding ‘Feeding
  bowls of Germanarchaeologists—and rattles. In Moravia therio-
                                                                  feet.® bowls’
 morphs already occur,’ and some vases stand on human                     and the-
                         p. 62. 4 SV. viii, pl. 1, 1; Mannus Ergzbd. iii,
                                                                          riomorphs
  1 SV. 1896, pl.2; Seger, PZ. i,
 2 Jahrb. Mus.        Véolk., Leipzig, iil pl. 1, 2; Pié, iii, fig. 4.
 (1908/9), pl. xv, 32; the pin terminated          5s SV. viii, pl. 1; ZfE. xxxv, p. 168,
 in a spiral, not  as  usually   in this  type,  _ fig. 8.
 in a club-head.                                   6 PA. 1919, p. 36, fig. 80, &c.
                                                   7 Pravék, 1908, p. 100, fig. 15.
 3 Examples in Museum at Olomouc.
 These    should   perhap  s   really   be   as-   8 Real. ii, p. 88; Schranil, pl. xxv,
 signed to class B.                                33-
            324             THE URNFIELDS              OF LAUSITZ      TYPE
              The bronzes,! though still rare, allow us to connect with the
            later urnfields a number of hoards, and several settlements are
           known as well as the cemeteries. Hence it is possible to give a
           fairly complete picture of the Lausitz culture in its mature
             hase.”
Distribu-     The urnfields and settlements of the Lausitz B type occupy
      tion the greater part of Germany east of the Elbe and south of the
           Spree, but the majority are still concentrated in Lausitz (no less
           than two hundred and fifty cemeteries have been identified in
           Oberlausitz alone!).3 Farther east is a series in Central Poland,
           extending as far as the Vistula near Warsaw and the Pilica.4
           South of the Sudeten there is a compact group in Bohemia,
           along the Elbe and its northern tributaries, connecting with an
            extensive chain of urnfields in Eastern Moravia, centred round
            Olomouc, that leads to a mixed group in Lower Austria.‘
            Farther to the east there are isolated but quite extensive
            cemeteries in Central Slovakia.© Clearly the Lausitz folk did
            not avoid country that to-day would be forest, presumably
            because in their days, owing to the Subboreal dryness, there
            were no forests there. At the same time a distinct preference
            for valleys is observable, and the settlements seem to cluster
            along trade routes. The outposts of the culture are pushed
            forward in a significant way towards the metalliferous regions
            of Slovakia.
               The extensive cemeteries, many of which cover several
            periods and include many hundred graves, evidently belong
            to a sedentary population. At the same time the huge number
            of the urnfields shows that the communities frequently sent
            out daughter colonies (Sacred Springs), or broke up into smaller
            groups.
               The settlements themselves, so far as they have been ex-
  Settle-   plored, entirely confirm the impression produced by the
   ments
            * Knives 3 (Kunétice, PA. 1919, p.          (tbid., pl. 1x, 3; Pravék, 1908, p. 101);
            136) and D4 (Letna near Prague, Pié,        gold rings like 1 a, &c.
            ili, fig. 11); Italian sickles (zbid.);     2 See p. 323, note 8.
            socketed spear and arrow-heads ; fibu-      3 Mannus, xix, p. 27.
            lae B3 with flat oval bow (North Bo-        4 Preep AS,          pl, Ville:   WA. v
            hemia, ZfE. xlv, pp. 739, 752), and Bs      (1920), pp. 48 ff.; pp. 155 f.
            (Brozanek, ibid., Hrubéice in Mora-         5 Menghin, Niederésterreich, p. 20.
            via, Gottwald, pl. 1x, 13); pins E6, E7,    6 Novak in Nitra, and Dominiky, Bar-
            E8, Eg, and spiral-headed—as an ex-         dinova, and Madovarcy (Cty. Hont),
            ception A4 from Kostelec; bracelets like    M. Turé. Sv. Martin, probably part
            A5 and Bz (but with only three ribs,        of the finds from Felsé-Kubin (Arva)
            Gottwald, pl. vit, Mostkovice, Mor.);       in North Slovakia belong here. Cf.
            flat buttons with a loop on the back,       MAGW-. xiv (1884), pp. 196 f.
            and the breast-ornament of fig. 183
      Fic. 179.   Ossuary and amphora, Naklo.   M. Olomouc




           a                    b                   c
Fic. 180. Early Lausitz amphora and terrine, late mug.   Brit. Mus.
Fic. 181. Amphora, Domazalice, pot, Mezice, cup, Namést.   M. Olomouc




    Fic. 182. Turban dish, Woischwitz, 4, and Lausitz
                                                      B amphora,
                     Grabschen, +. M. Breslau
                         EAST     OF THE ELBE                                325
cemeteries.    The Lausitz folk lived in regular villages which
were not, however, at the period under discussion protected
by any fortification.’      Thanks principally to the careful exca-
vations of Dr. Kiekebusch at Buch near Berlin,’ the houses
constituting the villages are well known. The Lausitz dwell- ‘Log
ings were log cabins planned like a Mycenaean megaron, with cabins’
a pillared entrance porch on the short side (average dimensions
6-6 x3 m?.). Traces of wooden thresholds were observed be-
tween the pillars of the porch and at the entrance to the
living-room behind it. The hearth stood in the main room,
and often a small pit had been dug beside the hearth as in the
similar houses at Erésd. In other houses a large store jar had
been sunk in the floor.
     The walls consisted of horizontal logs supported by upright
 posts, the interstices being filled up with mud plaster. ‘The
 roof must have been gabled. The houses do not seem to have
 been laid out according to any definite plan, but Kiekebusch
 traced a curious ‘compound’ consisting of a large house of the
 usual plan by the side of which eight small, one-roomed huts
 had stood.3
     The Lausitz people were certainly cultivators, as remains Agricul-
 of grain and querns in the houses, and the sickles so com-
                                                                   ture

 monly discovered in the hoards, and sometimes even        in  the
  graves, demonstrate. Naturally they possessed domestic ani- Horses
  mals. Among these is undoubtedly to be reckoned the horse.
  Horn cheek-pieces from bits, similar to those from the Hun-
  garian villages (Fig. 160), have been found in several Lausitz
  settlements.*
      For fishing, bronze fish-hooks were used.
                                                              and Trade
      The distribution of the settlements along trade routes in
  the number of foreign, especially Hungarian, types    found
                                                         engaged
  the area of the Lausitz culture show that its authors      cases
   in active and regular trade. The hoards seem in manycollec   t- Travel-
   to have belonged to travelling smiths who went aboutrepairing ling smiths
   ing old metal in exchange for new implements or         largely
   worn-out tools on the spot; for the hoards consist
                                                ls, collected
 of old and worn ornaments, weapons, and utensi           the
                                                        of
 for recasting, or unfinished products. An indicationhoards of
 wealth acquired by commerce is afforded by great        (Gross
 1 Mannus Ergzbd. iii, p. 32; Mannus,       *% MAGW. xxv (1895), p. 40
 xix, pp. 39 f.                             Zernosek, wrongly classed by Wein-
 2 Die Ausgrabung des bronzezeitlichen      zierl as neolithic); Kiekebusch, J. c.,
 Dorfes Buch bei Berlin, 1923, PP- 5! ff.   fig. 20 (Buch).
 3 Ibid., p. 66.
          326               THE URNFIELDS          OF LAUSITZ       TYPE
          gold, generally in the form of wire, from Silesia, Bohemia, and
        Moravia."                                                 4
 Metal-     But the Lausitz    people were  also  industr ialists   and, in par-
   lurgy ticular, metallu rgists.  The   settlem ents  and    even    the graves
           have yielded moulds, generally of sandstone. The hoard of
           Nova Ves in Bohemia? included a bronze anvil and three two-
           piece moulds of bronze for palstavs. ‘They can only have been
           used for casting the wax models used in the cire perdue process.
           And if the Lausitz folk were not themselves miners, they
           took care to lay hands on the supplies of metal, as the exten-
           sion of the Lausitz urnfields into Central Slovakia very clearly
           indicates.
Creation      At least one important innovation may possibly have been
    of the due to the Lausitz smiths—the creation of the socketed celt.
 socketed We have seen that the intermediate stage between the Nordic
      celt prototype E3 and the true socketed form E6, has so far only
           been discovered in Silesia, and that the Lausitz province was
           in close contact with Hungary where core-casting had long
           been practised. Thus the pre-conditions for the creation of the
           new implement that was to enjoy such a wide popularity later,
           were fulfilled within the Lausitz province.
              It is likely that the Lausitz folk did use celts of types E63
          and C4 which occur in a few hoards. B5 ‘is far more common,
          as is C3. Hungarian battle-axes of type A3 appear as imports
          in the hoards.‘
 Knives      Other metal tools in use were knives5 of several types
          and sickles of the button and Italian forms.
                                                     Some Saxon graves
          contained a curious sort of razor, apparently related to the
          Germanic series ;° otherwise this implement was not yet in use
          in the Lausitz province.
  Stone     Besides the metal tools the settlements have yielded many
 wmple- picks, hammers, and awls, and other artifacts of bone and horn.
  ments   More remarkable is the occurrence of celts and bored hammer-
          axes of polished stone bothin graves and settlements.’ Schranil
          thinks that the celts from the graves were old artifacts picked
          up and used as charms by the Bronze Age folk. As a matter of
          fact the Lausitz people, like their Hungarian contemporaries,
          indubitably used and manufactured bored hammer-axes, and
          * SV. ii (1902), pp. 1 ff.; PA. 1913,     “1-3.
          pls. 11-1v; Stocky, BAB., pl. xt.         5) Pig i, fig. LISPA ror            6
          2 Schranil,
                  nil, Bohmen, p. De 146 :          6%. cM,
                                                         M. Volk., ., Leipzig,
                                                                        Leipzig, i (xg08 8/9),
          oo        lv, p. 33 (Hoard of Protsch,    pl. xv, 25.        ee
            ilesia).                                7 e.g. Kiekebusch, op. cit., p. 76.
          4 Schranil, Béhmen, p. 145, pl. xxvut,
                            EAST    OF THE ELBE                              224
very probably employed polished celts too. Clay models of
hammer-axes were made for funerary use in North Bohemia’
and elsewhere.
   The principal weapon was the bow, the arrows being tipped Weapons
with bone,? flint, or socketed bronze heads.                  Less common
were spears with socketed heads. The spear-head has the
lanceolate form of type 2. Swords occur only in hoards and
belong almost exclusively to types C2 and C33
   Thecommonest ornaments were pins of types D6, D3,E6,E7,                          Pins
E8, and in Silesia Es (in order of frequency). ‘Two-membered
fibulae of type B3 begin to appear sporadically as accidental                       Fibulae
elements in Lausitz cemeteries from Silesia to Lower Austria,‘




              Fic. 183.   Double spiral ornament of bronze wire. 4

though the form probably originated on the northern borders
of the Lausitz province in East Germany.’ In Moravia the
type was transformed into B3 a, under the influence of North
Italian and Hungarian forms like A4. In addition a few vari-
ants of Bs are known from Saxon and Bohemian cemeteries.°
In contrast to the numerous Northern types, which extend as
far as Austria, the southern series is represented only by a
single example of A4 from Dominiky in Slovakia.
   Perhaps akin to the pins is the ornament illustrated in
Fig. 183 consisting of a narrow coil of bronze wire terminating
in two big spiral disks. It occurs in Lausitz graves’ and
hoards,® and also in Hungary and Bosnia. It may have been
a breast-ornament? and perhaps reveals the prototype of the
 : Examples in M. Hradec Kralove          5 Beltz’s statistics, though incomplete
from Silesian period.                     for the south, enumerate 58 specimens
2 e.g. Buch, fig. 18; MAGW. xxv,          from beyond the frontier as against 22
                                          within it.
p- 37, fig. 47-                           6 ZfE. xlv, pp. 712 and 738; Pié, iti,
3 e.g. Prestavlk; FfA. i, p. 106, pl.v;
Real. ii, p. 90.                          fig. 1; Schranil, p. 153.
4 ZfE. xl\v, pp. 750 ff.; Gottwald, pl.   7 Gottwald, pl. 1x, 3; Schranil, pl.
1x, 13 (Hrubéice, Mor.); Mannus, iv       XXVIII, 23.
(1912), p- 175, fig. 15 Menghin, Nie-     8 e.g. Protsch, Silesia, SV. iv, p. 33
                                          9 Cf. Seger, SV. iv, p. 36.
derésterreich, pl. VII, 4.
        328             THE URNFIELDS               OF LAUSITZ TYPE
        spectacle brooch. The commonest bracelet is the massive form
        with overlapping ends, but A4 is still sometimes found.
Torques    A torque like A1, but wrapped round with wire, was found
         in agrave at Tynice on the Elbe in Bohemia while others are
         simply twisted.' Disks with a loop on the back” are very
         common; perhaps they served as buttons.
            Gold is not uncommon in the Bohemian hoards where it
         generally occurs in the form of wire. The extraordinary plaited
         gold ornaments like Fig. 184 belong to this pure Lausitz
         period 3
 Amber      Amber was found in one grave near Hradec Kralove (K6nig-
         gratz). Wolves’ teeth and glass beads (blue and yellow) too
         were occasionally worn on necklaces.
 Bronze     Finally, a few graves and hoards have yielded smooth cups
   vases of hammered bronze,‘ and later a variety with ornamental
         bosses appears.
Chrono-     The poverty of metal finds makes the chronology of the
    logy Lausitz culture doubtful. It is generally assigned as a whole
         to Montelius III = Reinecke D.5 This would agree with the
         Hungarian evidence: the pottery of Tészeg C seems parallel
         to early Lausitz ware, while in D types allied to the fluted ware
        of Seger’s class B intrude; the Macedonian connexions date
        the latter to the eleventh century.
           At the same time influence from the Lausitz culture seems
        detectable in South German and Tyrolese graves that belong
        undoubtedly to Reinecke D (p. 350 below). Conversely, late
        Lausitz types like fibula B3z belong in South-Western Germany°
        and in Bohemia?’ to phase E (Reinecke’s Hallstatt A). We
        conclude that the Lausitz cultures as a whole belong to the
        Late Bronze Age, though their roots may very likely go back to
        the preceding phase.
 Origin    The origin of the Lausitz culture has puzzled all archaeolo-
        gists. ‘The earlier investigators, struck with the similarity be-
        tween its wart ornament and that of Tdszeg and Pilin, thought
        of a Hungarian origin.’ Schuchhardt,? on the other hand,
        * Schranil, p. 154.                          27; AuhV.       v, p. 215;   Seger, Real.
        > €.g. (Gottwald, pl. vit), Mostkovice,      Vii, Pp. 253.
                                                     6 Beltz, ZfE. xlv, p-. 675.
        3 Schranil, Boéhmen, p. 144.                 7 With spectacle and harp fibulae at
        4 Rohow (Ratibor), SV. iv, p. 21;            Lzovice (PA. 1914, pl. 1); with em-
        Velatice (M. Brno). Kraft, Mannus            bossed bronze cups at Velatice (M.
        Ergdnzbd. v, p.45, gives a list of sites.    Brno).
        He thinks the smooth type originated          8 Undset, Eisen.
        in East Central Europe.                       9 e.g. Alteuropa, pp. 286 f.
        5 Reinecke, Kol. f. Anthrop. 1902, p.
                           EAST OF THE ALBE                                       329
ees to derive it directly from the neolithic Walternien-
  urg culture, and from its earliest phases at that! Kossinna*
first recognized that it was rooted in the native Aunjetitz cul-
ture, and further researches by von Richthofen* have con-
firmed his view.                                         ,
   The distinctive wart ornament was present, albeit in a rudi-                         Con-
mentary form, on Aunjetitz pottery. That culture possessed                              nexions
further, dishes, amphorae (Fig. 140),3 terrines, and mugs from                          with Aun-
                                                                                        jetitz




      Fic. 184. Plaited ornament of gold wire, Kéniggratz.         After Pi¢. +

which our Lausitz forms can be derived; even the ossuary
might be connected with a deep bowl with scarcely perceptible
shoulder from Sarka in the Jira collection.‘
  Moreover, the Lausitz culture was economically the heir
of the Aunjetitz; it occupied a similar area in the lowlands,
and rested on trade and industry. Even some of its bronzes
carry on an Aunjetitz traditions That the Lausitz culture
1 Mannus, iii, pp. 318 f.                      tween neck and body. Cf. also Pié,
2 Mannus Ergbd. iv, pp. 140-3; cf.also         i, pl. v, 19.
Kostrzewski, Przeg A. ii, p. 170, &c.          4 Cf. Stocky, BAB. viii. 6.
3 An example from Kobylisy near                5 Pins Es5 (Seger in PZ. i) and D6
Prague, with no distinct separation be-        (von Richthofen, p. 69); bracelet A4.
   3443                                   Uu
         330            THE   URNFIELDS          OF LAUSITZ       TYPE
            was descended in the last resort from that of Aunjetitz is
            then clear.
Hunga-         It is equally clear that the older investigators were to a certain
     rian extent right in assuming a Hungarian element in the Lausitz
affinities culture. From that quarter must have come the hornbits, the
            rattles, theriomorphs and figurines, and the idea of core-casting,
            if the socketed celt were the creation of the Lausitz group.
            The wart ornament itself, that appears simultaneously in North
            Hungary (Tdszeg C), the Lausitz, and South-West Germany, 1s
            immediately inspired by the cones that ornament Hungarian
            gold disks.’ Its diffusion to those three areas was, as we have
            noted, due to the fact that all were supplied with copper from
            Slovakia. It was, indeed, to ‘Hungarian’ influence that the
          - Lausitz culture owed its specific form.” But, if in this sense con-
            stitutive, the Hungarian influence is in fact external inasmuch
            as it can be explained by trade (trade comprising, of course, the
            activities of Hungarian tinkers or perambulating smiths). Its
            extent is not surprising since we have seen how closely the Oder
            valley was related to Hungary in the Middle Bronze Age, and
            the importance of Hungarian ores to surrounding countries.
               The Lausitz culture was then the offspring of the Aunjetitz
            culture and the Hungarian Bronze culture. But where pre-
            cisely was it born? Did it arise in the Lausitz and Silesia and
            spread thence southwards as the Czech school maintain? Or
            are the Lausitz cultures, as just described, the results of the
            convergent growth of the Aunjetitz cultures in Silesia, Mora-
            via, and Lower Austria respectively? The latter view seems
            to be coming into favour to-day. Cervinka? points out very
            properly that the Lausitz pottery of Moravia approximates
            closely in technique to the local Aunjetitz ware. Indeed, some
            settlements like Hradisko near Kromeriz seem to have been
            occupied continuously from the Aunjetitz to the Lausitz phase.
            The same remark might very properly be made about the
            cemetery of Gemeinlebarn.4 The nearest parallels to Lausitz
            forms belong to the eastern (Veselé) groups of Aunjetitz pot-
            tery rather than to the Bohemian, and the intermediate forms
            (proto-Lausitz) are found chiefly in the south-east. And it is
            frankly hard to see how the population of the Lausitz, seem-
            ingly exiguous in the Early Bronze Age,’ should have rapidly
         * Kossinna, Mannus, iv, p. 180.          3 Real. ii, p. 94.
         » It may have been transmitted either    4 Szombathy, p. 75, denies the con-
         along the March or north of the Car- _ tinuity.
         pathians; for there was an outpost of  5 Cf. Mannus, xix, Da23s
         the Egyek culture in Galicia.
                           EAST OF THE ELBE                                    gas
expanded by the Late Bronze Age to occupy or conquer the
whole region from the Spree to the Ipoly.
   That is implicitly what has been asserted by Buchtela:*
the Lausitz cultures, in Bohemia at any rate, would have been
introduced by a new people from across the Sudeten. And
despite its difficulties that view seems correct. Both the earliest
stages and the richest development of the true Lausitz culture
are to be found in the eponymous area; its outposts in Moravia
or Slovakia correspond only to what in Lausitz are later phases,
and grow sparser the farther we move from that centre. And
the Lausitz culture, whatever it may have borrowed from the
south, took with it, as far as Lower Austria, certain types such
as two-member fibulae that are certainly northern. We shall
see in Chapter XIX that in the Late Bronze Age of Hungary
an intrusion must be admitted that can only be interpreted in
ethnic terms.
    Somehow or other the seemingly peaceful and sedentary
peasants of the Lausitz were able to impose their vase forms,
their types of ossuary, and their ornaments upon the survivors
of Aunjetitz folk farther south. The Lausitz folk who had at
first imported thence their gold and their copper now set out
to control the supplies themselves—and succeeded.
                        III.   THE    SILESIAN     TYPE
A further evolution of the late Lausitz culture is represented
by the urnfields of Silesian type in Silesia,3 Western Poland,‘
Bohemia,’ and Moravia® This evolution is generally thought
to have taken place in Silesia. The Silesian cultures south of
the Sudeten would be due to fresh influences, probably fresh
ethnic infiltrations from that quarter.? But there is certainly
no sharp break in the cultural continuity and the change in the
population if any must have been minimal.
   The burial rite is unchanged save that the ‘Seelenloch’ was Ceme-
no longer left in the urns and that the ashes are less carefully settle-
                                                                 teries and
purified. The settlements resemble those of the Lausitz group ments
(log cabins), but some are fortified in Moravia. The urns (Fig.
186a) seem to represent a development of type 2, in which,
however, the opposition between body and neck is much less
Epa Ra. Win bee.                           near Krakow).
2 And perhaps superseded the south-        5 7ZK. iv, pl. 11.
ern one-member type!                       6 Pravék, 1910, p. 144.
3 SV. viii, pl. 111; Real. vii, pl. 197.   7 Schranil, Béhmen, p. 173; Cervinka,
4e.g. WPZ. ii, pp. 88 ff. (Skotniki        Real. ii, p. 90, denies anyethnic change.
            332             THE    URNFIELDS           OF LAUSITZ      TYPE
           sharp, and the profile is gently rounded. Wide, flat lugs often
           project downwards just below the belly, while late specimens
           have two handles, borrowed from the amphora, sitting on the
           shoulder (Fig. 187). In Bohemia and Moravia the rim 1s
  Pottery usually everted. The urns were now covered with flat clay
    forms disks ornamented with finger-nail impressions.‘ The dishes
           are normally conical with an omphalos in the base (Fig. 188 b).
           The handles of the cups always rise well above the rim (Fig.
           187b). The pots 8 and g persist in slightly modified forms.
           Rattles and theriomorphic vases become general. As new
           shapes small flasks (Fig. 186 b) and drinking-horns appear.
 Graphit-     The majority of vases of Silesian type are covered with a
       ing gleaming graphite slip.
Ornament      The ornamentation consists of incisions or shallow groovings
           forming arcs (Fig. 186), or bands of alternating triangles as
           in the previous phase (Fig. 186 b). ‘The dishes and shallower
           cups are often adorned with a sort of star pattern on the inside
           (Fig. 188 b). Some of the ossuaries exhibit a plastic band, set
           off with slashings, round the shoulder. This is an imitation of
           the metal torques worn by those whose ashes the urns were to
           contain. In the succeeding phase, indeed, the bronze torque
           itself was sometimes hung round the neck of the urn.?
               It is clear that the form, ornamentation, and texture of the
            finer vessels are due to a deliberate imitation of metal, and
            bronze cups of ‘Italic manufacture’ are actually found both in
            graves and hoards.
     Pins      The graves contain various small pins, of which D7 and
            E123 are the most conspicuous. South of the Sudeten‘ fibulae
            are represented by forms with flat oval bow,5 and the spectacle
  Fibulae   brooch. Of the two-membered series a grave at Skalice near
            Hradec Kralove contained what seems to be a variant of Br.
            Otherwise this series is now found mainly in hoards—often in
            giant specimens of B3.6
               Twisted torques, like ABr, are everywhere characteristic.
            Bracelets like A4 and, in Moravia,’ Bz were still worn, as were
            looped buttons and pendants, particularly C2 and C2,
  Knives       Knives of various forms, particularly 13,° are found in the
            * Mannus Ergdnzbd. iii, p. 38, pl. v,       (Skotniki) and Schranil, Bohmen,p.177.
            Tan                                         7 e.g. Ivanovice (M. Brno, grave),
            FSI, Nit, p. 16.                            Dubicko (M. Olomouc, settlement).
            3 In Moravia, WPZ. iv, fig. 12.             8 WPZ. iv,p. 38 (figs. 11-12) (Haders-
            4 Hadersdorf, WPZ. iv, p. 40, fig. 12.      dorf, TrSice); Kunsthist. Altas, pl. 38,
            5 Nepasice, Schranil, p. 178.               2 (Stillfried); MAGW. lii (1922), p.
            ° Cf., however, WPZ. ii, p. 95, fig. V,3    (21); Skalice (M. Hradec Kralove), &c.
ae




     Fic. 185. Amphora cup and jar of Lausitz B type, Mohi puszta. M. KoSice




           Fic. 186.   Urns and flask, Silesian type, Horkau.   M. Olomouc




              Fic. 188.   Silesian dish and pot, Horkau.   M. Olomouc
                         EAST    OF THE ELBE                               333
graves. Small razors with single-' or more often double-edged
blades are sometimes found, but always in bad condition. The
hoards contain many sickles of both forms and celts like E6
orC4. Apart from arrow-heads and a fewspear-heads, weapons
are.rare even in the graves.        The swords from hoards include
B3, Bs, and C3, all in late variants with leaf-shaped blades.’
And a Hungarian mace-head from Hulin 3 deserves notice.
  Perforated stone axes and clay models thereof were still in use.                 Stone
   Pins‘ and other small ornaments of iron, and, very rarely,                      axes
knives of the same metal were already being imported.                              Iron
   The Silesian folk worked bronze as efficiently as their pre-
decessors, but the transformation of their culture was due to
trade. Amber beads are now found in the settlements, and Amber
probably indicate that the ‘eastern route’ leading to the East
Prussian deposits was already carrying the traffic. It was
through control of this commerce that Hungarian mace-heads
and swords, bracelets like B2, pins like D8, and fibula like A3
were attracted from the foundries of Upper Hungary to Mora-
via. From the south-west came the true Hallstatt types of
fibula and knife and, in the long run, the ‘Italian’ bronze vases,
Mediterranean glass beads, and a new metal—iron.
   Indeed, in the Silesian phase the cultural influence of the Relations
south overcomes the ethnic stream from the north observed with the
in the previous phase, and gradually transforms the culture of south
East Central Europe into a province of the ‘Hallstattian’.
Naturally this transformation proceeded faster in the south
than in the north. The large urnfields in Lower Austria
(Hadersdorf on the Kamp® and Stillfried on the March’)
already contain, besides Silesian shapes, Villanova forms® and
types belonging to the Upper Danubian group.
   Eventually peaceful penetration was followed by incursions
of new folk, inhuming their dead, who have left their remains
in the iron-workings of By¢iskala in Moravia? and even reach
Bohemia. These Hallstatt intrusions give the lower limit of
the Silesian culture, whose beginnings lie well back in the early
Hallstatt A (Reinecke), or towards the close of our Period VI.
 t Borstendorf (Mor.), MAGW. xxv,       from this period, e.g. at Dubicko near
p. 204 (no. 305).                       Olomouc.        °
2 Schranil, p. 180.                     6 Naturhistorisches Museum, Vienna.
3 M. Olomouc.                           7 Universitats - Museum,         Vienna.
4 Even in Silesia, Mannus Erganzbd.     Much, Kunsthist. Atlas, pls. Xxxvul,
ii, p. 39.                              xxxix.    Cf. Menghin,      Niederdster-
5 de Navarro, G¥. 1925 (2), p- 497.     reich, pp. 22 f.
The majority of his finds seem later,   8 Hoernes, Urgeschichte, p. 477, fig.
but there are undoubted instances        10.                9 Real. ii, p. 96.
                                              XVII
                      THE NORTH              ALPINE           URNFIELDS
                                                    I
Distri-       S soon as we cross to the west bank of the Elbe in Bohemia
 bution   A we enter an urnfield province that differs substantially
          from that just described. ‘The earlier phases of the western
          culture are best represented in Lower Austria (Gemeinlebarn,’
          Paudorf,t Herzogenburg,? Gradl near Krems3), Upper Austria
          (Nofing),‘ the Tyrol (urnfields round Innsbruck-H6tting,      Miih-
          lau, Matrei, Wilten, Aldrans, Véls5),  Upper   and  Lower   Bavaria
          (especially Griinwald near Munich®), and Central Bohemia
          (the Knoviz-Milaveé culture of Czech archaeologists’). It has
          early outposts all over Switzerland as far as the Aar,* in Western
          Hungary (Velem), and on the Neckar. Eventually it occupied
          the whole Rhine basin, spreading as far as Holland.
             The North Alpine urnfield culture has a similar distribution
          to the Early Bronze Age Aunjetitz and Straubing cultures.
          Its authors settled by preference in the fertile valleys and along
  Con-    trade routes.      Often, however, they forced their way far into
nexion the mountains, e.g. round Salzburg and in the Tyrol, but such
   withextensions of settlement are in every case obviously correlated
mining with mining or with trade. Indeed, the most distinctive feature
       of the North Alpine urnfield culture is the evident anxiety of
       its authors to control important trade routes and deposits of
       copper and salt. It is the urnfield folk whose remains are found
       in greatest abundance round the copper mines of Salzburg?
       and ‘Tyrol     and the salt deposits of Hallstatt, Hallein in
       Salzburg,” Reichenhall 8 in Upper Bavaria, and Mergentheim
       in Wurtemberg.% The distribution of the cemeteries of the
       Knoviz group in Central Bohemia suggests a similar correla-
          t Szombathy, op. cit.; Hoernes, Ur-           9 No urnfields have actually been
          geschichte, p. 477, fig. 7.                   found in this district, but the bronzes
          2 Real. v, p. 316, pl. 97 (settlement).       and ceramic remains are distinctive;
          3 MAGW. li, p. 42 (settlement).               Kyrle, OKT. xvii, esp. p. 49.
          4 Theuer, p. 11, and pl. tv, 1.               10 FfA. vi (1912), p. 58 (Schwatz), per-
          5 Mostly unpublished; cf. Real. v, p.         haps also H6tting.
          394.                                          tt 'The mines were first worked by the
          6 BAUB. xix (1915), px 15; much un-           urnfield folk; the famous cemetery re-
          published material from Lower Ba-             veals their culture in a later stage only;
          varia is at Straubing and Landshut.           Mahr, Hallstatt, p. 32.
          7 Cf. Real. ii, p. 86; vii, p. 11; ZK.        2 OKT. xvii, p. 69.
          Iv, p. 23; MAGW. xxi, pp. 4f.; xxiv,          3 MAGW. xxxiv, p.60; Behrens, p.
          pp. 61f.; Schranil, Bohmen, pp. 157-          222; AuhV. v, p. 394.
           9.                                           ™ Schumacher, Rheinland, i, p. 69.
          8 Heierli, Urgesch., pp. 251 f.
               THE    NORTH    ALPINE     URNFIELDS                      335
tion with the exploitation of the tin lodes of the Erzgebirge
(see Map IX).
   Their demand for copper and salt, and consequent advance Contact
into the highlands, brought the urnfield folk into contact with with the
the older population of the tumuli, described in Chapter XV, barrow-
and this contact gave the urnfield culture of the Upper Danube— builders
Rhine area a far more complicated character than that of the
Oder—March basins. These complications necessitate a dis-
tinction of several sub-groups such as was unnecessary in
dealing with the Lausitz cultures. We may recognize an
Austro-Bavarian, a Knoviz-Milaveé, and a Franconian group.
The common features of the whole series may, however, first
be summarized.
  The remains are derived from graves, settlements, mines,
and hoards, but as usual the burials afford the most instructive
data.
   The burial rites of the North Alpine urnfields are far less Burial
uniform than in those east of the Elbe or in Hungary. As rites
there, cremation was the general rule, the ashes being preserved Crema-
in cinerary urns. In one or two cases,’ though the grave con- tion
tained an urn, the ashes lay outside it! The same peculiarity
is later noticeable in the great cemetery of Hallstatt itself.
A ‘Seelenloch’ was very frequently provided for the escape of
the ghost in the urns from barrows round Plzen,} and in the
forest of Haguenau ‘ the same peculiarity was observed.
   Though flat graves predominate in urnfields there are a Barrows
                                                                 and flat
number of graves under barrows in Western Bohemia, Bavaria, graves
and the Rhineland that must be assigned to the urnfield cul-
ture; in them, in contradistinction to the cremation interments
of the tumulus culture proper, there was a regular grave-pit
beneath the mound, and the ashes were contained in typical
urns. Many of the urn burials under barrows (Ihringen,’°
Jagstfeld,° and the Haguenau group) belong to the later phase
of the urnfield culture, but the barrow of Milave¢ in Western
 Bohemia must rank as one of the earliest burials of our group.’
 Not a few cases are known in which cists of stone slabs or dry
 masonry were built to contain the ossuary, but such mostly
 belong to the later phase and may be secondary phenomena.°
 1 Grunwald I (BAUB. xix, p. 16);     ° Ibid., p. 188; FbS. xx, p. 14.
 Doubravka, east of Plzen.            7 So Kraft, B¥. 131, p. 166. Probably
 2 Mahr, Hallstatt, p. 20.            Kammerberg near Gunzenhausen be-
 3 Sbor. Plzen, vii, p. 14.           longs here too; PBI. 1889, p. 4.
 4 Schaeffer, Haguenau, p. 223.       8 Kraft, l.c., p. 189.
 5 BF. 131 (1927), Pp. 167 (Baden).
            336                THE    NORTH       ALPINE    URNFIELDS
Inhuma-        Finally, certain inhumation burials must, on account of their
    tions   furniture or of their position in the middle of urnfields, be
            assigned to the group under review despite the abnormal burial
            rite. The most significant of these exceptional inhumations
            are the contracted burials found in Knoviz settlements in
            Bohemia.’ Again, at Gemeinlebarn in Lower Austria some
            inhumation graves, such as 55,” contain typical urnfield vases!
            There is a specialized group showing similar abnormalities in
            Oberpfalz and Franconia, and in the later phase there are
            several cases of interment in the extended position on the
            Middle Rhine} and on the Main.
    Urns       The distinctive urn, type 1, of the North Alpine group has
            a piriform (Milave¢) or globular (Hétting) body and a short
            cylindrical neck with a wide brim (Fig. 189). The body is
            sometimes fluted or roughened. Not seldom there is a plastic
            ridge or imitation rope, often duplicated, running round the
            shoulder, or four small nipples in the same position, or both
            ornaments combined. Otherwise the earlier urns are plain,
            save in the Tyrol, where specimens richly decorated with in-
            cised patterns, small warts, or false cord-impressions‘ are
            quite common.
   Pillar      In the Tyrol a special type (1a) was developed, in which the
    urns    brim is supported by little pillar-like handles that are twisted
            or slashed (Fig. 190). ‘This variant is termed a pillar urn,’ and
            recurs in the domestic pottery of the Knoviz culture in Central
            Bohemia and perhaps once at Gemeinlebarn (Fig. 191).
 Lausitz       Besides the typical urn with cylindrical neck, the biconical
ossuaries   Lausitz ossuary is found sporadically in many early urnfields.
            There are many examples from the Plzen district, several in
            Lower Austria,’ one from Apperndorf in Lower Bavaria,’ one
            from Griinwald near Munich,’ and one from Wilten near
            Innsbruck.?
               In contradistinction to the Lausitz and Hungarian graves
            of the same type, the North Alpine urnfields include many
            tombs richly furnished with bronzes. We can thus form a
            clear picture of the armament and dress of the urnfield people.
             * Schranil, Bohmen, p. 169; Real. ii, p.   5 Real. v, p. 394.
            85; Pig, i, p. 126.                         6 Gemeinlebarn 15, 6, 9, 13, 53, &c.
            2 Szombathy, Flachgrdber bei Gemein-        Gradl near Krems, MAGW. li, p. 42,
            lebarn, pl. 12.                             fig. 13, &c.
            3 e.g. Wollmesheim I in the Palati-         7 M. Landshut.
            nate (infra, p. 361).                       8 BAUB. xix, fig. 2 (grave II).
            4 Made by rolling a ribbed or closely       9 M. Innsbruck. This list is not ex-
            twisted metal ring over the surface.        haustive.
Fic. 189. Dolion from Mihlau,               Fic. r90.Pillar urn, Mihlau,
  Grave 1. M. Innsbruck. 75                 Grave 1. M. Innsbruck.




       Fic. rgt.   Pillar urn from Praha-Bubenic.   Narcdni M.   1
                                                                 5




       Fic. 192.   Large deep bowls, Eisenbichl, after MAGW.
                 THE NORTH         ALPINE URNFIELDS                                337
  The axe was not used as a weapon, and so no bronze celts                                 Stone
are found in graves, but, as farther east, stone celts had been celts
deposited in one or two tombs. From the numerous hoards
and the finds in settlements we know that the favourite celts
of the group belong to the winged class, generally with the Winged
wings well up towards the butt and often embellished with a celts
cast loop to take the string that kept it fast to the haft (B5).
   The typical weapon was the sword, generally a slashing Swords
variety. Early graves and hoards contain tanged swords of
type C3 (Reutlingen), or bronze-hilted weapons like B4 (Mila-
vet) or B3; but with more swelling grip (Kammerberg and
NOfing).2 Later we have Hungarian swords like B53 and the
ribless variants, occasional antennae and Ronzano _ types,‘
and the tanged sword of type C4.5 It is noticeable that
such weapons have not yet been found in Lower Austrian
cemeteries of the early phase.
    Curious rapiers rather like A3° and others of type Aq’ Rapiers
 occur, principally in the peripheral regions. Flat knife-daggers
 with narrow butt (B3), and socketed spear-heads of lanceolate
 form, and arrow-heads were also used.*
   Knives, as in the Lausitz, were often placed in the graves, Knives
but diverge substantially from the eastern forms. The favourite
types were 9,? 12,° and above all 11,‘ together with more
archaic forms like 4 (Miihlau, Gemeinlebarn) and a variant
of 1% with curved back.
   Razors are at first less common. We have already mentioned                              Razors
the curious type A 1-3 that seems to be confined to the
barrows of Western Bohemia, Franconia, and Oberpfalz.                               In
grave 25 at Mihlau (Tyrol) the familiar penannular type
already appears, to become exceedingly common in the later
Bohemian and South German urnfields and in the Swiss lake-
dwellings.
    Sickles do not occur in graves, but the Italian form and, Sickles
 1 This seems the easternmost speci-            8 Kraft, op. cit., p. 165.
 men of the type found in a grave.              9 Muhlau (Tyrol), Singen, Heides-
 2 Theuer, Oberésterreich, pl. Iv, 1.           heim (Rheinpfalz).
 3 WPZ. xi, p. 122=BRGK. xvi, p.                10 Egg (Canton Zurich).
 23 ; Gétze-Fest., p.172; Kraft, Bronze-
                                                11 Rovio (Canton Ticino, BP. i, pl. tv),
 REIL, Pla Xl, Le                               Benningen (Basel, BF., l.c., pl. vut,
 4 Gotze-Fest., p. 173.                         1), St. Ilgen (nr. Heidelberg, AuhV.
 s BRGK. vii, p. 179, fig. 89, 3 (Woll-         v, pl. 35, 640).
 mesheim).                                      12 Matrei, Muhlau, and other Tyro-
 6 Kraft, BF. 131, p. 162.                      lese cemeteries, Real. v, pl. 129, h.
 7 Behrens, no. 565, p. 230; Hock,              3 Hostin, Stocky, BAB. xliv. 9.
 Frankenland, 1914.
    3443                                   XX
         338             THE NORTH ALPINE URNFIELDS
         more rarely, button sickles are abundantly represented in
         hoards, as in the Lausitz area.
             The ornaments found in the urnfields vary so greatly from
          group to group that a detailed description of them must be
 Fibulae postponed. Here it suffices to say that fibulae are only found
     rare sporadically, chiefly in the Austro-Bavarian group, and to
    Gold draw attention to the comparative abundance of gold ob-
          jects. Farther west round Plzen, in Bavaria, and the Tyrol
          the precious metal is represented principally by small helical
          wire rings generally of type 1a. But a gold disk ornamented
          with stamped concentric circles was found in a Tyrolese
          urnfield, and the grave at Binningen (Canton Basel) and the
          hoard of Paseka' in Western Bohemia contained large oval
        sheets of gold leaf, likewise ornamented with stamped circles,
         here supplemented by tangents, zigzags, and triangles in relief
         (Fig. 193). Perhaps these were originally intended as platings
         on knife sheathes.?
  Amber     Amber} and glass beads are also sometimes found.
 Bronze     Further evidence of the wealth of the urnfield folk is afforded
   vases by the bronze vases. Smooth shallow cups with ribbon handles
         riveted on were found in the Tyrolese cemeteries, at Griin-
         wald, and in Western Bohemia, all in the earliest phase. The
         most striking vessel of the early group, however, is the famous
Wheeled wheeled bowl from Milavet.5 It approximates in form to the
   bowls usual cinerary urn, but stands on a framework to which four
         wheels (four-spoked) are attached. Parallels are known from
         North Germany and Denmark, but the whole group has very
         plausibly been connected with Hittite and Phoenician cult
         objects.°
            Though both types of bronze vessel are usually designated
         Italian, no really exact parallels are known in the Peninsula.
         Even the large buckets, ornamented with birds’ protomae, that
         appear just a little later,’ have more numerous parallels in
         North-Eastern Hungary than in Italy, though the ornament was
         very popular in the latter country in Benacci I times. And in
         Bavaria such buckets are associated with gold vases far more
         likely to have come from Hungary than Italy.
    Bits    Though it is clear that wheeled vehicles were known, horse
        : Mraft, BY.131,pl.vit;Real.ii,pl.35.   AuhV.v, p. 213, written before the
        : SA. xvil (1915), pp. 115 f.           excavation of the Griinwald cemetery.
          e.g. Gemeinlebarn, grave 81,Szom-     5 Stocky, BAB. lii; AuhV. v, p. 207.
        bathy, p. 59, perhaps older.            © Kraft, BF. 132, lve:      ;
        * Kraft gives a list of the finds in    7 Unterglauhe:
        Mannus Ergénzbd. v, p. 45, n.1. Cf.     27. Chon e TT                   ae
                THE    NORTH      ALPINE     URNFIELDS                 339
trappings do not yet appear in the graves. The employment
of the horse is, however, attested by the horn cheek-pieces
from bits found in several settlements."
   Settlements of the early urnfield folk are less well known. Settle-
The sites (e.g. round Innsbruck) seem generally to have been ments
chosen with a view to defence. If fortification is not demon-
strated with certainty for the earliest phase, there is no doubt
that the early South German ‘ring walls’ of the next period
were built by the urnfield folk.
   The type of habitation is likewise uncertain. Rectangular Log huts
log cabins have been identified at Mergentheim, Buchau on the


                                                       R
                                        OE   IN LLL




                  Fic. 193.   Gold-leaf plating from Paseka

Federsee, and Hallwil in Switzerland (Aargau).3 On the other
hand, at Burgweinting near Regensburg‘ we hear of ‘Wohn-
griiben’ as usual. Those round Knoviz in Bohemia have been
described in detail, but their interpretation as refuse pits or
silos still seems possible.
   The mines and industrial settlements deserve a section to Hoards
themselves. The hoards connected with their exploitation have
the same character as the contemporary depots described in
Chapter XVI. They seem to have been left by travelling
tinkers, engaged in the collection of old scrap bronze for re-
smelting, and include many worn implements as well as form-
less lumps of bronze.
                   Il. THE     COPPER     AND   SALT       MINES

We have connected the prehistoric copper mines of the Tyrol
and Salzburg and the salt mines of the Salzkammergut with
the urnfield people. Their cemeteries spread in a significant
manner all along the Grauwack zone of the Eastern Alps,5 and
 « AuhV. v, p- 396, fig. 2, h; Schu-     Eisenbichl near Reichenhall, MAGW
 macher, Rheinlande, p. 69.              xxxiv, p. 60.
 2 Kraft, BY. 131, p. 189.               4 Verh. OP. \xviii, p. 37-
 3 Schumacher, Rheinlande, i, p. 69;     ° BRGK. xvi, p. 22.
 Reinerth, Wohnbau;      perhaps also
             340             THE       NORTH    ALPINE   URNFIELDS
           the exploitation of the mines in the urnfield period is admitted
           by all authorities.                                 OF oe
      The     Mining? was     carried out by  means   of open workings  and
    mines also by regular shafts and underground galleries when the
           surface lodes had been exhausted. The shafts were generally
           slanting, and sometimes a second or even a third shaft was cut
           toimprovethedraught. Where the softness of the stone required
           it, the walls of the shafts and galleries were strengthened with
           props. Generally it was found sufficient to fix stout piles
           spanning the gap between floor and roof or between the
           walls by means of a wedge, but in very soft stone the walls of
           the galleries were supported by planks behind the props.’
 Methods      In driving the shafts the rock was first split by kindling a
        of fire  against it and then throwing water on the hot surface.
   mining The miner’s chief implement was a sort of short bronze crow-
             bar socketed to take a wooden shaft. Many knee-axe shafts,
             designed to fit bronze celts with the wings at, or generally
             above, the middle of the body, have been found at Hallstatt
             and at Diirnberg near Hallein. These axes would have been
             used for cutting the timbers.
 Grooved        In the copper mines the ore was roughly broken up and
 hammer-     washed before transportation to the surface. Grooved hammer-
    stones   stones (cf. Fig. 130) were used for breaking up the ore, and the
             refined product was then carried to the surface in wooden
             troughs or leather sacks. The ascent was facilitated by a
             ladder made from a tree-trunk with notches cut in it to serve
             as steps.
 Smelting       The copper ore was smelted close to the shaft, but the ovens
             were always near streamlets. The furnaces were apparently
             built into the side of the mountain, and probably stood about
             a metre high. There was a depression on the floor of the oven
             where the molten metal might accumulate. It is questionable
             whether any special channel was provided to allow the slag to
             run off; perhaps the oven wall was opened up periodically,
             and the slag raked out. The Mitterberg ore contains such a
             high sulphur percentage that it easily burns by itself. All
             that would be needed would be to light a fire on the oven’s
           hearth. and then fill up the furnace with alternate layers of ore
           and charcoal.
Age of the _ As noted in Chapter VII, Much believed that the exploita-
    mines tion of the Tyrolese copper ores began
                                                    in our Period III. The
             This account is based      on Andree,   2 Andree, p. 34.
             Bergbau in der Vorzeit.                 3 Klose in OKT. xvii, p. 32.
                THE NORTH       ALPINE   URNFIELDS               341
Late Bronze Age mining industry just described would, on
this view, be the ultimate development of the old surface
workings. Kyrle, as we saw, was inclined to reject the Copper
Age exploitation altogether. As to the regular mining, his
conclusions are very definite. The copper mines were all
in operation simultaneously; the objects found in them are
everywhere the same; the methods of working show no
trace of development. ‘The technique of mining’, he con-
cludes, ‘was not autochthonous; it was introduced by experi-
enced miners after the discovery of the ores.’* It would be
natural to identify the initiators of the new industry with the
urnfield folk.
    The remains from the mines do not settle the question, Bronzes
but if the bronzes found stray or in settlements in the mining from
region be examined they certainly support the view just quoted. the
Apart from a couple of hoards, obviously connected with the region
amber trade across the Brenner, Early Bronze Age types are
conspicuously lacking. On the other hand, Late Bronze Age
types (swords, vase-head pins, ribbed and twisted bracelets),
characteristic of the urnfield culture, are very common.
    They do not, however, clinch the issue. Hell of Salzburg Pottery
has recently revived—in a modified form—Much’s theories in
a series of important articles based upon a study of the pottery
from settlements some of which indubitably are connected
with the mining industry. The settlements are for the most
part hill stations, and all yielded chalcolithic remains of the
Altheim culture.
    From the Rainberg near Salzburg,’ perhaps also from the Middle
 Klinglberg3 (near the Mitterberg mines), and the Grillberg Bronze
                                                                 Age
 (near Elsbethen),* come sherds resembling the pottery of the sherds
Middle Bronze Age barrows in Bavaria and Oberpfalz. Simi-
 lar wares occur at Reichenhall just across the Bavarian border
 accompanied by bronzes characteristic of the older Bavarian
 tumuli.S Finally, some sherds from Gétschenberg near Bischof-
 shofen’ and elsewhere—especially fragments of jugs with a
 shoulder-groove as in the Eastern Aunjetitz group—might Aunetitz
 really be Early Bronze Age. Metal forms belonging to that forms
 period are represented bya flanged celt of type At from Hell-
 brunner hill near Salzburg,7 and a pin of type B2 from
 « OKT. xvii, p. 49.                s MAGW. xxxiv (1904), pl. UI, 21;
2 ORT. xvii, fig. 24, 1.            Reinecke, AuhV. v, pp. 393 f.
3 MAGW. li, p. 202.                 6 WPZ. xiv (1927), pp. 12-22.
4 MAGW. xlviii (1919), p. 215       7 MAGW. li (1921), p. 34-
          342               THE       NORTH    ALPINE    URNFIELDS
          Rainberg.t Hence Hell concludes that the arrival of skilled
          miners in the Austrian Alps should be dated back to our
          Period IV.
   Late     The bulk of the remains from the settlements would, how-
 Bronze   ever, seem to belong to the. Late Bronze Age. Among the
     Age abundant coarse sherds appear fragments of an urn-like pithos
    types with concave neck.2 The neck is generally smooth, the body
dominant roughened and separated from the neck byaplastic ridge set
          off with finger-tip impression. This form of pithos occurs    in
          the Late Bronze Age barrow of Riegsee 23 in Upper Bavaria 3
          and in the settlements round Reichenhall+ (Fig. 192 a), and
          then in many contemporary settlements in Lower Austria5
          and Bohemia.® It is no doubt related to pithoi of the Aunje-
          titz period,’ but is equally akin to the ossuary from our urn-
          fields. A wider form, associated with the foregoing at Eisen-
          bichl near Reichenhall (Fig. 192 b), is actually found in early
          settlements of that type.? The definite association of this type
          of vase with the mining settlements gives therefore no con-
          clusive evidence as to the origin of the miners. They might
          have brought it with them from Hungary in the Early Bronze
          Age or from somewhere else in the Late Bronze Age. The
          fact remains that the urnfield folk did eventually settle round
          the mines. Prior to their advent there is no evidence for inten-
          sive settlement, still less for any wealth of local or imported
          bronzes in the Eastern Alps. If the ores had been early ex-
          ploited we should reasonably expect to find in such a well-
          studied area a mass of imported luxury articles of older type
          than actually do meet our eyes in the urnfield period. The
          evidence therefore favours Kyrle’s view.
                               III.    THE    SEPARATE     GROUPS
          (a) The Austro-Bavarian Group.
          The urnfields of the Upper Danube basin from Lower Austria
          to Switzerland constitute a very consistent group, distinguished
          by the bronzes and accessory vases from the Bohemian and
          Franconian series.                           .
          x OKT., l. C., figvert. Of course,as we   © Information from Dr. A. Mahr.
          saw, this pin lasted in Hungary into      7 e.g. the big vase from Helmsdorf,
          the urnfield period.                      Pp. 232; in the last resort the jar from
          4 WPZ. xiv, p. 12, fig. 2, 6.                szentivan represents the prototype.
          3 Naue, OB., pl. XxxIx, 2.                8 Kraft seems to take it as an ‘inter-
          4 MAGW. xxxiv, pl. 1, 5-6.                mediate’ form, BF. 131, p. 168.
          ’ Herzogenberg, Real. v, pl. 97d;         9» MAGW. xxxiv, pl. 11, 7-8; Kraft
          Haslerberg, ¥ZK. i, p. 20, &c.            BY. 131, pl. v1, 2 (left).      ;
                  THE NORTH          ALPINE    URNFIELDS                      343
  The accessory vases comprise a considerable variety of Accessory
types.    Dishes were not often used to cover the urns and so vases:
 are not prominent. The commonest form has a collar and forms
 broad rim.’ Cups appear in three varieties: (2) a shallow
 form in which the handle falls from the rim to the shoulder
 as in Lausitz* (Fig. 194a), (3) a variant in which the handle
 begins mid-way up the neck; more rarely (4) the handle sits
 on the shoulder. Small pots (5), not unlike the urn in shape,
 appear in several urnfields, especially in Baden and Switzer-
 land.3 The jug (6) (Fig. 196) resembles the cup (2), save that
 the neck is taller. Among interesting variants may be noted
 small urns of Villanova shape (Fig. 195) from the Tyrol
 cemeteries and ‘feeding cups’ from Griinwald and Lower
 Austria.
    The small vases are generally very fine and often blackened Graphite
 with graphite. Forms 2-5 are frequently ornamented with in- and
 cised patterns—zigzags, triangles, inverted wolf’s teeth—in a fluted
 broad belt framed by horizontal incisions and running round ornament
 the shoulder. The field may be broken up by four small
conical warts.+ Other vases, and especially the miniature Villa-
 nova urns, often show vertical or oblique flutings chiefly on
 the shoulder.’ Wart decoration is not uncommon.°
    Besides vases, the people of this group were apparently Fire-dogs
 making the so-called ‘moon-figures’ out of clay even in this
phase (cf. Fig. 152). The early examples come from settle-
ments along the Danube,’ but later they spread all over
Switzerland and down the Rhine. They seemed to have
served as fire-dogs, but are none the less certainly related
in the last resort to the Cretan Horns of Consecration*® and
the system of religious conceptions embodied in the steer
cult... The hearth was sacred, and these cult symbols mark
its sanctity.
   Next to the pottery the bronze ornaments best define our
group, since the arms belong to the types already enumerated.
The massive bracelets are twisted or heavily ribbed as Ez,
F3, and F3.
1 Oberendingen, Schifferstadt, Reut-       7 Burgweinting, Verh. OP. Ixviii, p.37.
lingen.                                    8 Cf. Tschumi, Schweiz, pp. 90, 183.
2 H6tting, Forst, Velem.                   9 It would perhaps have been trans-
3 Kraft, B¥., pl. vil, 2 and Ix, 3, c.     mitted up the Danube, since there are
4 Kratt,, B7..131, pp. 172-3.              examples of rather doubtful antiquity
5 Ibid., p. 176; for Tyrol cf. fig. 194.   from Bulgaria and Hungary (p. 283
6 e.g. Hoernes, Urgeschichte, p. 417,      above).
fig. 2 (H6tting).
           344              THE NORTH ALPINE URNFIELDS
    Pins      No less distinctive are the pins with vase,’ turban,’ poppy,’
           or bulb heads‘4 (D11, Dg, Dio, and D8).
 Fibulae      Fibulae appear only as accidents: the Peschiera form with
           twisted bow in several graves round Innsbruck, A3 a at Griin-
           wald5 five times, and A”2 a at Egg (Canton Zurich). Later, a
           couple of two-member fibulae reached our area: B3 at Gemein-
           lebarn in Lower Austria, Taimering near Regensburg,° and
           at several sites farther north on the Rhine and Main and B4
           at Burladingen in Hohenzollern, Aub on the Main,’ and at
           Wollmesheim in the Palatinate (here with a skeleton!).
   Finger    Small spiral rings of gold with twisted ends (1) are not un-
     rings known, and later type 4 of bronze came into use.
   Girdle     The girdle was fastened with the very distinctive clasp
    clasps type  3.2. The leather was studded with hollow buttons that
           now have loops on the inside, and perhaps wheel-pendants
           were hung from it. In the Griinwald and the Tyrolese urn-
      The fields the disk-pendants were already surmounted with heraldic
Hallstatt birds’ heads, a motive that has been rightly connected with the
      bir Egyptian winged disk probably in its later Hittite-Assyrian
           form.
  Chains      Chains of closed rings united by band-shaped links are also
           found in graves of the group (cf. Fig. 203).
           (b) The Knoviz Group.
           In Central Bohemia, besides the regular cremation burials, we
           meet human remains in bell-shaped pits mixed with animal
 Canni-    bones and other kitchen refuse.? Matiegka many years ago
  balism   pointed out that the human bones, generally quite fragmentary,
           had been scorched by fire, split to extract the marrow, and
           hacked about with knives; they could then only be the remains
           of cannibal feasts.’? Matiegka’s inference has been confirmed
           by further observations in Bohemia, and the gruesome custom
           * Velem Szt. Vid, Paudorf, Hétting,       bellished with several ribs; in later
           Griinwald (near Munich), Hallstatt,       specimens the head is globular and
           Salzburg (OKT. xvii, Beitr. III,          there are less than five ribs, Kraft,
           fig. 10).                                 BF. 131, p. 165.
           2 Milaveé.                                5 Gétze-Festschr., p. 173.
           3 Mels (Canton St. Gall), Egg (Zu-        6 Hock, Frankenland, 1914, pl. 1, ro.
           rich), Marstetten (Wurtemburg). Cf.       7 Ibid.
           Kraft, BY., pp. 131, 162. AsA. xxix,      8 Rovio (Canton Ticino), Mihlau,
           pp. 76, 139, 212, who makes a special     Griinwald, Arndorf (Lower Bavaria):
           group originating in North Italy out of   later Jagstfeld (on Neckar), &c.
           graves with these pins and those with     9 Inone pit portions of four skeletons,
           swords like A3. Cf. p. 358 below.         not one complete, were identified.
           4 In the early specimens the heads are    *e MAGW. xxvi, p. 129; Schranil, p.
           relatively small and the neck is em-      WZ,
Fic. 195.   Miniature urn, Véls.   M. Innsbruck




   Fic. 196. Jugs, Mihlau.     M. Innsbruck
                 THE NORTH         ALPINE      URNFIELDS                      345
has been also detected in Austria! The pottery and bronzes
from Knoviz deposits approximate so closely to those from
late Milavec barrows in Western Bohemia that the two groups
may here be treated as one.”
   Besides the urn with cylindrical neck, the biconical Lausitz Lausitz
ossuary (I) is common in Bohemia but generally in a rounded forms
variant. ‘he second Lausitz urn-form also occurs, usually
with a very long neck. In the later phase, E, it grows into the
‘storeyed urn’ (Etagenurne) with a bulging neck. The type is Storeyed
commonest      round Plzen,3 but also occurs on the Elbe, both urns
in Bohemia‘ and in Saxony,5 and sporadically even in Ober-
pfalz° and Franconia.’
   Other forms reminiscent of Lausitz B are fluted cups (like
Fig. 197a) and dishes with fluted rims (like Fig. 182a). The
Lausitz amphora is represented by a few stray examples with
degenerate warts.’ The pillar urns (Fig. 191) and the wide Pillar
bowls (Fig. 197c) have closer parallels farther west.           urns
   The smaller vessels, including the storeyed urns, are always Graphit-
smooth and not infrequently graphited in the later phases. ing
The big urns, on the other hand, are generally rough. Decora-
tion when present is restricted to fluting or light grooving.
Warts are rarely used, but a deep groove running round the
base of the neck of some late urns is taken over from the older
tumulus vases.
   The weapons of the Knoviz culture correspond to those
used farther west with the addition of a few Hungarian mace-
heads,’ like Plate 15, 3, imported from the south. But from
Plzen comes a remarkable bronze shield °—the earliest dated Shields
bronze shield from Central Europe (Plate 15). The type might
be regarded as a native development of the round wood or
leather shield of the tumulus culture, but has very close
parallels on the ninth-century Assyrian sculptures, to say
nothing of analogues from Great Britain and Scandinavia.
t MAGW. liii, p. 83.                       9 Repet 12; PA. xviii, pl. u, 6=Pit,
2 Fuller details distinguishing the        ii, pl. xm, 6; Schranil, Béhmen, pl.
several groups are given by Schranil,      XXXII, 35 and p. 162.
Béhmen, pp. 160-8 and 182 ff.              10 Sbornik Plzen, ii (z911), pp. 96 ff.
3 Sb. Plzen, vii, p. 15 (fig. 5).          Being found in a unitary hoard it
4 Vepyek, Pétipsy (near Kadai), Pit, i,    enables us to date other specimens as,
fig. 54; Schranil, pl. xxix.               e.g., Behrens, fig. 48, from Rhine near
s Abercromby, ii, p. 45; ZfE. viii         Mainz. The Plzen shield was found
(1876), p. 95.                             in a Knoviz-Lausitz pot with a frag-
6 AuhV. v, p. 244.                         mentary sword blade (? C3), Italian
7 Hock, Frankenland, 1914, p. 254          and button sickles, a pin-head like Bro,
(Gundelsheim near Bamberg).                and a spiked tutulus with very low
8 e.g. barrow 89 at Haj.                   spike. It is assigned to phase E.
   3443                                   Yy
            346              THE    NORTH      ALPINE    URNFIELDS
Bracelets      The ornaments, on the other hand, divergesubstantially from
            those current in Bavaria. Massive bracelets are found only in
            hoards;* light wire or ribbon types alone are found in Knoviz
     Pins   graves.   So, too, the pins ABo, Bro, E8, and D1 agree more
            closely with the Lausitz than the Austro-Bavarian series.
 Fibulae    Fibulae are found almost exclusively in hoards, and all in
            phase E. The commonest are the giant variants of B3. In the
            hoard of JenSovice? the several stages of manufacture may be
            seen—quadrangular bronze bar, bar hammered out flat in the
            middle, oval plate terminating in wires not yet coiled, and the
            article complete but for pin. Later still, spectacle fibulae, built
            on the plan of the Nordic series with a separate, pivoted pin,
            are found in the barrows round Plzen.
               Still a number of western types occur such as armlets or
            anklets like Fig. 170, 2, finger rings, like type 2 save that the
            wire of the spiral disks is twisted, compound neck-rings like
            Pl. 8, G2, razors of types 1-2, knives like type 9, &c. Armlets
            like narrow versions of B1, on the other hand, are a link with the
            eastern group.

           (c) Franconian Group.
           A small but highly specialized group of cemeteries in the basin
           of the Upper Main and Piegnitz must be mentioned here for
           the sake of completeness. ‘They are not urnfields, but are
           more closely related to the local ‘Tumulus cultures.
              Several methods of disposing of the corpse were in use
           concurrently. Besides inhumation in the extended position
   Secon- there are cases of secondary burial3 (interment after the flesh
     dary
    burial
           has decayed away from the bones), possible instances of roast-
           ing of the remains, the bronzes also showing traces of the
           action of fire? and cremations with or without inurnment of
  Crema- the ashes.’ The bones or cinerary urn lay either on a circular
      tion
           bedding of small stones or in a pit or cist which was often
    Circle surrounded by a similar stone bedding.       Sometimes a real
   graves
           barrow surmounted the grave, but this was not always present,
            and in some cases, even when a barrow was observed, it may
           have grown up as a result of successive secondary interments
           as Wunder suggested.7
 Mixture
  of types
              The grave goods display an interesting mixture of types
            * Paseka, ee Real. ii,> pl.
                                    E   36.         5 e.g.
                                                        “ 2° ibid., oe xv, > p. o 3763 > xxi > p. 2 8 7-
            2 Stocky, BAB. xlix.                    6 Ibid., p. 268; cf. Frankenland, 1914,
            3 Abh. Niirn. xxi, pp. 260, 275, 291.   Pp. 254.
            4
              Ibid., p. 263.                        7 Abh. Niirn. xv, p. 44.
                 THE    NORTH       ALPINE         URNFIELDS                       347
derived from the Hercynian tumulus cultures and the eastern
and western groups of urnfields. Typologically they denote
two distinct periods, the first of which is the immediate con-
tinuation of the Middle Bronze Age tumulus culture.
   Apart from socketed arrow-heads, weapons are rare. On Knives
the other hand knives and razors are very abundant. The
typologically early forms of knife (2, 5, and 6) are so common
here that Kraft seems inclined to regard Franconia as their
original home. So, too, the primitive looking razors’ are so Razors
plentiful that they might have been differentiated in this area
though their ultimate home was Italy.
   In Reinecke’s Hallstatt A phase regular knives of Swiss (13
and 14)? and Upper Rhenish (10)3 types were introduced
apparently up the Main. From the same quarter came penannu-
lar razors,‘ ‘pendants’ of the same shape (as in the Lake-
dwellings), and the curious transverse celt B5a (Mihlanger)
of Swiss type.
   Among the ornaments twisted bracelets like ABr and F%3,
disks with a loop on the back, pins like D1 may be due to
eastern connexions, while anklets® are Rhenish and the vase-                             Anklets
headed pin from a late grave at Grundelsheim’ and perhaps
the commoner early pin D6 are Bavarian. A remarkable Amber
necklace of amber and blue glass beads from Henfenfeld illus- Glass
trates connexions with the north and south.
   The commonest ceramic form is a big urnlike vase with Urns
trumpet mouth (Fig. 198,a).* Later specimens? are taller
and more piriform. Such urns have analogues and perhaps
prototypes in the Late Bronze Age barrows and urnfields of
Upper Bavaria where pin D6 also occurs,” but might never-
theless be grouped with the North Alpine class. Parallels to
the later form can be cited from inhumation graves in ‘Thu-
ringia." But with this urn appear degenerate amphorae of the Lausitz
Hercynian tumulus type (Fig. 198, b, d),” and what might pass types
for very rounded descendants of the Lausitz ossuary (Fig.
1 Jbid. xxi, pl. Lxx (Henfenfeld);         7 Frankenland, 1914, pl. 1, 16.
Behrens, p. 231, no. 268 (Gadheim          8 Dixenhausen and Henfenfeld (Abh.
near Schweinfurth).                        Niirn. xxi), perhaps     Kammerberg
> Muhlanger, Abh. Niirn. xv, pl. Vul.      near Gunzenhausen, PBI. 1889, pl.
3 Frankenland, 1914, pl.1, 8 (Giindels-    1, 7:
heim).                                     9 Miuhlanger, Lampertshofen.
4 Ibid., pl. 1, 29 (Fuchstadt).            1 PBI. 1895, pl. 11, 5; 1907, pl. 1,
s Mihlanger, Lampertshofen (Z/E.           8-9.
xxxv, NA. p. 40).                          x       ¥ST. x, p. 86 and pl. xin, 8.
6 Probably like Fig. 170, 2. Abh. Niirn.   12 Note the position of the handles;
xxi, p. 288; Behrens, p. 230, no. 565      through failure to observe this Hér-
            348             THE   NORTH     ALPINE    URNFIELDS
            198,c). In the Main valley Lausitz forms certainly occur.
            For instance, at Reindorf near Lichtenfels," an amphora, a cup,
            anda pot of the Lausitz B types, designated 4, 6, and 7on p. 322,
            were found in a cemetery of inhumation and cremation graves
            belonging perhaps to Reinecke’s Bronze Age D. Farther down
            stream at Fuchstadt a Lausitz amphora adorned with four
            groups of concentric circles? was found in a cremation grave
            under a barrowbelonging to Reinecke’s Hallstatt A. The closest
            parallels to this vase come not from the Lausitz but from
            Western Bohemia,} whence the two storeyed urns, mentioned on
            p- 345, must have been imported about the same time.
               Hence in Franconia we seem to have a survival of the
            Hercynian tumulus culture, crossed with an early northward
            push from the North Alpine urnfield culture and overlaid by
            a current from North-Western Bohemia.

                                      IV.   CONCLUSION
  Econo-    The group of urnfield cultures best illustrated in the Austro-
     mics   Bavarian cemeteries belong to a race of farmers who were not
            only successful cultivators but also possessed herds and horses.
            They were further engaged in trade and industry.
Sociology      They are marked out as a sedentary folk by their substantial
            villages and extensive cemeteries. he fortifications imply a
            close social organization, the great wealth of some graves sug-
            gests submission to princes or chiefs. War and fighting were
            common events in their lives. The whole impression of the
            period—the numerous hoards, the care lavished on weapons
            and defence indicate an age of struggle and unrest.‘
    Origin     It is generally held that the appearance of the urnfields
            denotes the advent of a new ethnic element in the Upper
            Danube basin. Every one agrees that the urnfield folk with
            their primarily agricultural and industrial economy, their closely
            knit communities and their peculiar burial rites, cannot be
Relations identified with the people of the tumuli.      These actually lived
to Tumu- in the highlands while the urnfield folk occupied the valleys,
   lus cul- and naturally an interchange of cultural elements took place
       ture
            between the two groups. We have noted already that many
            of the bronze and ceramic types found in the urnfields also
            mann has connected the vase with the   3 Barrow 98, at Haj, M. Plzen, no.
            Lausitz series.                        528.
            * M. Wirzburg.                         4 Cf. Reinecke, AuhV. v, p. 397.
            ? Behrens, fig. 40.
                                 c

Fic. 197.   Knoviz cups and dishes, Bubenic.   Narodni Museum.
                          aand bi,ct




                              c                         d
       b
   Fic. 198. Urns and amphorae, Henfenfeld.       M. Nurnberg
                THE NORTH ALPINE URNFIELDS                            349
occur in the contemporary barrows of Upper Bavaria. The
bronze-hilted swords derived from type B3, perhaps also the
taste for heavily ribbed pins and bracelets, would have been
borrowed from the Bavarian tumulus-builders. On the other
hand, the fine pottery from the later barrows is far more likely
to have been the work of the sedentary peasants than of the
pastoral hill folk whose metalwork was always superior to
their pottery. The relations between the Knoviz folk of Central
Bohemia and the Milave¢ people of the west, who had ad-
vanced as far east as Prague (Velka Dobra), would be of the
same order. The contact between the two groups in either
case can hardly have been always peaceful, and probably it is
their opposition which gives the peculiarly martial character to
the North Alpine urnfield cultures. At the same time, while
a section of the tumulus folk kept apart, another section, both
 in Bohemia and Bavaria, may well have been absorbed in or
 have dominated the urnfield folk and come to constitute an
 integral and distinctive part of the new communities.”
    It remains possible that the urnfield folk were (I) descen-
 dants of the local Aunjetitz-Straubing population of the low-
 lands, or (II) invaders (a) from the Lausitz area or (6) from
 the south-east, or were (III) constituted from a combination of
 all these elements. Their culture certainly shows points of
 agreement with each of the three groups enumerated.
    (I) The urnfields occupy very much the same area as the Relations
 Early Bronze Age cemeteries, and in some cases (Kelheim, to
 Straubing, Kornwestheim, Gemeinlebarn) the same site was Aunjetitz
 occupied in both periods. At the last-named site a definite cultures
 continuity between the inhumation and cremation graves has
 been asserted by Hoernes,’ and a curious blending of Lausitz,
 North Hungarian (Egyek), and North Alpine types is notice-
able. Moreover, the urnfield cultures are the economic heirs
of the Aunjetitz, as farther east. Nor is the contrast in burial
rites complete. We have contracted skeletons at Gemeinlebarn.
Conversely, a cremation burial with pottery of the Straubing
type is reported from Kelheim.3
   The distinctive urn with cylindrical neck is regarded by
most authorities as derived in the last resort from Aunjetitz
forms.? The intermediate types have, however, not yet been
traced either in Bohemia or Lower Bavaria, but might well be
1 Cf. Cervinka’s remarks on the Kno- _ bathy.
viz culture, Real. vii, p. 11.         3 p. 235 above.
2 JZK. i, p. 43; it is denied by Szom- 4 Kraft, BY. 131, pp. 168 f.
            350              THE    NORTH      ALPINE    URNFIELDS
          sought in Lower Austria or Slovakia. In the same way the
          jugs of the Austro-Bavarian group may be connected with
          Straubing forms, but come nearer Moravian and Lower Aus-
          trian Aunjetitz shapes. The fine black ware of Bavaria is like-
          wise reminiscent of the Eastern Aunjetitz fabrics. A survival
          of the Aunjetitz population might then be admitted both in
          Bohemia and Lower Bavaria, but to explain the change a new
          element would have to be postulated.
Theory of |The theory of an incursion of Lausitz people has found
a Lausitz more supporters.    The Czech school‘ explain the Knoviz cul-
incursion   ture as a westward extension of the Lausitz culture, crossed
         with Aunjetitz survivors. Cervinka* rightly insists on the
         contribution made by outposts of the West Bohemian tumulus
         culture. An extension of the same wave from the Lausitz to
         Bavaria has been favoured by many German authorities.
  Agree-    The agreements between the two cultures are certainly
   ments striking. In addition to a general community of economic
 between life (agriculture, industry, trade) and social structure (regular
     two village-communities) we have a perfect agreement in funeral
  groups    rites—cremation, inurnment of the ashes, burial in urnfields.
            This agreement extends to details. The typical Lausitz ossuary
            is found in Western          Bohemia,     Lower     Austria, the Tyrol,
            Bavaria, and even the Rhineland.            In two or three cases even
            a ‘Seelenloch’ was provided (in urns of native type). The
            domestic architecture (log-cabin building) and control of the
            horse again serve to connect the western province to the
            eastern.
               In the Knoviz area quite a number of accessory vases and
            even the bronzes (especially the pins) belong to Lausitz types;
            farther west only the cups look at all Lusatian, the ornaments
            are essentially different.
Contrasts      Despite the many significant points of agreement, the North
            Alpine and Lausitz urnfields are separated by contrasts that
            are scarcely less important. The Lausitz graves are always
            very poor in bronzes; the North Alpine sometimes quite rich;
            the Lausitz culture looks peaceful and democratic; the North
            Alpine definitely martial and aristocratic; the Lausitz settle-
            ments were never fortified; the sites in Bavaria and Tyrol were
            chosen definitely with a view to defence. Perhaps these diver-
            gences might be explained by the circumstances of the Lausitz
            invaders in a country occupied by the warlike barrow-builders.
            I Buchtela, JZEK. iv, p. 32; Schranil,   > Real. vii, p. 11.
            Béhmen, p. 148; Stocky, BAB., p. 23.     3 Mannus, Erganzbd. v, p. 52, n. 2.
                 THE NORTH        ALPINE     URNFIELDS                     aet
   That will explain some of the differences in industry, too.
Others seem more deep seated. The Lausitz people used a
socketed celt; in the urnfield area west of the Elbe this type
is rare; the regular axe belongs to the family of winged celts.
The typical ossuary is almost foreign to the Lausitz culture.’
 _ The contrast is accentuated by the existence of a vague fron- The Elbe
tier along the Elbe in Bohemia: on the east lie the extensive a frontier
cemeteries of poor graves with a pure Lausitz inventory, on
the west the burials in urns with cylindrical necks and rich
hoards containing Austro-Bavarian types (Paseka). A mass
expansion of the Lausitz culture to Bavaria, such as we can
trace in Moravia, is inconceivable.         None the less a real incur-
sion of Lausitz people seems required to explain the wide
distribution of the typical ossuary. The only question is the
extent and importance of this element as a constitutive factor
in the new unity.
   Kraft ? has enumerated several cultural elements in the South South-
German urnfields which have their rootsin Hungary or the south- Eastern
east. These—clay plastic, theriomorphs, pintaderas, rattles— elements
have already been found as accidental elements in the Lausitz
culture.3 That the ‘horn-shaped’ fire-dogs have the same ante-
cedents seems probable, but cannot be proved in view of the
questionable date of the Hungarian specimens, e.g. from Len-
gyel.t The ‘experienced miners’ postulated by Kyrle5 could
in Central Europe only be found in Slovakia or Hungary, and
the bronze technique disclosed in the urnfields was essentially
Hungarian. Perhaps the Soroksar type of urn (Fig. 155) may
have contributed to the formation of the pillar-urns. Other-
wise the Hungarian influence might be accounted for by ex-
ternal relations attested for the end of the Middle Bronze Age
by the cylinders and pendants from Oberpfalz, and later by
the Hungarian swords from the Tyrol and Bavaria and the
mace-heads from Bohemia.            On the other hand, the influence
of the Hungarian bronze culture on the frontier civilizations
of Lower Austria went deeper. We have, for instance, types of
the Tészeg-Egyek group at Gemeinlebarn (Fig. 178c). The
conversion of the urn with cylindrical neck into an ossuary
might well have taken place in that region. The fine fluted
ware is richly developed there, and might even have grown up
: I know a few stray ones in Moravia,    and the one-member brooches west
e.g. Gottwald, pl. vi, 13. The fibula    of that river loses its significance.
being a late and accidental element in     BY. 131, pp. 178 f.
both groups, the contrast between the    3 p. 330 above.
two-member series east of the Elbe       4 p. 283 above.        5 p. 341 above.
        352              THE    NORTH      ALPINE     URNFIELDS
        in Austria out of a fusion between survivals of the Baden type
        with Aunjetitz elements. It is therefore tempting to bring a
        substantial element of the new population from this quarter.
        This explanation might be combined with I a if it be admitted
        that Lausitz settlers had reached Lower Austria at the begin-
        ning of the Late Bronze Age,‘ or that the Lausitz culture there
        was parallel to rather than dependant on that of Lausitz
        proper.
           We incline to consider the new factor in the urnfield cul-
        tures of Bavaria to be due to the amalgam of late Aunjetitz,
        Gata, and Lausitz elements created in Lower Austria. A move-
        ment of the new composite group towards Bohemian tin and
          Alpine copper, bringing it under the influence of the Bohemian
          and Bavarian tumulus cultures respectively, would have re-
          sulted in the formation of the two groups just described.
  Italian    In the urnfields we meet from the start a series of accidental
influence forms generally regarded as of Mediterranean or rather Adriatic
          origin. That attribution is patently correct in the case of the
          glass beads, the Peschiera fibulae from the Tyrol,” and perhaps
          even the looped type from Griinwald.3 The southern origin of
          the razors and bronze vessels is less obvious. The early razors
          from Oberpfalz and Bohemia might rank as a local invention
          did they not sometimes betray the indent that links them in
        an irreversable manner to the Italian and Sicilian series
                                                                ;+ the
        later penannular type A4 is probably a native development
        despite a few parallels from Upper Italy.5 Bronze cups re-
        sembling the North Alpine specimens in shape first occur in
        the hoard at Tolfa® but, as Reinecke 7 remarks, there is no
        reason why such hammered work should not have been pro-
        duced north of the Alps. As a matter of fact neither the smooth
        cups nor the wheeled bowls can be matched in Italy. The
        knife dagger, Plate I, B4, is a late Mycenaean type ® but again

        ™ Franz      and     Mitscha-Marheim     double-spiral catch-plate at Griin-
        (BRGK. xvi, p. 21) incline to recog-     wald is a Hungarian addition.
        nize a phase of Lausitz culture in       4 Cf. Dawn, figs. 48, 49. Since this
        Lower Austria belonging to Reinecke      indent occurs in Sicily, which is inde-
        C. And of course we have proto-          pendent of North Italy in Siculan II,
        Lausitz graves scattered about at much   the feature cannot be regarded as
        the same time.                           Continental.
        2 Identical types from Pianello, BP.     5 BP. x1. pl. vi.
        xl, p. 138, fig. 35.                     6 Maclver, op. cit., pl. 18, 1-2.
        3 Found with proto-Geometric pot-        7 AuhV., p. 213, n. I.
        tery on Kephallenia, Blinkenberg,        8 Evans, Archaeologia lix, pp. 82 and
        Fibules, fig. 13b. Cf. Maclver, Villa-    113; fig. go.
        novans, pl. 19, 13 (Pianello); but the
                 THE NORTH        ALPINE    URNFIELDS                     353
occurs at both ends of the Apennine Peninsula.t It may be
presumed, too, that the revival of spiral ornamentation illus-
trated on the sword-hilts was due to Mycenaean influence, and
here again the Adriatic * must have been the mediator.
   Relations at this time were not one-sided. In Upper Italy North
we find pins of types D1, D11, &c.,3 wheel-pendants,? twisted Alpine
torques,’ and other types that seem certainly to have come type in
from beyond the Alps and serve in a general way to confirm Italy
the dating of the Late Bronze Age suggested on p. 255.
   We cannot at the moment go further and point to any North
Alpine group as the ancestor of the Villanova or proto-Villa-
nova (Pianello) culture. Despite the parallelism of the bronze
industries and frequent interchange of their products only the
early Alban cemeteries include pottery that looks at all ‘North
Alpine’. As a matter of fact it is the Comacine culture rather
than the more easterly groups round Bologna and Este that
show most affinity to the North Alpine area.
t Montelius, VCI., pl. 4, 13-14, and    pare rather the bone tube from Mon-
fig. 387; Childe, Dawn, fig. 49.        tale, Montelius, CPI., pl. 19, 17.
2 Kraft prefers to look to the Danube   3 Montelius, VCYI., pl. x11.
waterway, but I fail to see the evi-    a fbid.. pl. Xvi, 7;
dence. Mycenaean motives are cer-       5 Maclver, pl. 19, 19 (Bismantova).
tainly embodied on the Hungarian        6 Cf. Maclver, Villanovans, pl. 17, 20
swords, but they are later than the     (cf. the Tyrol urns), 12 (cf. bilobate
spirally decorated groups of Reinecke   cups from Herzogenberg and Velem).
C2-D. With their decoration com-




  3443
                                                  XVIII
                       FROM        SWITZERLAND                TO BRITAIN
                              I. THE    LAST      LAKE-DWELLINGS
  Bronze      N Switzerland the inhabitants of the pile-villages on the lake
     Age       shores had ‘preserved their old neolithic culture long after
    lake-  bronze was in regular use in other parts of Europe’.*’ A few
dwellings Early and Middle Bronze Age objects are found in many lake-
           dweilings which are usually designated ‘neolithic’ because of
           the immense preponderance of stone implements.
   Ceme-      On the other hand, in the valleys several cemeteries, fur-
    teries nished with Middle Bronze Age objects, have come to light
           that bear no visible relation to any lacustrine settlements.?
           Those in North-Eastern Switzerland are mainly interments
           under barrows furnished with bronzes proper to the Swabian
           group of the Tumulus Culture. In the valleys of the Rhone and
           Aar,3 on the other hand, the graves are small cists or simple
           trenches without any barrow over them. They are furnished
           with spatuliform celts (Fig. 199), triangular (A1) and bronze
           hilted (Az) daggers, and later short ogival swords (PI. I, A6),
           and other objects of ‘western’ type; even halberd blades occur
           sporadically. Kraft+ holds that these types are derived in
           the last resort from the El Argar culture of Spain, but that the
           bronze-hilted daggers represent a local development. At the
           same time he admits that many of the ornaments from the
           graves or found stray in the same region, such as ingot-torques
             and pins Ar, A2 (one stray), A3, A4, A6, and Ao, are of eastern,
            i.e. Hungarian or Bohemian, origin. In fact the group, which
            only begins about phase B of the Bronze Age, is like the Alsa-
            tian, primarily dependent upon the Danubian bronze industry.
            It none the less developed a distinct individuality of its own,
            and may be designated after Kraft the Rhone culture.
 The urn-      The advent of the urnfield folk transformed Alpine civiliza-
  field in- tion. Instead of the multiplicity of small hamlets that had
    vasion lined the shore of every lake in the
                                                  ‘Stone-Age’, a few much
            larger settlements5 were built, generally farther out from the
Synoicism present shore. These are the lake-dwellings traditionally de-
    of lake scribed as Bronze Age, which nevertheless belong in fact to
  villages
             < Viollier in MAGZ.   xi   :     .                i    iolli        ;       Cae
             2 Breuil, ¥SG Ga oe:orff:Viol-                ce See           Be
             lier, OAM. pp. 128 ff.; AsAg.        iv,   4 AsA. xxvii (1927), pp. 5 ff.
             pp. 1 ff); AsA. xxvii, pp. Fi.             5 Gross, Les Protohelvétes, p. 27.
                 FROM        SWITZERLAND      TO BRITAIN                        355
Reinecke’s Hallstatt A (our Late Bronze Age E) and the suc-
ceeding period. Precisely similar settlements were established
on some Bavarian lakes (Starnberg and the Federseemoor), and
perhaps in the bed of the Rhine.
   The position of the new villages, far from the shore, has Low level
been explained by Reinerth and Vouga as due to the lower of lakes
level of the lake waters at the height of the Subboreal dry
epoch. The replacement of a multitude of small hamlets by a
few substantial villages seems to have been the result of a
synoicism effected by the urnfield folk who, as we have seen,
reached the Aar already in the first half of the Late Bronze Age.
  In any case it is certain that the new epoch was ushered in Change
by the advent of a new people. Franchet" has pointed out in pottery


        Te. See
     iCAE     ee                                     tt
                                                     pete                   =




         Fic. 199.   Spatuliform celt, Villars-sous-Mont (Freiburg).   }4

that the Late Bronze Age pottery of Switzerland marks a com-
plete break with neolithic traditions. The pottery is now fine
and evenly fired;wood and stone tools are used instead of bone
in its manufacture; the clay is allowed to dry before ornaments
are incised in it.
   The forms include many types belonging to the urnfield Forms
cultures, notably the compound vases, feeding cups, therio-
morphs (Figs. 200-2), small ‘Villanovan’ pots with fluted
ornament? (like Fig. 195), urns with cylindrical necks and
shallow dishes (Fig. 201). Some elements in the decoration
are patently derived directly from the urnfield cultures, whereas
others, e.g., the common fretwork motives (Fig. 202c), come Fretwork
from the Tumulus group or from the Rhone culture. No less ornament
valuable clues as to the origin of the new element are provided
by the numerous ‘moon idols’ (horn-shaped fire-dogs) (Fig. Fire-dogs
202, a) found in all the Bronze Age stations.
   From the same quarter come many of the bronze types,
knives like 9 and 11, the wheel pendants and the universal
pins with miniature vase-heads, while the distinctive globe-
headed pin Ex1 is quite obviously a descendant of the bulb-
                                                         nih
head type D8 of the early urnfields.             ;
   The invaders brought with them the light, swift   ‘Asiati c’
 t AsA. xx (1920), p. 166.               2 Precisely as in the Tyrolese urnfields.
           356            FROM     SWITZERLAND        TO BRITAIN
New do- horse which first appears at this time,’ and the horn-ended
  mesticbit to control it. They also imposed their methods of house-
   horsebuilding in so far as walls of logs replace the wattle-and-daub
   Log- shelters previously used.”                                ae
  cabins      The Swiss ‘Bronze Age’ that arose on this foundation, if
           rather belated, was original and creative. ‘The superposition
           of the urnfield folk upon the older lake-dwellers formed an
           industrious and ingenious population, whose energies were
           stimulated by contact with remote regions and the proximity
           of the Villanova culture of Upper Italy.
 Metal-      The lake-dwellers were, of course, cultivators               and stock-
   lurgy   breeders, but in the Late Bronze Age they blossomed forth,
           above all, as skilled smiths and traders. Every village had its
           bronze workshop,} the remains of which are marked by in-
           numerable moulds of clay or sandstone, hammers, ingots of
          copper, tin, and bronze, and fragments of the clay pipes which
Speciali- supplied the blast to the furnaces. Moreover, there is evidence
  sation for regular specialization at this time, since any given type,
          common to all the lake villages, is found in each case in
          greatest profusion only at one of them.‘
‘Foreign     The products of these expert craftsmen found a market in
   trade’ quite distant lands. So the distinctive Swiss type of knife (14)
          has been found in Silesia and Hungary, and many other widely
          distributed forms whose origin is to-day less certain, such as
          antennae and Ronzano swords, may well be of Swiss manu-
          facture. At the same time the lake-dwellers seem to have
          secured control of the amber route down the Rhine as well as
          the west-to-east traffic in French, and perhaps even Cornish,
Imports    tin. Many exotic products—tin, lead, gold, amber, jet, and
    from   glass—and foreign artifacts are found in the lake-dwellings.
Scandi-    Even bronze ‘basins’ and fibulae manufactured in Scandinavia
   navia   reached Western Switzerland.s Naturally Italian manufac-
Villano-   tures were well represented. The fragment of a bronze bit of
     van   Benacci I type from Alpenquai, Zurich (Fig. 203, 2), is a fine
 imports   instance.
Weights       This great commercial activity naturally involved the use
           of some system of weights. In 1907 Robert Forrer recognized
           that certain roughly spherical or hemispherical lumps of lead
           (or stone) provided with bronze loops for suspension were
           weights. They correspond to multiples of various early East
           * MAGZ. xxix, p. 250; a new variety   3 Heierli, Urgeschichte, pp. 225-6.
           of dog appears at the same time.      4 Ibid., p. 219.
           2 Gross, l.c.                         5 Ibid., figs. 311, 310.
Fic. 200. Bilobate cup, jar, and theriomorphic vase,
        Alpenquai. M. Zurich, after MAGZ




  Fig. 201.   Dishes viewed from inside, Alpenquai
             FROM    SWITZERLAND         TO BRITAIN             357
Mediterranean weights—the Aeginetan, Phoenician, Egyptian
(Italic) or Carthaginian mina respectively." Certain types of
ring may have served as currency.
   The enumeration of all the bronze types current would be Bronzes
tedious. The more important only need be mentioned. By
far the commonest celts are the type with wings near the butt Winged
and a loop at the side including specimens with a transverse celts
blade like Fig. 203, 11.     Socketed celts are quite rare, but
socketed chisels are as common as winged celts.
  The knives include many forms such as Io, 12, and 13, Knives
but 14 alone -is distinctively Swiss and indubitably a local
form. The commonest razor is the penannular form, but Razors
single-bladed crescents are also found (Fig. 203, 4).
   The favourite weapons were antennae or Ronzano swords, Swords
which may have been manufactured locally.
   Of the innumerable pins, that with a great hollow globular Pins
head ornamented with holes encircled by engraved rings (E11)
was a distinctive local type. Fibulae are far from common.
The great majority, and particularly the ribbed form (A’2 a),
seem Italian imports.
   A speciality of West Switzerland was a thick, hollow armlet
of penannular form adorned with concentric circles united by
parallel lines.
  Rings, wheels, lunulae, &c., served as pendants.
   Stone and horn were now scarcely used for implements. Bits
Horn cheek-pieces for bits were not uncommon. Besides these
occur bronze bits of various forms; one very primitive speci-
men hasa rigid snaffle bar. It quite possibly represents a local
translation into metal of the older type with a wooden or
leather snaffle.
   Though older types naturally occur, the Bronze Age lake- Relative
dwellings appear to begin in the latter half of the Late Bronze date
Age (Reinecke’s Hallstatt A). The lower limit for their exis-
tence is supplied not so much by occasional iron objects as by
sherds of Hallstatt B(C) pottery painted in black and red or in
graphite on a matt black ground.’ Alpenquai and many other
sites were abruptly deserted after this, but some villages on
the western lakes may have survived the catastrophe. The
regular Bronze Age lake-dwellings do not, however, long
outlast the first third of the first Iron Age (Reinecke Hall-
statt B).
         t Forrer, Nouvelles Acquisitions, p. 40.
         2 MAGZ. xxix, p. 197; cf. Reinecke, AuhV. v, p. 321.
            358             FROM     SWITZERLAND         TO BRITAIN
  Italian      Italian imports allow us to give an approximate absolute
synchron- value to these typological limits.   The most distinctive import,
       isms the bit from Alpenquai, belongs to Benacci I,’ but types of
            the succeeding phase are not entirely missing.» Hence on
            Randall Maclvar’s figures the Swiss Bronze Age villages flour-
            ished from 1050 to about 800 B.c.—figures which agree well
            enough with the general Bronze Age chronology set out on
               250.
    Aban-   :  Mier   the latter date the villages perished by fire. Their
  donment destruction must in part be due to the onslaughts of Hallstatt
of villages barrow-builders from the Middle Danube basin.3          But the
            rising of the lake waters, consequent upon the onset of the
            Subatlantic climatic conditions, must have been the main cause
            of their final desertion.
                               II. THE     RHENISH      URNFIELDS
           The urnfield cultures spread rapidly all down the Rhine, reach-
           ing Holland and Northern Belgium during the second phase of
Intrusive the Late Bronze Age. The expansion into the Rhine valley
       and may well have begun already in the earlier phase (Reinecke D),
   native and doubtless took place in several waves and very likely by
 cultures several routes, just as had the original colonization by the
           Danubians in neolithic times. At the same time the urnfield
           folk encountered not only tumulus-builders as in Bavaria, but
           very likely also remnants of the Adlerberg population still
           living in the valleys. Hence the Rhenish urnfields, despite
           many common traits,‘ present on closer examination a very
           diversified aspect. Kraft5 has very effectively emphasized
           this diversity and sought to unravel the complex events that
           caused it. He recognizes two main currents: an earlier group
           in phase D, coming from Upper Italy and characterized by
           swords like A3 (in a special variant) and pins like Eg, and a
           later with swords of series C, and pins like Ero.
    North     In the last chapter we mentioned several cemeteries from
   Alpine the Upper Rhine and from the Neckar containing bronze and
      urns ceramic types distinctive of the North Alpine urnfields. The
           northernmost point known to the author is Rheingénheim in
            t Cf. Maclver, pl. Iv, 1.                V, pp. 243 ff.
            ? The fibula from Hauterive (Gross,      5 BY. 131, pp. 162 ff.; AsA. xxix, pp.
            op. cit., pl. XvIII, 64) is already an   74-90, 137-48, 209-16 to be continued
            Arnoaldi form.                           in xxx. (It is impossible here to incor-
            3 Keller-Reinerth, Thurgau, p. 76; cf.   porate the complex details of these very
            Pp. 410, below.                          valuable but difficult and still incom-
            4 Summarized by Reinecke, AuhV.          plete papers.)
                 FROM      SWITZERLAND          TO BRITAIN                    359
the Palatinate.. These cemeteries are monuments of an ad-
vance that may have well begun already in Reinecke D. It
profoundly influenced the culture of the natived Rhenish
tumulus-builders, especially those who, like the tribes living
round Haguenau,” dwelt right on the borders of the good agri-
cultural land occupied by the urnfield folk.
   On the Middle Rhine, especially on the west bank (Palati- Crema-
nate and Rheinhessen), but also in Oberhessen, there are several tions
cremation burials without urns belonging typologically to without
Reinecke’s phase D. Characteristic of these graves are double- urns
bladed razors of the early type (2),3 knives like 12, and poppy
and shepherd’s crook-pins. The pottery includes jugs and
cups of later fretwork ware‘ or fluted vases. The former Relation
represent the survival of a native tradition; in the latter influ- with
ences from Bavaria are perhaps detectable. Since in some Adlerberg
cases the graves in question actually occur in cemeteries already culture
used by the Early Bronze Age Adlerberg folk (e.g. on the
Adlerberg itself), it might be argued that they belong to de-
scendants of that people. The burial rite and the bronzes none
the less reveal the influence of the urnfield cultures of Kraft’s
‘North Italian’ group.
   The largest group of urnfields on the Upper and Middle Main
Rhine (extending as far as the Sieg), on the Neckar, and on group
the Main from the vicinity of Wiirzburg down stream, contain
a very distinctive furniture.
   The ossuary proper is often small but it, and the remaining Dolion
grave goods, are usually (but not always) contained in a huge
urn or dolion. The dolion is rough and ornamented, if at all,
only with plastic rope mouldings. It is frequently (1) a typical
representative of the North Alpine urn with cylindrical neck,’
t Typical urn (almost exactly like          (AuhV., 1.c.). Main: Tauberretters-
fig. 189) in M. Speyer.                     heim, Goldbach, Grossostheim, Mell-
2 Schaeffer, op. cit., pp. 251 f. (use of   richstadt, Essfeld, &c. (Frankenland,
cinerary urn, wart decoration, Seelen-      1914, pl. 11), Hanau        (AuhV. vy,
léche, stone celts, knife 12).              pl.44). Oberhassen: Friedberg (Beh-
3 Adlerberg, cf. Reinecke, AuhV. v,         rens, fig. 50), Muschenheim       (PZ.
p. 213; pl. 2, 546. Behrens, pl. xx.        xi-xii, p. 126). Rhein below Main:
4 Adlerberg,      cf. Reinecke, AuhV.       Urmitz (Behrens, pl. xx11, B), Ander-
Vv, p. 213; pl. 32, 546; Behrens, pl. xx.   nach (Mannus IV Ergbd., pl. x,
5 Typical sites are: Upper Rhine-           B), Nauheim, Franzhausschen (M.
Neckar; Burladigung (Hohenzollern)          Cologne).
(AuhV.v, pl. 44), Birkle bei Asch, near     6 e.g. Goldbach near Aschaffenberg,
Blaubeuren (ib.), Wingersheim (Alsace)      Framersheim near Alzey (Behrens,
(BRGEK. vii, p. 201). Neckar: Mirr          pl. xx1, e) Muschenheim (Oberhessen)
(Paret, fig. 9), Neuenstadt a. K. (FOS.,    PZ. xi-xii (1919-20), p. 126, Nauheim
1914, pl. 11), Mannheim (Wagner, il,        (M. Cologne).
fig. 265), Eberstadt (near Darmstadt)
          360             FROM     SWITZERLAND          TO BRITAIN
          but quite as often (II) the wide rim, distinctive of that group
          on the Danube or the Elbe, is omitted,’ both variants occurring
          side by side. In a third variant (III) the body is angular and
          definitely biconical, while even the neck is slightly conical.”
          Finally, we find cases in which the open jar, such as we saw at
          Eisenbichl near Reichenhall (Fig. 192 b), is used as an urn.3
Ossuary      The ossuary proper and the accessory vases are of a very
          fine fabric, generally dark faced and ornamented with horizontal
          facets, grooves, fine incisions or, rarely, bosses. The angular
          profiles, broad faceted rims and stepped shoulders, are un-
          mistakable. The ossuary has a slightly conical neck and recalls
         the Villanova form in general outline, though the neck is rela-
         tively shorter than in Upper Italy (Fig. 204c). On the Main
         vases of this type are sometimes provided with two handles at
         the base of the neck when they remotely resemble Lausitz
         amphorae‘ (Fig. 204a). Variants with a single handle are also
         known 5 (Fig. 204b).
            The remaining vases from graves are small variants of the
         ossuary and dishes with wide faceted rims and small bases
         (Fig. 204d). Rattles and feeding-bowls occur sporadically.
Weapons     Graves of this group are furnished sparingly with weapons
         (antennae and Ronzano swords, socketed arrow- and spear-
         heads). Celts are represented only by rare stone specimens.®
         Penannular razors and a large assortment of knives are more
         common.
  Orna-     The ornaments include compound collars (G2) as at Griin-
   ments wald, globe-head pins (E10), including pure Swiss types (E11),’
          and those with a miniature vase-head, and two-membered
         fibulae types B3* and B4.. Big anklets of type 3 Fig. 170 have
         been obviously taken over from the Tumulus culture. Glass
    Gold beads and gold are rare. The precious metal, however, occurs
         in the form of rings of type 1a and of disks stamped with groups
         of concentric circles. Finally, we may note several bronze cups.
   Flat-    Pottery and bronzes of the types just described were usually
  graves found in urnfields, but precisely the same material occurs
     and t AuhV.
                  v, pp. 236f., figs.2 and 4=     5 Ibid.13.
 barrows Behrens, pl. xx1, a-d, and fig. 41.      6 e.g. Nauheim M. Cologne.
          ? Mannheim, Wollmesheim II (Rhe-        7 Bretzenheim nr. Mainz, AuhV., pl.
          nish Palatinate), Friedberg (Ober-
          hessen, Behrens, fig. 50, 3), Ander-
                                                  43.
                                                  8 Behrens, figs. 45-6; RGM. Fest-
          nach, Mannus IV Ergbd., pl. x, B,       schrift., 1927, p. 137.
          22-3.                                   9 Burladigung, Fuchstadt, Wollmes-
          3 Heidesheim, Heilbronn,      Fechen-   heim I and If.
          heim (PZ. xi-xii, p. 143).              0 Essfeld near Aschaffenburg, Woll-
          4 Frankenland, 1914, pl.11, 10and 16.   mesheim I and ite
              Fic. 202.   Fire-dogs and bowl, Alpenquai.   M. Zurich



—




ee
SS
ee
a
o




_>




eShUCM
ere.S




              a                     Dy a               c                d
                     Pottery of Frankonian urn-fields. a, Tauberrettersheim;
te
eke
ae
         Fic. 204.
                      b, Essfeld; c, Melrichstadt; d, Goldbach. §
                                                                  er



                                                                       s

                 FROM    SWITZERLAND            TO BRITAIN                        361
sometimes under barrows.’ Far more irregular are flat inhu-
mation graves containing a similar furniture and sometimes
actually forming part of an urnfield. Often such inhumation Inhuma-
graves are peculiarly rich. At Wollmesheim in the Palatinate? tions
one grave contained the skeletons of a man and his wife, urns
of variant III, a sword of type C4, arrow-heads, two anklets
of type 3, a fibula of type B4, and other bronzes. Near by
were two cremation interments in urns, accompanied by the
same types of anklet and fibula as the skeletons.
   This group is generally treated as a mere development of Relations
the North Alpines group under the influence of Italian and with
Swiss metallurgy. The form and ornamentation of the faceted North
pottery in particular would be due to the imitation of metal Alps
forms.3 Kraft, on the other hand, would recognize here a
cross between the North Alpine groups and currents from the
Lausitz and Bohemia coming down the Main. This stream and with
would have brought with it the ceramic fluting from which Lausitz
the facets evolved, certain pot-forms, and the two-membered
fibulae.s The occurrence of a biconical ossuary of Lausitz
form® at Weisenheim in the Palatinate is certainly favourable
to the idea.     So too, the amphorae, like Fig. 203a, from the
Main cemeteries might be regarded as descendants of the
Lausitz amphora.
   If, however, we look farther east to the Upper Weser basin Fulda
we see that round Fulda the urnfield culture is inspired rather shows
from the south-west than from the east. The urns belong for Lausitz
the most part to the Rhenish types I,’ III,> (and IV), and influence
are associated with very late vase-head pins, a degenerate small
variant of pin E11 with much reduced head, and perhaps even
bits of iron. The cemeteries therefore produce a definite im-
pression of lateness as contrasted with those on the Rhine or
Main.    Hence, though ossuaries, having the form of a Lausitz
amphora, do occur,’ we cannot regard these late remains as
favourable to the. idea of West Lausitz prototypes for the
Rhenish urnfield culture. If a strong current from the east
were affecting the latter we should expect to find evidence for
it first in a place like Fulda, whereas the contrary is the case.
t Jagstfeld, Grossostheim, Birkle bei     razors, but this is impossible; both
Asch (AuhV. v, p. 234).                   are ‘southern’, on the Main.
2 M. Speyer, Behrens, p. 246; cf.         © BY. 131, p. 212.                        ;
also Mannheim, Wagner, op. cit.           7 Lanneshof, Fuldder Gesch. Ver. vii.
3 So Reinecke, AuhV. v, l. c.             8 Uffhausen, ibid. xii (1914), pl. 11.
4 BF, 131, pp. 207-8.                     9 Op. cit. vii, pl. Iv, 10; xii, pl. 11, 3.
5 Kraft adds the bronze cups and the
  3443                                  a A
             362              FROM      SWITZERLAND         TO BRITAIN
             We incline, therefore, to think that Kraft has over-estimated
             the direct Lausitz influence on the Rhine.
                A detailed account of the urnfield culture on the Middle
             Rhine is superfluous, since it reproduces almost precisely what
             we have already described in the Upper Danube basin and
             Switzerland. All the main traits noted there—regular villages,
             agriculture, industry and trade, and peculiarities of detail such
             as the horned fire-dogs '—recur farther north, albeit in a poorer
    Trade    form. The distribution of the many hoards* and their con-
             tents disclose trade routes from the north from the Upper
             Weser basin across the Wetterau to the Lower Main, and from
             the west via the Moselle as well as from the east up the Danube
             to the Upper Rhine and across the Furth gap to the Upper
             Main.
   Amber      The first route brought, with amber, objects of Scandinavian
           type such as the plate fibulae and ‘suspension basins’ similar to
Gold from those that we have already met in Switzerland.2 Many of the
      west gold objects, particularly the remarkable ‘hat’ from Schiffer-
           stadt in the Palatinate 4 (exactly like one from Avanton in the
           Department of Vienne), and perhaps also the numerous gold
           ‘sun-disks’ ornamented with stamped circles, would be made
           of French (or Irish) gold.’ Hungarian and Bohemian types,
           apart from those brought with them naturalized by the urn-
    Swiss field people, are, on the other hand, rare. The main inspira-
 influence tion of the Rhenish industry came from Switzerland (pins like
             D4, Exo, hollow armlets with circle ornaments,® penannular
             razors, antennae and Ronzano swords, &c.), and through
             Switzerland from Italy (Villanova forms in the pottery).
                The urnfield cultures may have developed for a long time in
             the valleys side by side with the remains of the old 'Tumulus
             culture in the highlands of Wurtemberg, Baden, the Oden-
             wald, and the Taunus. Clearly it lasted well into the Iron
             Age proper.
Intrusion       Eventually it came under the influence of the Hallstatt
  of inhu-   barrow-builders using painted pottery, iron, and Hallstatt
mationists   swords. ‘The Giindlingen culture of Schumacher? which Rei-
              ™ The Rhenish specimens are enu-          rightly attributes it to his phase D
             merated and mapped by Behrens,             (AuhV., v, p. 214).
             Mainz. Festschr., 1927, pp.131f. They      5 They are naturally to be connected
              extend down the Rhine from Alsace to      with forms like B.M. Bronze, fig. 119.
              Gladbach.                                 Note, however, that the patterns occur
              2 Map in Behrens, Bronzezeit, pl. 1-11.   on bone disks in Italy apparently even
              3 Behrens, p. 61.                         in phase D.
              4 Ibid., p. 21: assigned there to the     6 e.g. Behrens, fig. 11.
              Middle Bronze Age, but Reinecke           7 Rheinland, pp. 86 ff.
                  FROM      SWITZERLAND          TO BRITAIN                    363
necke* has made into a special phase, B, of the Hallstatt period,
seems in reality to be the result of the first contact between the
urnfield folk and native Tumulus people on the one hand, and
the invaders advancing from the east on the other; at least
the urn and other ceramic types are only modifications of those
already found in the Late Bronze Age settlements of Lower
Bavaria and the Franconian barrows. Its authors would thus
have been the neighbours rather than the precursors? of the
nomadic tribes of mounted hunters and pastoralists who in-
terred their dead under the barrows of the Koberstadt and
Alb-Salem groups.3
               III.   THE   LOWER        RHINE   AND     BRITAIN
On the Lower Rhine below Cologne genuine urnfields of the Barrows
South German type are no longer forthcoming. On the other and urn-
hand, the later tumuli approximate in many respects to urn- fields
fields and intrude into Holland (Limburg and Brabant) and
Belgium.      The burial rite is always cremation; the ashes, en-
closed in an ossuary, are buried in shallow pits dug in virgin
soil; the barrows are very low and cluster together to form
regular cemeteries. Dutch and Belgian archaeologists in fact
always term these late groups of barrows urnfields.
   These modifications of the earlier burial rites suggest an
admixture of urnfield folk with the old barrow-builders, and
the grave goods confirm that impression.
   The commonest urn is a bulging type with short cylindrical Urn
that should probably be considered a descendant of the Rhenish
type II, though Rademacher regards it as native.* The angular
urn of type III is less common but is, however, known even in
Holland.5 The open urn type IV also occurs.°
   Broad rimmed dishes and small pots of Villanovan form like
Fig. 1957 also occur.
   The ware is generally brownish in colour, and the southern Native
ornamentation by fluting or grooving is rarely seen. On the elements
other hand, the urns and accessory vases are frequently adorned in decora-
                                                                                      tion
 t AuhV., pp. 313 f.                       4 Mannus Erghd. iv, p. 125; but cf.
2 The analysis of Stampfuss (Mannus        Kraft, BY. 131, p. 163.
Ergbd. v, pp. 58 ff.) is fatal to          5 Holwerda,     Nederlands,   pl. i, 8
Reinecke’s attempt to create a period      (Bergeik); Oudh. Meded. vii (1913),
out of the Giindlingen culture.            fig. 53, 53 (Riethoven); cf. Mannus
3 Schliz, AfA. ix, p. 240, claims to       Ergbd. v, pl. v, 8 (Wettweiss).
have found craniological evidence for      6 e.g. at Weert, Holwerda, op. cit., pl.
the intrusion of a new ethnic element      II, 3 and 9.
from the Middle Danube that might          7 Bergeik, ibid., pl. 11, 10.
be inferred from the ‘Illyrian types’.
             364               FROM     SWITZERLAND          TO BRITAIN
           with bands of late fretwork motives (stamped) round the
           shoulder.t This technique plainly belongs to thenativebarrow-
           builders who had practised it already in the Middle Bronze
           Age.”
  Bronzes    "The Lower Rhenish urn-burials are practically without
           bronze furniture. We have at best a couple of knives like 123
           and a unique type from Wesel, pins with decadent poppy- or
           vase-heads,* tweezers, and looped buttons.’ A perforated stone
           axe was found in one grave at Riethoven, but without ceramic
           remains. A Ronzano sword found in the Waal® must have
           been brought to Holland by the urnfield folk.
 Chrono-      The poverty of bronzes makes a relative dating of the Lower
      logy Rhenish and Dutch cemeteries difficult. Holwerda’ assigns
           them boldly to the beginning of our era. Rademacher® and
           Stampfuss? date them a thousand years earlier. Actually the
           truth would lie between these two views.
   Endof      South of Dusseldorf and Duisburg the advance of the Hall-
 urnfields statt culture (Giindlingen ?) limits the urnfield phase below.”
             Farther north this southern influence is not felt, but the cul-
             ture of the type just described is eventually superseded by that
             which Holwerda terms ‘German’," the Harpstadt type of
             Stampfuss” representing a later wave of the same. The Ger-
             man, influence, characterized by biconical or open urns with
             finger-tip ornament on their walls and rims (instead of on
             raised strips) would, according to Rademacher,"3 have reached
             Holland about 500 B.c. An urn of this family in a late variant
             was found containing a Roman fibula of the first century a.D.,™
             but that circumstance does not oblige us to reduce Rade-
             macher’s figure for the beginning of the second or German
             phase in Holland materially.
Extension        The urnfield culture of the Lower Rhine therefore appears
to Britain   as a last outpost of the North Alpine group that had absorbed
             much of the tumulus population. But its roots in the south
             * Mannus Ergbd. iv., pl. x, B and          2a (Riethoven). .
             p. 124. Holwerda, op. cit., p. 99.         ® Holwerda, Nederlands, pl. x11, 25.
             * Holwerda (/.c.) is therefore wrong       7 OD. Cit., pp..10o ft.
             in calling it ‘Hallstatt’. Kraft, never-   8 Mannus Ergbd. iv, p. 127.
             theless, regards the Lower Rhenish         9 MbidsVapeose
             ornament as derived from a later           10 Rademacher, I. c., p. 128.
             variant of the South German style          ™t Nederlands, p. 105; its chronology
             (BF. 131, p. 163).                         is attested by the arrangement of the
             3 Pleyte, Overijsel, pl. 1v, 2; Drenthe,   graves at Riethoven, Oudh Meded.
             pl. XxxIII, 2-3.                           iv (1910), pp. 34 f.
             4 Mannus       Ergbd.    V; pl. til and    % Mannus, xvii (1924), pp. 302 ff.
             Pp. 79; n. 1.                              3 Op. cit., po 120.
             5 Oudh. Meded. iv (1910), pl. XVIII,       4 Oudh Meded. i, pp.8 f.; cf. iv, p. 35.
               FROM     SWITZERLAND          TO BRITAIN                 365
were soon broken, so that it stagnated till overwhelmed by
Teutonic tribes from farther east. Its peculiar interest is that
the Lower Rhenish culture in its last stage crossed the sea to
Britain as the finds from Scarborough: show. As at the begin-
ning of the Bronze Age the beaker folk from the Upper Rhine,
mingled with the Battle-axe folk from Central Germany, in-
vaded Britain, so again at the end of that age the Urnfield
people from the east crossed the North Sea.
        * Arch, \xxvii, pp. 180 ff.; cf. Kendrick, The Druids, p. 39.
                                          ulging
                                         euMY
                                            IewaoynA
                                         eAjeq
                                               SIZSOYSTy]                                                                                                                         AjoyreseA
                                                                                                                                                                                SOqUIOy
                      qJeunqify
                                          vaosof


                                                                       viel yey
                                                                                                               Iseuey,
                                         OAosG         (pessas                                                                                                                pohuq
             eulyeA
   uoliesy)           ovaoqng
                                             ovulse[yy                                                    Ajeuizsoyy
                                         efuogq euljogq                                                                                            soAsuoQhyy
                                   REN
                                                                                                        gATWIOG
   Bysogg                                   suliezef
                                         gedry
                                                                                                             osinsz
                                                                                                                                                                                SOIR,
                                                                                                                                                                                  soreyy
                                                                                           SOI                                                                                Asen




                                                                       neyog 6€ LOVAZNOU
                            vorffoug
                            Sz
                                                                                                    EF FY Sb
                                          gz
                                                                       oF                  IF                  LY
                                          62
                      fz          Oe     Lz
                                          of



SdUVOH oz
                                                                                                                                                 3 Y I
                                          If
             zz
            Iz        +z
                                          ze
                                          ££
                                          FE
                                                                                                                                           p Ristdicy
                                                                                                WeapeA or   prq
                                                                                                            eneg
                                          Sf
                                                                                                                               NVIHLAOS
                                                                                                                               SGNI4d
                                          gf
                                                                                                "325
                                                                                                PIA
                                                                                                 zh                              ouog
                                                                                                                                  2 Je-r0gq
                                                                                                                                    q                  ¥eyzsnduiojey
                                          LE
                                                                                                                                       ordey,
                                                                                                                                       "ZG
                                                                                                                                       uoye]A[
                                                                                                                                        9   BWOAD
                                                                                                                                             2
                                                      SI9uIEzsog


                                                                                                                                                                                       AUZAITIZS
                                                                                            z
                                                   9izsogozs
                                                                           Sa.LIS
                                                       uosureg
                                                            eostidQ

                                                                                                                                                                                             soacisl
                      yequiozG-euly
                                          pyuezs
                  Soe_
             uplieyos[eg                                      Sood                                                                       “
                                                                                                uvAIe
                                                          usess1geq                                                  effeuto             soeyuny\y


                                                                                                                                                                          sezsofuiay
                                                soAuviy
                                                      npleHpesoy
                                           fneqy nplery
                                                    npfeyy   SMe

                                                                                                                                                                   puesiv,A
                                                                                                                                                                   epndy
                         9S[PA           o110q
                                                                                                                                yoASA
                                                                                            [PEASSf                                                       ‘d
                                                                                                                                                          "ZS
                                                                                                                                                          souyf




                                                                                                                                        uvniafssvavab SeUre
                                                             IN                                 TT                  7,
                                                                        ALVT
                                                                                                         UEJUUIIOISIS]
                                                                                                                     TYOINca
                                                                                                              vaeyedeakse7z
                                                                                                                  Auesiepy      oAner0g
                                                                                                                                njesfy
                                                                                                                           soseqnplepy
             V g O qofes J                       J f yyJ JNN td
                    1guIED
                      eyzng
                      Al                      esqog
                                              9s[PPq
                                              H                   gsouef
                                                                  1ojueyT
                                                                  O
                                                                                                HAM         FINO         DOO     aAM AMO
                                                                                                                                DOr
                                                                                                                                HHH
                                                                                                                                             CO n
                                                                                                                                   He Ae ROA Oe e




                                                                                                                                                                                                        AYVONOH
                                                                                                                                                         upnahss
                                                                                                                                                              spring
                                                                                                                                                                               Yun]




                                                                                                                                                                                                       SaLIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NI
                                                                                                                                        wv                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                         sPpymmn
                                                                                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                                                        v




                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZNOUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ADV



                                                                                                                                                                                                       LSALVI




                                                                                                                                                                                                       NVIH.LAOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                            GNV




                                                                                                                                                                                                       dew‘xX
                                     XIX
  THE      END      OF THE HUNGARIAN BRONZE                            AGE
                       AND THE SCYTHS
IK Slovakia and the Hungarian plain the regular use of iron
   was not introduced from the south-west but from the east.
But the new metal was only adopted long after the original
Bronze Age civilization had been reduced to chaos by the in-
cursion of Lausitz folk fromthe north-west, and whena brilliant,
if belated, Bronze Age culture had arisen out of the fusion of
intrusive and autochthonous elements.
   We have already noted that the Lausitz people advanced The Lau-
in a compact mass as far as Centra] Slovakia.t But they cer- sitz inva-
tainly extended their domain much farther south, overrunning sion
the whole plain and even crossing the Balkans by the Morava—
Vardar road to make temporary settlements in Macedonia. The
results of this incursion were to remodel the boundaries of the
cultural provinces, sketched in Chapter XIV, and to alter their
civilization more or less profoundly.
   The current of invasion probably followed two routes. Its
effects west of the Danube are described in Chapter XX. The
changes in the plain and east concern us here. In the north
elements from our groups 1 and 5 were absorbed in a hybrid
culturein group I, in which the intruders were at first dominant.
Other elements from group 1 seem to have been brushed aside
westward, and people from group 5 were driven across the
Tisza to form a new compound, group II, with older Transyl-
vanian constituents. The southern settlements of group 17
and apparently the whole of group 2 vanish, while group 4
extends its domain to the Danube at Gerjen, to Syrmia, and
perhaps up the Maros as group III, while a IVth group is
vaguely discernible among the hills of ‘Transylvania.
               I. THE     NORTH      HUNGARIAN         GROUP
The composite group I occupies the whole zone fringing the
metalliferous mountains of Slovakia and North Hungary from
the Hron (Gran) and the Danube to the steppe country in
Hajdu County beyond the Tisza. From this area we have im-
I p. 324 above.                           Dunakeszi and Vatya, proving a partial
2 Nevertheless a few typical fluted       survival of these urnfields into Period
cups, as in Tészeg D, are found spora-    VI.
dically in cemeteries of group I, as at
          368        THE END      OF THE HUNGARIAN          BRONZE      AGE
          portant settlements, enormous urnfields, and a vast number of
         rich hoards. These evidently cover a long period beginning
         quite early in the Late Bronze Age and lasting well into our
         Period VII.
Villages    The settlements include ‘villages on hills like Pilin and
         ‘terremare’, like the upper strata at Tészeg, Tiszafiired, and
         Szihalom, while remains of the period are found in many caves
         that have also yielded Bukk ware.
            Some settlements have been excavated, but unfortunately
         no detailed reports are available. It is clear that defensible
         heights were chosen, as in the Tyrol, and some centres, e.g.
         Pilin, may have been fortified. The distribution of the largest
         villages round the metalliferous mountains suggests that they
  Metal were connected with metallurgy. Numerous moulds from
working Pilin,*     Aszdd,?     Fels6-Kubin,3    together    with    fragments      of
          blast-pipes and metallurgical tools, confirm this impression.
          As we shall see, the metal trade brought to the region a variety
          of foreign imports, while a multitude of quite distinctive local
          types were evolved and distributed over a wide area.
  Ceme-      The cemeteries were adjacent to the settlements, and in some
   teries cases two or more were attached to the same village; no less
          than six have been located in a small area round Hatvan.!
   Urns      In the cemeteries cremation was universal. The urns vary
          greatly in form; no two urns were alike in the twenty graves
          excavated at Zagyvapalfalva.s The most usual type is bulging
          or piriform, with a slightly conical neck and everted rim. There
          are often two or more small handles just under the belly (Fig.
          205, 2) or sitting on the shoulder as in ‘Silesian’ urns (Fig.
          206, b). More rarely the handles join the rim and shoulder in
          a manner reminiscent of Gata (Fig. 206, a). A less common
          type of urn is just a large open-mouthed pot like the Lausitz
          forms 7-8 (Fig. 205, 4 and 12). These last are left rough: the
          bulging urns are always smooth, dark-faced, and often graphited.
Decora-      An almost universal method of decoration was the applica-
     tion tion of small warts that may be framed by grooved
                                                                semicircles
          and combined with horizontal or vertical flutings, incised arcs
          or arcadings, and plastic rope mouldings as in the proto-
          Lausitz urn of Fig. 174.°
 Dishes     The urns were covered with dishes reminiscent of earlier
          z peeks pl. tv.                       5 AE. xl (1923-6), pp. 60 f.
          2   Ibid., pl. v.                     ° e.g. Zagyvapalfalva, AE. xl, fig. 22
          : AE. ii (1882), pp. 279 f.           (left).
            CIA. 1877, ii, p. 166.
                           AND THE SCYTHS                                    369
forms (Fig. 207), but not without parallels in the Lausitz
area. ‘Those in use at Egyek and Hajdu Bagos in particular
agree with the dishes of T’észeg C both in form and ornament
(Fig. 205, 8; cf. Fig. 163), but it will be noticed that the warts
are degenerate in comparison with the older specimens.
   The accessory vases include numerous Lausitz forms:                               Lausitz
amphorae,     fluted,’    or   even    wart-ornamented,?             cups   with forms
shoulder flutings (Fig. 205, ga), turban dishes 3 and pots of
Lausitz type 7-8.4 According to Pi¢,5 even a Lausitz ossuary
of type 2 was found in one of the cemeteries near Aszod.




                                            MANNMN TTTTTT TTT


            Fic. 205.    Pottery from Egyek and Hajdubagos.      3

   The pottery thus shows a combination of two traditions.
If many of the urns and the style of their decoration may be
descended from native Hungarian types, the intrusive element
is attested by the Lausitz forms just enumerated.®
   The graves are very poorly furnished with bronzes, and these Grave-
have an extraordinarily archaic look. Weapons are restricted to goods
atypical daggers, knives, and socketed arrow-heads, though
miniature palstavs, socketed celts, swords, and button sickles,
found at Pilin,’? may have been made for funerary use. The Pins
ornaments reveal a mixture of native types, already familiar in
the Middle Bronze Age of Hungary, and innovations that were
= Mohi Puszta, Kisterenne, Aszdéd.         Puszta Szt. Janos ware from Egyek
2 Egyek (M. Munkaéevo).                    and Aszéd (Hampel, pl. Lxxu11, 3), and
3 Mohi Puszta, Egyek, Tészeg, Aszdd,       a variety of jug that occurred in group
Dunakeszi.                                 4 at the end of Period V (zbid., pl.
4 Mohi Puszta, Egyek, &c.                  LXXXVIII, 3; Hatvan).
5 iii, p. 16.                              7 Hampel, pl. Lxx.
6 We should note imported vases of
  3443                                3B
         370       THE END OF THE HUNGARIAN                BRONZE       AGE
         at home in the Lausitz or Bohemia.           To the former group be-
         long, besides the simple shape F1, the bracelets B2,"* C2,3 D1
          (thin),? pins Ao (everywhere), C5a,3 E12,” B7,” *tutuli like Az,
          and Ao and pendants like type B3,3 developing into B4.” 3          ;
 Foreign     As foreign forms we may: reckon the twisted torque ABr,*
    types finger rings with double spiral ends,” 4 pins D4,° Bro,” * and a
          variant on C8,? and we may class the tweezers from Aszod and
          Zagyvapalfalva as intrusive too.
             A curious item in the furniture of certain graves at Zagyva-
          palfalva® was constituted by flat stone disks to which Felsé
          Kubin? and some Moravian urnfields offer parallels.
 Hoards      If the cemeteries illustrate the tenacity with which old
          native fashions were preserved in the teeth of all racial move-
          ments, the hoards illustrate the revolution caused by the
          Lausitz intrusion, the adaptability and wealth of some class at
          least in the new complex, and the extensive trade relations of
          North Hungary. The hoards in question occupy almost exactly
          the same area as the cemeteries and settlements just described,
          though they are particularly numerous, as might be expected,
          in the dangerous frontier regions beyond the Tisza. Though
          only a few types found in the cemeteries recur in the hoards,®
          there are no other connected remains to which the latter can be
          attached. And yet it is clear that many of the types they con-
          tain were created in North Hungary. Hence we must conclude
          that the people who made and used the objects from the
          depots were the same as those buried in the cemeteries, or
          at least a class among the latter.
Division    ~The hoards are not all contemporary. Though some are
     into useless for dating purposes, being mere collections of scrap
  phases metal, it is possible to divide the rest up between two or three
          phases, of which the last already falls certainly into Period VII.
  Supre-     The perforated axe went out of use altogether. Its place was
macy of abruptly taken by the socketed celt, which suddenly appears
socketed in great numbers in all the hoards belonging to Period VI.?
     celt Moulds for its manufacture were
                                               found in the settlements of
        ™ Aszéd (CIA., 1877, ii, p. 168).       CLxII1), B7 at Saj6 Gémér (Hampel,
        2 Zagyvapalfalva (AE. xl, p. 66).       pl. cxiv) and Salgétarjan (ibid. L11),
        3 Egyek (Felentés Debrecen 1909. évt,   pendants like B4 at Tékés (Bereg) and
        Pp. 39).                                Debrecen (Jelentés Debrecen 1926 évi,
        4 veg Kubin, MAGW. xiv (1884), p.       pl. v), &c.
        198.                                    9 The date is given by the swords of
        5 Mohi Puszta (M. Koiice).              types B3 and A4 found with them at
        6 AE. xl, p. 68.                        Aranyos (Borsod, Hampel, pl. ccxv1)
        7 MAGW. xiii, p. 68.                    and Piricse (Szabolcs, ibid., pl. cxci1)
        8 e.g. pins D8 at Forré (Hampel, pl.    respectively.
Fig. 208.   Gold cup from Angyalféld.   British Museum.   121g
                           AND THE SCYTHS                                   371
Pilin, Tiszaféldvar, Fels6 Kubin, &c.t The socketed celt?
now becomes the characteristic implement in North Hungary
as in the Lausitz province. Sickles of the Italian and button
types are common. Razors were manufactured at Pilin,3 some Razors
conforming to the terremare type (Plate 5, Bz), others copying
the later Benacci II crescent.                      |
   The battle-axe, the favourite weapon of North Hungary
in the Middle Bronze Age, disappears almost as completely
as the shaft-hole working axe;‘ its place is taken by slashing
swords. The bronze hilted series begins with foreign types ap- Swords:
pearing already in Period VI: B3 from Forro in Abauj,> B4 from Foreign
Buzita in Abauj,° Aranyos in Borsod,’ the Danube at Pest® and types
Bga from Buzita, Piricse,? &c. From these foreign types deve-
loped local forms even before the end of Period VI. In B5 the Native
grip is encircled with ribs representing binding thongs, and develop-
there is a nick high up in the blade to prevent the sword ments
shaking out of the scabbard. The swelling blade seems in-
spired by a reminiscence of the old short sword illustrated at
Hajdu Samson. The new native Hungarian product was, as
we saw,” already being imported into the Tyrol, Switzerland,
 and Wurtemberg in phase E of the Late Bronze Age; there is
 an example even from Upper Italy." Another local type found
 in hoards with the foregoing, but possibly outliving it, has a
 saucer-shaped pommel. It, too, was exported widely, but
 especially to Galicia,’ where Bs also occurs frequently.
    Side by side with the foregoing and, as far as the closed finds Series C
 allow us to judge, first in company with the foreign types at
 Aranyos,% appear swords of series C. These must, therefore,
 rank in the first place as intruders; but they underwent a
 local development on the same lines as the bronze-hilted
 weapons. Finally, we may note a single antennae sword from
 Felka in county Spis (Szepes, Slovakia),’® and a rapier of type
 A3 from Rima-Szombat.”®
: Hampel, pls.11 andiv; AE.ii,p.279.      ® Ibid., pl. cxcvu, 5.
2 There is a palstav of North German      9 Ibid., pl. cxcil.
form from Pilin (ZfE. xxiv, p. (573) 3    10 p, 351, above.
Xxxvii, p. 810), but the Italian winged   ™ Randall-Maclver, Iron Age, pl. xvul,
types are unrepresented.                  12 (Comacine area).
3 Hampel, pl. xvii.                       1 Przeg A. ii, pp. 11 fff.
4 There is a late specimen of this        13 Hampel, pl. ccxvi.
period from Felsé-Balogh (Gémér) ;        14 Despite the arguments advanced
Hampel, pl. xciv, 7.                      by Peake, Bronze Age, p. 88.
5 Hampel, pl. cLx.                        15 AF. xxxi (1911), p. 344.
evibid., pl. XXI, 5.                      16 Hampel, pl. Cxiil.
7 Ibid., pl. cCXvVI, 5.
         472       THE END        OF THE HUNGARIAN              BRONZE      AGE
Spear-     After the sword the most important item in the warrior’s
 heads   equipment was the spear. These have now lanceolate or rhom-
         boid blades in contradistinction to the Middle Bronze Age
         leaf-shaped type."
   Mace     Finally, a distinctive North Hungarian weapon was the little
         mace of Pl. 15, 2 that may result from a lingering affection
         for the battle-axe. It is common in hoards from the beginning
         of Period VI, and was exported to Bohemia’ and Carniola.>
  Orna-     In addition to ornaments found in graves, we may mention
  ~ments in particular the coil shown in the middle row of Fig. 209.4 The
         type is commonest in North Hungary, where it appears already
         in the early hoard of Forrd,5 but it was exported to Western
         Hungary and the Banat. The same hoard and others show that
         cylinders were still being worn thoughout Period VI, but
         these were apparently longer and tighter than in Period V. In
         addition girdle plates of hammered bronze now appear. And
         among the pins a partiality for giant sizes ° is noticeable as in
    Gold contemporary deposits of Wurtemberg.          Among the beads,
   beads the gold specimens from Angyalféld7 found with the cup of Fig.
         208, deserve notice; they illustrate the same four-pointed star
         that we noticed in faience in Period V. But now the rays are
         wrinkled like the pottery warts, as in the similar glass beads
         from Croatian cemeteries of Period VII. The same hoard con- |
         tained a small pendant in the shape of a broad-tailed bird of
         bronze sheathed in gold leaf ornamented with stamped circles.
Fibulae     The development of big pins was, however, checked by
         the adoption of the fibula during Period VI. Though no
         brooches are found in tombs, North Hungary in the Late
         Bronze Age becomes definitely a fibula province.’ The local
         series begins with Ar found on the western edge of the pro-
         vince at Haidehof Puszta (Mosony). From this an indepen-
         dent local series develops parallel to the harp and spectacle
         types farther west and keeps the exaggerated spiral catch-
         plate throughout. But A3 was perhaps introduced from the
         head of the Adriatic,? since there are specimens also in West
         t Hampel, pl. ccxvit.                      by Marton, AE. xxxi (1911), pp. 333 ff.;
         2 Repeg, cf. P. 345 above.                 XXXIll, pp. 145 ff., 195 ff., and 328 ff.
         3 Jurkendorf near Rudolfswerth,    M.      The following summary is based on
         Laibach, no. 3373.                       - his articles.
         4 There is a miniature one from Pilin.     9 Its prototypes are found in Submy-
         5 Hampel, pl. ctx.                         cenaean tombs on Kephalenia (Blin-
         ° e.g. Saj6-Gémér, Hampel, cxiv;           kenberg, fig. 136) and in the Late
         Salg6-Tarjan, ibid., pl. Lu.               Bronze Age hoard of Tolfa in Central
         7 AE. xiii (1928), p: 58; 11,              Italy (Randall-MaclIver, Villanovans,
         8 ‘The Hungarian fibulae are discussed     pl. 18, 3).
Fic. 209.   Hoard of Rima-Szombat, after Hampel.   4
        374       THE END       OF THE     HUNGARIAN         BRONZE      AGE
        Hungary.'      In any case it took root in North Hungary, where
        it occurs at Szt. Endre, Pilin, Aszéd, and Debrecen.”                   It gave
        birth to the variant A6, perhaps under the influence of the two-
        membered type B3a, since it is commonest in the area where
        the Lausitz influence was strongest 3 and where stray specimens
        of B3 aareactually found.* It was exported to Bohemia, there to
        occur in urnfields of Silesian or, more probably, Platenice type.’
           Still later, belonging exclusively to Period VII, appears the
        composite variant As that is only at home in North Hungary
        and Slovakia.© Thence it was exported to West Hungary,’
        Moravia, and Bohemia,* Transylvania, and even Moldavia.’




                Fic. 210.   Bronze cups from second hoard of Hajdu Samson.       4

        Its association at Kurd with Italian cordoned buckets shows the
        relative lateness of the type.
           Foreign fibulae are seldom found in North Hungary in
         Periods VI or VII;          A” 2a is found at Aszdéd.%             ‘There are
         also a few spectacle brooches from Aszdd, and from Slovakia,"
         and the fibula found with foreign goldwork at Fokorti in
         County Heves belonging to type A” 4.
   Horse-   Bronze bits are not found in our area, but elaborate com-
trappings pound pendants that appear in hoards near the end of Period
         t Kesthely, Regély (Tolna), Velem,       Puché (‘Trencen), Saj6-Gé6m6r, Kom-
         and Tethen (Gyé6r).                      jath (Liptdé), Medvedze (Arva), Felka
         2 Felentés Debrecen 1926 évi, pl. V.     (Spis).
         3 Pilin, Kisterenne, Debrecen, Mis-      7 Velem, Kurd (Tolna), Orcsi, and
         koles, Madacska (Nograd), Dominik        'Térdk-Koppany (Somogy), Uszavélgy
         (Hont), and Velem.                       (Zala).
         4 Hampel, pl. xxxrx, 2-3.                8 ZfE. xlv, p. 681; Scharnil, Béhmen,
         5 Pic, iii, pl. xtv; Scharnil, Bohmen,   p. 196.
         Dextrose                                 9 Parvan, Getica, pl. x1x, and fig. 307.
         6 Bodrogkeresztur, Debrecen, Aszdéd,      10 AF. xxxiii, pl. vil, figs. 46-7.
         Kisterenne, Alpar (Pest), Dolyan, and     28 BUR SSS joy, AGils
         Marczal (Nograd), Bohuslavice, and
                          AND    ‘THE SCYTHS                            375
VI (e.g. at Rima-Szombat, Fig. 209) are generally interpreted
as horse-trappings. And from Zsujta (Abauj) comes a bird-
shaped top from a chariot-pole that can be little if any later.?
Another chariot part comes from the depot of Komjath that
belongs definitely to Period VII. It is therefore clear that the
people of North Hungary drove, even if they did not ride. They
must have controlled their steeds with bone-ended bits as in
Period V.
   Metal vessels are very common: we have both smooth? and Metal
bossed3 cups of hammered bronze (Fig. 210) and similar cups




        Fic. 211.   Cauldron with T-handles from Hajdu Sdmson.    4

shapes in gold (Fig. 208) that belong in part to Period VI.
Especially on the eastern frontier of the province many large
vessels are found: cauldrons with twisted handles fitting into Cauldrons
loops that are attached to T-pieces (Fig. 211) are represented and
in no less than five hoards just across the Tisza.4 Big buckets buckets
decorated with cireles flanked by birds’ heads in repoussé>
(Fig. 212) are found at three sites in the same area.
   All this beaten bronze ware is usually called Italian, but, as The
we have noted, doubts have been cast on the Italian origin of bronze
                                                                              ware
« Cf. Svijan in Bohemia, Richly, pl.   Aszéd, Breznobanya(Zvolen)  (Hampel,   local
XXxvill, and Hader in Lower Bavaria    pls. Lx1v-Lxv; Man, xxvi. 84).
(Reinecke in Verh. Hist. Vereines f.   4 Hajdu Bérsémény, Hajdu Samson,
Niederbayern, xli (1905), p. 344).     Rohod, Maria Pécs, and Kantor-
2 Hajdu Samson,Csikszentkiraly, Bod-   janosi (Szabolcs Varmegye, p. 9).
rogkeresztur.                          5 Hajdu Bérsémény, Sennyé, and
3 Hajdu Samson, Hajdu Bérsémény,       Szennyespuszta.
          376      THE END      OF THE     HUNGARIAN        BRONZE      AGE
          the smooth cups and the T-cauldrons. Moreover, it would be
          manifestly absurd to contend that the gold cups from Angyal-
          féld (Fig. 208) were made in Italy. On the other hand, North
          Hungary would be a convenient centre for their diffusion. ‘Thus
          the T-cauldrons are found in Galicia, where undeniably North
          Hungarian swords are common, and in Transylvania* and West
          Hungary,? where fibulae of type As likewise occur. The
          smooth cups recur in the Ukraine.3
             It was evident that the North Hungarian culture was de-
Industry finitely based on the exploitation of the copper ores in which
      and the area it occupies is so rich. In the course of the foregoing
    trade analysis it will have become plain that North Hungary was also
          the home of a vigorous secondary industry. That is attested by
          the wealth and variety of original types as much as by the size
          of the workshops discovered at Pilin, Kisterenne, and Aszod.
          We can also detect evidence of industrial specialization. We
          find hoards composed exclusively of swords (Podhering,
          Zsujta) or of bronze vases (Hajdu Samson). Naturally, there-
          fore, not only metal but finished products of metallurgy were
          exported far and wide. We have seen that undeniably North
          Hungarian objects reached Carniola, North Italy, Switzerland,
          Wurtemberg, Galicia, and Moldavia.             If we accept the buckets
          as Hungarian we can add North Germany.’ The reflex of this
          trade is seen in the foreign objects that reached the industrial
          centres. Intercourse with the north brought amber to Géddllé5
          and Pilin.© The eastern connexions brought the Scythian
          objects that herald the collapse of the Bronze Age civilization.
    Italy From Italy came at least the fibulae of type A3, perhaps also Aq.
          Later we find at Aggtelek pottery adorned with little bronze
          knobs as at Sta. Lucia and Este.7’ And whether the buckets be
          Italian or no, the bird’s head motive’ adorning them is very com-
          mon in the Peninsula, and must either have reached Hungary
          from there or from a short-lived intermediate centre east of the
 No con- Adriatic.     On the other hand, direct relations with the Aegean
tact with have ceased.     The first Greek object to reach our area is the
 Aegean
          * Bardocs, Ordéngés Fiizes, and Alba    7 AE. xxxiii, p.155,n.6. Cf. Randall-
          Gyula, Parvan, op. cit., p. 309.        Maclver, Iron Age, pp. 14, 16, &c.
          2 Somlyé6 (Veszprem) Hampel, pl.        8 It is supposed to represent the solar
          Lxvil; cf. MAGW. xv, p. 138 and pl.     barque carried by swans, but is pro-
          XII, 12 (Wies in Styria).               bably rooted in the last resort in the
          3 Tallgren, Pontide, fig. 91.           Sun cult as elaborated in the Hittite
          4 Parchim, AuhV. v, pl. 56, 1018.       Empire and Phoenicia. On the trade-
          5 CIA., 1877, ii, p. 166.               route see Roska, Dolgozatok, 1928, p.
          ¢ Hampel, i, p. 20. He says ‘Etruscan   254.
          amber and glass beads’.
                            AND    THE SCYTHS                                377
archaic hydria from Bene, dated to the sixth century and intro-
duced with the Scyths. Nevertheless the swords of type
Bs are adorned with an early Mycenaean pulley-motive ?
which is also seen on bone plaques from Tiszafiired 3 and bone
pommels from Tészeg D. Parallels from Vattina show that
this pattern came up the Danube, but it must already have be-
come naturalized in the Banat long before it was applied to
Late Bronze Age swords in North Hungary. Possibly too the
solid swans or ducks that appear perched on a mace flew up
the Danube. The earliest European resting-place of this
Asiatic bird was on the rim of a cup found in a submycenaean
hoard at Tiryns.t But probably he winged his way thence up
the Adriatic.
   If many of the foreign types found in North Hungary were Invasion
due to trade, that will not account for the abrupt appearance of need to
a whole series of new tools and weapons at the beginning of our explain
period. In particular the replacement of the neat shaft-hole new
axe by the socketed celt, a much inferior device, can only be forms
explained in ethnic terms. And the general adoption of the
sword instead of the battle-axe was scarcely less revolutionary.
These changes in armament, like the sudden introduction of
fluted decoration and a whole series of Lausitz forms in the
pottery, were the symbols of an actual conquest of North
Hungary by the Lausitz people. If old traditions survived, they
were preserved at first by a subject population. The North
Hungarian province of the Late Bronze Age belongs essentially
to the north rather than the south. Yet the older elements
asserted themselves more and more as time went on.
   The chronology of the period is fixed both stratigraphically Chrono-
and typologically. The intrusive fluted ware appears in ‘T’észeg logy
D, and the same level contains bone pommels adorned with the
same pulley-pattern as the swords of type B5. ‘The oldest
intrusive types that appear in bulk characterize the first half of
the Late Bronze Age—Reinecke D—while the earlier North
Hungarian exports (e.g. the mace from Repec) are found in
deposits of the same phase in Bohemia. The development of
the industry in the second phase is still better attested by finds
of North Hungarian swords in the Hallstatt A deposits of
Bavaria and Wurtemberg and by the strict parallelism between
t Parvan, pl. XVIII.                      fig. 16.    ees?                Mighob
2 Marton, AE. xxix (1909), p. 411.        One such bird in bronze overlaid with
3 AE. xxv, p. 168.                        gold leaf forms part of the Angyalféld
4 *Apy. AeAr., 1916, mapdprnya, p. 16,    hoard.
  3443                               aC
       378        THE    END    OF THE     HUNGARIAN         BRONZE     AGE
       North Hungarian and Benacci I bronze work. The conjunction
       of a fibula of type As with cordoned buckets at Kurd suffices
       to prove that the North Hungarian Bronze Age outlasted-
       Period VI. But the total absence of mature Benacci II or
       Arnoaldi types east of the Danube—there are plenty beyond
       the river—warns us against allowing too longa life to the Bronze
       Age. In fact, by the seventh century North Hungary was orien-
       tated to the east.' If the Scyths had not yet annexed the plain,
       their incursions had probably already ruined the settlements
       in the east of the province. Hence the Late Bronze Age
       in North Hungary would begin about 1100 B.c. and last till
       700 B.C. or a little later.

                          II. EAST     HUNGARIAN         GROUP     II
       In the D levels of the frontier site of T’észeg we find the intru-
       sive fluted ware mixed with the native stippled fabric and two
       others that are found pure in settlements and urnfields beyond
       the Tisza and on the steppe tracts of Hajdu County. A new
       cultural province begins there, distinguished both by its
       bronzes and its pottery from group I, and extending roughly
       from Munkacs (Munkaéevo) in Subcarpathian Ruthenia to the
       Maros. The most important sites are Mojgrad, Berettyo
       Ujfalu,? Bihar,3 Szelevény, and the ‘Lopos Halom’ near
       Gyulavarsand,‘ together with the urnfield of Puszta Szent
       Janos west of Grosswerdein.5
          In this area also we have settlements, cemeteries, and hoards.
        The settlements are very like those of Period V, but in some
        cases at least, e.g. at Bihar, show a more specialized industrial
        character reminiscent of Pilin. As to the cemeteries, nothing
        can be said in default of detailed reports of any excavation. We
        can only describe the pottery and the artifacts found in the
        various types of deposits.
Pottery _ The distinctive pottery, represented by two main fabrics,
        is definitely metallic both in form and ornament. The forms
       include large urns, dishes like those from Tészeg C, and various
       cups and jugs with or without feet, approximations to which
       already appear in Tészeg C. The rims of the cups often slope
       away to the handle as in the wares of Period III from the same
        * Cf. Parvan, Getica, pp. 384 and 770.   asterile layer.
       2 ‘The material in question comes from     3 Hampel, pl. LXXII, 2-3, 5.
       a layer above the settlement of            4 AE. xxviii (1908), pp. 5 f.
        Danubian II and separated from it by      5 Hampel, pls. Lxxv-LxxvI.
                             AND    THE    SCYTHS                            379
 region.’ ‘The first ware, which we may name after the site Puszta
 of Puszta Szt. Janos, is ornamented with flutings bordered by Set.
 incised or dotted lines twisting round small warts to form a Fanos
 series of horizontal S spirals (Fig. 213 b). This ware, found ware
 at all the sites mentioned above, was exported to Aszéd and
_Vattina. In T6szeg C we can already perceive hints of a transi-
 tion from typical wart-ware to the Puszta Szent Janos style.
 Its metallic origin is shown by a hollow gold disk or saucer, Metal
 8-7 cm. wide, found at Gyulavarsand, that is decorated with prototypes
 exactly the same pattern.? Reinecke notes the resemblance to
 the designs on swords of type B4.
    In the second ware, best represented at Berettyé Ujfalu,
 the designs are incised and cross-hatched, and consist for the
 most part of hanging pot-hook spirals (Fig. 214b). Finally,
 fluted ware occurs sporadically at most sites.
    The settlements have yielded plentiful bone and horn im-
 plements, especially hollow harpoon-tips, and even stone celts.
 Among the bronzes socketed celts are not very common, and Celts
 occur principally in late hoards and often in the peculiar East
 Hungarian variant. We miss altogether the razors and No
 tweezers so popular farther north, though sickles of Italian type VTAZOrS
 are plentiful.
    So too swords are rare and late. The battle-axe with a Battle-
 spiked butt seems to have remained the favourite weapon east axes
 of the Tisza (Fig. 148d). The spear-heads often preserve the
 old-fashioned leaf-shaped blade as against the new form intro-
 duced into North Hungary.
    Fibulae were not worn in the area occupied by group II, No
 and the pins are not very distinctive. ‘The most typical orna- fibulae
 ment was a solid or hollow penannular bracelet with triangular
 cross-section. Some of the gold ornaments described below, Gold
 in particular bracelets like Fig. 224, e.g., may well have been bracelets
 made by the authors of group II culture, since the majority
 have been found within its domain; they can, however, be
 more conveniently described at a later stage.
    The culture just reviewed seems to be largely due to the Origin
 battle-axe folk of the Middle Bronze Age groups 1 and 5,
 driven eastward by the Lausitz invasion. For a substantial
 1 p. 290, above.                          ccxxvI, &c.
