Grammatical Categories

The very natural tendency to use terms derived from traditional grammar,
like verb, noun, adjective, passive voice, in describing languages
outside of Indo-European is fraught with grave possibilities of
misunderstanding. At the same time it is desirable to define these terms
in such a way that we can avail ourselves of their great convenience
and, where possible, apply them to exotic languages in a scientific and
consistent way. To do this, we must re-examine the types of grammatical
category that are found in languages, using a worldwide view of
linguistic phenomena, frame concepts more or less new, and make needed
additions to terminology. These observations apply pari passu to
English, which hardly less than some American Indian languages is off
the pattern of general Indo-European.¹

In the reaction from conventional grammars of American languages based
on classical models, there has been a tendency to restrict attention to
the morphemes by which many grammatical forms are marked. This view
loses sight of various word-classes that are marked not by morphemic
tags but by types of patterning: e.g. by the systematic avoidance of
certain morphemes, by lexical selection, by word-order that is also
CLASS-ORDER, in general by association with definite linguistic
configurations. At the beginning of investigation of a language, the
“functional” type of definition, e.g. that a word of a certain class,
say a “noun,” is “a word which does so-and-so,” is to be avoided when
this is the ONLY test of distinction applied; for people’s conceptions
of what a given word “does” in an unfamiliar language may be as diverse
as their own native languages, linguistic educations, and philosophical
predilections. The categories studied in grammar are those recognizable
through facts of a configurational sort, and these facts are the same
for all observers. Yet I do not share the complete distrust of all
functional definitions which a few modern grammarians seem to show.
After categories have been outlined according to configurative facts, it
may be desirable to employ functional or operational symbolism as the
investigation proceeds. Linked with configurative data, operational
descriptions become valid as possible ways of stating the MEANING of the
forms, “meaning” in such cases being a characterization which succinctly
accounts for all the semantic and configurational facts, known or
predictable.

We may first distinguish between OVERT CATEGORIES and COVERT CATEGORIES.

An overt category is a category having a formal mark which is present
(with only infrequent exceptions) in every sentence containing a member
of the category. The mark need not be part of the same word to which the
category may be said to be attached in a paradigmatic sense; i.e. it
need not be a suffix, prefix, vowel change, or other “inflection,” but
may be a detached word or a certain patterning of the whole sentence.
Thus in English the plural of nouns is an overt category, marked usually
in the paradigm word (the noun in question) by the suffix ‘-s’ or a
vowel change, but in the case of words like ‘fish, sheep,’ and certain
gentilic plurals, it is marked by the form of the verb, the manner of
use of the articles, etc. In ‘fish appeared,’ the absence of any article
denotes plural; in ‘the fish will be plentiful,’ a pluralizing adjective
denotes it; in ‘the Chinese arrived’ and ‘the Kwakiutl arrived,’ the
definite article coupled with lack of a singular marker like ‘person,’
‘Chinaman,’ or ‘Indian’ denotes plural. In all these cases plural is
overtly marked, and so, with few exceptions, are all noun plurals in
English, so that noun-plural is an overt category in English.² In
Southern Paiute the subject-person of a verb is marked by a sublexical
element (or “bound morpheme”) that cannot stand alone, like English
‘-s’; but it need not be attached to the verb, it may be attached to the
first important word of the sentence. In English what may be called the
potential mode of the verb is an overt category marked by the morpheme
‘can’ or ‘could,’ a word separate in the sentence from the verb but
appearing in every sentence containing the category. This category is as
much a part of the verb system of morphology as though it were denoted
by a bound element in a synthetic Algonkian or Sanskrit verb; its
morpheme ‘can’ may replace coordinate elements in the same modal system,
e.g. ‘may, will,’ but it may not, like a mere lexical item (e.g.
‘possibly’) be simply added to them. In Hopi also there is a rigid
system of mutually exclusive “modalities” denoted by detached words.

A covert category is marked, whether morphemically or by
sentence-pattern, only in certain types of sentence and not in every
sentence in which a word or element belonging to the category occurs.
The class-membership of the word is not apparent until there is a
question of using it or referring to it in one of these special types of
sentence, and then we find that this word belongs to a class requiring
some sort of distinctive treatment, which may even be the negative
treatment of excluding that type of sentence. This distinctive treatment
we may call the REACTANCE of the category. In English, intransitive
verbs form a covert category marked by lack of the passive participle
and the passive and causative voices; we cannot substitute a verb of
this class (e.g. ‘go, lie, sit, rise, gleam, sleep, arrive, appear,
rejoice’) into such sentences as ‘It was cooked, It was being cooked, I
had it cooked to order.’ An intransitive thus configuratively defined is
quite a different thing from the “dummy” intransitive used in
traditional English grammar; it is a true grammatical class marked by
these and other constant grammatical features, such as nonoccurrence of
nouns or pronouns after the verb; one does not say ‘I gleamed it, I
appeared the table.’ Of course compound formations involving these same
lexemes may be transitive, e.g. ‘sleep (it) off, go (him) one better.’
In the American colloquial forms ‘go haywire, go South Sea Islander,’
etc., the word or phrase after the verb is a covert adjective, cf. ‘go
completely haywire.’

Another type of covert category is represented by English gender. Each
common noun and personal given name belongs to a certain gender class,
but a characteristic overt mark appears only when there is occasion to
refer to the noun by a personal pronoun in the singular number—or in the
case of the neuter class it may be marked by the interrogative and
relative pronouns ‘what, which.’ The grammatical alignment is no less
strict than in an overt gender system like that of Latin, where most
nouns bear their gender mark. No doubt for many English common nouns a
knowledge of actual sex and of scientific biological and physical
classification of objects could serve a foreigner in lieu of knowledge
of the grammatical classes themselves, but such knowledge would be of
only limited use after all, for the greater part of the masculine and
feminine classes consists of thousands of personal names, and a
foreigner who knows nothing of the cultural background of Western
European Christian names must simply learn, i.e. observe, that ‘Jane’
belongs to the ‘she’ group and ‘John’ to the ‘he’ group. There are
plenty of names of overt similarity but contrasted gender, e.g. ‘Alice :
Ellis, Alison : Addison, Audrey : Aubrey, Winifred : Wilfred, Myra :
Ira, Esther : Lester.’³ Nor would knowledge of any “natural” properties
tell our observer that the names of biological classes themselves (e.g.
animal, bird, fish, etc.) are ‘it’; that smaller animals usually are
‘it’; larger animals often ‘he’; dogs, eagles, and turkeys usually ‘he’;
cats and wrens usually ‘she’; body parts and the whole botanical world
‘it’; countries and states as fictive persons (but not as localities)
‘she’; cities, societies, and corporations as fictive persons ‘it’; the
human body ‘it’; a ghost ‘it’; nature ‘she’; watercraft with sail or
power and named small craft ‘she’; unnamed rowboats, canoes, rafts ‘it,’
etc. The mistakes in English gender made by learners of the language,
including those whose own languages are without gender, would alone show
that we have here covert grammatical categories, and not reflections in
speech of natural and noncultural differences.

The classes of nouns based actually or ostensibly upon shape, in various
American languages, may be either overt or covert. In Navaho they are
covert. Some terms belong to the round (or roundish) class, others to
the long-object class, others fall into classes not dependent on shape.
No overt mark designates the class in every sentence. The class mark as
in English gender is a reactance; not a pronoun, however, but a choice
between certain verb stems that go definitely with one class and no
other, although there are very many verb stems indifferent to this
distinction. I doubt that such distinctions, at least in Navaho, are
simply linguistic recognitions of nonlinguistic, objective differences
that would be the same for all observers, any more than the English
genders are; they seem rather to be covert grammatical categories. Thus
one must learn as a part of learning Navaho that ‘sorrow’ belongs in the
“round” class. One’s first and “common-sense” impression of covert
categories like English gender and Navaho shape-class is that they are
simply distinctions between different kinds of experience or knowledge;
that we say ‘Jane went to her house’ because we know that Jane is a
female. Actually we need not know anything about Jane, Jane may be a
mere name; yet having heard this name, perhaps over the telephone, we
say ‘What about her?’. Common sense may then retreat a step further and
say that we know the name Jane to be given only to females. But such
experience is linguistic; it is learning English by observation.
Moreover it is easy to show that the pronoun agrees with the name only,
not with the experience. I can bestow the name ‘Jane’ on an automobile,
a skeleton, or a cannon, and it will still require ‘she’ in pronominal
references. I have two goldfish; I name one ‘Jane’ and one ‘Dick.’ I can
still say ‘Each goldfish likes its food,’ but not ‘Jane likes its food
better than Dick.’ I must say ‘Jane likes her food.’ The word ‘dog’
belongs to a common gender class with a preference for ‘he’ and ‘it,’
but the gender-classed given name of a dog determines its own pronoun;
we do not say ‘Tom came out of its kennel,’ but ‘Tom came out of his
kennel, Lady came out of her kennel, The female dog came out of its (or
her) kennel.’ “Doggish” names like ‘Fido’ are of the ‘he’ class: ‘Towser
came out of his kennel.’ We say ‘See the cat chase her tail,’ but never
‘See Dick chase her tail.’ The words ‘child, baby, infant’ belong to the
common class and can take ‘it,’ but the given names of children take
either ‘he’ or ‘she.’ I can say ‘My baby enjoys its food,’ but it would
be linguistically wrong to say ‘My baby’s name is Helen—see how Helen
enjoys its food.’ Nor can I say ‘My little daughter enjoys its food,’
for ‘daughter,’ unlike ‘baby,’ is grammatically in the feminine class.

Likewise with various covert categories of exotic languages: where they
have been thought to be recognitions of objective differences, it may
rather be that they are grammatical categories that merely accord up to
a certain point with objective experience. They may represent
experience, it is true, but experience seen in terms of a definite
linguistic scheme, not experience that is the same for all observers. On
the other hand, the distinctions between present and absent, visible and
invisible, made in many American languages, may well represent
experiential differences; and again we may have such experiential
differences engrafted upon purely grammatical classifications, yielding
mixed classes such as “experiential-present plus grammatical-feminine.”

A covert category may also be termed a CRYPTOTYPE, a name which calls
attention to the rather hidden, cryptic nature of such word-groups,
especially when they are not strongly contrasted in idea, nor marked by
frequently occurring reactances such as pronouns. They easily escape
notice and may be hard to define, and yet may have profound influence on
linguistic behavior. The English intransitive verbs as configuratively
defined above are a cryptotype. A similar cryptotype comprises the verbs
of “copulative resolution” (‘be, become, seem, stay, remain,’ etc.),
which also lack the passive and causative but may be followed by nouns,
pronouns, and adjectives. Transitives (a cryptotype which includes ‘run,
walk, return,’ etc.—indeed most English verbs) possess the passive and
causative and may be followed by nouns and pronouns but not by
adjectives alone. Names of countries and cities in English form a
cryptotype with the reactance that they are not referred to by personal
pronouns as object of the prepositions ‘in, at, to, from.’ We can say ‘I
live in Boston’ but not ‘That’s Boston—I live in it.’ A word of this
cryptotype is referred to by ‘there’ or ‘here’ in place of ‘in it, at
it, to it,’ and by ‘from there (here)’ in place of ‘from it.’ In various
American languages such place names constitute a grammatical class; in
Hopi they lack the nominative and objective cases, occurring only in
locational cases; in Aztec they bear characteristic endings and exclude
the use of certain prepositions.

English adjectives form two main cryptotypes with subclasses. A group
referring to “inherent” qualities—including color, material, physical
state (solid, liquid, porous, hard, etc.), provenience, breed,
nationality, function, use—has the reactance of being placed nearer the
noun than the other group, which we may call one of noninherent
qualities, though it is rather the residuum outside the first
group—including adjectives of size, shape, position, evaluation
(ethical, esthetic, or economic). These come before the inherent group,
e.g. ‘large red house’ (not ‘red large house’), ‘steep rocky hill, nice
smooth floor.’ The order may be reversed to make a balanced contrast,
but only by changing the normal stress pattern, and the form is at once
sensed as being reversed and peculiar. The normal pattern has primary
stress either on the noun (‘steep rocky hi′ll’) or on the inherent
adjective (‘pretty Fre′nch girl’). We cannot simply reverse the order of
adjectives and say ‘French pre′tty girl’—the form suggests a contrasted
‘French plai′n girl’ but the pattern of so contrasting adjectives is
un-English; the proper contrast is ‘plai′n French girl.’ We can however
reverse the adjectives by altering the stress pattern and say ‘Fre′nch
pretty girl,’ if in contrast with e.g. ‘Spa′nish pretty girl,’ though
such forms are clearly exceptional.

The contrasting term PHENOTYPE may be applied to the overt category and,
when no ambiguity results, to the mark which accompanies the overt
category in the sentence.

The distinction between overt and covert categories, or PHENOTYPES and
CRYPTOTYPES, is one of two distinctions of supreme importance in the
theory of grammatical categories. The other is the distinction between
what may be called SELECTIVE CATEGORIES and MODULUS CATEGORIES.

A selective category is a grammatical class with membership fixed, and
limited as compared with some larger class. A PRIMARY selective
category, or LEXEMIC category, is one compared to which the next larger
class is the total lexicon of the language. Certain semantic and
grammatical properties are assured in the word by selecting it from a
certain class of fixed membership not coterminous with the whole
vocabulary. In order that a certain grammatical property may be “in the
lexeme,” it cannot be in all lexemes. The familiar “parts of speech” of
most European languages, but not of English, are lexemic categories. The
situation in English is peculiar, and will be touched upon later.
Lexemic categories may be either overt or covert. Hopi is an example of
a language in which they are covert. Possibly Maya may be another such
case, though we lack clear information on that point. In Hopi there is
no distinction in the simplex (bare-stem) forms between nouns and verbs,
and sentences are possible in which there is no distinction in the
sentence. Thus le·′na or pam le·′na means ‘it is a flute,’ and pe·′na or
pam pe·′na means ‘he writes it.’ Hence nouns and verbs may be alike in
overt characteristics. But it is easily possible to make sentences in
which le·′na appears with case suffixes and in other forms quite
impossible for pe·′na, and vice versa. One has to learn, and cannot
always tell from the sentence, that le·′na and pe·′na belong to
different compartments of the lexicon.

It is probably more common to find lexemic classes that are overt, as in
Latin, French, Aztec, Tübatulabal, Taos, and Navaho. In French, ange and
mange belong to different compartments of the vocabulary (noun and verb)
and there is always a feature in the sentence that tells which; one does
not find such pairs as il mange : il ange, c’est un ange : c’est un
mange. It may be possible to have Ange! versus Mange!, but special and
abbreviated types of sentence like these with their lack of formal
distinctions do not justify calling the categories covert. In Latin,
Aztec, Tübatulabal, and Taos, the distinction is marked not only in the
sentence, but also usually in the paradigm word itself. Yet this overt
mark of the noun, verb, or other “part of speech” cannot usually be
transferred to a lexeme outside of the proper group. The mark that goes
with a covert lexemic class need not stand for any other category such
as case, person, or tense, though it does for example in Latin, Greek,
and Sanskrit. The “absolutive suffixes” found attached to lexemic nouns
in most Uto-Aztecan languages have basically no other character than
that of such class-marks, though in Aztec they are also tied up with
number; and needless ingenuity has been wasted in trying to make them
out to be “articles” or the like. The absolutive suffixes in Taos go
with the selective class of nouns but indicate gender and number also.
In Latin the distinction between the nouns (including in this class the
adjectives) and the verbs is selective and overt, but that between
adjectives and substantives is selective and covert; compare est gladius
and est bonus. As with all covert classes, the distinction is revealed
upon forming the proper type of sentence: est bona occurs, but not est
gladia.

Lexemic categories include not only nouns, verbs, adjectives, and other
“parts of speech,” but also “full” words and “empty”⁴ words or stems, as
in Chinese and perhaps the Wakashan languages, and still other types of
distinction; e.g. in Algonkian the lexemic classes include large groups
of stems having different combinatory powers and different positions in
the verbal complex.

A modulus category is a nonselective category, i.e. it is generally
applicable and removable at will. Depending on its type, it may be
applied either to any “major word” (any word excepting small and
specialized selective classes, e.g. “particles”), or, more often, to any
word coming within a certain prerequisite larger category, which may be
either selective or another modulus category. The cases, tenses,
aspects, modes, and voices of Indo-European and Azteco-Tanoan⁵ languages
are modulus categories, applicable at will to words belonging to the
proper larger category—cases being moduli of the larger category of
nouns; aspects, tenses, etc. moduli of the larger category of verbs.
Hence the person versed only in Indo-European types of grammar poses to
himself the distinction between selective and modulus classes (or
between selectivity and modulation) as the distinction between “parts of
speech” on the one hand and “grammatical forms” of the aspect, tense,
and voice type on the other. But, in widely different types of speech,
these familiar types of meaning and function cease to be associated with
selectivity and modulation in the same way; entirely different
alignments there hold sway in the grammar, and, until this is
recognized, an adequate conception of the grammar cannot be obtained. It
is not necessary to have large categories, such as nouns and verbs, in
order to have such modulus categories as aspect. In Nitinat⁶ (and
presumably in the closely related Nootka and Kwakiutl) all major words
have aspects, such as durative, momentaneous, inceptive, etc.—both the
word for ‘run’ and the word for ‘house’ always bear some element marking
this aspect.

We may use the term “modulus” alone to denote the distinctive class
meaning and function of the category; thus the present-participle
meaning is a modulus in English. We may also use modulus to mean the
grammatical operation of producing one such meaning, and hence, where no
ambiguity results, to mean the element or pattern that marks the
modulus. Thus we can say that in English the present-participle modulus
is the suffixing of ‘-ing,’ or for short that it is ‘-ing.’ Where
greater preciseness is desirable, we may call the overt mark the (or a)
SIGNATURE of the modulus. This distinction is ultimately important;
sometimes it is necessary to distinguish several signatures of the same
modulus. In illustrating overt categories we cited the English
noun-plural, which is a modulus category. The modulus, or plural type of
meaning, is one and the same thing throughout the various examples, but
the signatures whereby this plural modulus may be applied to the word
‘fish’ are different from one example to the next. To these signatures
we may add ‘-s’ or ‘-es,’ giving ‘fishes.’ Since ‘sheep, deer, moose,
caribou,’ etc. belong to a cryptotype that excludes ‘-s,’ and
“fishermen’s fish” such as ‘trout, bass, salmon, mackerel, cod,’ etc.
(contrasted with “low-grade fish,” e.g. ‘sharks, skates, eels,
sculpins,’ etc.) belong to another such cryptotype, we cannot use this
last signature for them. As this example shows, it is not necessary to
have one-to-one correspondence between moduli and signatures. Where a
high degree of such one-to-one correspondence obtains, it has often been
the custom to apply the graphic but not very scientific catchword
“agglutinative” to the language. Languages of the typical
“agglutinative” type, such as Turkish, have been referred to as if they
had such one-to-one correspondence, and moreover as if they had no
categories but modulus categories. The grammar of Yana (Hokan stock,
California) consists largely of moduli, but has also a few selective
categories; e.g. a class of stems which must stand first in the verbal
complex and a class which must stand second.

A distinction of the same semantic type as that between verbs and nouns
in selective categories may be handled by modulus categories instead.
That is, the possible moduli include not only voice, aspect, etc., but
also VERBATION and STATIVATION.⁷ Whenever, as for example in Yana, the
mere application of certain distinctive suffixes or other signatures
makes a “verb” out of any stem, then we do not have a class of verbs in
the same sense as in French, Latin, Greek, Hopi, Aztec, Taos, and
Navaho: i.e. a selective class. We have verbations instead of such
verbs. The so-called verbs and nouns of Semitic are moduli, applicable
to lexemes in general by signatures consisting largely of
vowel-consonant sequence patterns, though there may be occasional gaps
in the universality of lexical applicability. In Hebrew we have e-e as
one of several signatures for stativation and [LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH
MACRON]-a as one of several for verbation, e.g. berek⁸ ‘knee’ : b[LATIN
SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]rak ‘he kneeled,’ derek ‘road’ : d[LATIN
SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]rak ‘he marched,’ geber ‘man, as virile or
strong’ : g[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]bar ‘he was strong,’ hebel
‘cord’ : [Whorf_p126a] ‘he bound,’ melek ‘king’ : m[LATIN SMALL LETTER A
WITH MACRON]lak ‘he reigned,’ qedem ‘antecedence’ : q[LATIN SMALL LETTER
A WITH MACRON]dam ‘he was before,’ regel ‘foot’ : r[LATIN SMALL LETTER A
WITH MACRON]gal ‘he went on foot.’ There are no doubt many Hebrew
“nouns” for which we do not know the verbation form in texts, but this
seems to be so largely because the textual Hebrew that we know does not
represent the full resources of the ancient living language; Arabic
shows better the general applicability of these moduli to the great
majority of lexemes. But verbs and nouns which are modulus categories
may be found nearer home than Semitic. The lexicon of English contains
two major selective divisions. One division, consisting mostly of long
words and words with certain endings, contains selective verbs like
‘reduce, survive, undertake, perplex, magnify, reciprocate,’ and
selective nouns like ‘instrument, elephant, longevity, altruism.’ A
limited number of short words belong also to the group of selective
nouns and verbs, e.g. ‘heart, boy, street, road, town; sit, see, hear,
think.’ In this selective vocabulary English is like French or Hopi. The
other part of the lexicon, mostly the shorter words but some long ones,
contains bare lexemes to which either verbation or stativation may be
applied at will, e.g. ‘head, hand, stand, walk, exchange, sight, skin,
weave, dog, surrender, massage,’ etc.⁹ This part of the vocabulary is
like Arabic, though the signatures are of a quite different sort. Those
for stativation include the articles, plural signatures, position after
possessive pronouns and selective adjectives; those for verbation
include position after a nominative pronoun, position before a pronoun,
noun, or stativation, the tense forms, the verbal auxiliaries and modal
particles, etc.

There may be wide variability in the semantic relations between
verbations and stativations in the same language. When contrasted with
the corresponding stativations, verbations may seem to add in an
inconstant manner such ideas as ‘he engaged in’ (hunt, jump, dance),
‘behave like’ (mother, carpenter, dog), ‘be in’ (lodge, hive), ‘put in’
(place, seat, pocket, garage), ‘make, add, install’ (weave, plant, roof,
pipe, tin), ‘take away’ (skin, peel, husk, bone), ‘get’ (fish, mouse),
‘use’ (spear, hammer, fiddle, bugle); while on the other hand
stativations seem to add inconstantly such ideas as ‘result’ (weave,
plant, form), ‘means’ (paint, trail), ‘action or place’ (walk, slide,
step, drop), ‘instrument’ (lift, cover, clasp, clip), etc. This
inconstancy, or, better, elasticity, in certain aspects of the meaning,
seen in Semitic as well as in English, is characteristic of the simple
moduli of verbation and stativation, and it may be contrasted with the
condition of having a number of different moduli, each a different
specialized type of verbation or stativation, which appears to be the
situation in Alaskan Eskimo. It merely means that, in a language with
simple primary types of moduli, the meaning of the individual lexeme is
more or less under the sway of the entire sentence, and at the mercy of
the manifold potentialities of connotation and suggestion which thereby
arise.

Can there be languages not only without selective nouns and verbs, but
even without stativations and verbations? Certainly. The power of making
predications or declarative sentences and of taking on such moduli as
voice, aspect, and tense, may be a property of every major word, without
the addition of a preparatory modulus. This seems to be the case in
Nitinat and the other Wakashan languages. An isolated word is a
sentence; a sequence of such sentence words is like a compound sentence.
We might ape such a compound sentence in English, e.g. ‘There is one who
is a man who is yonder who does running which traverses-it which is a
street which elongates,’ though the exotic sentence consists simply of
the predicative lexemes ‘one,’ ‘man,’ ‘yonder,’ ‘run,’ ‘traverse,’
‘street,’ and ‘long,’ and the proper translation is ‘A man yonder is
running down the long street.’ Such a structure might or might not be
found in an isolating language; again it might or might not be found in
a polysynthetic one like Nitinat. The polysynthetic language might or
might not fuse some of the lexemes into long synthetic words, but it
would doubtless have the power in any case of fusing in a great many
aspectual, modal, and connective elements (signatures of moduli). Of
such a polysynthetic tongue it is sometimes said that all the words are
verbs, or again that all the words are nouns with verb-forming elements
added. Actually the terms verb and noun in such a language are
meaningless. The situation therein is radically different from for
example Hopi, for, though in the latter le·′na ‘it is a flute’ and
pe·′na ‘he writes it’ are both complete sentences, they are words which
are not equally predicative in all positions of a sentence, and they
also belong to selective covert classes of noun and verb that in general
take different inflections, and look alike only in particular types of
sentence. In Hopi the verb-noun distinction is important on a selective
basis; in English it is important on a modulus basis; in Nitinat it
seems not to exist.

So far we have dealt with categories which are distinct both
configuratively and semantically, and these are the typical formulations
of grammar. But we also have word groups which are configuratively
distinct and yet have no difference in meaning; these we may call
ISOSEMANTIC or purely formal classes. They in turn are of two sorts
corresponding to selective and modulus in the semantic categories, but
here better styled SELECTIVE and ALTERNATIVE. Selective isosemantic
classes are typified by “declensions” and “conjugations,” those very
common features of languages the world over, richly developed in Latin,
Sanskrit, Hopi, and Maya, less developed in Semitic, English (“strong”
and “weak” verbs), and Aztec, and almost lacking in Southern Paiute.
They also include gender-like classes without semantic difference, as in
Bantu and in certain of the genders of Taos (all these might be called
“declensions” with pronominal agreement or the like); classes requiring
different position in a sentence or complex without difference in type
of meaning (stem-position classes in Algonkian); and classes requiring
different signatures for the same modulus without difference in type of
meaning, e.g. in Hebrew the segholate (e-e) “nouns” and parallel
stativation groups. Alternative isosemantic classes are what their name
implies: e.g. the English group comprising ‘don’t, won’t, shan’t,
can’t,’ etc. and the group of ‘do not, will not, shall not, cannot.’ In
this case we could perhaps speak of a modulus of brevity, convenience,
or colloquial attitude which is applied in the former group. Alternative
classes sometimes show stylistic as opposed to grammatical difference.
In other cases there seems to be no GENERALIZABLE difference, as in
English ‘electrical, cubical, cyclical, historical, geometrical’ versus
‘electric, cubic, cyclic, historic, geometric.’

There remains another type of distinction: SPECIFIC CATEGORIES and
GENERIC ones. A specific category is an individual class existing in an
individual language, e.g. English passive voice, Hopi segmentative
aspect. A generic category, in the restricted sense of application to a
particular language, is a hierarchy formed by grouping classes of
similar or (and) complementary types, e.g. case in Latin, voice in Hopi.
Here much depends on both the insight and the predilections of the
systematizer or grammarian, for it may be easy to build up specific
categories into very logical schemes; yet what is rather desired is that
such generic categories should represent systems which the language
itself contains. We do well to be skeptical of a grammarian’s
systematization when it is full of ENANTIOMORPHISM, the pairing with
every category of an opposite which is merely the lack of it. Specific
categories of seemingly opposite meaning such as passive voice and
active voice (when this term “active” means merely “nonpassive”) should
be brought into one generic category (“voice”) only when they are more
than two, or when, if there are only two, taken together they contrast
as a unit with some other system of forms.

Finally, in a still wider sense generic categories may be so formulated
as to become equivalent to the concepts of a general science of grammar.
Such categories are made by grouping what seem to us to be SIMILAR
SPECIFIC CATEGORIES IN DIFFERENT LANGUAGES. Only in such a sense can we
speak of a category of “passive voice” which would embrace the forms
called by that name in English, Latin, Aztec, and other tongues. Such
categories or concepts we may call TAXONOMIC categories, as opposed to
DESCRIPTIVE categories. Taxonomic categories may be of the first degree,
e.g. passive voice, objective case; or of the second degree, e.g. voice,
case. Perhaps those of the second degree are the more important and
ultimately the more valuable as linguistic concepts, as generalizations
of the largest systemic formations and outlines found in language when
language is considered and described in terms of the whole human
species.

 

Reprinted from Language, 21:1–11 (1945). According to a note supplied by
the editor of Language, “This paper was written late in 1937 at the
request of Franz Boas, then editor of the Int. J. Amer. Linguistics. The
manuscript was found in the Boas collection by C. F. Voegelin and Z. S.
Harris.” The Boas collection is cataloged in Language Monograph no. 22,
1945.

1. The author wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness to his colleagues,
Dr. George L. Trager and Dr. Morris Swadesh, with whom some of these
questions of category have been discussed.

2. There is of course a minority group of possible or theoretically
possible sentences, e.g. ‘The fish appeared,’ in which plural is not
distinguished from singular. But, in actual speech, such sentences are
embedded in a larger context which has already established the plurality
or the singularity of the thing discussed. (Otherwise such a sentence is
not likely to occur.) Such minority types are not considered in the
distinction between overt and covert; i.e. they do not prevent a
category from being classed as overt. In covert categories the unmarked
forms are relatively numerous, often in the majority, and are
undistinguished even by context.

3. There are a very few names of indeterminate or double gender:
‘Frances (Francis),’ ‘Jessie (Jesse),’ or ‘Jess, Jean (Gene), Jocelyn,
Sidney, Wynne,’ and perhaps a few others. The number is increased if we
include nicknames like ‘Bobby, Jerry,’ etc.; but, all in all, such
instances are relatively so few that they in no way disturb our
alignment of facts.

4. An “empty” word or stem is probably one that is highly specialized
for grammatical or syntactic indication, perhaps in a way that does not
admit of being assigned a concrete meaning. For example, such a form
might have no other meaning than to serve as the reactance of some other
category, or as the signature of a modulus category (see the next
paragraph).

5. B. L. Whorf and G. L. Trager, “The relationship of Uto-Aztecan and
Tanoan,” Amer. Anthrop., 39:609–24 (1937).

6. See Mary Haas Swadesh and Morris Swadesh, “A visit to the other
world: a Nitinat text,” Int. J. Amer. Linguistics, 7:3–4 (1933).

7. Stativation is a term used to denote the modulus of forms which are
contrasted with verbations in a way similar to that in which nouns, as a
selective category, are contrasted with verbs in the languages that have
such a contrast. It is used here instead of “nomination” or
“nominalization,” because these terms through past usage have come to
suggest derivations rather than moduli, while “stativation” helps us to
think of the form not as a noun derived from a verb, but simply as a
lexeme which has been affected by a certain meaningful grammatical
coloring as a part of certain configurations.

8. Since these Hebrew examples are used only to illustrate vowel
patterns, they are written in approximate morphophonemic orthography,
which does not attempt to show the distinction between the stops b, g,
k, etc. and the spirants which replace them after vowels under regular
statable conditions.

9. Adjectivation in English is another modulus which is applied both to
bare lexemes and to selective nouns, but there are also selective
adjectives, and these are not modulated into substantives.

8

Discussion of Hopi Linguistics

320 Wolcott Hill Road,

Wethersfield, Conn.

Dear John:

You will be interested to hear that I have been appointed to a part-time
lectureship at Yale for the term January to June 1938, Department of
Anthropology, to give one 2-hour lecture a week on Problems of American
Linguistics. During the fall term my colleague George L. Trager will
have the same group in Phonetics, so that I do not plan to devote much
of any time to phonetic or phonemic problems per se. I am going to
orient my lectures largely toward a psychological direction, and the
problems of meaning, thought, and idea in so-called primitive cultures.
Methods of investigating language which reveal something of the psychic
factors or constants of the American Indians in the given linguistic
community will be emphasized. I say psychic instead of mental, since
affect as well as thought, insofar as it is linguistic, will be treated.
I expect to give a good deal of attention to the subject of the
organization of raw experience into a consistent and readily
communicable universe of ideas through the medium of linguistic
patterns. Altogether I hope to present some conceptions rather exciting
to the cultural anthropologist and to the psychologist, and to have some
budding exponents of both disciplines among my students.

In preparing material for the course I should be very glad to have any
assistance that you and the University can render, for I know you and
they are interested along this linguistic-psychological line. I might
outline here certain concepts that I am now working on, based on
analysis of the Hopi language, which naturally will be one I shall draw
on considerably for examples, though I expect also to devote some time
to Aztec and Maya. An introduction to the general problem may be found
in the analysis of Hopi categories of verb morphology, especially those
which for purposes of convenience may be called aspect and tense,
although exactly the same meaning that these terms have in classical
European linguistics cannot be taken for Hopi. We have however two
distinct morphological categories, the suffixes of which are differently
treated and have different positions, the tense suffix coming after the
voice suffix. There are three tenses: past (i.e., past up to and
including present), future, and generalized (that which is generally,
universally, or timelessly true), all of which are mutually exclusive.
Of these, the only one to be considered here is the future (suffix -ni).
A first approximation to its meaning is the English future. There are
nine aspects, of which I shall consider chiefly the inceptive (-va) and
projective (-to). The punctual aspect is the aspect of the simplex (stem
without suffixes or modification); the past tense is the tense of the
simplex. A first approximation to the meaning of the inceptive is
‘begins doing’ (I shall translate the Hopi past tense by the English
present), and to that of the projective is ‘does with a forward
movement.’ Later I shall refer to the progressional resultative or
“crescentive” form in -iwma. There is another inceptive-like
progressional form in [Whorf_p133] but I am not including it as it has a
noticeably different meaning (‘is well on the way to getting it done’).

In getting translations of the English ‘begins doing it’ form with a
large number of different verbs, we eventually find that, whereas the
Hopi uses the inceptive for the majority of the verbs, for a certain
number it uses the projective, and for a considerable number it jumps
out of the “aspect” category entirely and uses the FUTURE TENSE (in the
punctual or nonspecified aspect). The usage is consistent and does not
depend on the formal type (“conjugation”) of the verb. Analysis shows
that it follows in a curious way the lexical meaning of the verb. The
question at once strikes one: Why should a pattern (‘begins doing it’)
which appears to us to be perfectly uniform and of the same nature in
all cases present itself to the mind of the bilingual English-speaking
Hopi informant as a meaning which switches back and forth between two
(or more) fundamental meaning categories of his own language? It is also
to be noted that, in almost all the cases where the inceptive is used
for ‘begins doing,’ the Hopi uses not only the suffix -va but also a
reduplication. The meaning of reduplication is a durativizing of the
punctual to denote a more extended process and hence would seem to be a
logical prerequisite to a form denoting the beginning of a process, but
nevertheless, where the projective or the future tense translates the
‘begins doing,’ the reduplication is NOT employed. This tends to confirm
one’s impression that the Hopi observer conceives the events in a
different manner from the one whose native language is English.

Thus in the expressions for ‘begins writing, breathing, sleeping,
flying, rolling (over and over), laughing, fighting, smoking, singing,
swimming, dying, looking, bumping it,¹ turning it, digging it, eating
it, breaking it, tearing it, killing it, tying it, gathering it, lifting
it, bending it, putting it in, putting it down, picking it up,’ and many
more, the inceptive (-va on reduplicated base) is used. In those for
‘begins running, moving, fleeing, going homeward, going away, going to
(a place), going up (or down), talking, opening it, closing it, shooting
it (arrow), driving it (car), being in or at (a place),’ the future is
used. Thus the forms are the same as for ‘will run, move, flee,’ etc. In
the expressions for ‘begins going out, going in, coming (= ‘arriving’ in
Hopi), falling down, falling (through space, a different verb), going in
a circuit, turning, rotating, splitting open (intransitive), tipping
over, spilling,’ and others, the projective aspect is used. ‘Does with a
forward movement’ seems appropriate to many of these, but why it is not
also appropriate to many of those in the other two groups is not clear,
nor why it should be the necessary translation of English ‘begins doing’
in this third group. The informant himself can give no explanation.

From phenomena of this sort, which are not confined to the inceptive
problem but pervade all Hopi grammar, I conclude that there must be to
the Hopi speaker a dimly felt relation of similarity between the verb
usages in each group having to do with some inobvious facet of their
meaning, and therefore itself a meaning, but one so nearly at or below
the threshold of conscious thinking that it cannot be put into words by
the user and eludes translation. To isolate, characterize, and
understand the operation of these dimly felt, barely conscious (or even
unconscious) meanings is the object of my further analysis. Such an
elusive, hidden, but functionally important meaning I call a CRYPTOTYPE.

Thus I would say that the meanings of the Hopi stems translated ‘be
writing, breathing, sleeping, breaking it,’ etc. are similar in that
they all contain “cryptotype A,” while ‘running, moving, going homeward,
opening it,’ etc. contain “cryptotype B,” and ‘going in, falling,
turning,’ etc. “cryptotype C.” The mode of lettering is simply a varying
and provisional one for each problem. In contrast with the cryptotype,
which has no formal mark and whose meaning is not clearly evident, but
is rather a submerged meaning shown as an influence, I give the name
PHENOTYPE to the categories inceptive, future, projective, etc.; i.e.,
the phenotype is the “classical” morphological category, having a formal
mark and a clearly apparent class-meaning. For schematic purposes, we
may refer to inceptive, future, projective, as phenotypes 1, 2, 3, with
reference to the present problem. It will be seen that, in a language
such as Hopi, the meanings of grammatical forms result from the
interplay of phenotype and cryptotype, and not from phenotype alone.
This concept is of course extensible to many other languages than Hopi.
Linguistics up to now has studied almost entirely the phenotypes. Study
of cryptotypes opens up a more psychological phase of linguistics.

So far we have three types of ‘begin’ forms, Al, B2, C3. If we equate
‘begins ——ing’ to ‘begins to be ——ing’ (which is rendered the same in
Hopi) and then pass to ‘begins to be ——,’ where —— is not an -ing form
but either (a) an adjective or (b) a past participle, we get an
interesting difference. With an adjective, e.g., ‘begins to be sweet,
red, white, blue, hot, big, short, good, round,’ etc. a new phenotype
(4), i.e. another inceptive-like morpheme, appears. A form in -iwma is
now used. This form is a combination of voice and aspect: the
resultative voice (‘as a result is sweet’) plus the progressional aspect
-ma (‘does in the course of motion, secondarily “passes” or “goes” into
or toward a state or condition’). In the case (b), e.g. ‘begins to be
torn, bumped, dug, cut, written,’ etc., it makes a difference whether
the condition is to be considered as resultative or passive, i.e.,
whether what is beginning is a torn condition, which uses phenotype 4
(-iwma), or what is beginning is a tearing act happening to a passive
subject, which uses (2) (future tense, -ni) plus the suffix of the
passive voice. If, however, cryptotype C is present, the form is C3
(projective, -to) just as in the previous case without passive meaning,
i.e., ‘begins to be split open, rotated, spilled,’ etc. is the same as
‘begins splitting open, rotating, spilling,’ although it is possible to
use the -iwma form here to give a definitely resultative meaning. In all
these ‘begin to be ——’ forms we see another cryptotype, D, which is
evidently the passive-resultative side of the meanings of both A and B,
besides also including the ordinary descriptive adjective. D can use two
inceptive phenotypes, 4 or 2. Phenotype 4 is really the progressional
aspect -ma, -iw- being the sign of the resultative voice corresponding
to the sign of the passive used with 2. We have added the types D4, D2.

It may now be noted that D is contrasted with A, B, C as inactive with
active. A, B, and C are alike in being active: i.e., actual movement and
change is shown going on, or else it is a vital state, a life process,
that is shown as in ‘sleeping’; the only exception (from our own
viewpoint) is ‘being in a place,’ which is very likely not a real
exception but a phase of the same idea. The “role” of the subject is
that of actor, even if the actor does nothing but be in a place; this
seems to be a common idea to A, B, and C. In D the “role” of the subject
is the nonacting substance that serves to display some condition or
quality. Perhaps it might be said that, in the first case, the subject
is regarded as the causal agent, in the second as not the causal agent,
of what I call the ‘verbation,’ i.e., the manifestation (action,
operation, condition, state, status, relation, etc.) announced by the
verb. We still cannot state the differences among the A, B, and C
cryptotypes, but one factor of cryptotypic meaning has been shown up.
The contrast active-inactive or causal-incausal nowhere appears as a
phenotype in Hopi. But as a cryptotypic contrast it is decisive in
governing the outward form.

If we get renderings for ‘begins to do,’ distinct differences appear as
compared to ‘begins doing.’ The Hopi now omits the reduplication from
the inceptive aspect forms of A1. Evidently the Hopi feels that our -ing
form denotes a more extended process than the infinitive. The B
cryptotype is however rendered just the same: i.e., -ni for both ‘begins
moving’ and ‘begins to move.’ The C is also the same: i.e., -to for
‘begins going out’ and ‘begins to go out.’ But moreover, the A
cryptotype can now use phenotype 2 (-ni) as well as 1; both forms are
possible for the same verb with the same translation. In certain cases a
slight difference in meaning creeps out. We have added one more type,
A2, which has a slightly different translation from the reduplicated A1,
and an even slighter difference in meaning from the unreduplicated A1.
This difference is hard to perceive, but is shown in certain examples
and is presumably connected with the difference in the phenotypes -ni
and -va (and is not cryptotypic).

Returning to cryptotypes A, B, and C: A and B are related by the fact
that A uses both -va and -ni and B uses -ni only. There is then
presumably something about the B type of ideas that makes the
characteristic inceptiveness of -va inappropriate. And there is
presumably something about C that makes both -va and -ni ineligible and
demands -to. D is characteristically inactive or incausal, and, in
contrast, A, B, and C represent three different types of activity or
causality. Omitting the space-relational forms and a few others,
causality becomes the same as activity. After a prolonged scrutiny and
analysis, aided by what grasp I have of Hopi linguistic ideas and
viewpoints, I arrive at the following characterization of these
cryptotypes A, B, and C. B is an activity, the starting of which implies
that there will be a certain amount of actual maintenance thereof,
springing from the initial impulse supplied by the subject or actor. B
represents acts springing from a subject-initiated impulse, but not
necessarily ALL such acts—only those in which the first initiation of a
phenomenon by the impulse immediately shows the activity in full-fledged
form, a form for which CONTINUING has simply the meaning of adding time,
but not of further developing nor of continuously adapting the form. In
nearly all cases we may read for “impulse,” “volitional impulse” or
“will,” either actual in an animate actor or “felt into,” the rarely
occurring inanimate subject. Hence the type includes the subjectively
determined kinds of uniform motion like running, fleeing, and “going” of
various sorts. Thus, in order to say ‘he begins to run,’ the activity
must already have shown itself in the effective form of running, which
will not thereafter be developed and stabilized, but merely continued
“as is.” “Being,” i.e., in Hopi a verbation of spatial relationship like
‘in, at, on, along, under, with,’ etc., is classed as of the same type
as “running.” A very few transitive verbs are included, in which the
actor transfers his impulse at once to the object in such a way that its
form of activity is at once completely displayed. Thus, ‘he opens it’
(no matter how little, it is open and no longer closed); closing it is
classed as a converse operation of the same type (the moving of any
barrier over the opening is a partial closing which, so far as it goes,
has been maintained and will not be changed in form by continuance); so
also ‘shooting an arrow.’

A however is an activity, the start of which does not mean even a brief
maintenance of itself as a result of one first impulse or tendency. If
the very first impulse should not be reinforced the laugh would not be a
laugh, the writing not a writing but at most a mark, or a pen-grasping,
the break not a break but only a strain. The action is felt to consist
of a developing train of events or a more than momentary application of
the will to action, a following-up sort of participation of the subject
necessary to even the briefest establishment of the action in its
representative form. Some of the verb meanings of A will at first seem
strangely selected from this standpoint, but a little meditation on the
matter will often show a peculiar insight revealed in the Hopi
cryptotypic meaning. Thus “sleep” is classed here by Hopi as though it
felt sleep to be a state which the subject developed into by a
continuous readjustment, not one which he launched himself into; while
“running” and “talking” are regarded as states launched into, not
progressed or adjusted into. All transitive verbs except the few special
ones in B are regarded as of this A type—the affecting of an object
requires an adjustment to it. Cryptotype A is thus an essentially
dynamic or symbolically dynamic concept, even though it may refer to a
resting state, and the dynamism emanates from the subject. Cryptotype A²
is active or symbolically active (actorial) but not dynamic; the subject
is simply introjected into a state of uniform motion, or its symbolic
equivalent, and left there.

Cryptotype C is an activity (always intransitive), into which the
subject needs only to be placed in the initial stage in order to be
seized by a natural tendency and carried on beyond the initial state in
spite of itself. It is delivered over, as it were, to a realm of
tendency, and henceforth is no longer master but must submit to an
inevitable development and change of the initial state. Thus the initial
state may be losing a support or losing balance, whereupon the subject
is delivered over to gravity and ‘falls’ or ‘tips over’ or ‘spills’;
once entered upon this state, it has to “see the finish of it.” Or, as
in the case of turning, rotating, and other mechanical actions, it may
be inertia, momentum, elasticity, or simply some indefinite automatic
tendency that seizes the subject, once the first projection of action
has, like a trigger, released it. The symbol for this is “being thrown,”
which is the symbolic image behind the projective aspect -to ‘does with
a forward movement.’ It may at first be thought curious that Hopi puts
‘going out’ and ‘going in’ in this category. Actually no external force
seizes the subject and moves him, but he does pass over a definite
dividing line into another realm, the realm of the exterior, whereas he
has been a part of the interior, or vice versa, and once he has made the
change he is subject to the laws and nature of the new realm, those of
the initial state being absolutely left behind. Thus in a way the verb
‘go in’ or ‘go out’ might serve as the symbol of all the other ideas in
this cryptotype. Cryptotype C is thus dynamic, or symbolically dynamic,
but the dynamism does not emanate from the subject but from the external
field. Finally, cryptotype D, as we saw, is not dynamic or even active,
but inactive, i.e. either static or passive.

The meaning of a PHENOTYPE, though ostensibly plain, can really not be
completely understood in all its subtlety until the cryptotypes that go
with it have been dredged up from their submerged state and their
effective meanings to some extent brought into consciousness. Thereupon
the different effects produced by the same phenotype with different
cryptotypes, and vice versa, result in a more pronounced consciousness
and clearer understanding of the phenotype itself. We are now in a
better position to study the subtle meaning of -va and -ni. In the case
of the latter we of course have to begin with a somewhat intuitive study
of the tense system as a whole, and then of the “future” tense, denoted
by -ni. The “future” tense asserts that expectancy of the event is
present, that the subject’s will to the event, if it is a voluntary act,
is present, and that the very first initial point of the event may have
been reached (here context governs), but that all beyond this is not
present but future: i.e. the event AS A WHOLE is future. In order that
the event as a whole may be future, the tense cannot imply that the
subject’s tendency will persevere beyond the initial point; otherwise
the sense of futurity would be greatly weakened or completely lost; it
would mean ONLY ‘he is starting his doing of it’ or ‘he is starting to
do it.’ On the other hand -va means ‘starts with perseverance or
gathering impetus to do it’; the initial point is present, the next
point swiftly impending, and the follow-through promised. With the A
cryptotype, unreduplicated, either -va or -ni may be used with a slight
difference in nuance, which is shown by some of the examples to mean
‘begins to do it.’ The -ni says the activity has gone to the initial
point, but the dynamic, perseverating meaning of the cryptotype itself
promises that the nondurative condition denoted by the verb will be
fairly embarked into. It is the same with -va, except that it makes the
embarkation even more positive. But, with the reduplicated or durative A
verb, we need -va because the dim cryptotypic perseveration in the A
verb is merely sufficient to embark, and, in order to promise a
follow-up through a durative action, we need to assert the persevering
will or tendency of the subject himself or itself, which is done by
means of -va. Thus, to say ‘he begins to chop it,’ meaning that he
swings the axe to make at least one chop (whether he makes any more or
decides to quit then and there we don’t know), we may use either -ni or
-va. But, to say ‘he begins chopping it,’ meaning that his first chop
will be followed by a second and a third and so on, we need the
reduplication and -va, not -ni. It is the same if the action is not
repetitive but merely continuous: i.e. ‘he begins sleeping.’

On the other hand, with cryptotype B, the cryptotypic meaning implies
that, once the initial point is reached (for which -ni is sufficient),
the event is manifested in its typical form and will maintain itself for
a time at least in that form; hence the whole question of perseverance
by the subject is thrown out of the window, so to say. This means that
-va would be redundant and inappropriate, perhaps suggesting more
purposive drive than is needed in the bare statement of a B-type
activity. There is about the B-cryptotype words a certain bareness and
abstractness; they announce a type of motion or position and let it go
at that. All the ‘going’ and ‘coming’ words are particularly abstract,
having no really verbal roots but being merely verbalized postpositions
or adverbs, ‘to, from, away,’ etc. It is perhaps a matter of the deep
layers of Hopi thought process that this cold bareness should not be
spoiled or falsified by the use of an element like -va.

This illustration will show how the meaning of a form in a language like
Hopi is capable of being more deeply analyzed by the cryptotype concept,
and how the totality of meaning is a joint product of cryptotypic and
phenotypic factors. In many languages the cryptotype concept would be of
little use, but there are languages like Hopi in which much of the
influential material of paradigm production lies in this heavily veiled
state, just as there are people whose mental life is much less
accessible than that of others. Cryptotypes play a much larger part in
Hopi than this rather minor problem of inceptive forms, which however
yields a neat illustration. I believe I am the first to point out the
existence of this submerged layer of meaning, which in spite of its
submergence functions regularly in the general linguistic whole.

I am very curious to know what you as a psychologist think of this
general idea. How does it bear on the problems you have in hand? The
resemblance of the cryptotypes to the concept of the unconscious of
Freud, and still more perhaps of Jung, will no doubt strike you,
although the parallel should perhaps not be carried too far.

 

The following, heretofore unpublished, was a draft of a letter addressed
to me while I was a student of psychology at the University of Minnesota
in the fall of 1937. Even though part of the handwritten draft was
copied out on the typewriter, with an original and one carbon, it was
apparently never sent, for I never received it. The draft manuscript was
found among family papers.

1. “It” denotes a transitive verb, requiring an object expressed or
implied.

2. [The first ed. has A but it is possible that B is intended here. PL]

9

Some Verbal Categories of Hopi

In the earlier stages of work on the Hopi language, I had the pleasant
feeling of being in familiar linguistic territory. Here, wondrous to
relate, was an exotic language cut very much on the pattern of
Indo-European: a language with clearly distinct nouns, verbs, and
adjectives, with voices, aspects, tense-moods, and no outré categories,
no gender-like classes based on shape of objects, no pronouns referring
to tribal status, presence, absence, visibility, or invisibility.

But, in course of time, I found it was not all such plain sailing. The
sentences I made up and submitted to my Hopi informant were usually
wrong. At first the language seemed merely to be irregular. Later I
found it was quite regular, in terms of its own patterns. After long
study and continual scrapping of my preconceived ideas, the true
patterning emerged at last. I found the experience highly illuminating,
not only in regard to Hopi but as bearing on the whole subject of
grammatical categories and concepts. It happens that Hopi categories are
just enough like Indo-European ones to give at first a deceptive
impression of identity marred with distressing irregularities, and just
enough different to afford, after they have been correctly determined, a
new viewpoint toward the, on the whole, similar distinctions made in
many modern and ancient Indo-European tongues. It was to me almost as
enlightening to see English from the entirely new angle necessitated in
order to translate it into Hopi as it was to discover the meanings of
the Hopi forms themselves. This was notably true for the four types of
verbal category herein discussed.

It will be well to outline first the following general distinctions:

1. OVERT CATEGORY: one marked by a morpheme which appears in every
sentence containing the category, vs. COVERT CATEGORY: not marked in
sentences in general, but requiring a distinctive treatment in certain
types of sentence, e.g. English genders.

2. WORD CATEGORY: a category (overt or covert or mixed) which delimits
one of a primary hierarchy of word classes, each of limited membership
(not coterminous with entire vocabulary), e.g. the familiar “parts of
speech” of Indo-European and many other languages, vs. MODULUS CATEGORY:
one which modifies either any word of the vocabulary or any word already
allocated to a delimited class, e.g. voices, aspects, cases.

3. SPECIFIC CATEGORY: an individual class of any of the above types,
e.g. passive voice, durative aspect, vs. GENERIC CATEGORY: a higher
hierarchy formed by grouping classes of similar or complementary types,
e.g. voice, aspect.

The categories treated in this article are all of the overt and the
modulus types, but it should be stated that covert categories and word
categories are also of great importance in Hopi grammar. Failure to
define such classes would at once give the grammar a very irregular
appearance. The generic categories here treated belong to the verb
system, and have been designated ASSERTION, MODE, STATUS, and MODALITY.

Assertion

Hopi verbs have three assertions: REPORTIVE (zero form), EXPECTIVE
(suffix -ni), NOMIC (suffix -[LATIN SMALL LETTER ENG]^(w)ï ). These
translate, more or less, the English tenses.¹ But they do not refer to
time or duration. They distinguish three different kinds of information.
Assertion, in other words, is a classification that refers the statement
to one of three distinct realms of validity. The reportive is simply a
reporting statement, telling of the historical actuality of a certain
situation: e.g. Eng. ‘he ran, he is running, I see it.’²

The expective declares an expectation or anticipation of a situation. It
is translated by the English future, or by ‘is going to,’ or by ‘begins
to,’ for an attitude may still be one of expectant anticipation, rather
than one of reporting a fait accompli, while the action is already
beginning. Since the assertions have nothing to do with time as such, an
expectant attitude may be projected into an account of past events,
giving the translations ‘was going to,’ ‘began to.’ A clue to meanings
otherwise obscure resides in the rendering ‘his doing it is (or was)
expected.’ Thus, addition of the concursive mode suffix -ka[LATIN SMALL
LETTER ENG] ‘while’ forms an expective concursive in -nika[LATIN SMALL
LETTER ENG], but to translate here by the English future ‘while he will
do it’ would be quite incorrect. The form means ‘before he does it’:
i.e. ‘while his doing it is expected.’³

The nomic does not declare any particular situation, but offers the
statement as a general truth, e.g. English: ‘she writes poetry, he
smokes only cigars, rain comes from the clouds, certain dinosaurs laid
eggs in sand.’ The three assertion categories are mutually exclusive.

Mode

Mode, in Hopi, is the generic category of the system by which is denoted
the nature of the mingled discreteness and connection between a sentence
(clause) and the sentence (clause) which follows or precedes it. The
INDEPENDENT mode (zero form) implies that the sentence is detached from
others, though it is possible to relate such sentences by paratactic
connectives like our ‘and.’ But the Hopi show a great liking for
hypotactic constructions. These employ six mutually exclusive DEPENDENT
MODES, denoted by suffixes placed after the assertion suffix. Each mode
denotes a basic type of relatedness involving both linkage and
discreteness, or disparity. With the further addition of qualifying
particles, these modes can distinguish a great number of possible
relationships, much as in Greek the basic system of three oblique cases
can be further developed by a large number of prepositions. However, the
mode relationships are not case relations, nor are the modes defective
forms like IE infinitives and gerunds, but full verb paradigms.

The names, suffixes, and types of discreteness-connection are as
follows: CONDITIONAL ([Whorf_p147a] eclipsing final vowel of base),
condition needed to justify a nonreportive (expective or nomic)
assertion in the other clause (Eng. ‘when, if’) (the mode clause is
logically in this same assertion, though it does not bear any assertion
suffix); CORRELATIVE (-qaY), explanatory justification of the statement
of the other clause (Eng. ‘because, since, as, for,’ gerund
construction); CONCURSIVE (ka[LATIN SMALL LETTER ENG], -kaka[LATIN SMALL
LETTER ENG]), parallel contemporaneous occurrence (Eng. ‘while, as,
and’); SEQUENTIAL (-t), sequence in time (Eng. ‘after, . . . and then .
. .’); AGENTIVE (-qa), qualification of a person or thing in one clause
as the subject in the other, the mode clause (Eng. ‘who, which,’ though
not Eng. ‘whom’); TRANSRELATIVE (-q, [Whorf_p147b]), general relatedness
bridging a difference of subject in the two clauses (no Eng.
equivalent). Each mode refers to a certain kind of disparity or
contrast, as well as of connection, between the two clauses; and a
separateness of subjects or performers in the two clauses is itself one
basic type of disparity on a level with the other basic types, and
necessitates the transrelative mode in one of the clauses. Hence all the
other modes refer to conditions in which the subject of both clauses is
the same: i.e. clause-contrast is based on other factors than disparity
of subjects. If it is desired to add to the general notion of the
transrelative mode an expression of factors like those which are basic
in the other modes, this can be done by detached particles. The subject
of the transrelative in many constructions and of the agentive in some
is in the objective case. That of all other modes is in the nominative.
There follow some illustrations of the uses of the modes. In these
examples and henceforth throughout this paper, the mode suffix is
hyphenated to assist in identifying the dependent verb.

Conditional: [Whorf_p148a] ‘when he goes home he will see the river’
(expective); [Whorf_p148b] ‘when he goes home he sees the river’
(nomic).

Correlative: [Whorf_p148c] ‘because he went home he saw the river’;
[Whorf_p148d] ‘he went home in order to see the river’: i.e. ‘he went
home because his seeing the river was expected, looked forward to (by
him)’; [Whorf_p148e] ‘he said that he saw the river’ (by his saying, to
quote, ‘he saw the river’).

Concursive: [Whorf_p148f] ‘as (or while) he went home he saw the river’;
[Whorf_p148g] ‘he danced and sang’ (at the same time).

Sequential: [Whorf_p148h] ‘after (or when) he arrived at his home he saw
the river’; [Whorf_p148i] ‘he danced and then he sang.’

Agentive: [Whorf_p148j] ‘the man who went home saw the river’;
[Whorf_p148k] ‘I saw the man who went home’ (the agentive takes noun
cases and here is in objective case, as likewise its subject).⁴

Transrelative: [Whorf_p148l] ‘when he goes home a man will meet (‘arrive
to’) him’; [Whorf_p148m] ‘when he goes home the chief meets him’
(nomic); [Whorf_p148n] ‘since the boy danced, therefore the girl sang’;
[Whorf_p149a] ‘he said that the girl went home’; nat ta·'wlaW-q ma·'na
wïni'ma ‘while he sang the girl danced’; [Whorf_p149b] ma·'na ta·'wla`wï
‘right after he (or, as soon as he had) danced the girl sang’;
[Whorf_p149c] [Whorf_p149d] ‘after he goes home the chief will meet
him.’

Our relative clause with relative pronoun object is transrelative in
Hopi, since there is disparity of subject; e.g. [Whorf_p149e]
[Whorf_p149f] ‘the man whom I saw went home’ (‘man,’ objective dependent
on ‘my seeing,’ ‘he went home’). Hopi treats ‘man’ as the object of the
seeing clause, while the subject of the going-home clause is ‘he’
expressed in the verb. English makes very little distinction between
this construction and the one expressed in Hopi by the agentive, often
using the same connective, ‘that’ or ‘which,’ for both, so that
bewildering changes of construction may result, in translating a number
of outwardly similar relative clauses into Hopi. These changes however
are perfectly transparent to a Hopi; even a bilingual Hopi, when given
the two propositions dressed in the same garb of English form, ‘the man
that I saw went home’ and ‘the man that saw me went home,’ will
instantly react with two completely dissimilar patterns: [Whorf_p149g]
ni'ma, and ta·'qa nïy tïwa'‘qa ni'ma. Hopi also produces transrelative
forms that translate our relative pronoun object of a preposition; and
here the remoteness from our pattern is extreme: e.g. [Whorf_p149h]
wa·'yma-q lε'‘pε ‘the bridge on which he was walking collapsed’ (‘bridge
[objective] on-it being his walking, it collapsed’). Most bewildering of
all to the usual Indo-European view is the manner in which Hopi combines
modes with modalities according to a systematic logic of its own, of
which more presently.

Lest the omission of “imperative” from the modes seem peculiar, I may
say that it belongs to a category of INJUNCTIVES (imperative,
semi-imperative, optative, vetative), defective paradigms that are
neither modes nor modalities.

Status

The status categories have been named AFFIRMATIVE (zero form,
declarative sentence), NEGATIVE, INTERROGATIVE, INDEFINITIVE. The
negative is formed in the reportive and nomic by the particle qa` ‘not’
before the verb, in the expective by [Whorf_p150a] before the verb. The
interrogative is the status of asking a question for a yes-or-no answer.
It is formed by the particle pï` as the first word in the sentence, e.g.
pï` ma·'na ti'yot [Whorf_p150b] ‘did the girl see the boy?’ There is no
different intonation from any other type of sentence. The reply-forms
are [Whorf_p150c] ‘yes,’ [Whorf_p150d] ‘no,’ pi·'hi·ˆy, an unanalyzable
word meaning ‘I don’t know.’ The indefinitive is the status of the
sentence containing an “interrogative” (better, indefinitive) pronoun,
adverb, or verb (e.g. the verb ‘do what’). It need not be necessarily a
true question, because such interrogative words are also indefinites
(i.e. the words ‘what?’ and ‘something’ are the same); or, better said,
the meaning of the word is an indefinite suggestion that implies also a
more or less inquisitive attitude ‘something—I wonder what?’ The Hopi
sentence [Whorf_p150e] ‘something is coming’ could be rendered
psychologically as an ‘I-wonder-what is coming.’ Whether this is to be
interpreted as a request for information or merely as an interesting
remark will depend on the context, which may include the general
behavior of the speaker.

Modality

Modality in Hopi is in rough terms the sort of thing that is referred to
by the subjunctive and some other moods of IE languages. But of course
we ought not to rest content with this “sort of” sort of definition. I
would say that the modalities of Hopi are moduli of moduli, that is,
they are methods of further modifying and amplifying the three-assertion
system that distinguishes three basic realms of validity, so that in
effect many more than three realms and subrealms of validity are
distinguished—again, much as prepositional relationships in Greek
amplify a basic system of case relationships. Modalities are to
ASSERTIONS what the particles [Whorf_p151a] etc. in our mode examples
are to MODES. They are denoted by particles designated MODALIZERS. The
word-category of modalizers is more abundant in morphemes than the
category of modality strictly considered. While there are many particles
of the modalizer type, it seems necessary to distinguish eight (perhaps
more) as mutually coordinated to the point of forming a system of eight
modalities, to which on schematic grounds we may add as ninth the
indicative modality or zero form. The line between the modalities and
the lexical use of other modalizers is not sharp; yet on the whole the
modalities are a set of mutually exclusive forms (with certain
exceptions), while the other modalizers are used more freely along with
each other or with the modality modalizers, occur in less frequent and
less formally patterned uses, and are perhaps most conveniently treated
as lexical items (see examples at end of this paper). The modalities
have been named: INDICATIVE, QUOTATIVE, INHIBITIVE, POTENTIAL,
INDETERMINATE, ADVISORY, CONCESSIVE, NECESSITATIVE, IMPOTENTIAL.

QUOTATIVE: modalizer ya`w. The assertion becomes the assertion of a
linguistic report. In telling a folk-tale ya`w is used like the English
‘so’ or ‘and so’ at the beginning of almost every long sentence; it
there means ‘so’ in the sense of ‘according to the story.’ In the simple
independent sentence it adds the idea ‘they say,’ ‘on dit que.’ It is
placed immediately after a direct quotation, the last word in which then
receives high stress on the last syllable, this combination being
equivalent to spoken quotation marks. It is used in indirect discourse,
the verb of saying, hearing, etc., being in correlative or transrelative
mode (see examples under these modes). Contrast [Whorf_p151b] ‘I heard
that he fell down’ (by verbal report) with [Whorf_p151c] ‘I heard him
fall down’ (heard the sound of his fall). However the quotative cannot
imply the confirmation or concede the truth of the report, which is the
function of the concessive modality [Whorf_p152a]; hence [Whorf_p152b]
‘I heard (of the fact) that he fell down’ (which is conceded to have
actually happened).

INHIBITIVE: modalizer [Whorf_p152c] This means that the subject is
blocked or prevented from producing the effect specified by the verb,
with complete lack of implication about the cause of this condition, as
to whether it lie in the ability of the subject or externally, etc. It
is translated simply by ‘cannot.’

POTENTIAL: This formulation strikes the English speaker at first as
topsy-turvy, if not positively weird. It is translated by ‘can,’ but is
simply the negative of the inhibitive, donated by [Whorf_p152d] Yet
analysis shows the form to be remarkably logical. By this means the Hopi
produce a perfectly neutral, potential ‘can’ that does not merely refer
to personal ability, but denotes that the way is entirely open for the
subject to turn potentiality into action if he chooses. (For the ‘can’
of personal or technical ability, ‘knowing how,’ there is a definite
verb, used with the expective correlative of the action verb.) But how
could such a neutral potential ‘can’ be better expressed than by a
negative form which declares simply the absence of all inhibitive or
frustrative checks between the subject and action?

INDETERMINATE: modalizer [Whorf_p152i] This indicates uncertainty,
corresponding to ‘perhaps, possibly, maybe,’ or in the expective to
‘may’: e.g. [Whorf_p152f] ‘when he goes home he may meet the chief’ (and
again he may not). The uncertainty is like that of a balancing between
about equal positive and negative probabilities; hence, e.g.
[Whorf_p152g] [Whorf_p152h] ‘I asked him if (whether) he were about to
go home’ (transrelative construction). Here at first [Whorf_p152i] seems
to play the role of Eng. ‘if,’ but it is not so. It answers only to the
indeterminacy expressed by the ‘if,’ whereas the linking and relating
function of the ‘if’ is performed by the transrelative mode relation;
[Whorf_p152i] itself is quite unable to effect any linkage.

ADVISORY: modalizer kε. It denotes an uncertainty like [Whorf_p152i],
but stresses slightly the possibility of the positive rather than the
negative outcome. If this positive possibility is being asserted in the
presence of a somewhat opposing attitude, or a dread of such an outcome,
it gives the feeling of our ‘might,’ ‘may nevertheless,’ or in the
reportive ‘might have done so.’ Thus, ta·'qa [Whorf_p153b] ‘when the man
sees it he may run away’ (his possible running away is the thing to be
kept in mind). Hence the sentence containing kε has an advisory
character, since it does not merely adumbrate an uncertainty, but calls
attention to one possible outcome thereof. Logically enough, our ‘may
not’ is kε qa`, not [Whorf_p152i] qa`, e.g. [Whorf_p153c] ‘when he goes
home he may not see it.’

CONCESSIVE: modalizer [Whorf_p153a]. It denotes that the assertion is
given validity as a concept rather than validity as an objective
experience:⁵ e.g. ‘it is conceded, granted, inferred from the evidence
at hand, assumed, considered as known,’ etc. In the independent sentence
it may be rendered ‘it seems that, evidently, apparently,’ or merely
‘so’: e.g. [Whorf_p154a] ‘so the chief went home’ (I gather). It is in
complex sentences that its subtle importance stands out. Consider the
transrelative pattern; [Whorf_p154b] ‘I see that it is red’ (by my
seeing it is red), [Whorf_p154c] [Whorf_p154d] ‘I see that it sparkles.’
The Hopi refuse to use this pattern as it stands for, e.g. ‘I see that
it is new,’ which demands the concessive in the clause expressing
newness, i.e. [Whorf_p154c] [Whorf_p154e] (by my seeing it is
inferentially new). In other words newness is not a visual sensation
like redness or light; it is not seen directly, but is inferred or
assumed, [Whorf_p153a], from seen data. To us this seems like
psychological analysis, but to the Hopi it is a clear and practical
distinction. The ordinary English conditional ‘if’ construction requires
in Hopi that the conditional or transrelative mode which represents the
linking function of our ‘if’ be also concessive to represent the
hypothecating function of the ‘if’; otherwise the mode would be
translated ‘when’ and not ‘if.’ Thus, [Whorf_p153a] [Whorf_p154f] ‘if he
goes home he will see the river’ (assuming that he goes home, etc.). The
contrary-to-fact ‘if’ is another matter ([Whorf_p154g] see below).

NECESSITATIVE: modalizer [Whorf_p154i] qa`. It means ‘necessarily,
naturally, inevitably,’ and seems queer from the IE standpoint in being
simply a double negative, which in Hopi always makes a positive. It is a
combination of qa` ‘not’ and [Whorf_p154i] ‘expective not’ and thus
means that there can be no expectancy of a negative. It often translates
English ‘must’ and ‘have to’ but is not tinged with any notions of
compulsion, duty, or obligation, being entirely neutral and abstract. It
is often used in the conclusion of conditional statements to indicate a
necessary consequence: e.g.
[Whorf_p153a] [Whorf_p154j] [Whorf_p154i] qa` [Whorf_p154k] ‘if he goes
home he will see the river’ (as a necessary consequence).

IMPOTENTIAL: modalizer [Whorf_p154h]. This modality is very difficult to
express in terms of our ways of thinking. It indicates what I might call
teleological ineffectiveness. We go part way along the road with the
Hopi by recognizing forms of assertion, like ‘may’ and ‘can,’ that are
on a different plane from the bare ‘does’ and ‘does not,’ and as
compared with these more rudimentary assertions have a status that
combines the qualities of affirmative and negative, of reality and
unreality. They are on a middle ground between these opposites, even
though formally cast in an affirmative pattern. But all our
middle-ground expressions refer to the realm of latency; the reason for
the statement’s dual positive-negative character is that its truth is
that of a latency, of which the manifestation belongs to the future. The
Hopi also have middle-ground expressions of this sort, as we have seen.
But they have, further, a middle-ground expression in which the dual
positive-negative character is not a matter of latency, but is ascribed
to events that have already happened. Moreover an expression referring
to something that never happened at all can be assigned to this same
realm of quasireality, along with references to actual happenings. The
criterion that fastens this particular stigma, as it were, of
quasireality upon the subject matter of discourse is ineffectiveness in
terms of the purpose, goal, drive, need, function, etc. (a variety of
concepts in our own ideology are here applicable) that originally formed
the grounds for the action. If a Hopi is reporting a train of events in
which a man ran away from his pursuers but was eventually captured by
them, he will use the impotential, and say ta·'qa [Whorf_p154h] wa·'ya
‘the man ran away’ (implying that ‘ran away’ cannot here be held to mean
‘escaped’). If the man ran away and escaped, the statement would be
simply ta·'qa wa·'ya. [Whorf_p155a] ma'qto is ‘I went hunting’;
[Whorf_p154c] [Whorf_p154h] ma'qto is the same, except that it implies
that I came back empty-handed or practically so. We could convey such
information by saying ‘well, I went hunting!’ in a disgusted tone, but
the Hopi sentence is not really comparable to this. It is a quite
unemotional statement; [Whorf_p154h] is not an expression of affect but
is intellectual, and would be used whether the speaker be unmoved,
displeased, or pleased; e.g. cö·'viw [Whorf_p154h] wa·'ya ‘the deer
fled’ (but I caught him just the same). My name for this modality,
“impotential,” refers to the connotation of impotence that it gives to
the statement of actions and attempts. In the expective, it changes the
translation from ‘will’ to ‘tries to’: e.g.
ma·'na [Whorf_p154h] [Whorf_p156a] ‘the girl tries to dance’ (but does
not for the present succeed). However, expective impotential does not
imply that later attempts will not succeed. When the expective refers to
the past of narration, its impotential refers to a frustrated attempt at
some event that did not actually happen: e.g. [Whorf_p154h] wa·'ya'ni
‘he tried to escape,’ of a prisoner who failed to escape. When the
impotential is expective in a dependent mode (i.e. when it is
conditional or transrelative and the other clause is expective), the
reality is further attenuated to a never-realized theoretical past
possibility. Thus our contrary-to-fact condition is impotential in Hopi:
e.g. [Whorf_p156b] ‘if he had gone home he would have seen the river’
(‘when in not-to-be-realized capacity of going home he was in
necessitous expectancy of seeing the river’). Here the concessive may be
added to the impotential, especially if the mode is transrelative: e.g.
[Whorf_p156c] ‘if he had gone home the chief would have met him.’ Our
‘although, but, yet,’ etc. indicate a tension of some sort between two
conflicting tendencies. The Hopi unerringly discriminate whether one of
these tendencies has actually aborted the other (the impotential
meaning) or whether the opposition is of the sort to be indicated by kε,
[Whorf_p152i], or some other means. Thus, in concursive,
[Whorf_p154c] [Whorf_p154h] [Whorf_p156d] ‘although I was sitting I felt
tired’; in transrelative, [Whorf_p154h] [Whorf_p156e]‘although he fled I
caught him.’ On the other hand, [Whorf_p154h] would be wrong in
‘although he was running he was singing,’ since neither action has
aborted the purpose of the other; here a Hopi would say simply
[Whorf_p156f] ‘while he was running he was singing,’ or perhaps add to
this an element denoting mild surprise. In the sequential
form[Whorf_p154h] [Whorf_p156g] ‘although he had arrived he did not
dance,’ [Whorf_p154h] implies that the function of coming was to dance;
he might as well not have come.⁶

The disparity of pattern from Indo-European appears in that, while all
these modalities resemble the IE subjunctive, not one aligns with it.
The Hopi interpret our subjunctive in various ways according to a
recognition of relationships of which we are not linguistically
conscious. Thus, in ‘if I were king,’ ‘were’ from the Hopi viewpoint is
impotential; in ‘to see if he were brave,’ ‘were’ is indeterminate; in
‘though he be stubborn,’ ‘be’ is advisory; in ‘if he be right,’ ‘be’ is
concessive. Or is the pattern so very different from Indo-European after
all? It remains a fact that the Uto-Aztecan languages in general, and
Hopi especially, are for American languages unusually reminiscent of IE
in their type of grammar. Could it be possible that in ancient forms of
IE, perhaps in Hittite, patterns of syntactic construction may exist
that would lend themselves to an analysis following somewhat the Hopi
outline?

Other Modalizers

There are a number of modalizers having uses less definitely formal than
those of the modality system. Their wide range of expression is shown by
the following samples:

[Whorf_p157a]: memory, recollection—‘according to recollection it is
so.’

[Whorf_p157b]: probability, reasonable expectation, justifiable
assumption or hope—‘supposedly’—and in the expective is like our ‘if all
goes well.’

na'wïs: obligation to voluntary action without compulsion; differs from
our ‘ought to, should’ by greater promise that the action will be
performed; may sometimes be rendered ‘has to,’ but, according to my
informant, corresponds to our expression ‘can’t very well refuse to.’

pε·v: ‘almost, nearly,’ pε·v kε ‘possibly almost,’ ‘almost may.’

pi`: acceptance of conditions as they are or must be, undeniable fact,
inevitability; sometimes corresponds to English word stress, e.g.
[Whorf_p158a] ‘he will arrive,’ [Whorf_p158b] ‘he will arrive,’ ‘he, at
least, will arrive.’ It also corresponds to ‘after all,’ and still more
to our shrug of the shoulders, while pay pi` ‘already,’ pi` indicates
philosophic resignation to unchangeable reality—pay pi` wa·'ya ‘he ran
away, and that’s that.’ Also common are the combinations with negative
(pi` qa`) and necessitative ([Whorf_p154i] pi` qa`).

ta'tam: necessity to which one resigns oneself with a self-sacrificing
feeling; ‘must,’ or ‘may as well’ imbued with this feeling; implies that
the subject is sacrificing his own interests or preferences.

[Whorf_p158c]: intention without clear resolve, vaguer than ‘wants to’
or ‘intends to’; more like ‘is (was) thinking of ——ing,’ ‘would,’ ‘would
like to.’

The extent to which “modal feeling” is diversified and the finesse of
its application differ markedly in different languages, but probably few
languages have gone so far into these fields as Hopi.

 

Reprinted from Language, 14:275–286 (1938).

1. In “The punctual and segmentative aspects of verbs in Hopi,”
Language, 12 (1936), I referred to the assertions as tenses and called
them factual or present-past, future, and generalized or usitative.

2. There is no distinction in the reportive between past and present,
for both are equally accomplished fact. What we call present tense (not
counting our present form which corresponds to the nomic) is from the
Hopi standpoint simply a report to others concerning a situation shared
with them, this report being either redundant information, or used to
call attention to, or tell about some fragment of the situation not
fully shared. Thus to the Hopi ‘he is running’ need not be different
from ‘he was running,’ for, if both the speaker and listener can see the
runner, then the ‘is’ of the former sentence means merely that the
listener can see for himself what he is being told; he is being given
redundant information, and this is the only difference from the latter
sentence. Now the Hopi listener senses no lack in Hopi grammar for its
not telling him that the information is redundant, when he can see for
himself that it is. If the speaker can see the runner but the listener
cannot, then the information is not redundant, but the situation in that
case is one of rapidly relaying the information, which rules out the
distinctive past meaning of ‘was,’ and again the Hopi find our tense
distinction irrelevant.

3. The orthography used for Hopi is phonemic and employs the American
Anthropological Association symbols generally used for American Indian
languages, with the following minor variations: k is somewhat fronted
and before a and ε sounds like k^(y); c is the affricate ts;
[Whorf_p146n3a] is glottal stop; v is bilabial and when syllable-final
unvoiced, r is retroflex, untrilled, and slightly spirantal, and when
syllable-final unvoiced, small capitals denote voiceless consonants
which are separate phonemes, a dot under a vowel denotes the short, and
lack of a mark the medium grade of the Hopi three-quantity vowel system,
' (“high accent”) denotes raised pitch and fairly strong stress and on
monosyllabic words is not marked but to be understood,` (“low accent”)
denotes a lower level of pitch and weak stress and is marked where it
occurs on monosyllabic words. The mode suffixes and most of the
particles have special pausal forms when they stand at the end of
sentences; these are not given except for the suffix [Whorf_p146n3b]
which is used in an example.

4. This objective-case agentive clause is the one exception to the rule
that disparity of subject requires the transrelative.

5. We may not here read “sensory” for “objective,” for experiences which
psychology would place at the level of percepts rather than sensations,
or even at the level of simple concepts, do not require the concessive,
though they are treated differently from sensations. They are the
percepts (or simple concepts) of seeing an action or phenomenon of a
type having a lexical name (verb), and are put in the indicative
transrelative, while it is now the verb of seeing that is in the
independent mode, e.g.,[Whorf_p153d] ‘I saw him run away,’ [Whorf_p153e]
‘I saw him shoot the bird.’ It is a remarkable fact that the Hopi seem
to recognize, in their language, a distinction of four types of received
information which correspond roughly to gradings made by psychology: (1)
sensory, e.g. ‘I see that it is red,’ ‘I hear him fall,’ sensing verb in
transrelative, information verb in indicative; (2)
perceptual-conceptual, e.g. ‘I see him fall,’ sensing verb in
independent, information verb in transrelative; (3) overt linguistic,
e.g. ‘I heard that he fell’ (unconceded), sensing verb in transrelative,
information verb in quotative; (4) pure conceptual, e.g. ‘I see that it
is new,’ ‘I heard that he fell’ (a conceded truth), sensing verb in
transrelative, information verb in concessive.

6. The realm of the might-as-well-not-have-been is, in a nutshell, that
middle ground between positive and negative which the impotential
represents. What we call the might-have-been is to the Hopi simply a
part of this realm. It is the expectancy (potency, tendency,
possibility, wish) that might as well not have been.

10

Language: Plan and Conception of Arrangement

Editor’s note: In 1938, Whorf circulated this table and accompanying
outline in manuscript form among selected colleagues. It was written as
a supplement to the Outline of cultural materials prepared by George P.
Murdock and his colleagues at the Department of Anthropology at Yale
University as a guide to ethnological field workers, and is referred to
in the brief “Language” section of that outline.

In several places in his writings Whorf mentions the desirability of a
“world-survey” of languages; this outline was doubtless intended by him
as a suggested standard framework for collecting the information on
particular languages which would be needed for such a survey.

The reader’s attention should be directed first to the table on page
160, which displays the whole scheme of language as conceived by Whorf.
The subsequent outline, which presents an expansion of the semasiology
section of the table, is thus only an appendage to the table, even
though it contains most of the meat. The material is printed with only
minor alterations and corrections of the original manuscript, which was
furnished by Professor Norman McQuown of the University of Chicago.

[Whorf_010_fig_001]

[EXPANSION OF Semasiology SECTION OF THE TABLE]

A. The sentence

1. Sentence-end marking: by

intonation (one pattern, several patterns)

pause forms

special marking elements

word order affective marking. Intonations or other elements marking
sentence end and also denoting, e.g., emphasis, interest, surprise,
doubt, interrogation, force of conviction, affective diminution, or
augmentation, etc.

2. Sentence-initial marking: by

word order, e.g., verb always first, etc.

sentence introducers

intonation

others

absent

3. Intrasentential linkage (syntax) (integrating principle within the
sentence) word order. Expansion of word order, subject-predicate order,
adjacent order (modifier before, modifier after, mixed), interrupted
order (tmesis), e.g., English split infinitive.

functional categories (e.g., nouns, verbs, predicators, etc.) variously
marked. See categories under B, The word.

marking of relationships, e.g., by cases, pre- or postpositions, action
directors (i.e., different markings of action-goal or cause-effect,
transitives, applicatives) et al.

subsumption (reference within verb or other keyword to the syntax)
pronominal incorporation or reference, noun incorporation directive and
instrumental elements, and body-part elements, etc. verb a nuclear
sentence (e.g. Navaho)

holophrastic sentence (form of polysynthesis in which verb takes in most
of the sentence)

sentence harmony, i.e., agreement of formal classes, e.g., agreement in
gender, number, etc. (Bantu is an extreme instance)

4. Intersentential linkage (external syntax) (addition of sentence to
sentence)

Paratactic (coordinating)

juxtaposition of sentences

coordinating elements

prosodic (intonations, etc.)

sublexical (suffixes, etc.)

particles (enclitics or words, e.g., ‘and’)

Hypotactic (subordinating) (use of dependent clauses) by order

prosodic means (intonation, etc., e.g., the English comma intonation)

sublexical marking, including special verb forms, gerundials

subordinating particles, conjunctions

5. Predication

Techniques

word order or sentence pattern (the isolating type)

sublexical predicators (i.e., suffixes, etc., which make a “verb” out of
anything to which they are added. Here the suffix, not the whole “verb”
is the predicator)

predicating word-classes (verbs and various types of quasiverbs; the
predicative force is fused with a lexical meaning, e.g., ‘eat, kill,
stand’) (See categories under B, The word)

verbal sentence only

verbal and nominal sentences—nominal sentences designated by order
pattern, sublexically, etc.

operators (words specialized for predication, otherwise lexical meaning
blank [‘be, become, cause, do’] or vague [‘make, turn, get,’ etc.]).
auxiliary verbs.

mixtures of techniques

Categories of predication

copulative (be)

general

inherent (Spanish ser), or subjective

objective (Spanish estar)

general verbal, including all the following:

causal

active–causal

intransitive—mediopassive

transitive

inactive–causal

intransitive

transitive

incausal

static

resultative

passive

others (the above may be stated differently according to the pattern of
language, e.g., instrumental verb, etc.)

6. Minimal and abbreviated sentences

abbreviated sentences

retrospective forms, e.g., ‘I did.’ ‘Will you?’

elliptic forms, e.g., ‘But tomorrow—!’

social formulas (‘thank you, hello, please,’ etc.)

minimal sentences

vocative type (‘John! Mother!’)

imperative type (‘Come!’)

others

‘yes’ and ‘no’

interjections

ordinary (‘oh, ouch, alas,’ etc.)

“swear words”

other types with special cultural force

B. The word (the word as part of the sentence)

1. Morphology (overt structure)

Techniques (of overt marking) (if possible, state degree, e.g., slight,
moderate, abundant, profuse)

prefixing

suffixing

infixing

vocalic ablaut

change of 1 vowel of stem, of 2 or more

ablaut elision, length-change, quavering

consonantal ablaut

accent and (or) tone changes

reduplication (total, partial, initial-syllabic, final-syllabic,
vocalic, reduplication with interpolation)

extrusion (commonly called reduplication)

vocalic, initial (tak—atak), final (lem—leme)

consonantal, initial (lem—leml), final (lem—mlem)

mixed (e.g., lem—lemel)

vowel-harmony accompanying other techniques

Categories, morphological. See 3. Categories

2. Covert structure and relationship

Techniques

selection^(*) (e.g., difference between ‘John, come, dog, kill’)

suppletion (e.g., ‘go, went’)

order (in phrase or sentence)

pronominal reference (e.g., used in English to mark gender-class)

reference by key-word not a pronoun

reactance (word with the covert relation governs choice of certain other
words, e.g., round- vs. long-object terms in Navaho, governs choice of
verb stem)

Categories, covert. See 3. Categories

3. Categories

May be either overt or covert. If possible, say which and how marked, or
mixed, e.g., verbs, suffixing; nouns, pure selection; nouns, absence of
other marking.^(†)

I. Word categories

a. Functional–lexical

noun

verb

adjective

adverb

none (it must be remembered that any or all of these types may not
exist; e.g., it may be impossible to have a “verb” without a suffix of
verbation which can be applied to ANY stem. There is then no class of
verbs, but only the “modulus category” (q.v.) of verbation.)

b. Functional

pronouns (personal, state kinds of—demonstrative, directive—state ideas
connoted—interrogative, negative, indefinite, relative, etc.)

particles (words used in marking or linking the SENTENCE, q.v.,
end-markers, initial-markers (inceptors), pro- and postpositions,
conjunctions, modal particles, predicators, operators, etc.)

articles. See II,c. definite–indefinite

c. Reference categories (which imply a classification of experience,
different kinds of things, state, or action)

genders (many different kinds, masculine, feminine, animate, inanimate,
personal, rational, irrational, integral, etc.)

multireference categories (many gender-like classes, often with
indistinguishable meaning, e.g., Bantu)

social status and rank classes

shape classes (e.g., Navaho, Haida)

presence–absence

visibility

locus and extension classes

d. Purely formal classes, e.g., conjugations and declensions

e. Personal name classes, gender, age, respect, etc.

II. Modulus categories. (These do not delimit word-classes in
themselves; they MODIFY, either ANY class, or classes already delimited
by other means)

a. Generally applicable

predication

verbation (predication other than ‘be’)

“nomination” or noun-designation

absolutive suffixes, nominative articles, zero-marking, etc.

adjectivization

b. Mixed application—sometimes generally applied, sometimes specially
applied

number (kinds 1, 2, 3, several, many, plural)

collectivity and distribution

duration

tension (extension–duration)

time or tense

comparison, e.g., of adjectives

see also reference categories; the same ideas may be applied as moduli

c. Special application

Applied usually to verbs (or along with verbation)

categories of predication, q.v. A. The sentence

voice: active, passive, etc.

resolution: transitive, intransitive, passive (voice and resolution
merge)

aspect (duration, extension, etc., e.g., punctual, durative, perfective,
imperfective, inceptive, continuative, progressive, frequentative,
iterative, usitative, etc.)

intensives

tense systems

mode (mood), e.g., indicative, subjunctive, inferential, dubitative,
optative, potential, permissive, concessive, adversative, et al.

status, e.g., interrogative, negative, quotative, emphatic

exclamative and other affective forms

address-forms, e.g., imperative, vetative (negative imperative),
hortative, etc.

gerundials or subordinators (cross-refer to A4)

Applied usually to nouns (or along with nomination)

state (i.e., possessed, unpossessed, pronominally possessed forms)

case (various cases)

adjectivization (also given under general)

definite-indefinite (articles, etc.)

partitives (some or any)

generality, e.g., ‘man, woman, canis,’ as opposed to ‘a man, a woman, a
dog’

continual, e.g., ‘wood, metal,’ as opposed to ‘stick, piece of metal’

individuative, e.g., ‘stick’

others—See Reference categories, into which these merge

d. Affective modulus categories (express speaker’s feelings rather than
an idea)

affective diminution (diminutives)

affective augmentation

respect forms

emphasis, exclamative, and other forms—what classes of words is the
affective modulus applied to?

III. Cryptotypes. Covert word categories with subtle meaning marked only
by reactances. Skip this in the survey except for obvious cases, as
determination of cryptotypes usually requires deep study of a language.

C. The lexeme (the word or stem as an item of the vocabulary, and as a
part analyzed or abstracted from sentence words)

1. Lexical hierarchies

a. The language possesses distinctions between roots and derivative
formations (stems, bases, themes). In this case the minimal irreducible
base is called ROOT.

b. The language may have only one sort, or one main sort, of lexical
element. In this case such an element is usually called STEM—e.g., stems
in Algonkin, Yana. Characterize language in this way if possible.

c. Lexeme may be identical with word (word in sentence). Lexeme always
different from word. Lexeme occurs in sentence—

1. with morphological elements

2. in polysynthetic composition

2. Root and stem types

polymorphous (no particular form for root or stem—however, this is rare;
apt to be appearance based on insufficient analysis, e.g., as regards
roots, English is not polymorphous)

monomorphous. One characteristic root type, or 1 or 2 related types,
e.g., CV, CVC, etc.

restricted. Type with considerable freedom of form with certain
restrictions, e.g., limitation on the kind and position of consonant
clusters within root or within stem, e.g., English. Indicate the
restrictions on clusters, etc. if possible.

3. Derivation (formation of secondary lexemes, i.e., word bases, from
roots)

Techniques. Overt. These are similar to morphological techniques; e.g.,
prefixing, suffixing, etc.

Covert techniques—transfer to a different covert class and change of
meaning with covert marking, e.g., ‘(to) stand, (a) stand (position),
(a) stand (pedestal)’

Degree of derivation—none, slight, moderate, great, cumulative (piling
of derivative upon derivative, e.g., the mock-learned
‘honorificabilitudinity’; this is found in Aztec, less so in Sanskrit
and Greek, possibly in Magyar and Turkish)

Derivational types^(‡)

Noun types from verb-like bases

action and state nouns, abstract nouns

agentives—nouns of the doer

instrumentives—nouns of instrument place nouns

[Whorf_p170a]

adjectival nouns others—there are many possibilities

Verb types from nounlike bases

verbs of activation, of possession, etc.

4. Composition

Compounding (essentially binary complexes; the 2 main parts may also be
separate)

modifier types. Does modifier come before or after?

types: noun–noun, verb–noun, noun–verb, etc.

coordinate types, e.g., ‘space-time’ in ‘space-time relationships’

Polysynthetic composition

composition of many stems with rules of order, e.g., Algonkin

a further possibility is: no distinction between stems (lexemes) and
markers of modulus categories. In this case cross-refer to modulus
categories.

Mixed types, e.g., “interrupted synthesis”

in Athabascan—may be skipped as often difficult to analyze

Nonisolatable lexemes—few, many, or all lexemes thus

5. Semantic root-structure

root analyzable into more or less vague parts and meanings, e.g.,
‘tread, track, trip.’ Root-nucleus (e.g., tr) and root- determinative

phonemic symbolism (correspondence between sound and sense)

recurrence of the same phoneme or phoneme-group with a type of meaning

overt manipulation of phonemes for semantic and affective results (e.g.,
childish forms in some NW coast languages)

roots susceptible of considerable intra-radical analysis.

 

* Selection, i.e., pure selection. Selection also accompanies all other
marking of word-categories. Pure selection requires existence of covert
word-categories (q.v.).

† Where possible, state avoidance of commonly found categories, e.g., no
plural, no gender.

‡ These may merge into or become identical with morphological
categories, and in some languages this section is to be transferred from
the LEXEME to the WORD: morphology.

11

The Relation of Habitual Thought and Behavior to Language

Human beings do not live in the objective world alone, nor alone in the
world of social activity as ordinarily understood, but are very much at
the mercy of the particular language which has become the medium of
expression for their society. It is quite an illusion to imagine that
one adjusts to reality essentially without the use of language and that
language is merely an incidental means of solving specific problems of
communication or reflection. The fact of the matter is that the “real
world” is to a large extent unconsciously built up on the language
habits of the group. . . . We see and hear and otherwise experience very
largely as we do because the language habits of our community predispose
certain choices of interpretation.

—Edward Sapir

There will probably be general assent to the proposition that an
accepted pattern of using words is often prior to certain lines of
thinking and forms of behavior, but he who assents often sees in such a
statement nothing more than a platitudinous recognition of the hypnotic
power of philosophical and learned terminology on the one hand or of
catchwords, slogans, and rallying cries on the other. To see only thus
far is to miss the point of one of the important interconnections which
Sapir saw between language, culture, and psychology, and succinctly
expressed in the introductory quotation. It is not so much in these
special uses of language as in its constant ways of arranging data and
its most ordinary everyday analysis of phenomena that we need to
recognize the influence it has on other activities, cultural and
personal.

The Name of the Situation as Affecting Behavior

I came in touch with an aspect of this problem before I had studied
under Dr. Sapir, and in a field usually considered remote from
linguistics. It was in the course of my professional work for a fire
insurance company, in which I undertook the task of analyzing many
hundreds of reports of circumstances surrounding the start of fires, and
in some cases, of explosions. My analysis was directed toward purely
physical conditions, such as defective wiring, presence or lack of air
spaces between metal flues and woodwork, etc., and the results were
presented in these terms. Indeed it was undertaken with no thought that
any other significances would or could be revealed. But in due course it
became evident that not only a physical situation qua physics, but the
meaning of that situation to people, was sometimes a factor, through the
behavior of the people, in the start of the fire. And this factor of
meaning was clearest when it was a LINGUISTIC MEANING, residing in the
name or the linguistic description commonly applied to the situation.
Thus, around a storage of what are called “gasoline drums,” behavior
will tend to a certain type, that is, great care will be exercised;
while around a storage of what are called “empty gasoline drums,” it
will tend to be different—careless, with little repression of smoking or
of tossing cigarette stubs about. Yet the “empty” drums are perhaps the
more dangerous, since they contain explosive vapor. Physically the
situation is hazardous, but the linguistic analysis according to regular
analogy must employ the word ‘empty,’ which inevitably suggests lack of
hazard. The word ‘empty’ is used in two linguistic patterns: (1) as a
virtual synonym for ‘null and void, negative, inert,’ (2) applied in
analysis of physical situations without regard to, e.g., vapor, liquid
vestiges, or stray rubbish, in the container. The situation is named in
one pattern (2) and the name is then “acted out” or “lived up to” in
another (1), this being a general formula for the linguistic
conditioning of behavior into hazardous forms.

In a wood distillation plant the metal stills were insulated with a
composition prepared from limestone and called at the plant “spun
limestone.” No attempt was made to protect this covering from excessive
heat or the contact of flame. After a period of use, the fire below one
of the stills spread to the “limestone,” which to everyone’s great
surprise burned vigorously. Exposure to acetic acid fumes from the
stills had converted part of the limestone (calcium carbonate) to
calcium acetate. This when heated in a fire decomposes, forming
inflammable acetone. Behavior that tolerated fire close to the covering
was induced by use of the name “limestone,” which because it ends in
“-stone” implies non-combustibility.

A huge iron kettle of boiling varnish was observed to be overheated,
nearing the temperature at which it would ignite. The operator moved it
off the fire and ran it on its wheels to a distance, but did not cover
it. In a minute or so the varnish ignited. Here the linguistic influence
is more complex; it is due to the metaphorical objectifying (of which
more later) of “cause” as contact or the spatial juxtaposition of
“things”—to analyzing the situation as ‘on’ versus ‘off’ the fire. In
reality, the stage when the external fire was the main factor had
passed; the overheating was now an internal process of convection in the
varnish from the intensely heated kettle, and still continued when ‘off’
the fire.

An electric glow heater on the wall was little used, and for one workman
had the meaning of a convenient coathanger. At night a watchman entered
and snapped a switch, which action he verbalized as ‘turning on the
light.’ No light appeared, and this result he verbalized as ‘light is
burned out.’ He could not see the glow of the heater because of the old
coat hung on it. Soon the heater ignited the coat, which set fire to the
building.

A tannery discharged waste water containing animal matter into an
outdoor settling basin partly roofed with wood and partly open. This
situation is one that ordinarily would be verbalized as ‘pool of water.’
A workman had occasion to light a blowtorch near by, and threw his match
into the water. But the decomposing waste matter was evolving gas under
the wood cover, so that the setup was the reverse of ‘watery.’ An
instant flare of flame ignited the woodwork, and the fire quickly spread
into the adjoining building.

A drying room for hides was arranged with a blower at one end to make a
current of air along the room and thence outdoors through a vent at the
other end. Fire started at a hot bearing on the blower, which blew the
flames directly into the hides and fanned them along the room,
destroying the entire stock. This hazardous setup followed naturally
from the term ‘blower’ with its linguistic equivalence to ‘that which
blows,’ implying that its function necessarily is to ‘blow.’ Also its
function is verbalized as ‘blowing air for drying,’ overlooking that it
can blow other things, e.g., flames and sparks. In reality, a blower
simply makes a current of air and can exhaust as well as blow. It should
have been installed at the vent end to draw the air over the hides, then
through the hazard (its own casing and bearings), and thence outdoors.

Beside a coal-fired melting pot for lead reclaiming was dumped a pile of
“scrap lead”—a misleading verbalization, for it consisted of the lead
sheets of old radio condensers, which still had paraffin paper between
them. Soon the paraffin blazed up and fired the roof, half of which was
burned off.

Such examples, which could be greatly multiplied, will suffice to show
how the cue to a certain line of behavior is often given by the
analogies of the linguistic formula in which the situation is spoken of,
and by which to some degree it is analyzed, classified, and allotted its
place in that world which is “to a large extent unconsciously built up
on the language habits of the group.” And we always assume that the
linguistic analysis made by our group reflects reality better than it
does.

Grammatical Patterns as Interpretations of Experience

The linguistic material in the above examples is limited to single
words, phrases, and patterns of limited range. One cannot study the
behavioral compulsiveness of such material without suspecting a much
more far-reaching compulsion from large-scale patterning of grammatical
categories, such as plurality, gender and similar classifications
(animate, inanimate, etc.), tenses, voices, and other verb forms,
classifications of the type of “parts of speech,” and the matter of
whether a given experience is denoted by a unit morpheme, an inflected
word, or a syntactical combination. A category such as number (singular
vs. plural) is an attempted interpretation of a whole large order of
experience, virtually of the world or of nature; it attempts to say how
experience is to be segmented, what experience is to be called “one” and
what “several.” But the difficulty of appraising such a far-reaching
influence is great because of its background character, because of the
difficulty of standing aside from our own language, which is a habit and
a cultural non est disputandum, and scrutinizing it objectively. And if
we take a very dissimilar language, this language becomes a part of
nature, and we even do to it what we have already done to nature. We
tend to think in our own language in order to examine the exotic
language. Or we find the task of unraveling the purely morphological
intricacies so gigantic that it seems to absorb all else. Yet the
problem, though difficult, is feasible; and the best approach is through
an exotic language, for in its study we are at long last pushed
willy-nilly out of our ruts. Then we find that the exotic language is a
mirror held up to our own.

In my study of the Hopi language, what I now see as an opportunity to
work on this problem was first thrust upon me before I was clearly aware
of the problem. The seemingly endless task of describing the morphology
did finally end. Yet it was evident, especially in the light of Sapir’s
lectures on Navaho, that the description of the LANGUAGE was far from
complete. I knew for example the morphological formation of plurals, but
not how to use plurals. It was evident that the category of plural in
Hopi was not the same thing as in English, French, or German. Certain
things that were plural in these languages were singular in Hopi. The
phase of investigation which now began consumed nearly two more years.

The work began to assume the character of a comparison between Hopi and
western European languages. It also became evident that even the grammar
of Hopi bore a relation to Hopi culture, and the grammar of European
tongues to our own “Western” or “European” culture. And it appeared that
the interrelation brought in those large subsummations of experience by
language, such as our own terms ‘time,’ ‘space,’ ‘substance,’ and
‘matter.’ Since, with respect to the traits compared, there is little
difference between English, French, German, or other European languages
with the POSSIBLE (but doubtful) exception of Balto-Slavic and
non-Indo-European, I have lumped these languages into one group called
SAE, or “Standard Average European.”

That portion of the whole investigation here to be reported may be
summed up in two questions: (1) Are our own concepts of ‘time,’ ‘space,’
and ‘matter’ given in substantially the same form by experience to all
men, or are they in part conditioned by the structure of particular
languages? (2) Are there traceable affinities between (a) cultural and
behavioral norms and (b) large-scale linguistic patterns? (I should be
the last to pretend that there is anything so definite as “a
correlation” between culture and language, and especially between
ethnological rubrics such as ‘agricultural, hunting,’ etc., and
linguistic ones like ‘inflected,’ ‘synthetic,’ or ‘isolating.’¹ When I
began the study, the problem was by no means so clearly formulated, and
I had little notion that the answers would turn out as they did.)

Plurality and Numeration in SAE and Hopi

In our language, that is SAE, plurality and cardinal numbers are applied
in two ways: to real plurals and imaginary plurals. Or more exactly if
less tersely: perceptible spatial aggregates and metaphorical
aggregates. We say ‘ten men’ and also ‘ten days.’ Ten men either are or
could be objectively perceived as ten, ten in one group perception²—ten
men on a street corner, for instance. But ‘ten days’ cannot be
objectively experienced. We experience only one day, today; the other
nine (or even all ten) are something conjured up from memory or
imagination. If ‘ten days’ be regarded as a group it must be as an
“imaginary,” mentally constructed group. Whence comes this mental
pattern? Just as in the case of the fire-causing errors, from the fact
that our language confuses the two different situations, has but one
pattern for both. When we speak of ‘ten steps forward, ten strokes on a
bell,’ or any similarly described cyclic sequence, “times” of any sort,
we are doing the same thing as with ‘days.’ CYCLICITY brings the
response of imaginary plurals. But a likeness of cyclicity to aggregates
is not unmistakably given by experience prior to language, or it would
be found in all languages, and it is not.

Our AWARENESS of time and cyclicity does contain something immediate and
subjective—the basic sense of “becoming later and later.” But, in the
habitual thought of us SAE people, this is covered under something quite
different, which though mental should not be called subjective. I call
it OBJECTIFIED, or imaginary, because it is patterned on the OUTER
world. It is this that reflects our linguistic usage. Our tongue makes
no distinction between numbers counted on discrete entities and numbers
that are simply “counting itself.” Habitual thought then assumes that in
the latter the numbers are just as much counted on “something” as in the
former. This is objectification. Concepts of time lose contact with the
subjective experience of “becoming later” and are objectified as counted
QUANTITIES, especially as lengths, made up of units as a length can be
visibly marked off into inches. A ‘length of time’ is envisioned as a
row of similar units, like a row of bottles.

In Hopi there is a different linguistic situation. Plurals and cardinals
are used only for entities that form or can form an objective group.
There are no imaginary plurals, but instead ordinals used with
singulars. Such an expression as ‘ten days’ is not used. The equivalent
statement is an operational one that reaches one day by a suitable
count. ‘They stayed ten days’ becomes ‘they stayed until the eleventh
day’ or ‘they left after the tenth day.’ ‘Ten days is greater than nine
days’ becomes ‘the tenth day is later than the ninth.’ Our “length of
time” is not regarded as a length but as a relation between two events
in lateness. Instead of our linguistically promoted objectification of
that datum of consciousness we call ‘time,’ the Hopi language has not
laid down any pattern that would cloak the subjective “becoming later”
that is the essence of time.

Nouns of Physical Quantity in SAE and Hopi

We have two kinds of nouns denoting physical things: individual nouns,
and mass nouns, e.g., ‘water, milk, wood, granite, sand, flour, meat.’
Individual nouns denote bodies with definite outlines: ‘a tree, a stick,
a man, a hill.’ Mass nouns denote homogeneous continua without implied
boundaries. The distinction is marked by linguistic form; e.g., mass
nouns lack plurals,³ in English drop articles, and in French take the
partitive article du, de la, des. The distinction is more widespread in
language than in the observable appearance of things. Rather few natural
occurrences present themselves as unbounded extents; ‘air’ of course,
and often ‘water, rain, snow, sand, rock, dirt, grass.’ We do not
encounter ‘butter, meat, cloth, iron, glass,’ or most “materials” in
such kind of manifestation, but in bodies small or large with definite
outlines. The distinction is somewhat forced upon our description of
events by an unavoidable pattern in language. It is so inconvenient in a
great many cases that we need some way of individualizing the mass noun
by further linguistic devices. This is partly done by names of
body-types: ‘stick of wood, piece of cloth, pane of glass, cake of
soap’; also, and even more, by introducing names of containers though
their contents be the real issue: ‘glass of water, cup of coffee, dish
of food, bag of flour, bottle of beer.’ These very common container
formulas, in which ‘of’ has an obvious, visually perceptible meaning
(“contents”), influence our feeling about the less obvious type-body
formulas: ‘stick of wood, lump of dough,’ etc. The formulas are very
similar: individual noun plus a similar relator (English ‘of’). In the
obvious case this relator denotes contents. In the inobvious one it
“suggests” contents. Hence the ‘lumps, chunks, blocks, pieces,’ etc.,
seem to contain something, a “stuff,” “substance,” or “matter” that
answers to the ‘water,’ ‘coffee,’ or ‘flour’ in the container formulas.
So with SAE people the philosophic “substance” and “matter” are also the
naive idea; they are instantly acceptable, “common sense.” It is so
through linguistic habit. Our language patterns often require us to name
a physical thing by a binomial that splits the reference into a formless
item plus a form.

Hopi is again different. It has a formally distinguished class of nouns.
But this class contains no formal subclass of mass nouns. All nouns have
an individual sense and both singular and plural forms. Nouns
translating most nearly our mass nouns still refer to vague bodies or
vaguely bounded extents. They imply indefiniteness, but not lack, of
outline and size. In specific statements, ‘water’ means one certain mass
or quantity of water, not what we call “the substance water.” Generality
of statement is conveyed through the verb or predicator, not the noun.
Since nouns are individual already, they are not individualized by
either type-bodies or names of containers, if there is no special need
to emphasize shape or container. The noun itself implies a suitable
type-body or container. One says, not ‘a glass of water’ but
[Whorf_p182a] ‘a water,’ not ‘a pool of water’ but [Whorf_p182b],⁴ not
‘a dish of cornflour’ but [Whorf_p183a] ‘a (quantity of) cornflour,’ not
‘a piece of meat’ but sik^(w)i ‘a meat.’ The language has neither need
for nor analogies on which to build the concept of existence as a
duality of formless item and form. It deals with formlessness through
other symbols than nouns.

Phases of Cycles in SAE and Hopi

Such terms as ‘summer, winter, September, morning, noon, sunset’ are
with us nouns, and have little formal linguistic difference from other
nouns. They can be subjects or objects, and we say ‘at sunset’ or ‘in
winter’ just as we say ‘at a corner’ or ‘in an orchard.’⁵ They are
pluralized and numerated like nouns of physical objects, as we have
seen. Our thought about the referents of such words hence becomes
objectified. Without objectification, it would be a subjective
experience of real time, i.e. of the consciousness of “becoming later
and later”—simply a cyclic phase similar to an earlier phase in that
ever-later-becoming duration. Only by imagination can such a cyclic
phase be set beside another and another in the manner of a spatial (i.e.
visually perceived) configuration. But such is the power of linguistic
analogy that we do so objectify cyclic phasing. We do it even by saying
‘a phase’ and ‘phases’ instead of, e.g., ‘phasing.’ And the pattern of
individual and mass nouns, with the resulting binomial formula of
formless item plus form, is so general that it is implicit for all
nouns, and hence our very generalized formless items like ‘substance,
matter,’ by which we can fill out the binomial for an enormously wide
range of nouns. But even these are not quite generalized enough to take
in our phase nouns. So for the phase nouns we have made a formless item,
‘time.’ We have made it by using ‘a time,’ i.e. an occasion or a phase,
in the pattern of a mass noun, just as from ‘a summer’ we make ‘summer’
in the pattern of a mass noun. Thus with our binomial formula we can say
and think ‘a moment of time, a second of time, a year of time.’ Let me
again point out that the pattern is simply that of ‘a bottle of milk’ or
‘a piece of cheese.’ Thus we are assisted to imagine that ‘a summer’
actually contains or consists of such-and-such a quantity of ‘time.’

In Hopi however all phase terms, like ‘summer, morning,’ etc., are not
nouns but a kind of adverb, to use the nearest SAE analogy. They are a
formal part of speech by themselves, distinct from nouns, verbs, and
even other Hopi “adverbs.” Such a word is not a case form or a locative
pattern, like ‘des Abends’ or ‘in the morning.’ It contains no morpheme
like one of ‘in the house’ or ‘at the tree.’⁶ It means ‘when it is
morning’ or ‘while morning-phase is occurring.’ These “temporals” are
not used as subjects or objects, or at all like nouns. One does not say
‘it’s a hot summer’ or ‘summer is hot’; summer is not hot, summer is
only WHEN conditions are hot, WHEN heat occurs. One does not say ‘THIS
summer,’ but ‘summer now’ or ‘summer recently.’ There is no
objectification, as a region, an extent, a quantity, of the subjective
duration-feeling. Nothing is suggested about time except the perpetual
“getting later” of it. And so there is no basis here for a formless item
answering to our ‘time.’

Temporal Forms of Verbs in SAE and Hopi

The three-tense system of SAE verbs colors all our thinking about time.
This system is amalgamated with that larger scheme of objectification of
the subjective experience of duration already noted in other patterns—in
the binomial formula applicable to nouns in general, in temporal nouns,
in plurality and numeration. This objectification enables us in
imagination to “stand time units in a row.” Imagination of time as like
a row harmonizes with a system of three tenses; whereas a system of two,
an earlier and a later, would seem to correspond better to the feeling
of duration as it is experienced. For if we inspect consciousness we
find no past, present, future, but a unity embracing complexity.
EVERYTHING is in consciousness, and everything in consciousness is, and
is together. There is in it a sensuous and a nonsensuous. We may call
the sensuous—what we are seeing, hearing, touching—the ‘present’ while
in the nonsensuous the vast image-world of memory is being labeled ‘the
past’ and another realm of belief, intuition, and uncertainty ‘the
future’; yet sensation, memory, foresight, all are in consciousness
together—one is not “yet to be” nor another “once but no more.” Where
real time comes in is that all this in consciousness is “getting later,”
changing certain relations in an irreversible manner. In this “latering”
or “durating” there seems to me to be a paramount contrast between the
newest, latest instant at the focus of attention and the rest—the
earlier. Languages by the score get along well with two tenselike forms
answering to this paramount relation of “later” to “earlier.” We can of
course CONSTRUCT AND CONTEMPLATE IN THOUGHT a system of past, present,
future, in the objectified configuration of points on a line. This is
what our general objectification tendency leads us to do and our tense
system confirms.

In English the present tense seems the one least in harmony with the
paramount temporal relation. It is as if pressed into various and not
wholly congruous duties. One duty is to stand as objectified middle term
between objectified past and objectified future, in narration,
discussion, argument, logic, philosophy. Another is to denote inclusion
in the sensuous field: ‘I SEE him.’ Another is for nomic, i.e.
customarily or generally valid, statements: ‘We SEE with our eyes.’
These varied uses introduce confusions of thought, of which for the most
part we are unaware.

Hopi, as we might expect, is different here too. Verbs have no “tenses”
like ours, but have validity-forms (“assertions”), aspects, and
clause-linkage forms (modes), that yield even greater precision of
speech. The validity-forms denote that the speaker (not the subject)
reports the situation (answering to our past and present) or that he
expects it (answering to our future)⁷ or that he makes a nomic statement
(answering to our nomic present). The aspects denote different degrees
of duration and different kinds of tendency “during duration.” As yet we
have noted nothing to indicate whether an event is sooner or later than
another when both are REPORTED. But need for this does not arise until
we have two verbs: i.e. two clauses. In that case the “modes” denote
relations between the clauses, including relations of later to earlier
and of simultaneity. Then there are many detached words that express
similar relations, supplementing the modes and aspects. The duties of
our three-tense system and its tripartite linear objectified “time” are
distributed among various verb categories, all different from our
tenses; and there is no more basis for an objectified time in Hopi verbs
than in other Hopi patterns; although this does not in the least hinder
the verb forms and other patterns from being closely adjusted to the
pertinent realities of actual situations.

Duration, Intensity, and Tendency in SAE and Hopi

To fit discourse to manifold actual situations, all languages need to
express durations, intensities, and tendencies. It is characteristic of
SAE and perhaps of many other language types to express them
metaphorically. The metaphors are those of spatial extension, i.e. of
size, number (plurality), position, shape, and motion. We express
duration by ‘long, short, great, much, quick, slow,’ etc.; intensity by
‘large, great, much, heavy, light, high, low, sharp, faint,’ etc.;
tendency by ‘more, increase, grow, turn, get, approach, go, come, rise,
fall, stop, smooth, even, rapid, slow’; and so on through an almost
inexhaustible list of metaphors that we hardly recognize as such, since
they are virtually the only linguistic media available. The
nonmetaphorical terms in this field, like ‘early, late, soon, lasting,
intense, very, tending,’ are a mere handful, quite inadequate to the
needs.

It is clear how this condition “fits in.” It is part of our whole scheme
of OBJECTIFYING—imaginatively spatializing qualities and potentials that
are quite nonspatial (so far as any spatially perceptive senses can tell
us). Noun-meaning (with us) proceeds from physical bodies to referents
of far other sort. Since physical bodies and their outlines in PERCEIVED
SPACE are denoted by size and shape terms and reckoned by cardinal
numbers and plurals, these patterns of denotation and reckoning extend
to the symbols of nonspatial meanings, and so suggest an IMAGINARY
SPACE. Physical shapes ‘move, stop, rise, sink, approach,’ etc., in
perceived space; why not these other referents in their imaginary space?
This has gone so far that we can hardly refer to the simplest nonspatial
situation without constant resort to physical metaphors. I “grasp” the
“thread” of another’s arguments, but if its “level” is “over my head” my
attention may “wander” and “lose touch” with the “drift” of it, so that
when he “comes” to his “point” we differ “widely,” our “views” being
indeed so “far apart” that the “things” he says “appear” “much” too
arbitrary, or even “a lot” of nonsense!

The absence of such metaphor from Hopi speech is striking. Use of space
terms when there is no space involved is NOT THERE—as if on it had been
laid the taboo teetotal! The reason is clear when we know that Hopi has
abundant conjugational and lexical means of expressing duration,
intensity, and tendency directly as such, and that major grammatical
patterns do not, as with us, provide analogies for an imaginary space.
The many verb “aspects” express duration and tendency of manifestations,
while some of the “voices” express intensity, tendency, and duration of
causes or forces producing manifestations. Then a special part of
speech, the “tensors,” a huge class of words, denotes only intensity,
tendency, duration, and sequence. The function of the tensors is to
express intensities, “strengths,” and how they continue or vary, their
rate of change; so that the broad concept of intensity, when considered
as necessarily always varying and/or continuing, includes also tendency
and duration. Tensors convey distinctions of degree, rate, constancy,
repetition, increase and decrease of intensity, immediate sequence,
interruption or sequence after an interval, etc., also qualities of
strengths, such as we should express metaphorically as smooth, even,
hard, rough. A striking feature is their lack of resemblance to the
terms of real space and movement that to us “mean the same.” There is
not even more than a trace of apparent derivation from space terms.⁸ So,
while Hopi in its nouns seems highly concrete, here in the tensors it
becomes abstract almost beyond our power to follow.

Habitual Thought in SAE and Hopi

The comparison now to be made between the habitual thought worlds of SAE
and Hopi speakers is of course incomplete. It is possible only to touch
upon certain dominant contrasts that appear to stem from the linguistic
differences already noted. By “habitual thought” and “thought world” I
mean more than simply language, i.e. than the linguistic patterns
themselves. I include all the analogical and suggestive value of the
patterns (e.g., our “imaginary space” and its distant implications), and
all the give-and-take between language and the culture as a whole,
wherein is a vast amount that is not linguistic but yet shows the
shaping influence of language. In brief, this “thought world” is the
microcosm that each man carries about within himself, by which he
measures and understands what he can of the macrocosm.

The SAE microcosm has analyzed reality largely in terms of what it calls
“things” (bodies and quasibodies) plus modes of extensional but formless
existence that it calls “substances” or “matter.” It tends to see
existence through a binomial formula that expresses any existent as a
spatial form plus a spatial formless continuum related to the form, as
contents is related to the outlines of its container. Nonspatial
existents are imaginatively spatialized and charged with similar
implications of form and continuum.

The Hopi microcosm seems to have analyzed reality largely in terms of
EVENTS (or better “eventing”), referred to in two ways, objective and
subjective. Objectively, and only if perceptible physical experience,
events are expressed mainly as outlines, colors, movements, and other
perceptive reports. Subjectively, for both the physical and nonphysical,
events are considered the expression of invisible intensity factors, on
which depend their stability and persistence, or their fugitiveness and
proclivities. It implies that existents do not “become later and later”
all in the same way; but some do so by growing like plants, some by
diffusing and vanishing, some by a procession of metamorphoses, some by
enduring in one shape till affected by violent forces. In the nature of
each existent able to manifest as a definite whole is the power of its
own mode of duration: its growth, decline, stability, cyclicity, or
creativeness. Everything is thus already “prepared” for the way it now
manifests by earlier phases, and what it will be later, partly has been,
and partly is in act of being so “prepared.” An emphasis and importance
rests on this preparing or being prepared aspect of the world that may
to the Hopi correspond to that “quality of reality” that ‘matter’ or
‘stuff’ has for us.

Habitual Behavior Features of Hopi Culture

Our behavior, and that of Hopi, can be seen to be coordinated in many
ways to the linguistically conditioned microcosm. As in my fire
casebook, people act about situations in ways which are like the ways
they talk about them. A characteristic of Hopi behavior is the emphasis
on preparation. This includes announcing and getting ready for events
well beforehand, elaborate precautions to insure persistence of desired
conditions, and stress on good will as the preparer of right results.
Consider the analogies of the day-counting pattern alone. Time is mainly
reckoned “by day” (taLk, -tala) or “by night” (tok), which words are not
nouns but tensors, the first formed on a root “light, day,” the second
on a root “sleep.” The count is by ORDINALS. This is not the pattern of
counting a number of different men or things, even though they appear
successively, for, even then, they COULD gather into an assemblage. It
is the pattern of counting successive reappearances of the SAME man or
thing, incapable of forming an assemblage. The analogy is not to behave
about day-cyclicity as to several men (“several days”), which is what WE
tend to do, but to behave as to the successive visits of the SAME MAN.
One does not alter several men by working upon just one, but one can
prepare and so alter the later visits of the same man by working to
affect the visit he is making now. This is the way the Hopi deal with
the future—by working within a present situation which is expected to
carry impresses, both obvious and occult, forward into the future event
of interest. One might say that Hopi society understands our proverb
‘Well begun is half done,’ but not our ‘Tomorrow is another day.’ This
may explain much in Hopi character.

This Hopi preparing behavior may be roughly divided into announcing,
outer preparing, inner preparing, covert participation, and persistence.
Announcing, or preparative publicity, is an important function in the
hands of a special official, the Crier Chief. Outer preparing is
preparation involving much visible activity, not all necessarily
directly useful within our understanding. It includes ordinary
practicing, rehearsing, getting ready, introductory formalities,
preparing of special food, etc. (all of these to a degree that may seem
overelaborate to us), intensive sustained muscular activity like
running, racing, dancing, which is thought to increase the intensity of
development of events (such as growth of crops), mimetic and other
magic, preparations based on esoteric theory involving perhaps occult
instruments like prayer sticks, prayer feathers, and prayer meal, and
finally the great cyclic ceremonies and dances, which have the
significance of preparing rain and crops. From one of the verbs meaning
“prepare” is derived the noun for “harvest” or “crop”: na′twani ‘the
prepared’ or the ‘in preparation.’⁹

Inner preparing is use of prayer and meditation, and at lesser intensity
good wishes and good will, to further desired results. Hopi attitudes
stress the power of desire and thought. With their “microcosm” it is
utterly natural that they should. Desire and thought are the earliest,
and therefore the most important, most critical and crucial, stage of
preparing. Moreover, to the Hopi, one’s desires and thoughts influence
not only his own actions, but all nature as well. This too is wholly
natural. Consciousness itself is aware of work, of the feel of effort
and energy, in desire and thinking. Experience more basic than language
tells us that, if energy is expended, effects are produced. WE tend to
believe that our bodies can stop up this energy, prevent it from
affecting other things until we will our BODIES to overt action. But
this may be so only because we have our own linguistic basis for a
theory that formless items like “matter” are things in themselves,
malleable only by similar things, by more matter, and hence insulated
from the powers of life and thought. It is no more unnatural to think
that thought contacts everything and pervades the universe than to
think, as we all do, that light kindled outdoors does this. And it is
not unnatural to suppose that thought, like any other force, leaves
everywhere traces of effect. Now, when we think of a certain actual
rosebush, we do not suppose that our thought goes to that actual bush,
and engages with it, like a searchlight turned upon it. What then do we
suppose our consciousness is dealing with when we are thinking of that
rosebush? Probably we think it is dealing with a “mental image” which is
not the rosebush but a mental surrogate of it. But why should it be
NATURAL to think that our thought deals with a surrogate and not with
the real rosebush? Quite possibly because we are dimly aware that we
carry about with us a whole imaginary space, full of mental surrogates.
To us, mental surrogates are old familiar fare. Along with the images of
imaginary space, which we perhaps secretly know to be only imaginary, we
tuck the thought-of actually existing rosebush, which may be quite
another story, perhaps just because we have that very convenient “place”
for it. The Hopi thought-world has no imaginary space. The corollary to
this is that it may not locate thought dealing with real space anywhere
but in real space, nor insulate real space from the effects of thought.
A Hopi would naturally suppose that his thought (or he himself) traffics
with the actual rosebush—or more likely, corn plant—that he is thinking
about. The thought then should leave some trace of itself with the plant
in the field. If it is a good thought, one about health and growth, it
is good for the plant; if a bad thought, the reverse.

The Hopi emphasize the intensity-factor of thought. Thought to be most
effective should be vivid in consciousness, definite, steady, sustained,
charged with strongly felt good intentions. They render the idea in
English as ‘concentrating, holding it in your heart, putting your mind
on it, earnestly hoping.’ Thought power is the force behind ceremonies,
prayer sticks, ritual smoking, etc. The prayer pipe is regarded as an
aid to “concentrating” (so said my informant). Its name, na′twanpi,
means ‘instrument of preparing.’

Covert participation is mental collaboration from people who do not take
part in the actual affair, be it a job of work, hunt, race, or ceremony,
but direct their thought and good will toward the affair’s success.
Announcements often seek to enlist the support of such mental helpers as
well as of overt participants, and contain exhortations to the people to
aid with their active good will.¹⁰ A similarity to our concepts of a
sympathetic audience or the cheering section at a football game should
not obscure the fact that it is primarily the power of directed thought,
and not merely sympathy or encouragement, that is expected of covert
participants. In fact these latter get in their deadliest work before,
not during, the game! A corollary to the power of thought is the power
of wrong thought for evil; hence one purpose of covert participation is
to obtain the mass force of many good wishers to offset the harmful
thought of ill wishers. Such attitudes greatly favor cooperation and
community spirit. Not that the Hopi community is not full of rivalries
and colliding interests. Against the tendency to social disintegration
in such a small, isolated group, the theory of “preparing” by the power
of thought, logically leading to the great power of the combined,
intensified, and harmonized thought of the whole community, must help
vastly toward the rather remarkable degree of cooperation that, in spite
of much private bickering, the Hopi village displays in all the
important cultural activities.

Hopi “preparing” activities again show a result of their linguistic
thought background in an emphasis on persistence and constant insistent
repetition. A sense of the cumulative value of innumerable small momenta
is dulled by an objectified, spatialized view of time like ours,
enhanced by a way of thinking close to the subjective awareness of
duration, of the ceaseless “latering” of events. To us, for whom time is
a motion on a space, unvarying repetition seems to scatter its force
along a row of units of that space, and be wasted. To the Hopi, for whom
time is not a motion but a “getting later” of everything that has ever
been done, unvarying repetition is not wasted but accumulated. It is
storing up an invisible change that holds over into later events.¹¹ As
we have seen, it is as if the return of the day were felt as the return
of the same person, a little older but with all the impresses of
yesterday, not as “another day,” i.e. like an entirely different person.
This principle joined with that of thought-power and with traits of
general Pueblo culture is expressed in the theory of the Hopi ceremonial
dance for furthering rain and crops, as well as in its short,
piston-like tread, repeated thousands of times, hour after hour.

Some Impresses of Linguistic Habit in Western Civilization

It is harder to do justice in few words to the linguistically
conditioned features of our own culture than in the case of the Hopi,
because of both vast scope and difficulty of objectivity—because of our
deeply ingrained familiarity with the attitudes to be analyzed. I wish
merely to sketch certain characteristics adjusted to our linguistic
binomialism of form plus formless item or “substance,” to our
metaphoricalness, our imaginary space, and our objectified time. These,
as we have seen, are linguistic.

From the form-plus-substance dichotomy the philosophical views most
traditionally characteristic of the “Western world” have derived huge
support. Here belong materialism, psychophysical parallelism, physics—at
least in its traditional Newtonian form—and dualistic views of the
universe in general. Indeed here belongs almost everything that is
“hard, practical common sense.” Monistic, holistic, and relativistic
views of reality appeal to philosophers and some scientists, but they
are badly handicapped in appealing to the “common sense” of the Western
average man—not because nature herself refutes them (if she did,
philosophers could have discovered this much), but because they must be
talked about in what amounts to a new language. “Common sense,” as its
name shows, and “practicality” as its name does not show, are largely
matters of talking so that one is readily understood. It is sometimes
stated that Newtonian space, time, and matter are sensed by everyone
intuitively, whereupon relativity is cited as showing how mathematical
analysis can prove intuition wrong. This, besides being unfair to
intuition, is an attempt to answer offhand question (1) put at the
outset of this paper, to answer which this research was undertaken.
Presentation of the findings now nears its end, and I think the answer
is clear. The offhand answer, laying the blame upon intuition for our
slowness in discovering mysteries of the Cosmos, such as relativity, is
the wrong one. The right answer is Newtonian space, time, and matter are
no intuitions. They are recepts from culture and language. That is where
Newton got them.

Our objectified view of time is, however, favorable to historicity and
to everything connected with the keeping of records, while the Hopi view
is unfavorable thereto. The latter is too subtle, complex, and
ever-developing, supplying no ready-made answer to the question of when
“one” event ends and “another” begins. When it is implicit that
everything that ever happened still is, but is in a necessarily
different form from what memory or record reports, there is less
incentive to study the past. As for the present, the incentive would be
not to record it but to treat it as “preparing.” But our objectified
time puts before imagination something like a ribbon or scroll marked
off into equal blank spaces, suggesting that each be filled with an
entry. Writing has no doubt helped toward our linguistic treatment of
time, even as the linguistic treatment has guided the uses of writing.
Through this give-and-take between language and the whole culture we
get, for instance:

1. Records, diaries, bookkeeping, accounting, mathematics stimulated by
accounting.

2. Interest in exact sequence, dating, calendars, chronology, clocks,
time wages, time graphs, time as used in physics.

3. Annals, histories, the historical attitude, interest in the past,
archaeology, attitudes of introjection toward past periods, e.g.,
classicism, romanticism.

Just as we conceive our objectified time as extending in the future in
the same way that it extends in the past, so we set down our estimates
of the future in the same shape as our records of the past, producing
programs, schedules, budgets. The formal equality of the spacelike units
by which we measure and conceive time leads us to consider the “formless
item” or “substance” of time to be homogeneous and in ratio to the
number of units. Hence our prorata allocation of value to time, lending
itself to the building up of a commercial structure based on
time-prorata values: time wages (time work constantly supersedes piece
work), rent, credit, interest, depreciation charges, and insurance
premiums. No doubt this vast system, once built, would continue to run
under any sort of linguistic treatment of time; but that it should have
been built at all, reaching the magnitude and particular form it has in
the Western world, is a fact decidedly in consonance with the patterns
of the SAE languages. Whether such a civilization as ours would be
possible with widely different linguistic handling of time is a large
question—in our civilization, our linguistic patterns and the fitting of
our behavior to the temporal order are what they are, and they are in
accord. We are of course stimulated to use calendars, clocks, and
watches, and to try to measure time ever more precisely; this aids
science, and science in turn, following these well-worn cultural
grooves, gives back to culture an ever-growing store of applications,
habits, and values, with which culture again directs science. But what
lies outside this spiral? Science is beginning to find that there is
something in the Cosmos that is not in accord with the concepts we have
formed in mounting the spiral. It is trying to frame a NEW LANGUAGE by
which to adjust itself to a wider universe.

It is clear how the emphasis on “saving time” which goes with all the
above and is very obvious objectification of time, leads to a high
valuation of “speed,” which shows itself a great deal in our behavior.

Still another behavioral effect is that the character of monotony and
regularity possessed by our image of time as an evenly scaled limitless
tape measure persuades us to behave as if that monotony were more true
of events than it really is. That is, it helps to routinize us. We tend
to select and favor whatever bears out this view, to “play up to” the
routine aspects of existence. One phase of this is behavior evincing a
false sense of security or an assumption that all will always go
smoothly, and a lack in foreseeing and protecting ourselves against
hazards. Our technique of harnessing energy does well in routine
performance, and it is along routine lines that we chiefly strive to
improve it—we are, for example, relatively uninterested in stopping the
energy from causing accidents, fires, and explosions, which it is doing
constantly and on a wide scale. Such indifference to the unexpectedness
of life would be disastrous to a society as small, isolated, and
precariously poised as the Hopi society is, or rather once was.

Thus our linguistically determined thought world not only collaborates
with our cultural idols and ideals, but engages even our unconscious
personal reactions in its patterns and gives them certain typical
characters. One such character, as we have seen, is CARELESSNESS, as in
reckless driving or throwing cigarette stubs into waste paper. Another
of different sort is GESTURING  when we talk. Very many of the gestures
made by English-speaking people at least, and probably by all SAE
speakers, serve to illustrate, by a movement in space, not a real
spatial reference but one of the nonspatial references that our language
handles by metaphors of imaginary space. That is, we are more apt to
make a grasping gesture when we speak of grasping an elusive idea than
when we speak of grasping a doorknob. The gesture seeks to make a
metaphorical and hence somewhat unclear reference more clear. But, if a
language refers to nonspatials without implying a spatial analogy, the
reference is not made any clearer by gesture. The Hopi gesture very
little, perhaps not at all in the sense we understand as gesture.

It would seem as if kinesthesia, or the sensing of muscular movement,
though arising before language, should be made more highly conscious by
linguistic use of imaginary space and metaphorical images of motion.
Kinesthesia is marked in two facets of European culture: art and sport.
European sculpture, an art in which Europe excels, is strongly
kinesthetic, conveying great sense of the body’s motions; European
painting likewise. The dance in our culture expresses delight in motion
rather than symbolism or ceremonial, and our music is greatly influenced
by our dance forms. Our sports are strongly imbued with this element of
the “poetry of motion.” Hopi races and games seem to emphasize rather
the virtues of endurance and sustained intensity. Hopi dancing is highly
symbolic and is performed with great intensity and earnestness, but has
not much movement or swing.

Synesthesia, or suggestion by certain sense receptions of characters
belonging to another sense, as of light and color by sounds and vice
versa, should be made more conscious by a linguistic metaphorical system
that refers to nonspatial experiences by terms for spatial ones, though
undoubtedly it arises from a deeper source. Probably in the first
instance metaphor arises from synesthesia and not the reverse; yet
metaphor need not become firmly rooted in linguistic pattern, as Hopi
shows. Nonspatial experience has one well-organized sense, HEARING—for
smell and taste are but little organized. Nonspatial consciousness is a
realm chiefly of thought, feeling, and SOUND. Spatial consciousness is a
realm of light, color, sight, and touch, and presents shapes and
dimensions. Our metaphorical system, by naming nonspatial experiences
after spatial ones, imputes to sounds, smells, tastes, emotions, and
thoughts qualities like the colors, luminosities, shapes, angles,
textures, and motions of spatial experience. And to some extent the
reverse transference occurs; for, after much talking about tones as
high, low, sharp, dull, heavy, brilliant, slow, the talker finds it easy
to think of some factors in spatial experience as like factors of tone.
Thus we speak of “tones” of color, a gray “monotone,” a “loud” necktie,
a “taste” in dress: all spatial metaphor in reverse. Now European art is
distinctive in the way it seeks deliberately to play with synesthesia.
Music tries to suggest scenes, color, movement, geometric design;
painting and sculpture are often consciously guided by the analogies of
music’s rhythm; colors are conjoined with feeling for the analogy to
concords and discords. The European theater and opera seek a synthesis
of many arts. It may be that in this way our metaphorical language that
is in some sense a confusion of thought is producing, through art, a
result of far-reaching value—a deeper esthetic sense leading toward a
more direct apprehension of underlying unity behind the phenomena so
variously reported by our sense channels.

Historical Implications

How does such a network of language, culture, and behavior come about
historically? Which was first: the language patterns or the cultural
norms? In main they have grown up together, constantly influencing each
other. But in this partnership the nature of the language is the factor
that limits free plasticity and rigidifies channels of development in
the more autocratic way. This is so because a language is a system, not
just an assemblage of norms. Large systematic outlines can change to
something really new only very slowly, while many other cultural
innovations are made with comparative quickness. Language thus
represents the mass mind; it is affected by inventions and innovations,
but affected little and slowly, whereas to inventors and innovators it
legislates with the decree immediate.

The growth of the SAE language-culture complex dates from ancient times.
Much of its metaphorical reference to the nonspatial by the spatial was
already fixed in the ancient tongues, and more especially in Latin. It
is indeed a marked trait of Latin. If we compare, say Hebrew, we find
that, while Hebrew has some allusion to not-space as space, Latin has
more. Latin terms for nonspatials, like educo, religio, principia,
comprehendo, are usually metaphorized physical references: lead out,
tying back, etc. This is not true of all languages—it is quite untrue of
Hopi. The fact that in Latin the direction of development happened to be
from spatial to nonspatial (partly because of secondary stimulation to
abstract thinking when the intellectually crude Romans encountered Greek
culture) and that later tongues were strongly stimulated to mimic Latin,
seems a likely reason for a belief, which still lingers on among
linguists, that this is the natural direction of semantic change in all
languages, and for the persistent notion in Western learned circles (in
strong contrast to Eastern ones) that objective experience is prior to
subjective. Philosophies make out a weighty case for the reverse, and
certainly the direction of development is sometimes the reverse. Thus
the Hopi word for “heart” can be shown to be a late formation within
Hopi from a root meaning think or remember. Or consider what has
happened to the word “radio” in such a sentence as “he bought a new
radio,” as compared to its prior meaning “science of wireless
telephony.”

In the Middle Ages the patterns already formed in Latin began to
interweave with the increased mechanical invention, industry, trade, and
scholastic and scientific thought. The need for measurement in industry
and trade, the stores and bulks of “stuffs” in various containers, the
type-bodies in which various goods were handled, standardizing of
measure and weight units, invention of clocks and measurement of “time,”
keeping of records, accounts, chronicles, histories, growth of
mathematics and the partnership of mathematics and science, all
cooperated to bring our thought and language world into its present
form.

In Hopi history, could we read it, we should find a different type of
language and a different set of cultural and environmental influences
working together. A peaceful agricultural society isolated by geographic
features and nomad enemies in a land of scanty rainfall, arid
agriculture that could be made successful only by the utmost
perseverance (hence the value of persistence and repetition), necessity
for collaboration (hence emphasis on the psychology of teamwork and on
mental factors in general), corn and rain as primary criteria of value,
need of extensive preparations and precautions to assure crops in the
poor soil and precarious climate, keen realization of dependence upon
nature favoring prayer and a religious attitude toward the forces of
nature, especially prayer and religion directed toward the ever-needed
blessing, rain—these things interacted with Hopi linguistic patterns to
mold them, to be molded again by them, and so little by little to shape
the Hopi world-outlook.

To sum up the matter, our first question asked in the beginning (pp.
178–179) is answered thus: Concepts of “time” and “matter” are not given
in substantially the same form by experience to all men but depend upon
the nature of the language or languages through the use of which they
have been developed. They do not depend so much upon ANY ONE SYSTEM
(e.g., tense, or nouns) within the grammar as upon the ways of analyzing
and reporting experience which have become fixed in the language as
integrated “fashions of speaking” and which cut across the typical
grammatical classifications, so that such a “fashion” may include
lexical, morphological, syntactic, and otherwise systemically diverse
means coordinated in a certain frame of consistency. Our own “time”
differs markedly from Hopi “duration.” It is conceived as like a space
of strictly limited dimensions, or sometimes as like a motion upon such
a space, and employed as an intellectual tool accordingly. Hopi
“duration” seems to be inconceivable in terms of space or motion, being
the mode in which life differs from form, and consciousness in toto from
the spatial elements of consciousness. Certain ideas born of our own
time-concept, such as that of absolute simultaneity, would be either
very difficult to express or impossible and devoid of meaning under the
Hopi conception, and would be replaced by operational concepts. Our
“matter” is the physical subtype of “substance” or “stuff,” which is
conceived as the formless extensional item that must be joined with form
before there can be real existence. In Hopi there seems to be nothing
corresponding to it; there are no formless extensional items; existence
may or may not have form, but what it also has, with or without form, is
intensity and duration, these being nonextensional and at bottom the
same.

But what about our concept of “space,” which was also included in our
first question? There is no such striking difference between Hopi and
SAE about space as about time, and probably the apprehension of space is
given in substantially the same form by experience irrespective of
language. The experiments of the Gestalt psychologists with visual
perception appear to establish this as a fact. But the CONCEPT OF SPACE
will vary somewhat with language, because, as an intellectual tool,¹² it
is so closely linked with the concomitant employment of other
intellectual tools, of the order of “time” and “matter,” which are
linguistically conditioned. We see things with our eyes in the same
space forms as the Hopi, but our idea of space has also the property of
acting as a surrogate of nonspatial relationships like time, intensity,
tendency, and as a void to be filled with imagined formless items, one
of which may even be called ‘space.’ Space as sensed by the Hopi would
not be connected mentally with such surrogates, but would be
comparatively “pure,” unmixed with extraneous notions.

As for our second question (p. 179): There are connections but not
correlations or diagnostic correspondences between cultural norms and
linguistic patterns. Although it would be impossible to infer the
existence of Crier Chiefs from the lack of tenses in Hopi, or vice
versa, there is a relation between a language and the rest of the
culture of the society which uses it. There are cases where the
“fashions of speaking” are closely integrated with the whole general
culture, whether or not this be universally true, and there are
connections within this integration, between the kind of linguistic
analyses employed and various behavioral reactions and also the shapes
taken by various cultural developments. Thus the importance of Crier
Chiefs does have a connection, not with tenselessness itself, but with a
system of thought in which categories different from our tenses are
natural. These connections are to be found not so much by focusing
attention on the typical rubrics of linguistic, ethnographic, or
sociological description as by examining the culture and the language
(always and only when the two have been together historically for a
considerable time) as a whole in which concatenations that run across
these departmental lines may be expected to exist, and, if they do
exist, eventually to be discoverable by study.

 

Reprinted from pp. 75–93, Language, culture, and personality: Essays in
memory of Edward Sapir, edited by Leslie Spier (Menasha, Wis.: Sapir
Memorial Publication Fund, 1941). The article was written in the summer
of 1939.

1. We have plenty of evidence that this is not the case. Consider only
the Hopi and the Ute, with languages that on the overt morphological and
lexical level are as similar as, say, English and German. The idea of
“correlation” between language and culture, in the generally accepted
sense of correlation, is certainly a mistaken one.

2. As we say, ‘ten at the SAME TIME,’ showing that in our language and
thought we restate the fact of group perception in terms of a concept
‘time,’ the large linguistic component of which will appear in the
course of this paper.

3. It is no exception to this rule of lacking a plural that a mass noun
may sometimes coincide in lexeme with an individual noun that of course
has a plural; e.g., ‘stone’ (no pl.) with ‘a stone’ (pl. ‘stones’). The
plural form denoting varieties, e.g., ‘wines’ is of course a different
sort of thing from the true plural; it is a curious outgrowth from the
SAE mass nouns, leading to still another sort of imaginary aggregates,
which will have to be omitted from this paper.

4. Hopi has two words for water quantities; [Whorf_p182a] and
[Whorf_p182b]. The difference is something like that between ‘stone’ and
‘rock’ in English, [Whorf_p182b] implying greater size and “wildness”;
flowing water, whether or not outdoors or in nature, is [Whorf_p182b];
so is ‘moisture.’ But, unlike ‘stone’ and ‘rock,’ the difference is
essential, not pertaining to a connotative margin, and the two can
hardly ever be interchanged.

5. To be sure, there are a few minor differences from other nouns, in
English for instance in the use of the articles.

6. ‘Year’ and certain combinations of ‘year’ with name of season, rarely
season names alone, can occur with a locative morpheme ‘at,’ but this is
exceptional. It appears like historical detritus of an earlier different
patterning, or the effect of English analogy, or both.

7. The expective and reportive assertions contrast according to the
“paramount relation.” The expective expresses anticipation existing
EARLIER than objective fact, and coinciding with objective fact LATER
than the status quo of the speaker, this status quo, including all the
subsummation of the past therein, being expressed by the reportive. Our
notion “future” seems to represent at once the earlier (anticipation)
and the later (afterwards, what will be), as Hopi shows. This paradox
may hint of how elusive the mystery of real time is, and how
artificially it is expressed by a linear relation of
past–present–future.

8. One such trace is that the tensor ‘long in duration,’ while quite
different from the adjective ‘long’ of space, seems to contain the same
root as the adjective ‘large’ of space. Another is that ‘somewhere’ of
space used with certain tensors means ‘at some indefinite time.’
Possibly however this is not the case and it is only the tensor that
gives the time element, so that ‘somewhere’ still refers to space and
that under these conditions indefinite space means simply general
applicability, regardless of either time or space. Another trace is that
in the temporal (cycle word) ‘afternoon’ the element meaning ‘after’ is
derived from the verb ‘to separate.’ There are other such traces, but
they are few and exceptional, and obviously not like our own spatial
metaphorizing.

9. The Hopi verbs of preparing naturally do not correspond neatly to our
“prepare”; so that na′twani could also be rendered ‘the practiced-upon,
the tried-for,’ and otherwise.

10. See, e.g., Ernest Beaglehole, Notes on Hopi economic life (Yale
University Publications in Anthropology, no. 15, 1937), especially the
reference to the announcement of a rabbit hunt, and on p. 30,
description of the activities in connection with the cleaning of Toreva
Spring—announcing, various preparing activities, and finally, preparing
the continuity of the good results already obtained and the continued
flow of the spring.

11. This notion of storing up power, which seems implied by much Hopi
behavior, has an analog in physics: acceleration. It might be said that
the linguistic background of Hopi thought equips it to recognize
naturally that force manifests not as motion or velocity, but as
cumulation or acceleration. Our linguistic background tends to hinder in
us this same recognition, for having legitimately conceived force to be
that which produces change, we then think of change by our linguistic
metaphorical analog, motion, instead of by a pure motionless
changingness concept, i.e. accumulation or acceleration. Hence it comes
to our naive feeling as a shock to find from physical experiments that
it is not possible to define force by motion, that motion and speed, as
also “being at rest,” are wholly relative, and that force can be
measured only by acceleration.

12. Here belong “Newtonian” and “Euclidean” space, etc.

12
