Gestalt Technique of Stem Composition in Shawnee

C. F. Voegelin has accomplished the difficult and signal work of
analyzing an immense number of baffling stem compounds of Shawnee into
their component lexemes (stems) and other morphemes (formatives),
classifying them according to formal categories of Shawnee grammar, and
discovering an important native semantic relation, that of the
occurrent, a lexeme that has some pervasive semantic influence that
induces the native to cling to translation of the occurrent even when he
neglects specific translation of the other lexemes in the compound.

Voegelin has asked me to illustrate the application of a different
aspect of linguistic method, which can be applied only after a formal
grammatical analysis has been made, but which then can sometimes show
the principles by which lexemes of differing meaning are placed in
certain sequences to produce semantic effects, whether in compounds or
in syntactic constructions.

Linguists have studied the Indo-European languages so long that they
have been able to generalize their most typical sequences and resultant
semantic effects into such general formulas as subject and predicate,
actor, action, and goal, attribute and head, and exocentric versus
endocentric, also to tag and handle relations that have a superficial
similarity in languages that may otherwise differ greatly from
Indo-European. But this last ability must turn out in many cases to be
only a happy, or at times perhaps an unhappy accident. When the
principles of composition are themselves widely different, these
schematizations break down and cannot account for either the rules of
sequence or the resulting semantic effects. Let me give a simple
instance from a language not widely removed from the syntactic type of
Indo-European—Aztec, belonging to the Uto-Aztecan stock. Here an
apparent attribute-head relationship is very definite, and the attribute
term or modifier always precedes the head or modified term (why this is
a necessary conclusion would require some length to explain). Yet many
expressions follow the type of ‘narrow road,’ [Whorf_p206a], in which
‘narrow’ has to be expressed by a sort of verbal passive participle,
‘narrowed’ (-picak-), and such a participle is placed last, hence after
‘road’ [Whorf_p206b]. The complete correlation of attribute and head
with word order in this language forces us to conclude that ‘narrow’ is
the head and ‘road’ is the attribute, as it is in English ‘roadside.’
Yet if one wished to say ‘new road, good road, brick road,’ in these
‘road’ would be ‘head’ and would come last. Of what use then, to one
wishing to compose in Aztec, is the category of attribute and head, when
it cannot say whether such a simple notion as ‘road’ is attribute or
head in semantic effects that seem so closely parallel as ‘narrow road’
and ‘good road’? One concludes that such categories are but linguistic
kinship systems, and like social kinship systems do not follow any
universal norm.

It is the same with the schematizations of subject–predicate,
actor–action, and action–goal. Even in English, the description of such
a sentence as ‘the tree stood here’ as ‘actor–action’ is rather forced,
even if it is formally parallel to ‘the boy ran.’ A hypothetical
American language X might use three or more lexemes instead of two for
the latter; perhaps (1) movement-of-foot (2) over-a-surface (3)
manifestation-of-boy-occurs-quickly. Perhaps (3) might bear formatives
that make it formally a verb, or an ‘action,’ but again such formatives
might be ‘operators’ applying to the whole sentence, no more to one
lexeme than another. Such a sentence cannot really be broken into a
subject and a predicate, not even when it consists of just two formal
words. Nevertheless it has an analysis, and the parts correspond to
certain essentials that have been segregated out of the situation
reported: i.e., the situation does contain something that might be
called a surface and something that can be called moving feet, besides
something that can be called a boy. Our problem is to determine how
different languages segregate different essentials out of the same
situation. This is often a crucial question in the description of a
language, and it must not be supposed that it has been answered by an
account of the formal rules for combination into sentences of the
lexemes and other morphemes that represent the language’s segregation of
essentials out of situations. Our hypothetical language X might express
the sentence (1)-(2)-(3) by a polysynthetic compounding of stems and
formatives into one formal word, as often in Shawnee, or by a number of
words arranged into a sentence as analytic as one of English; yet in
either case the really important difference from English is the same,
viz., that it has isolated the peculiar group of essentials (1), (2),
(3), and ignored our own isolation of ‘boy (as actor)’ and ‘ran.’ So,
where we speak of ‘cleaning (a gun) with a ramrod,’ Shawnee does not
isolate any rod or action of cleaning, but directs a hollow moving dry
spot by movement of tool (Shawnee stems, part III, 157). This is what
makes Shawnee so strange and baffling from the standpoint of English,
and not at all the mere fact that it is polysynthetic. A language can be
polysynthetic and still say ‘clean with a ramrod’ polysynthetically,
thereby remaining quite transparent from the standpoint of English.

To compare ways in which different languages differently “segment” the
same situation or experience, it is desirable to be able to analyze or
“segment” the experience first in a way independent of any one language
or linguistic stock, a way which will be the same for all observers.
This cannot be done by describing the situation in terms of
subject–predicate, actor–action, attribute–head, etc., for any
scientific use of such terms contemplates that they shall have a
variable meaning as defined for each particular language, including the
possibility that for some languages their meaning shall be nil. Neither
can it be done wholly by familiar terms ranging from the common-sense
type to the quasiscientific, as by trying to break up the situation into
‘things, objects, actions, substances, entities, events.’ Cautious use
of such terms may be helpful, perhaps unavoidable, but it must be
remembered that in their ranges of meaning they are but the creatures of
modern Indo-European languages and their subsidiary jargons, and reflect
the typical modes of segmenting experience in these tongues. They do not
become scientific for linguistics because they may happen to be used in
physics or chemistry. When they refer to psychological experience, like
the terms ‘thoughts, ideas, concepts,’ they require no less caution in
use, but they are under no specially strong taboo for being
“mentalistic” or “mystical.” Mystical in the proper sense they certainly
are not, but are merely “lexations,” no better and no worse than
‘gravitation’ or ‘cheese.’

There is one thing on which all observers of the appearance of a running
boy will agree, at least after questioning or experimental testing—that
it can be divided into parts—and they will all make the division in the
same way. They will all divide it into (1) a figure or outline having
more or less of motion (the boy) and (2) some kind of background or
field against which, or in which, the figure is seen (that is, if we
define observation in its common visual sense and so leave out the blind
“observers”).

A discovery made by modern configurative or Gestalt psychology gives us
a canon of reference for all observers, irrespective of their languages
or scientific jargons, by which to break down and describe all visually
observable situations, and many other situations, also. This is the
discovery that visual perception is basically the same for all normal
persons past infancy and conforms to definite laws, a large number of
which are fairly well known. It is impossible here to do more than touch
on these laws, but they bring out clearly that the basal fact of visual
perception is the relation of figure and ground, that perceptions are
largely in the nature of outlines, contrasted more or less with the
grounds, fields, and fillings of outlines, and that perception of motion
or action is figural in type, or connected with the perception of at
least a vague outline quality.

To say that the facts are essentially the same for all observers is not
to deny that they have their fringe of aberrations and individual
differences, but these are relatively minor. Brain lesions and eye
defects produce distortions; special skills or mental effort can
rearrange emphases and sometimes change the figure-ground roles of
certain items, as when one “wills” the drawing of a cube seen edgewise
to look like a hexagon with three radii. Color blindness and unequal
sensitivity to colors are such marginal variations; impression of size,
too, has marginal variation, as when the moon looks to one person the
size of a nickel, to another as big as a house, yet always subtends on
the retina less than a pencil at arm’s length. When it comes to shape,
the variations are still more marginal and slight. All these variations
operate within the frame of known laws, and so do not hinder a normative
account of perceived data. The FACTS may differ slightly; the LAWS are
the same for all. If the perceptual influences are such as to cause one
normal person to see a definite outline, they will cause all other
normal persons to see the same outline. For example, all people see the
constellation Ursa Major as the outline which we call dipper-shaped,
though they may not call it a dipper or have such a utensil in their
culture, and though there are, of course, no lines connecting the stars
into this or any other outline.

But how do these laws of vision give any canon of reference for
non-visual experience? By process of elimination. Everything that “takes
up space” can be shown to be known directly or indirectly through
vision. Everything unvisual is unspatial in character (and vice versa)
and is felt as immediate to the experiencer. Touch alone is somewhat
fused with visual material, and, when it tells us form, contour, and
texture, it is indirectly visual. Visual experience is projected and
constitutes space, or what we shall call the external field of the
observer; unvisual experience is introjected and makes up what we shall
call, following some Gestalt psychologists, the ego field, or egoic
field, because the observer or ego feels himself, as it were, alone with
these sensations and awarenesses. Hence in referring a certain
experience to the egoic field, because it is not in the visual field, or
to the ambivalent borderland, as when a sensation is known by both modes
as within the observer’s body, we are classing it as all observers class
it, regardless of their language, once they understand the nature of the
distinction. Moreover, the egoic field has its own Gestalt laws, of
sense quality, rhythm, etc., which are universal. We can unhesitatingly
class the referent of a lexeme of hearing, tasting, or smelling along
with those of thinking, emotions, etc., in the egoic realm and apart
from any lexeme referring to an experience having outline or motion. The
difference between light and darkness, and the referent of seeing, not
of what is seen, also, is either borderland or of the egoic field,
because the sensation quality is introjected though the figure-ground
quality is projected; the referent of saying something is also egoic,
because the observer introjects both his own and other people’s speech,
equating an essential from it to his egoic field of hearing or sound;
and the referent of possessing or having is also egoic.

This principle of classifying referents is nonlinguistic and nonsemantic
in the ordinary sense of semantic. An isolate of experience in either
the external or the egoic field, e.g., a shape or a noise, is not a
meaning. Nevertheless a language may sometimes have a principle of
classifying groups of morphemes and their semantic effects which is
coordinated with this universal principle. Thus, in English, verbs
referring to the subject’s ego-field experience use the simple present
tense for momentary present fact, and not the present progressive. Other
verbs employ the present progressive tense for either momentary or
continued present fact, and the simple present (except in special
locutions like ‘here he comes’) for the nomic or customary tense aspect.
Foreigners learning English do not know this, and hence may say ‘I am
hearing you, he is seeing it.’ English speakers say ‘I hear you, he sees
it, he feels sick, I say that—, I think that—’; but, on the contrary, ‘I
am working’ (not ‘I work’), ‘the boy is running’ (not ‘the boy runs,’
which is nomic, e.g., ‘the boy runs whenever—’).¹

I have found this Gestalt method of describing referents and situations
of so much service toward understanding puzzling points of languages, as
different in viewpoints as English, Hopi, Aztec, and Maya, that I
decided to try it on Shawnee, though I know nothing of Shawnee or any
other Algonkian language except from what Voegelin has published in the
present series and his manuscript for the remainder of the series, which
will complete his lexicon of Shawnee and Miami. The results are as
follows, and it is for Algonkianists to say whether they have any
significance or utility.

A fairly simple rough general rule applies to formation of a Shawnee
stem compound. It may be likened in applicability to the rough general
rule for noun-phrase composition in English: modifier precedes modified.
Neither rule is absolute; e.g., in English ‘brick buildings’ represents
the typical case where the general rule applies, ‘buildings brick except
for frame porches’ one of the overriding special rules. The English rule
is a good rough guide to a modern European, learning to compose English,
because his own language is sufficiently similar so that he understands
what is meant by modifier and modified: his language makes a similar
classification of experience, and at most, as in French, merely reverses
the order.² The phraseology of modifier and modified does not work for
Shawnee stem compounds that result in a verb, as they usually do. The
rough general rule (aside from the overriding rules) for Shawnee is:
figure precedes external field, the more figural precedes the less
figural, but the egoic field generally precedes all these. The chief
overriding rules are: (1) a group of stems of vague figure (vague
movement, texture, size, etc.) precedes everything; (2) non-initial
stems must be preceded somehow, even in contravention of the general
principle, although they generally comply in being less figural than
what precedes; (3) when the result is a noun (but not a bahuvrihi or
sentence used like a noun) the rule is reversed, and ground or field
characters precede the figural; (4) two themes each compounded according
to all the foregoing may be placed together, sometimes resulting in
irregular sequences within the total formation; (5) such a theme is
sometimes used like a stem.

The descriptions of the reference of stems will be:

svf  special stem of vague figure (often of vague motion, direction,
texture or plasticity of surface or mass, size, etc.).

ef  egoic field reference.

f  figure—this group expresses outline and space distribution more than
the others; it does not necessarily imply movement but movement may be
present, and an f stem may be used after some more figural f stem to
denote relative external field, ground, or filling quality of the
latter.

frg  figure as relative ground, as in preceding description, often a
body part.

mf  movement figure, the ‘idea’ or image of a certain outline of
movement.

fcm  figure containing movement, a vaguely outlined field which is
relatively stationary but has movement or “coming to rest” within it.

xf  external field or ground, with a minimum of figural or outline
quality.

i  instrumental, a special small group of elements.

This is the normal order of position, i.e., svf, ef, f, frg, mf, fcm,
i—although there is nothing very rigid about the relative order of frg,
mf, fcm, with respect to each other. Formatives will be denoted:

s  (formative of) subject.

o  object and/or transitive.

t  transitive element.

m  miscellaneous formatives.

In a broad sense the group f, frg, mf, fcm, xf, is one, and sometimes
the same stem can fill any one of these positions if it is preceded or
followed by stems in such a way that the progression of decreasing
figural quality and increasing ground or field quality is carried out.

Examples of svf stems are: pa[Whorf_p146n3a]- ‘going, moving thither’;
paak- ‘hard, firm, staccato movement’; tep- ‘acquiring’; kt- ‘big,
superlative’; ka[GLOTTAL STOP]k- ‘rough, dry’; laakeet- ‘lightly,
easily, quickly’; laašiwe- ‘down, off from, above’; lo[GLOTTAL STOP]θee-
‘go out, off, through’; liil- ‘diversity.’

Examples of ef stems are: pa[GLOTTAL STOP]pa- ‘tapping sound’ (ef
because a sound); petškw- ‘aversion, repugnance’; petθak(y)- ‘trouble,
nuisance, intricate, difficult, confused, excited’; pt- ‘accidental,
unintentional, erroneous’; teepwe- ‘truth’; tepaat- ‘satisfactory’;
[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]i[GLOTTAL STOP]θ- ‘fear’; kiš- ‘warm,
hot’; -kiiškwe- ‘consciousness’; katawi- ‘ability’; katow- ‘ask, beg’;
lalalwee- ‘rattling noise’; miim[GLOTTAL STOP]kaw- ‘discovered,
remembered’; wiyakowee- ‘anger’; waaši- ‘intentional’; halan-
‘notifying’; -eele- ‘thought.’

Examples of the (f— —xf) group of the first degree, operating chiefly as
f, are: pap- ‘roomy configuration’; pat- ‘moist spot or mass’;
Ppe[GLOTTAL STOP]t- ‘weakly propping configuration’; petekw- ‘rounded,
around, roll’; petakw- ‘covering, top, above’; piit- ‘interior outline,
inside, hole’; pi[GLOTTAL STOP]taw- ‘in-between figure’; pakw-
‘plantlike, leafshaped’; peekw- ‘dry spot’; pe[GLOTTAL STOP]kw-
‘cluster, bunched together’; po[GLOTTAL STOP]k(y)- ‘broken, smashed
condition’; pašk(y)- ‘emergence from opening’; poškw- ‘irregular
fraction, halved, broken’; tepilahi ‘straight (outline)’; tepet(w)-
‘together, in a group’; [LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]ee- ‘matched
pair or combination, equal, even’; kip- ‘covered, closed up’; kotekwi
‘turning, winding’; kakaanwi ‘long (long outline)’; kooky- ‘immersed in
water’; šaapw- ‘in and out, through’; škote ‘fire (fiery figure)’; laa-
‘midst of area’; leep- ‘tapering at base’; liipiik- ‘settled liquid’;
—l[GLOTTAL STOP]pw- ‘contracted, pounded down’; laka[GLOTTAL STOP]kwa
‘ribbed contour, like washboard or palate’; lekw- ‘covered with ground
or ashes’; liiky- ‘dismantled, apart’; le[GLOTTAL STOP]θawaa- ‘forked’;
laal- ‘hanging down, away from’; lel[GLOTTAL STOP]ky- ‘torn outline,
tear cloth, etc.’; waawiyaa- ‘circle.’

Some f stems often operating as frg are: (-)le[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH
CARON]- ‘finger, hand, in the fingers, on the hand’; -e[LATIN SMALL
LETTER C WITH CARON]e- ‘belly, body’ (in fact, all body and body-part
terms are usually frg); -a[GLOTTAL STOP]kwi- ‘(mass of) vegetation,
flora, wood’; -aalaka ‘hole, hollowness’; -kamekwi ‘house, in the
house’; -šee- ‘cloth, clothing’; -wale ‘back pack’; -api ‘sitting
configuration, sitting.’

Some mf stems are: peteki ‘back in time or space’ (movement or path);
-pho ‘picking up while running’; ptoo- ‘running’; [LATIN SMALL LETTER C
WITH CARON]iip- ‘conveying in, conveying secretly’; [LATIN SMALL LETTER
C WITH CARON]i[GLOTTAL STOP][LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]iip-
‘shaking’; -[GLOTTAL STOP]tan- ‘flowing, floating’; -ke- ‘general bodily
movement’; -eška- ‘initiating bodily movement’; -eka ‘dancing’; -kawi
‘dripping’; -[GLOTTAL STOP]θa- ‘flying’; loop- ‘swinging’; lek-
‘dissolving, melting’; miil- ‘giving’; hee- ‘going’; -[GLOTTAL STOP]θen
‘breaking off from moving thing.’

Some fcm stems are: pi[GLOTTAL STOP]te- ‘foaming’; pootawe ‘burning
wood’; -e[GLOTTAL STOP]tekwi ‘stream’; kapee- ‘crossing stream’; kalawi-
‘talking (person talking)’; kon- ‘swallowing’; kwaap- ‘lifting from
water’; kwaškw- ‘recoiling’; kwke- ‘movement of hook in water’; -a-
‘teeth movement’; -[GLOTTAL STOP]ši-, -[GLOTTAL STOP]šin- ‘coming to
rest’; -laa- ‘boiling.’

Examples of stems chiefly operating as xf are: -piiwe ‘hair, feathers’;
-aapo ‘liquid’; -pki ‘scattering over level surface, level surface’;
tepki ‘swampy, marshy terrain’; tepe[GLOTTAL STOP]ki ‘night’; -taškwi
‘flora’; -la ‘color’; -kami ‘expanse of water’; -[GLOTTAL STOP]ki
‘expanse, abundance’; -[GLOTTAL STOP]kwatwi ‘sky’; -šwaa- ‘space, room’;
-[GLOTTAL STOP]škw-atwi ‘herbage’; -aam- ‘soil, ground’; -[GLOTTAL
STOP]ho- ‘water, wetness’; -[GLOTTAL STOP]šk(y)- ‘softness, sliminess.’

Examples are hardly needed of the small group of very common i stems
(instrumentals) indicating operation by hand, foot, tool, heat, etc.

A few examples of composition may be explained in detail. In Shawnee
Stems, part III, 289, under kip-, kipw-, stem of f type, an outline of
closure or of something covered up is placed or ‘pictured’ on a ground
or in a setting of: (a) buckskin, (b) a path, (c) the eye region, (d)
the eye region with movement of hand (-kip-iikwee-n-, -f-frg-i-), also
in the anus region, the mouth, the ear, etc. Or consider the way of
saying ‘among the swamps.’ Our own manner of lexation is to isolate from
the experience an essential that we call ‘swamp,’ in the form of a
typical English noun. As such a noun, it slides in the grammatical
grooves prepared for all nouns, is treated as a typical “thing,”
referred to as having individual separation, singularity, plurality,
suitability for article and preposition treatment. There is little
difference in linguistic treatment between a swamp and a butterfly, in
spite of the enormous difference in the perceptual experience. In
Shawnee we have to forget the English type of lexation and fall back on
the perceptual situation. The referent of our preposition ‘among’
becomes actually the part of the picture with the most quality of
outline—a limited, defined spot in the midst of an indefinite
field—which is a field of swampiness. The picture is, as it were, rough
sketched by placing first the figural element laa- ‘midst of area’
followed by its ground or setting tepki ‘swampy terrain,’ > laa-teepki
(f-xf) ‘(spot) among the swamps, in the swamp’ (part II, 137).

In part II, 157, we have for ‘I clean or dry gun by running ramrod in
it,’ ni-peekw-aalak-h-a, s-f-frg-i-o. The figural center of the
composition is a dry or clean spot (peekw) which is placed in a setting
of hollowness or ‘hole’ by the stem -aalak-, frg, a figure serving as
relative ground or field for the first figure; the figural center is
then activated or given motion by the instrumental -h- ‘by movement of
tool,’ and denoted as transitive with inanimate object by the formative
-a. In part II, 143, the f-stem [LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]ee-
sets up a basic outline for the composition, the configuration of a
matched pair, or matching units. Essentials of filling quality for the
matched pair are given by xf stems signifying ‘certain kind or type,
general appearance, color,’ or by frg stem ‘person-s,’ or by xf-xf,
e.g., ‘color plus body hair,’ and ‘color plus water.’ Thus the words
mean ‘of the same type, looking alike, of the same color,’ etc. In
ni-Ppeθ-k-a, s-f-mf-o, part I, 69, ‘I lean against it to hold it up,’
the basic outline of propping, visually often something like a rough T
or a lower-case lambda, is given by Ppeθ (< Ppe[GLOTTAL STOP]t), and the
vague figural quality of a moving animate body is imparted by the mf
stem -k- ‘bodily movement.’ In ni-Ppe[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH
CARON]-ši-m-a, s-f-fcm-t-o, ‘I put him there (on some support) to keep
him from falling,’ the second figure -ši-, a vague outline of motion
coming to rest within an area, comes to rest in or on (as filling of)
the basic prop outline, and is made transitive with animate object.

Many further examples of stem compounding are briefly analyzed in the
list at the end of this appendix. It remains to speak of noun
compounding and theme compounding, which are here regarded as overriding
the basic rule of stem compounding. When the result of compounding is a
noun, the rule is reversed: field or ground precedes figure, the less
figural precedes the more figural. Since this is also commonly the case
in the usual type of attribute-head relation in English, the Shawnee
noun (unlike the verb) can usually be understood in terms of such a
relation; e.g., part III, 290, kopeleko-miyeewi, xf-f, ‘iron road
(railroad).’ The thing mentally associated with the head term or figure
precedes it, again as in English; in this type of analysis it is
regarded as a datum of the speaker’s egoic field due to memory, and
hence is denoted efm. Thus, part II, 139, takhwaan-ekaawe, efm-f, ‘bread
dance’; p. 141, taamin-aapo ‘corn liquid (whisky)’; p. 143, [LATIN SMALL
LETTER C WITH CARON]iipa-yeemo, efm-f, ‘spirit bee’; p. 145, [LATIN
SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]aki-y[GLOTTAL STOP]kweeθa, frg-f, ‘small
woman,’ where the vague figure, awareness of degree of size, precedes
the more definite outline.

Two compound themes may be compounded with each other, but what rule if
any governs the order I am unable to say. The examples seem few compared
to the huge number of ordinary stem compounds. Thus in part I, 67, is a
form that can perhaps be analyzed as waasinitaši-pa[GLOTTAL
STOP]lenaweewi-[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]i, theme-theme-s. The
first theme would be waaši-nitaši, ef-f ‘intentionally at a spot there,’
the second pa[GLOTTAL STOP]lenaweewi, svf-ef ‘going thither, living.’ On
the other hand, perhaps we have here a theme preceded by two stems.

It may be that there are two kinds of lexemes in Shawnee, stems and
themes, and two kinds of compounding techniques, one for stems and one
for themes. According to such a theory, stem compounds would use the
principle of figure before ground and would result in a verbal theme,
which if ending the word makes it a verb or normal sentence, or else a
nomic sentence used as a noun (a bahuvrihi form). Theme compounds would
use the principle of ground before figure, the result being whatever the
last theme is, verb or noun. It would then appear that certain lexemes
although not analyzable are always themes, e.g., fundamentally nominal
lexemes and the svf and ef lexemes. These svf and ef elements, being
themes, precede the f——xf verbal theme, as less figural. This is, of
course, very tentative.

Nothing treated in this appendix explains which stem the native regards
as most pervasive: i.e., as the occurrent. This may be a question quite
apart from that of the method of compounding. I might hazard a guess
that it may depend on the degree of analogic pressure behind the various
stems in a combination. Some stems in the nature of the case would be
more productive of combinations than others. The stem with the greatest
number of close parallels to the combination in question might be felt
by the native as nuclear.

There follows a list of analyzed combinations from parts I, II, III,
each preceded by page number and followed by formula and translation,
often reworked from Voegelin’s to illustrate the technique, with
occasional comments on the semantic effect.

Part I:  67 pa-kwke, svf-fcm ‘he went to condition of water with hook
moving in it, he went fishing.’ 67 ni-pa[GLOTTAL STOP]-pem-[GLOTTAL
STOP]θe-[GLOTTAL STOP]to, s-svf-f-mf-o ‘I pass it (the resolution) along
(around).’ 67 ye[GLOTTAL STOP]-pa[GLOTTAL STOP]-nekot-θee-θi-ya,
m-svf-f-mf-m-s ‘when I go there alone.’ 68 papi-šwaa-wi, f-xf-s ‘figure
of roomy occupancy in field of general space occurs, it has plenty of
room.’ 69 ni-pat-šk-a-m-a, s-f-xf-fcm-t-o ‘I kissed him’ (f moist spot,
xf general softness, fcm lip mvt., stem -a- can be called fcm but is
perhaps also i). 69 ni-pat-šk-a[GLOTTAL STOP]h-w-a, s-f-xf-i-t-o ‘I made
him wet with mud’ (i, mvt. of tool or means). 70 ni-peteko-n-a, s-f-i-o
‘I roll it.’ 70 peteko-[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]e-ška, f-frg-mf
‘he doubled up his body’ (rolled outline in relative ground of body or
belly, general bodily mvt.). 70 ta[GLOTTAL STOP]petekiši-miim[GLOTTAL
STOP]kaweele-ta-m-akwe, theme-theme-t-o-s < ta[GLOTTAL STOP]-peteki-ši,
svf-mf-m ‘back to that place,’ miim[GLOTTAL STOP]kaw-eele, ef-ef
‘remember.’ 71 ni-petškw-eele-m-a, s-ef-ef-t-o ‘I hate him.’ 71
petθaki-lee-θa, ef-f-m ‘(person who) is a nuisance.’ 71
ni-petako-l-aw-a, s-f-mf-t-o ‘I shot above him’ (outline of
superposition, projectile mvt.). 71 ni-pt-a-m-a, s-ef-fcm-t-o ‘I
accidentally bit him.’ 72 pii[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH
CARON]-θe-[GLOTTAL STOP]θen-wi, f-mf-fcm-s ‘it breaks off and flies in.’
72 pii[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]i-le[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH
CARON]e-[GLOTTAL STOP]šin-wa, f-frg-fcm-s ‘he laid his hand inside.’ 72
ni-pii[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]i-miil-a, s-f-mf-o ‘I gave it to
him through a hole.’ 72 piit-alwa, f-frg (interiority figure, bullet
filling) = ‘bullet sack.’ 72 pi[GLOTTAL STOP]teewi-laate, fcm-fcm as
relative ground ‘it foams when boiling.’ 73 ni-pi[GLOTTAL
STOP]tawiše-[GLOTTAL STOP]θe-to, s-theme-fcm-o ‘I joined pieces of
cloth,’ pi[GLOTTAL STOP]tawi-še, f-xf ‘juncture (f) in cloth (xf).’ 73
piimi-pooteθ-wa, ef-f-s ‘he makes error in smoking.’ 74
paak-aame[GLOTTAL STOP]ki, svf-xf ‘it is a hard spot (svf) of ground
(xf). 74–75 ni-paak-eele-m-a, s-svf-ef-t-o ‘I think of his strength.’ 76
ni-paki-kaw-[GLOTTAL STOP]to, s-svf-mf-o ‘I make it drip.’ 77
ni-pkw-e[GLOTTAL STOP]ko-ta, s-f-fcm-o ‘I cut a piece off it.’ 83
leelawi-piikwa, f-xf ‘central point (f) of undergrowth (xf) occurs.’ 83
kinwi-piikwa, f-xf ‘long narrow area (f) of brush (xf) occurs, brush
extends along.’ 83 ni-po[GLOTTAL STOP]ki[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH
CARON]e-el-aw-a, s-f-frg-mf-t-o ‘I caused breech (f) in body (frg) with
projectile mvt. (mf) to him, I shot him in the body.’ 83 po[GLOTTAL
STOP]k-iikwe, f-frg ‘he has breech (f) in one-side-of-face (frg), he has
one eye out.’ 87 ni-poškwi-piye-en-a, s-f-frg-i-o ‘I caused irregular
fraction (f) of long extension (frg) by hand mvt. (i) of it (tree), I
broke a limb of the tree.’ 87 ni-poškwi-n[GLOTTAL STOP]ke-[GLOTTAL
STOP]ši-m-a, s-f-frg-fcm-t-o ‘I broke (f) his arm (frg) by motion coming
to rest (fcm), by throwing him against something.’ 9l ni-paala[LATIN
SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]i-we-l-a, s-f-mf-t-o ‘I carry (mf) him
downward (f).’ 91 ni-pele-še-en-a, s-f-frg-i-o ‘I ripped the seam of
it.’ 92 meelawaa[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]i-paam-[GLOTTAL
STOP]θe, ef-f-mf ‘he was tired (ef) of running (mf) around (f).’ 99
piyet-aalak-θen-wi, svf-f-xf-s ‘it lies (is in xf) with hole (f) this
way (svf).’

Part II:  135 ni-tephikan-[GLOTTAL STOP]θe-to, s-f-fcm-o ‘I put it in
jar-s.’ 135 ni-tepi-kiiškwe, s-svf-ef ‘I returned to consciousness.’ 136
pa[GLOTTAL STOP]-tepowee-ki, svf-ef-s ‘they went to council
(counseling).’ 137 ni-tepeto-kalawi-pe, s-f-fcm-m ‘they were talking
(fcm) in a group, together (f).’ 137 tepeto-ptoo-ki, f-mf-s ‘they were
running in a group.’ 138 tetep-a[GLOTTAL STOP]kwi, f-frg ‘rolling
outline of flora’ = ‘grapevine.’ 138 ni-waawiyaa-tap-šk-a, s-f-mf-i-o ‘I
rolled (mf) it in a circle (f) by kicking (i).’ 141 ni-me[GLOTTAL
STOP][LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]i-tehe, s-svf-ef ‘I have thought.’
149 ni-θaki-[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]aalee-pi-l-a,
s-f-frg-fcm-t-o ‘I cause holding-outline (f) on nose (frg) with tying
(fcm), I put halter on him.’

Part III:  289 kape-ho-kwi, fcm-xf-s ‘he crosses floating.’ 293
kotekw-aakami, f-xf ‘water (xf) is in a winding (f) channel.’ 295
ni-kakaanwi-le[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]e, s-f-frg ‘I have long
hands.’ 297 ni-kooki-tepe-en-a, s-f-frg-i-o ‘I dipped his head (frg,
filling of the immersion-figure) in the water.’ 298 ni-Kki-le[LATIN
SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]ee-pi-l-a, s-f-frg-fcm-t-o ‘I put (binding
action, fcm) a ring (circular outline, f) on his finger (frg). 300
kaško-[GLOTTAL STOP]še, f-frg ‘he has sharp ears.’ 300 ni-kišw-eele-m-a,
s-ef-ef-t-o ‘I regard him as worthy, permit him.’ 301 kiišoo-kwaam-wa,
ef-ef-s or svf-ef-s he ‘sleeps warmly.’ 303 ni-kilek-a-m-a, s-f-fcm-t-o
‘I caused mixed configuration (f) with mvt. in mouth (fcm), I mix it in
my mouth.’ 304 kolep-šin-wa, f-fcm-s ‘he turned over lying down.’
306–307 ni-kaawat-eele-m-a, s-theme-ef-t-o ‘I think of him as round’
(kaaw-at- theme, hence can precede ef?). 308 ni-kwaško-l-aw-a,
s-fcm-mf-t-o ‘I knocked him down by shooting him.’ 308
ni-kwaškwi-tepe-en-a, s-fcm-frg-i-o (irregular order but fcm could be
considered f) ‘I pushed his head away.’ 310 šaapot-aalakat-wi, f-frg-s
‘it has a hole through to the other side.’ 319 θaak-ho-[GLOTTAL
STOP]θen-wi, f-xf-xf-s ‘it is partly immersed sticking out of the
water.’ 320 ni-θak-aalow-een-a, s-f-frg-i-o ‘I caught him by his tail.’

 

Reprinted from the appendix, pp. 393–406, to C. F. Voegelin, Shawnee
stems and the Jacob P. Dunn Miami dictionary. Indianapolis: Indiana
Historical Society, 1940. (Prehistory Research Series, vol. I, no. 9,
April 1940).

1. Cf. ‘he is feeling (outlining) it’—external field visual touch, and
‘he feels it’—egoic field sensation.

2. Yet sometimes the non-English speaker makes a Gestalt error, as when
a Mexican translated for me desierto de los leones as ‘lion desert.’
Normal English does not say ‘lion wilderness’ or ‘fish ocean’ because of
an overriding rule that a small compact figure does not modify a total
external-field ground, or in vernacular ‘a little object can’t modify
all out-of-doors.’

13

Decipherment of the Linguistic Portion of the Maya Hieroglyphs

The Maya were the only fully literate people of the aboriginal American
world. The buildings and monuments of stone that they left are covered
with their writings—writings of which little has yet been read except
the dates with which they begin. Moreover, they wrote many books and
manuscripts, and three such books of fairly late period have been
preserved. These are the famous three Maya codices, and I propose,
before the end of this paper, to read a very brief extract from one of
them, and to show, in a very plain and simple way, what the Maya writing
system was like, and how its signs were put together.

Included in this writing system is a group of signs and combinations of
signs referring to a special kind of subject matter. These are signs
denoting numerals, periods of time, and terms of the calendar, between
which mathematical relations exist and the use of which constitutes a
system of mathematics. The mathematical references of these signs have
been determined from these mathematical relations that are observed to
exist between them, and thus we can read the dates and the positions of
the solar-lunar calendar that are recorded at the beginning of most
inscriptions. Besides this mathematical record, there is the purely
linguistic portion of the writings, between the parts of which we can
observe grammatical or linguistic relations, but no mathematical
relations. These purely linguistic portions are those with which I shall
deal. I shall deal, moreover, with the writing in the codices, not that
of the inscriptions, though the inscriptional writing is generally
similar to that of the codices. It may surprise many to know that, in
the codices, the nonmathematical, linguistic signs outnumber the
mathematical ones by more than a hundred to one (not counting
repetitions of the same sign). So much for the belief that the Maya
writings are mainly mathematical.

When Champollion began the decipherment of Egyptian writing, he was in
the relatively fortunate position of not having to oppose an extensive
body of established doctrine holding that the markings were not writing
but a nonlinguistic symbolism. To be sure there were the fantastic
speculations of Athanasius Kircher, concerned wholly with the religious
and mystical symbolism which he read into the hieroglyphs, but these
were upheld by none of the scholarly disciplines and quickly went down
before Champollion’s irrefutable logic. At that time the philologist and
literary scholar reigned supreme in the study of ancient cultures.
Champollion therefore had only to prove the linguistic logic of his
results to philologists; he needed not to advocate his methods to
archaeologists, for there were none, except philologists. There was not
then the specialized separation of disciplines which prevails now. At
that time philology led the way, read inscriptions, and stimulated
archaeology.

It is popularly supposed that the success of Champollion’s effort was
wholly due to the discovery of the Rosetta Stone with its bilingual
inscription and that there is nothing corresponding to the Rosetta Stone
in Maya hieroglyphs. Both suppositions are wrong. Champollion would have
ultimately succeeded without a Rosetta Stone, for the inscriptions
happened to be in a language that he knew. He knew Egyptian, that is
Coptic, the late form of the language and still essentially the same
tongue, which the ancient Egyptians spoke and wrote. Just so the Central
American writings happen to be in a language that it is possible to
know. They might have been in a dead language, and then the case would
indeed have been difficult, but fortunately they are in Maya, which is
still spoken and can be studied from many sources. But how do we know
they are in Maya? This will be quite clear to a linguistic scholar, who
appreciates that, if texts in an unknown character are in a language
that he knows, it is likely that he can detect that fact from the nature
and frequency of repeated collocations of signs. In addition, the
meaning of various clusters of signs in the Maya system is known from
tradition (e.g., the glyphs of the months) and others from pictures that
accompany them in the codices. The hieroglyphs record a language in
which the writings for a certain month and for ‘sitting position’ begin
with the same sign, which is the image of a feather. This condition is
satisfied only by the Maya language, in which the roots of these
particular words and the root of the word ‘feather’ all begin with the
same syllable. Again, it is a language in which the writings for ‘snake,
fish,’ and a certain time period all begin with the same or with
mutually interchangeable signs, a condition also satisfied by Maya. It
is a language in which the writings for ‘honeybee, earth,’ and the name
of a day begin the same, in which ‘hold in the hand’ and ‘nothing’ begin
the same, in which ‘spear’ and ‘noose’ begin with the same sign, which
is also found in the clusters that mean ‘jaguar,’ ‘nine,’ and ‘lunar
month,’ and so on. The evidence mounts and becomes at last overwhelming.
Not even Cholti or Tzeltal, the languages closest to Maya, can satisfy
the requirements; only Maya can do so.

There exists also a lesser equivalent of the Rosetta Stone, i.e., the
preserved names of the ancient months and other calendar terms with the
sign clusters for writing them, the ways of writing the numerals, the 27
characters recorded by Bishop Landa, the sign clusters for the cardinal
directions, the colors, quite a number of animals, and various gods—a
collection of odd bits that, when gathered together, make a not
inconsiderable total. Finally there are many texts in the codices in
which the meaning is almost as plain as though a translation ran beside
it, because of the detailed pictures that run parallel with the text and
illustrate it. Thus we really do have a Maya Rosetta Stone, as well as a
knowledge of the language of the texts, so that, given linguistic
scholarship like that of Champollion, it is perfectly feasible to
decipher and translate some of the texts now, and eventually all of
them.

But, on the other hand, the linguistic decipherer today has to contend
with the chasm that now exists between American archaeology and
philology. The philological viewpoint, with its scholarly interest in
texts simply as texts, has become rather strange and incomprehensible to
modern American archaeology, with its high development, along the
scientific side, of the logical correlating of strictly material
evidence, the while its popular side and its financing is largely
connected with the esthetic interest, and with the interest that
attaches to concrete human subject matter, particularly that of an
exotic kind. Now the linguistic and philological interest is to be
distinguished both from the materially and physically scientific
interest and from the estheticohuman one; for, while it is not entirely
divorced from either, and it cannot live in a vacuum, yet it finds its
main concern upon a different level, a level of its own. The linguistic
scholar is interested in a text as the monument of a language arrested
and preserved at a certain point of time. He is not primarily interested
in the subject matter of the text, as either history, folklore,
religion, astronomy, or whatnot, but in its linguistic form, which to
him is the supreme interest of interests. From this proceeds his type of
objectivity, an earnest that his reading will not be affected by
theories concerned with the content of the writing. He puts aside
content to concentrate on linguistic form. He aims to reconstruct the
language as it actually was, with its consonants and vowels in their
actual places in words, its paradigms of declension and conjugation and
its patterns of syntax, thereby adding a new body of facts to the whole
domain of linguistic taxonomy. A by-product of his research is the
reading of history and culture, but it may be questioned if his
discovery of strictly linguistic fact in a time perspective is not the
more important. The decipherment of Hittite has proved to be far more
important for the light it has thrown on the development of the
Indo-European languages than for all the accounts of Hittite reigns and
conquests. The battles and politics of the Hittites are as dead as a
nail in Hector’s coffin, but their verb forms and pronouns and common
words are matters of live interest in American universities at this
moment, since the accurate facts of the Hittite language revealed by
careful decipherment are completely revolutionizing our concepts of
Indo-European linguistics. This authoritative knowledge of Hittite could
not have come about if the deciphering scholars had not been linguists
who had slowly and carefully ascertained, by scholarly methods, with
profound respect for the text as a text, the exact words and grammar,
conceiving this as their paramount duty. It could not have come about if
they had conceived their duty as that of reading off a sweeping survey
of Hittite history and culture, or even of clothing the dry bones of
archaeology with the flesh of human narrative, important as these things
are.

The desiderata for Maya decipherment are no different. Reading Maya
texts must be a slow, careful investigation of linguistic forms,
regardless of the interest or lack of interest of their subject matter.
We must not conceive it our task to read off sweepingly the Maya
literature for the sake of the information on history, culture,
religion, or whatever else may be contained in it. The annals of this
subject are cumbered by such attempts to read off or “interpret” the
whole corpus of the Maya codices at one fell swoop, from Brasseur de
Bourbourg to one very recent such an attempt. Such amusements proceed
from a longing for glamour and quick results, misconceiving what is the
most valuable thing to be obtained from the results. On the other hand,
much of the work of Cyrus Thomas and various bits of linguistic data
pointed out by Morley and others have been at least in the right
direction—they seem to have understood what the problem really is.

The Maya writing system was a complex but very natural way—natural to
minds just beginning to exploit the idea of fixing language in visual
symbols—of using small picture-like signs to represent the sounds of
fractions of utterances (usually of a syllable or less in extent),
combining these signs so that the combined fractions of utterance
outlined the total utterance of a word or a sentence. Past study of this
system has been considerably retarded by needless and sterile logomachy
over whether the system, or whether any particular sign, should be
called phonetic or ideographic. From a configurative linguistic
standpoint, there is no difference. “Ideographic” is an example of the
so-called mentalistic terminology, which tells us nothing from a
linguistic point of view. No kind of writing, no matter how crude or
primitive, symbolizes ideas divorced from linguistic forms of
expression. A symbol when standing alone may symbolize a “pure idea,”
but, in order to represent an idea as one in a definite sequence of
ideas, it must become the symbol for a linguistic form or some fraction
of a linguistic form. All writing systems, including the Chinese,
symbolize simply linguistic utterances. As soon as enough symbols for
utterances have been assembled to correspond uniquely to a plainly
meaningful sequence (phrase or sentence, e.g.) in the language being
written, that assembly of signs will inevitably convey the meaning of
that linguistic sequence to the reader native to that language, no
matter what each sign may symbolize in isolation. Meaning enters into
writing, writing of any kind, only in this way, and in no other. The
meaning of any linear or temporal succession of symbols is not the sum
of any symbolisms or denotations that the symbols may have in isolation,
but is the meaning of the total linguistic form which that succession
suggests. Hence the fact that some individual signs look like pictures
of the things or ideas denoted by the words of the utterance plays no
real part in the reading; those signs are just as much symbolic,
learned, and at bottom arbitrary signs for fractions of utterance as any
other characters or letters. On the other hand, resemblance to an object
or picture may be really important in decipherment, as a clue to how the
sign came to be invented, to the logic of its original use, and hence to
the fraction of utterance, i.e., sound, which answers to it in reading—a
clue to be tested by how well that proposed fraction, or sound, fits
into each proposed reading.

[Figure 13.1]

Figure 13.1

Examples of Maya symbols having phonetic values.

Figure 13.1 shows 23 symbols selected out of the several hundreds found
in the whole Maya literature. These particular ones have been chosen
because they enter into the written words and the codex sentence used as
examples of decipherment in this paper. The fractions of utterance to
which these signs regularly correspond have been identified by
comparative evidence—running back ultimately to that body of evidence
which I have called the Maya Rosetta Stone. Signs 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 12, 17,
22, are also given by Landa with the same values (1, 7, 12, 17 being
slightly altered in form) in his book Relación de las cosas de Yucatán,
a first-hand account of the Maya shortly after the Conquest. The
left-hand column shows in alphabetic order the fraction of utterance,
i.e., sound which regularly¹ corresponds to the appearance of the sign
in a written form. The next column to the right shows the usual
appearance of the written sign, with common variants added in some
cases. The list includes less than a third of all the signs the phonetic
values of which I consider fairly well established. The column headed
“Probable Object Source” names the thing or condition of which the
written sign was probably at one time a picture. However, these theories
of pictorial origins, while they seem probable and have a substantiating
value, are not the evidence for the phonetic values, and their being
proved wrong would not invalidate the latter nor alter the readings, but
would merely mean that the ORIGIN of the sign was other than I have
supposed. There are several signs for which I am unable to offer any
explanation (e.g., no. 16), yet for which the phonetic value is
reasonably certain. I did not guess the probable object source of no. 6
until after I had known its phonetic value for several years.

The extreme right-hand column shows the Maya word, as given in the Motul
dictionary,² for the thing or condition postulated as the object source.
It will be observed that the initial sound of this Maya name of the
object (i.e., the first consonant and/or the first consonant and vowel)
is the sound which the sign represents in writing, as shown in the
left-hand column, except in the case of no. 1, in which the initial h is
either lost or transposed, yielding a or ah. The Spanish entry under the
English name of the object source is the way in which the Motul
dictionary defines the Maya word in the extreme right-hand column.

Figure 13.1 then should be self-explanatory. The following supplementary
remarks may be added: number 1 does not occur initially in a word.
Primary word-initial h in Maya, in becoming secondarily word-internal,
as when it begins the second member of a compound word, tends to be
weakened or lost. This explains why a syllable originally denoting ha
would denote a when used only to write noninitial fractions of words.
Number 6 is especially interesting. Maya has simple, unanalyzable words
for ‘write’ or ‘book,’ not connected with ‘paint’ or ‘draw’ as in Aztec
and many other American languages. This fact, ceteris paribus, argues
for the greater antiquity of writing in the Maya culture than in these
other cultures. Maya missives and books (e.g., the codices) were written
on an elongated strip of tissue which was then folded up, and, when tied
or clasped, would have an appearance not unlike a modern letter sealed
in its envelope, or like no. 6.³ The nipple (im) sign for i appears in
the codices usually with three nipples, which leads me to think that the
teats of a deer or other animal may have been one of the original forms;
sometimes it appears with two; Landa shows it with two, and the sign of
the day Ik (ik’) may be based on an original human breast form with only
one. Number 8 probably represents a kat, an earthen, basketry, or wooden
pan, tray, or low flat tub, often boat-shaped; it was also called a
[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]em or ‘boat’ (see Motul, chem licil ppo
and chem che), and conversely a boat may have been called a kat. The
comblike lines may be the conventionalization of a fluted rim or of
projecting basketry withes, or may represent people in a kat in the
meaning ‘boat.’ Number 10 is an example of the many perspective drawings
found in both Maya art and the writing symbols—a rounded, flattened pot,
basket, or calabash with a k’al, a tied-on or clasped lid or cover. The
Maya, as is well known, drew in perspective from very early times.
Number 11 is a k’uk’úm, ‘feather’ or ‘plume,’ and in this word k’úm was
probably felt to be the true initial form of the stem and k’u- a
reduplication, which may not have been historically the case, but which
would be felt analogically in a language like Maya in which initial
reduplication is a derivational process in wide use. Nothing as yet is
postulated as to the object source of 16, a profile head with a sort of
parrotlike beak; a suggestion here would be the parrotlike bird called
moan or muan. The sign corresponds to the consonantal sequence mn, with
any or no vowel intervening, and as a day sign denotes the day Men.
Number 23 looks very much like a form of no. 1, but it is always upright
and placed in front of a sign cluster with its concave side toward the
cluster, while no. 1 is not placed in front of a cluster and is usually
horizontal. Number 23 corresponds to initial u of a word or to u as a
separate word or as a prefix.

[Figure 13.2]

Figure 13.2

Maya sign clusters representing words.

Figure 13.2 shows the writing of six words occurring in the codices.⁴
The sign clusters or glyphs of various animals, originally determined by
Schellhas from their concurrence with pictures, have long been known.⁵

Number 1 is cited by Schellhas as the glyph meaning ‘snake.’ It will be
noted that it consists of no. 8 of Figure 13.1, ka, and no. 17, n, and a
third symbol. This third symbol and the iguana figure in the next glyph
of Figure 13.2 are the only symbols cited in this paper which are not
found in Figure 13.1. The first two symbols spell kan, which is the Maya
word for ‘snake.’ The third symbol is probably derived from a picture of
a rattlesnake’s rattles, intended to evoke the linguistic response
“snake,” i.e., kan, and has itself the value kan. However, it is
apparently insufficient by itself to write the word kan. It was not
usual in the Maya system to write a word of one syllable simply by one
sign having the value of that syllable, probably because that sign often
was polyphonic, having other values. Instead, the Maya method was to
suggest the syllable by a combination of signs that, to Maya speakers
acquainted with the conventions of the writing, was probably
unambiguous. This combination of signs could be made according to two
principles: (1) synthetically, building the syllable from signs to be
understood as fractions of the syllable, which together made the whole
syllable; (2) by repeated affirmation, that is, by combining, in the
sense of repeating, different ways of denoting the whole syllable. A
word of one syllable, or often a syllable within a longer word, could be
written by either method, or by both together, as in the case of this
writing of the word kan. The signs ka and n build the word
synthetically, the sign kan repeats it; we have double writing, but only
single reading. It is as if the writing said “my first is ka, my second
is n, my whole is one of the values of the snake-rattle sign, and so
must be kan.” The combination is, by sum of all its parts, ka-n-kan, but
we may use the convention of transliteration ka-n^(-kan) to show that
the final kan is a doubling in the writing only, not in the reading.

Number 2, Figure 13.2, is the sign cluster meaning ‘iguana,’ or ‘large
lizard,’ a meaning which is quite obvious, since it accompanies plain
pictures of that animal, besides containing such a picture itself. But
this one picture-like sign, no matter how much it may look like the
animal, is not sufficient by itself to write the word meaning ‘iguana.’
The Maya system, as already noted, requires combination with at least
one other sign before we can have a unit of writing, capable of standing
alone. The exceptions to this rule form a very restricted list indeed,
the most important ones being the 20-day signs, which are single
elements enlarged to the size of a full cluster and capable of standing
alone. The month glyphs and calendric and mathematical glyphs, in
general, conform quite to the rule, being clusters of signs. Number 2
writes the one-syllable word hu ‘iguana’ entirely by the method of
repeated affirmation, using the ordinary sign for hu, no. 6 of Figure
13.1, topped by an iguana figure, which of course has the linguistic
value of the animal’s name. Here the formula which we use in
transliterating is hu-hu, to be read or pronounced, of course, as “hu.”

Number 3 writes the word kumhu, the name of a Maya month, entirely by
the synthetic method. It is the well-known glyph of this month Cumhu as
found in the codices. It uses the feather sign kum, no. 11 of Figure
13.1, plus hu, no. 6; so we transliterate kum-hu. Some other words of
the codices using the sign kum, no. 11 of Figure 13.1, are kumah, the
stem “sit” with transitive suffix meaning ‘seats’ or ‘carries seated,’
and kumaç, another word meaning snake (cf. Quiche kumaç ‘snake’).
Although we are still somewhat in doubt concerning the values of the
vowels in these words, the general phonetic contour is interestingly
confirmed by the fact that the codices write kumah not only as kum-ma
(with 11 and 15) but also as kw-m-a, while Landa cites a way of writing
the month Cumhu which is the cluster of kw-m-hw; in both of which
writings kw and m are signs not included in Figure 13.1 (but confirmed
by other evidence) while a is 1 and hw is 5 of Figure 13.1.

Number 4 of Figure 13.2 occurs in texts of the Codex Tro-Cortesianus
dealing with hunting and illustrated with hunting pictures. It is
obviously a sign cluster or word referring to animals killed by spears
or arrows, and the commentary in the Villacorta edition⁶ of the
Tro-Cortesianus calls it “signo de cacería por medio de flecha y lanza.”
It is a writing composed synthetically with doubling of one subsyllabic
sign. At the top is the cup-and-loop sign lu, lo, no. 14 of Figure 13.1,
written within the outlines of no. 15, m, ma, which is doubled, the
lower member of the doubled pair enclosing the tail sign n, no. 17 of
Figure 13.1. When we find doubled a sign which according to the total
setup is probably to be interpreted as a syllabic confirmed by a
subsyllabic, we may transliterate without the convention of writing a
superscript, using instead a convention that permits of possible
interpretation as a long consonant or vowel, e.g., in this case not
ma-ma but m-ma. Number 4 is then transliterated lu-m-ma-n or lo-m-ma-n,
which is a word meaning exactly what the accompaniment of pictured
scenes tells us. It is the passive participial inflection in -an of the
stem lom, which means a ‘spearing or stabbing thrust or blow,’ and by
extension a ‘spear,’ while with the verbal inflection it denotes the
occurrence of a spearing action. The Motul dictionary gives “lom : tiro
de lanza, o dardo, y cocas assi, y estocada, o puñalada.” This stem with
the transitive verbal inflection is given by the Motul as “lomah, ob :
fisgar, o harponear, dar estocada o puñalada, alancear y aguijonear,”
this citation being followed by that of the passive participial form,
“lomán : cosa que esta assi fisgada.” Hence this word loman written in
the hieroglyphs of the Maya text means ‘speared, stabbed; pierced,
wounded or killed by a spear, arrow,’ etc.

Number 5 of Figure 13.2 is synthetic with doubling of the inherent vowel
of one sign. It is common in the hunting section of the Codex
Tro-Cortesianus, and is obviously the word denoting catching of animals
by a noose or lasso, or in a noose snare—a trap consisting of a noose
set to spring by a stretched rope triggered and attached to a small
bent-down tree so that, when the animal steps in the noose and releases
the trigger, the tree springs back, drawing the slipknot of the noose
and catching the animal. The glyph or sign cluster no. 5 accompanies
pictures of this operation, e.g., Tro-Cortesianus 42c. Villacorta calls
it “signo de cacería por trampa.” It consists of the double loop or knot
sign l, le, no. 13 of Figure 13.1, and the dot sign e, no. 3 of Figure
13.1, and is to be transliterated le-e and read le ‘loop, noose,
slipknot, noose trap or snare,’ Motul “le : lazo para cazar y pescar, y
pescar con lazo,” with the verbal inflection, e.g., leah meaning ‘catch
or trap with noose snare,’ for which the Motul gives the participial
“lean : cosa enlazada o cogida en lazo.” Here again we see the principle
that a sign is inadequate by itself, in that no. 13, though itself
derived from the picture of a slipknot or noose le and denoting the
sound fraction le, is not sufficient alone to write the monosyllabic
word having this sound, i.e., le ‘noose,’ but is subject to the rule
that a sign must be combined with another and cannot stand alone. Here
it has its inherent vowel reaffirmed by attachment of the sign e. Hence
there is a mixture of the synthetic and the repeated-affirmation
principles in sign clusters or glyphs of this type. We also find the
verbally inflected form leah ‘catch with noose,’ written le-e-a, with
no. 1 of Figure 13.1 for a. Cyrus Thomas correctly analyzed the le-e
‘cluster,’ I believe, though I worked it out without referring to his
work. A number of Thomas’ readings are undoubtedly correct.

In no. 6, Figure 13.2, we have one of the polysynthetic words common in
Maya, in which two stems are compounded and suffixes attached. It is
illustrated in Tro-Cortesianus, page 46, by three pictures showing
vividly in successive stages of action a deer caught and jerked upward
by the spring of the bent tree to which the noose of the trap is
attached. It is written le-e-sin-a (or -ah), with signs 12, 3, 19, and 1
of Figure 13.1, and is to be read lesinah. This word is typical of a
common kind of Maya compound, consisting of two stems with the verbal
inflection suffixed after the second. The stems are le, already defined,
and sin ‘stretch or string tightly (as cloth, hides, or cords are
stretched on a frame), draw taut, string with stretched cords, string
up, string or rig a noose trap or the like to spring when released,’
etc. The Motul gives “zin (i.e., sin): estender paños o cueros y colgar
estendiendo o tender desarrugando; armar lazos; armar arco o ballesta.”
Such a compound usually has the following type of meaning: designating
the two stems as X and Y, a compound X-Y-ah or X-Y-t-ah⁷ means do X by
means of Y, transitively, or to an object. Thus, since le-ah means catch
in a noose, we can form freely words such as le-k’ab-ah (or more modern
le-k’ab-t-ah) ‘catch in a noose by action of the hand’ (k’ab ‘hand’),
le-k’as-ah ‘catch in a noose by a tying action,’ and so on. Our word
le-sin-ah then means ‘catch in a noose by the action sin or catch in a
noose by tight stretching, catch by the spring of a tautly strung noose
trap.’⁸

[Figure 13.3]

Figure 13.3

Page 38 of the Codex Tro-Cortesianus.

Now, having noted the reading of a few individual words, let us read a
short sentence written in Maya hieroglyphs. Figure 13.3 shows page 38 of
the Codex Tro-Cortesianus, and the sentence thereon to be examined in
particular is that made by the four sign clusters or glyphs over the
second seated figure in section b, the middle of the three horizontal
divisions of the page. Figure 13.4 shows this sentence written on one
line, analyzed, transliterated, and translated. As can easily be
observed from Figure 13.3, the texts which comment on the pictures, or,
to put it the other way, which are illustrated by the pictures, are
placed over the pictures, reading from right to left across the width of
the picture, and then on the line below similarly; or they run
vertically downward in the cases where there are no pictures. This order
is easily demonstrated from the parallelism of the writing; we have here
plainly a repetition of very similar short sentences or clauses. Thus,
if we give a letter to each cluster or glyph which is the same, the
middle-section text over the first or left-hand picture runs A–B, and
then on the line below C–D, next to the right running straight downward
we have A–B–E–F, then over the next picture A–B–C–D again, then downward
again A–B–G–H. The texts of the top and bottom sections can be seen to
run in the same manner, which indeed is general throughout the codices.
The texts would seem to be in a style which is common enough in
aboriginal American songs, chants, and ceremonies: sets of phrases
containing a constant element repeated throughout a set, as when each
line of a song stanza begins the same way but then introduces a certain
difference. Thus the text which we have just examined consists of lines
each beginning A–B and then becoming different. Navaho chants are of
course typical cases of this sort of thing. In the top section, dealing,
as the pictures show, with hunting by means of the spear, each clause
begins with the word loman ‘speared’ that we have already studied. We
shall not pause however to analyze this top section in detail, since the
limits of this paper do not allow it.

[Figure 13.4]

Figure 13.4

Analysis of a Maya sentence taken from page 38 of the Codex Tro-
Cortesianus.

The middle and bottom sections are very similar to each other, though
not identical, and deal with drilling, as can be seen from the pictures.
The pictures of the middle section show the using of the drill to make
fire; the bottom set shows the drilling of an object which appears to be
a stone. Each clause in each section begins with the word for drilling
or drill, as is evident not only from comparison with these pictures,
but also from one of the other Maya books, the Dresden Codex, in which
the same sign cluster accompanies pictures of drilling. This cluster, A,
occupies first position, which is the regular position of the
predicating word of a clause in Maya of the sixteenth century (if not
also today) as shown by the hundreds of short simple sentences in the
Motul dictionary. This predicator need not be a formal verb in Maya
grammar (though it most often is), but it is what corresponds to the
predicate in an English translation. The final two words of each clause,
C, D, · · · etc., are the well-known name glyphs of the Maya gods. They
are the names of the persons shown in the pictures, as has long been
known, and consequently they are undoubtedly the grammatical subjects of
the clauses. The second cluster of each clause may be called B₁ in the
middle section, B₂ in the bottom section, to indicate that it is the
same throughout each section but differs between the two sections. By
elimination and by position after the predicator, it should indicate the
grammatical object and/or result of the verb action, which agrees with
the fact that the drilling is pictured with different objects and
results in the two sections. Thus we have, as a first schematization:

A, predicator or verb (drilling)

B₁, B₂, object and/or result (fire, stone)

C, D, · · · etc., subject (names of gods or persons)

Figure 13.4 is a detailed exposition of the sentence over the second
picture of the middle section, which shows the Roman-nosed god of the
codices, or god D, making fire with a drill. The top line is a copy of
the text, arranged from left to right on one line, instead of on two
lines as in the original. This line, like the original text, is in
glyphic script, the form of writing used in the codices. It closely
resembles the monumental glyphic style of the stone inscriptions, but is
less ornate and has more rounded outlines. In both these styles the
signs in a cluster are gathered into a tight bunch or cartouche, in
which they are grouped in two dimensions, and there is only a vestige of
linear order in that the front or extreme left-hand part of a cluster
never stands for the last part of a word, and similarly the rear or
right-hand part never stands for the beginning of a word. The signs in a
cluster are usually in contact and often fused together or enveloped in
the same flowing outline; they may be attached to the top or bottom of a
central sign, or they may be one within another; i.e., one sign may
serve as the frame or ground of another. In short, the putting together
of signs is more like a heraldic device than like our kind of writing.⁹
But the reading of the signs is exactly as if they were written in
linear order, although this order must be learned separately for each
glyph and hence requires a separate and often prolonged study of each by
the decipherer.

The second line from the top in Figure 13.4 shows the signs which
compose each cluster regrouped in one-dimensional linear order. Such an
arrangement I call open transcription or linear script, and there is
some evidence that the Maya actually used such a form of script, though
not in the inscriptions or in the codices that happen to have been
preserved. Landa cites instances of the utterances ma in k’ati and elele
written by a native informant in this manner,¹⁰ the signs delineated
consecutively from left to right and either close together or actually
touching one another. It seems not unlikely that such a linear script
may have been used by the later Maya for convenience in ordinary
purposes, as the Egyptians used demotic, while the glyphic script would
have been regarded as more hieratic and ornamental and used for
important books, priestly writings, and inscriptions. Be that as it may,
conversion of a passage of glyphic into open transcription is a device
which is often helpful to the decipherer. It will be noted that all the
signs in this passage are given in Figure 13.1, so that, from this line
of open transcription, the whole utterance can be read off in rough
outline, as shown in the third line or transliteration. Since many of
the signs can be indefinite as to vocalic timbre, even when they imply a
preferred inherent vowel, the vowels of the utterance are here and there
doubtful, although the indication of definite vowels is generally much
better than in Egyptian or unpointed Hebrew. To a certain extent, but by
no means wholly, the transliteration of vowels is based on sixteenth
century Maya, which can hardly have changed radically in this respect
since the period of the codices, probably not very many centuries
earlier; and it is also based partly on comparative evidence from other
Mayan dialects, a field of research which must of course go hand in hand
with scholarly and philological reading of the codices. But it must also
be emphasized that the text itself contains unmistakable reference to
many of its vowels; thus the signs a, e, i, u of Figure 13.1 are
unambiguous in their indication of vowels, though the position of the
vowel in the word may not always be clear. Thus we arrive at the
transliteration, namely:

h-š-e-sa u-to-kak i-ç-mn-a k-ka-haw

The position of the e in the first word is not wholly clear, since this
e is written inside both the h and the s signs; and another possible
transliteration is h-e-š-sa or he-e-š-sa, to be read either hešesah or
hešsah, which would indicate that the stem which means ‘drilling,’ which
is haš in sixteenth century Maya, was pronounced more nearly heš in the
dialect of the codices. At present more evidence would be needed to
confirm this, and the reading hašesah seems preferable, the vowel a not
being indicated in the writing but a reasonable reconstruction from Maya
linguistic evidence.

Under the transliteration is a reconstruction of the original sentence
in the light of Maya linguistics, written in the usual Americanist
phonetic system, and below the translation of this is a repetition of
the reconstruction written in the traditional Maya orthography. This is
included in order that Maya students may see the sentence written in the
way most familiar to them, though the use of this traditional spelling
for linguistic purposes is not to be recommended and imposes a handicap,
indeed may breed quite misleading notions in the minds of students. Thus
we have for the reconstruction:

Phonetic  hašesah u-to⋅k-k’ak’ içamna ka-ahaw

Traditional  haxezah u tooc kak Itzamna ca ahau

Under the phonetic transcription is the literal translation: ‘makes (or
made) by drilling his burning-fire Itzamna our lord,’ or in smoother
English: ‘Our lord Itzamna kindles (kindled) his fire with a drill.’

The first word is a derivative of the stem haš meaning ‘twisting or
rolling between the palms, drilling,’ and with the verbal inflection,
‘twist between the palms, work a drill, bore, drill.’ The Motul has
“hax, ah, ab (i.e. haš, hašah, hašab) : torcer con la palma o palmas de
las manos y hazer tomiza, o cordel assi, y lo assi torcido” and again
“haxs : taladrar o agujerar taladrando y la cosa taladrada o agujerada
assi.” This stem is the only word for drilling in Maya that I know of,
so the case is particularly convincing. The word for ‘a drill, the
instrument,’ is hašab; we do not have it in this codex, but rather the
verbal inflection. The suffix -es, -s (followed by -ah) of the verbal
inflection is causative, similar in meaning to the suffix -bes; X-es-ah
means ‘puts (put) it (grammatical object) into the condition X,’ or else
‘cause (caused) it to exist by the condition or action X, makes (made)
it by X-ing, by doing X.’ The second type of causative meaning is that
which fits the present case. The suffix -ah denotes transitive action
already accomplished, in contrast with -ik, transitive action not
accomplished or not finished, either future or continuing in the
present. Thus hašesah means ‘makes (made) it by drilling.’

Makes what by drilling? According to our scheme above, that which is
denoted by the next sign cluster, B₁. In the bottom section of the same
page, the corresponding cluster B₂ denotes the stone or stone object
being drilled. In that case ‘makes by drilling’ of course does not mean
create the object wholly by drilling, but rather perform that step in
the manufacture of the object that requires drilling. Hence in that case
there is merely a subtle shade of difference between hašesath and hašah
‘drills it.’ To digress a little, cluster B₂ is probably to be read
e-i-l-l: e, dots, here many instead of three, i of three nipples, and a
form of double-loop l doubled by scratches (la[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH
CARON]) between the loops. The word eil could mean ‘edge tool,’ i.e.,
‘weapon point, knife,’ etc. Such points or knives were of course
predominantly of stone among the Maya, and were no doubt sometimes
drilled.

Returning to the middle-section text; here hašesah B_(l) means ‘makes B₁
by drilling,’ actually in the sense of ‘causes’ or ‘creates,’ since B₁
evidently denotes ‘fire.’ This fits in well with the expression cited by
the Motul for ‘making fire with the firedrill’: hašah k’ak’ (k’ak’
‘fire’), which uses the simpler or less inflected form hašah rather than
hašesah. The Motul gives “hax kak (i.e., haš-[ah] k’ak’) : encender
lumbre casando fuego frotando un palo con otro,” also “haxab kak (hašab
k’ak’ ‘drill for fire’) : artificio o recaudo con que sacan fuego los
indios.”

The cluster B₁ is analyzed as u-to-kak, consisting of sign 23 of Figure
13.1, u; sign 21, to, tu (to be read here to); and 9 of Figure 13.1,
which if it is a doubled and enlarged ka (no. 8) might be read kaka,
kak, or simply ka. Here the reading kak fits exactly. The initial u here
would denote the preposed third-person pronominal reference u. For our
present purposes it is immaterial whether this be regarded as a prefix
or a separate word always occurring immediately before nonpronominal
stems. Owing wholly to the grammatical patterns of English (and other
European languages), it must be translated as ‘he (she, it, they)’ if
the following stem is translated as an English verb, but as ‘his (her,
its, their)’ if that stem is translated as an English noun. From the
Maya standpoint it denotes the same relationship at all times; Maya
stems are neither nouns nor verbs in the English sense, but a single
class delimited on a quite different basis from our parts of speech. The
stem with which this u is in construction is what is written as to-kak
in the rest of the cluster.

The writing to-kak however is only approximately phonetic, as with Maya
writing in general; it suggests only in rough outline the sound of the
utterance, from which suggestion the reader is expected to infer the
right Maya word; the Maya application of phonetics in writing had
progressed no farther than this, as we have already seen. Now the word
that is apparently indicated is not what a modern Americanist
phonetician understands by the transcription tokak, but rather what he
would transcribe as to⋅kk’ak’. This is a compound word, to⋅k-k’ak’,
consisting of the stems to⋅k ‘burn, burning, ignition’ (o⋅ denotes long
o) and k’ak’ ‘fire.’ The Motul gives these as “tooc (i.e., to⋅k) :
quemar, abrazar, y cosa quemada” and “kak (i.e., k’ak’) : fuego, o
lumbre.” Note that the Maya way of writing to⋅kk’ak’ does not
distinguish the glottalized palatal stop k’ at the end of k’ak’ from the
corresponding unglottalized stop k at the end of to⋅k, nor does it
distinguish the sequence of the two, kk’ from either one singly nor the
long vowel o from a short o. This is all part and parcel of the
approximate and outline-like character of the phoneticism, implicit
rather than clearly conscious phoneticism, which Maya scribes employed.
There is a phonemic difference between the simple and the glottalized
stops in Maya, but it is a minimal difference. The writing used the same
symbol for both a simple stop and the homorganic glottalized stop;
instances of this are numerous. This does not mean that these were not
distinct sounds in the Maya dialect of the codices. It is almost a
certainty that they were distinct, just as they are in all modern
dialects of Maya. They were not distinguished in writing probably in the
same way that minimally differing phonemes (e.g., the long and short
vowels of Latin) are often not distinguished in a writing system,
because the native reader can always tell from the context which sound
to supply. And this condition is no more than we meet, to varying
degree, in all systems of writing other than those devised by linguistic
scientists for the express purpose of an accuracy going beyond the needs
of simple communication.

The expression u-to⋅k-k’ak’ may be translated ‘his burning fire,’ or
probably better ‘his kindling fire, his igniting of fire.’ It follows a
type of Maya two-stem compound, probably the same type as already
explained, though the idea of “by means of” here need not be injected
into the translation. We now have attained to translation of the whole
predicate: ‘(he) causes by drilling his ignition of fire’; and it is
evident that this expression hašesah u-to⋅k-k’ak is but a more elaborate
form of the hašah k’ak’ cited by the Motul dictionary as the way of
saying that one starts fire with a fire drill; it follows the same basic
pattern.

I might here digress briefly, anticipating a misconceived objection that
might be raised, to say that the sign cluster to-kak sometimes occurs in
the codices where there is no pictured reference to fire, and seems in
these cases to refer to an animal in a hunting scene. An instance of
this is seen in Figure 13.3, top section, over the second picture, where
occurs the cluster to-kak-a, with -a of no. 1, Figure 13.1, and without
preceding u-, forming part of a sentence roughly analyzable as loman
u-NORTH tokaka X ‘speared (in) his north (is) (grammat. object)–X.’ I
shall suggest first, but not in seriousness, a type of explanation that
overstresses the mentalistic approach. I shall suggest that the reason
why this glyph accompanies both pictures of fire and pictures of a
hunted animal is that it is a glyph which denotes sacrifice or a
sacrifice: hence either a sacrificial fire or a sacrificial animal. Now
apparently just this sort of explanation, with its thin veneer of
ethnological allusion, sounds plausible to some minds that have engaged
themselves with Maya hieroglyphs, and it is necessary to warn against
it. This is the reason why no people but linguists should touch the
hieroglyphs. In the present case of course, the explanation is all
out-and-out concoction of my own, cooked up in a few seconds merely to
illustrate a point. A trained linguist would, I believe, be inclined to
ask: “Have you searched for an explanation in the configurations of
utterances and in the data of the vocabulary, before adopting this quite
speculative hypothesis?” The real reason no doubt is that, besides the
stem to⋅k ‘burn,’ Maya has the similar sounding stem tok (with nonlong
o) ‘take away, take by force, capture, carry off,’ etc. The Motul has
“toc, ah, ob (i.e., tok) : quitar, tomar por fuerza, privar, arrebatar,
robar y usurpar casas, y cosas muebles.” The sign cluster to-kak in this
case is not being used to write the compound word to⋅k-k’ak’ but to
write some similarly-sounding derivative or inflection of the stem tok,
and the word probably means ‘prey, animal taken or carried off, catch,
game.’ Possibly the word contains tok and the repetitive plural suffix
-ak; hence ‘(successive) catches of game.’ The context is enough to
distinguish this word from the similarly-written word pertaining to
fire.

The next sign cluster, i-ç-mn-a, writing the word içamna “Itzamna, name
of the leading Maya god, the Roman-nosed god of the codices,” is very
important because it is the first proper name written in Maya
hieroglyphs to be deciphered. Proper names and especially personal names
have a peculiar convincingness in the decipherment of any script. They
are ideal tools for decipherment when they can be had. When a decipherer
can with the aid of his system spell out some well-known proper name
which should occur in his text, he knows that he is on the right track.
It will be remembered that it was the names of Ptolemy and Cleopatra in
an inscription that gave Champollion his most effective clues, and
similarly it was the names of Xerxes and Darius in the Behistun
inscription that afforded Rawlinson his starting point for the
decipherment of cuneiform. It has long been agreed that the Roman-nosed
god of the codex pictures, or god D, corresponds in characters to the
one traditionally known as Itzamna. His glyph is always written in this
way. If we knew more of the ancient names of the gods, our progress in
decipherment would be materially aided. Unfortunately the god Kukulcan,
who appears so frequently in the codices, evidently is not called by
that name in the codices, or else, if he is called by that name, it is
written by a unitary word sign.

The next cluster, k-ka-haw, representing the pronunciation kahaw, is to
be reconstructed ka-ahaw ‘our lord, our master, our king.’ This was the
characteristic epithet of Itzamna as the Maya Zeus. In the Chilam Balam
of Chumayel and also that of Tizimin, this god is referred to and called
Itzamna kavil. Here kavil equals in the Americanist phonetic system,
k’awil, from kahawil (glottalization arising from loss of -ah-) from
ka-ahawil, which has the same meaning as ka-ahaw. Thus this decipherment
may be likened to Rawlinson’s recognition of ‘king, great king, king of
kings’ after the name of Xerxes. The Motul defines ahaw as “ahau (ahaw)
: rey o emperador, monarca, principe o gran señor.” The preposed
pronominal ka (traditional spelling ca) is the second-person plural
governing the following word, the translation of the relationship being
possessive when that word is translated as a noun, subject when it is
translated by a verb. Here of course the translation is ‘our.’ The
cluster k-ka-haw ‘our lord’ is an almost invariable accompaniment of the
name Itzamna in the codices; rarely it is omitted, and rarely it occurs
with the names of other gods. Occasionally also with names of gods we
find the simple epithet ahaw ‘lord,’ written a-hw, with an a sign not
listed in this paper but cited in slightly variant form by Landa, and
with no. 6 of Figure 13.1 for hw. In accordance with the general
principle of Maya writing that signs may not be used in isolation,
except as day signs, the word ahaw is not written with sign 5 (haw)
alone, except when it means the day Ahau.

Thus we arrive at our final translation: ‘Our lord Itzamna kindles his
fire by drilling.’

The importance of this decipherment and translation is quite independent
of the interest or lack of interest of the subject matter. As far as
concerns the information which this translation gives us about the Maya,
or about its own subject matter, it is quite trivial; it is no more than
we could have gathered from the pictures alone. Its importance is
linguistic and philological—linguistic because it gives information
about the structure of a language, as far as the writing can express it,
at a certain period of past time; philological because it is precedent
to the study of a literature and of culture as reflected in this
literature, at a period of past time and in a historical context and
perspective. From this one short sentence can be gathered a host of
linguistic and philological data, only a small fraction of which has
been discussed in this paper, data which can be tested and correlated,
and employed heuristically in further investigations, of progressive
difficulty. A very few of these further ramifications of this sentence
are barely hinted at in the footnotes, which the exigencies of space
have kept relatively brief. Each such footnote actually represents an
extensive study. In this way the decipherment establishes itself upon a
constantly growing enlacement of sentences, their translations
controlled by sets of pictures, which sentences mutually give rise to a
growing grammar, syntax, vocabulary, and sign list.

There are two main wrong ways of trying to read the Maya codices. One
wrong way is to attempt a clean sweep of the job—to retire into
seclusion and eventually emerge with a book—a book which “tells all,”
which reels off, interprets, explains, epitomizes, and comments on
everything from page 1 of the Tro-Cortesianus to the last page of the
Dresden. There have been several such books in the past hundred years.
Usually such books proclaim the discovery of a key. This key is then
applied at the author’s sweet will, and the trick is turned as easily as
a magician lifts a rabbit out of a hat. Often, moreover, such an author
has exposed his slight acquaintance with the Maya language and with
linguistic procedures in general. Historical writings are not to be read
with keys; there is never any key but research. The amateur decipherer
is prone to make a false analogy between straightforward writing and a
cipher. Actually the very word “decipher” which I have employed so
profusely in this essay, embodies a misconception. Why have I used it? I
suppose because it is simple and vivid, it has been generally used for
this sort of research, and I have succumbed to usage. But really one
does not decipher a literature; one deciphers only a cipher. A cipher is
a method of writing with deliberate intent to conceal the content from
those who do not possess the key. It is deciphered with a key because it
has first been enciphered with a key. A straightforward writing, not
intended to conceal its tenor from all but a select few, is not really
deciphered; it is analyzed and translated. The methods of such analysis
and translation are quite different from the methods of message
decoders; they are the methods of Champollion and Young with Egyptian,
of Rawlinson and Grotefend with Babylonian, of Hrozny and Sturtevant
with Hittite; they are the methods of linguistics and philology.

The other wrong way of attacking the linguistic portion of the Maya
codices is the Sitzenfleisch approach. It concentrates for long periods
upon isolated glyphs or words, having conveniently forgotten that such
things as sentences exist. Suppose that, in this method, one succeeds in
deciphering or partly deciphering the glyph of Itzamna. Then one next
spends years scrutinizing every glyph of Itzamna in the literature,
noting the most minute differences, to the pen quirk, and linking it up
first with every scrap of information that can be gleaned about Itzamna,
then with every god in the Middle American area that can be connected
with Itzamna. The mere glyph disappears from view, having served as the
springboard into a sea of mythology, religion, and folklore, from which
one may perhaps emerge at last with a monograph entitled “The Concept of
Itzamna.” This method, through concentrating entirely on word study,
wanders so far from the specific incidences of the word in the texts
that it finally ceases to be linguistic altogether, and becomes
something else. Words are nothing without sentences. What a word is
depends on what it does: i.e., on its position and function in the
sentence. This is even more important than how it is written. In Maya as
in English there are many homonyms, and also words which though not
homonyms are written alike, as in English are ‘lead’ (the metal) and
‘lead’ (go in front). Hence the determination of the sounds of signs and
of their glyphic combinations is only half the battle.

There is only one road to decipherment of the Maya hieroglyphs and
reading of the Maya literature. It is through a growing concatenation of
sentences, proceeding from the less to the more difficult, beginning
with sentences whose meaning can be understood from pictures, with the
linguistic interest and linguistic findings kept constantly foremost,
and conclusions relative to subject matter resolutely submerged. The
linguistic findings must eventually bear the scrutiny of, and become the
ground of, collaboration for various linguistic scholars. One man cannot
be the medium for interpreting a literature; such a task requires the
mutual contributions of many scholars who are able to proceed in general
agreement as to basic principles. Linguistic principles alone carry the
conviction necessary to such scientific agreement.

As the research progresses and expands and grows more sure, it becomes
able to read with some confidence sentences which lack pictures to
control the translation. We shall thus begin to read cautiously portions
of the inscriptions, and the long pictureless texts of the Peresianus
codex whose meaning is now utterly mysterious. As the major linguistic
difficulties are conquered, the study becomes more and more
philological; that is to say, subject matter, cultural data, and history
play an increasing role—it becomes a matter not only of reading but also
of understanding as much as possible the allusions, the references, the
nonlinguistic contexts, the cultural patterns which are seen by
glimpses, as it were, through the bare words and grammar of the
translations. This is philology. But as the base of philology we must
have linguistics. Only in this way can we ever hope to understand the
history and culture of the Maya.

 

Reprinted from pp. 479–502 of the Smithsonian Report for 1941
(Washington: Government Printing Office, 1942). This paper was read
before the Section on Anthropological Sciences of the Eighth American
Scientific Congress, Washington, D.C., May 10–18, 1940.

1. Regularly but not always in the case of all these signs, for
polyphony is a prevalent trait in Maya writing, as it is also in
Sumerian and Akkadian (Babylonian) cuneiform. That is, various signs are
polyphones, with two or more contrasting sets of sound values, besides
the slightly differing values within a set, such as either ha or h with
vowel lacking or indefinite, which slight differences are on another
level than the polyphonic contrasts. The native reader, able to grasp
words as wholes, is not confused by these polyphonic values; he knows
from the other signs assembled with the one in question just which of
the polyphonic values applies in a given case, just as the reader of
English is not confused by the ‘o’ in ‘women’ or the ‘olo’ in ‘colonel,’
but is governed by the total collocation so that he reacts with
fractions of utterance entirely unlike those regularly associated with
the written forms o and olo. Polyphony is therefore the same type of
thing as irregular spelling under an alphabetic system of writing. Thus
the Maya sign no. 5 of Fig. 13.1 has also the value la, l, as in the
writing of the word lak’in, lik’in ‘east’; this value may very likely
derive from the word lalail ‘the largest, greatest, principal, chief’—a
near-synonym of ahaw. Sign no. 15 occasionally has the value [LATIN
SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON], as in the writing of [LATIN SMALL LETTER C
WITH CARON]ik’in ‘west’; this value probably derives from [LATIN SMALL
LETTER C WITH CARON]uk ‘catch or seize with the hand,’ a near-synonym of
ma[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON].

2. The Motul dictionary is an anonymous sixteenth century work ascribed
to Fray Antonio de Ciudad Real, and is the most voluminous and authentic
source of information on the Maya language at the time of the Conquest.
Actually it is not only a dictionary but a grammar and a chrestomathy as
well, for most of the word citations are accompanied by copious examples
of phrases and sentences. The technique of stem composition in Maya of
this period is beautifully brought out in these examples; the same is
true of syntax. The Maya words in Fig. 13.1 are not cited in the
conventional Maya orthography used in the Motul dictionary, but in the
phonetic alphabet used by most present-day linguists for American Indian
languages (the revised American Anthropological Association system),
except that ç is used instead of c for the alveolar affricate (a sound
like ts). The cedilla has been added to the c to avoid confusion with
the c of Maya orthography which represents k. Symbol 22 is cited by
Landa with the value c; it is unquestionable that he meant Spanish ç or
the soft sound of c, as in the name of the letter “ce,” which is very
likely what he asked his Maya informant to write. This soft sound of c
was close to ts in old Spanish, which is why it was equated to the Maya
sign for ts, no. 22. The sounds [LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON] and š
are English ch and sh, k’ is a glottalized k; the language has a series
of such glottalized sounds: p’, t’, c’, [LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH
CARON]’, k’. Through some curious omission, the Motul dictionary does
not actually cite the word ne, ‘tail,’ but this is, of course, a
well-known Maya word.

3. As may be inferred from this, I regard the previous theories about
what no. 6 represents, one of which calls it a kernel of maize (to which
it has no resemblance), as fanciful. The fact that in some Maya pictures
corn plants may sprout from characters of writing, and characters may
take part in the scenes like persons or objects, is secondary symbolism,
not the original logic from which the character arose. All this
elaborate secondary symbolism, perhaps religious and magical in large
degree, has nothing whatever to do with the reading of the characters in
their capacity of symbols of writing, any more than the elaborate
symbolism and numerology that grew up around the Hebrew letters in
rabbinical tradition affects the reading of the Hebrew text by one jot.
This secondary symbolism may eventually become a matter of philological
literary study, wherein it will very likely prove important. At present,
and from a linguistic standpoint, clearing away all this sort of
symbolism is essential to understanding the proper symbolism and
function of the Maya signs in writing. The use of no. 6 to denote the
day Kan is a writing of the original name of the day Hu—i.e., ‘lizard,
iguana’ (cf. Aztec Cuetzpalin, ‘lizard,’ for the same day). All the
original names of the days, except for Ik, Cimi, Caban, and perhaps
Manik, Cauac, and Eznab, and one or two more, became changed under the
Maya culture after the establishment of the writing system. Some of the
days continued to be represented by the initial letter or character of
their original names, much as we write ‘lb.’ for ‘libra,’ but read it
‘pound.’ The voluminous speculations of Seler concerning the day symbols
are to be taken with a great deal of caution, if they are not indeed
stumbling blocks of the worst kind.

4. In an unpublished paper read before the annual meeting of the
American Anthropological Association at Washington, D.C., in December
1936, entitled “A comparative decipherment of forty-six Maya written
words,” I exhibited 46 word-writings similarly analyzed, including hu
and kumhu of the present six.

5. Paul Schellhas, Göttergestalten der Mayahandschriften, 1897.

6. J. Antonio Villacorta C. and Carlos A. Villacorta, Códices Mayas,
published in Arqueología Guatemalteca, 1932.

7. The form with the suffix -t- before the suffix -ah is the common form
in Maya of the Motul dictionary for binary compounds of this type.

8. We find in the codices other compounds of this type, including some
others with sin as second member; thus in the Tro-Cortesianus (e.g.,
41a) the picture of a deer trussed up in a bundle, legs folded up, with
cords lashed around it, is accompanied by the sign cluster ma-sin-a
(with Landa’s ma sign), to be read probably massinah, assimilated from
ma[LATIN SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON]inah (compound of stems ma[LATIN
SMALL LETTER C WITH CARON] and sin), meaning ‘clasp together (like a
clasped fist) by pulling and tension, by tight stringing, by tightly
drawn cords.’

9. It should be pointed out that, even in our kind of writing, i.e., the
alphabetic kind, linear order of signs is not quite absolute in many
systems, which contain vestiges of an older two-dimensional way of
grouping. Thus, in the writing of pointed Arabic, pointed Hebrew, and
Pitman shorthand, the vowel points are grouped two-dimensionally with
the consonantal signs, not written consecutively with them in the order
of actual utterance. In the Devanagari alphabet the vowel signs are
fused two-dimensionally with the consonant signs, and the vowel i to be
uttered after a consonant is actually attached in front of that
consonant. Our own ‘wh’ is similarly written backward, being actually
‘hw’—a special cluster of signs that retains an unusual order of
positions. Some monograms and modern advertising placards also use
two-dimensional groupings of letters.

10. Diego de Landa, Relación de las cosas de Yucatán. The first phrase
means ‘I do not want.’ The second utterance is gibberish from the Maya
standpoint, but, judging from the context, it evidently represents the
informant’s attempt to comply with a request to “write L-E, ‘le.’ ”

14

Linguistic Factors in the Terminology of Hopi Architecture

The common material of Hopi buildings is stone. Adobe, the usual
building material of the Rio Grande country, is rarely used. The stone
is quarried and roughly dressed by the Hopi themselves, and set up
without mortar. Walls are stone, roofs and floors above ground are
tamped earth or clay several inches thick on a layer of close-set poles
laid across cylindrical timbers or beams ledged in the walls. Interior
surfaces of walls and ceilings are usually finished with a clay plaster
or stucco, and then whitewashed with a fine white clay; exteriors are
sometimes stuccoed, usually left in bare masonry. One-story buildings
are the most frequent, but two-story ones are not uncommon, and in Walpi
even occasional third stories are to be seen. Stairways and ladders,
both of which are used, are external to the buildings. The pit house or
kiva, used for ceremonial purposes, is essentially similar except that
it is buried and wholly or partially hollowed out of the ground, its
upper portion projecting like a well-curb and bearing a roof with a
hatchway for the entrance ladder.

Hopi has a fairly considerable number of terms for what might be called
structural elements or component parts of a building, including
essential appurtenances to a building such as ladders, stairs, and
windows. Such terms are grammatically all nouns. The following is a
representative list; it follows the order of construction, from the
foundations up.

ki[LATIN SMALL LETTER ENG]a ‘foundation,’ or ‘foundations’;
[Whorf_p256a] ‘an erection of masonry,’ not a part of a finished
building, ‘unfinished wall, unroofed wall, or standing portion of a
ruin’; tek^(w)ánmère ‘encircling or enclosing wall’; te·wi ‘ledge,
shelf, or setback,’ applied both to a natural ledge and to the
architectural form; tek^(w)ni ‘wall,’ chiefly a roofed wall, but also
applied to a finished stone fence or rampart; [Whorf_p256b] ‘partition,’
or ‘closure’ of any kind; [Whorf_p256c] ‘door,’ i.e. closing piece or
door proper; höcíwa ‘door opening, doorway’; poksö ‘vent hole, unglazed
window, chimney’; panávca ‘piece of glass, glazed window’; nayáve ‘adobe
brick’; palwi, [Whorf_p256d] ‘plastering clay,’ used as stucco
whitewash, and ‘floor clay’; [Whorf_p256e] ‘lowest story of a building
of more than one story, or a sunken room like a basement; story with a
floor above it’; [Whorf_p256h] ‘ceiling’; wúna piece of timber of any
kind, ‘board, plank, post, log, pole,’ whether placed in structure or
not; [Whorf_p256f] ‘beam or joist of roof or upper floor, timber or log’
for this purpose, usually when in place in the structure; kiqálmö
‘eaves,’ or ‘cornice’; [Whorf_p256g] ‘roof’ (not however the term in
such expressions as ‘on the roof’); kiska ‘tunnel or covered way, roofed
passage.’

Of these 19 terms, which are some of the most common ones, 8 are
unanalyzable stems, or in a few cases partially and conjecturally
analyzable; the other 11 are transparent derivatives or compounds.

Terms of this class, all denoting structural elements or parts, are
nouns, having the noun declension of two cases, nominative and
objective, and a set of construct-state or possessed forms. They all
denote three-dimensional solids in the geometrical sense, solid and
rigid masses, or definitely bounded areas on or perforations through
such solids.

As we look over the grammatical class of nouns we are struck by the
absence of terms for interior three-dimensional spaces, such as our
words ‘room, chamber, hall, passage = interior passage, cell, crypt,
cellar, attic, loft, vault, storeroom,’ etc., in spite of the fact that
Hopi buildings are frequently divided into several rooms, sometimes
specialized for different occupancies. We should never notice this state
of affairs unless we approached it from the grammatical viewpoint first,
for, if we simply ask the informant for the word for ‘room’ we shall
certainly get a reply—a word which to him is the equivalent and
translation of our word ‘room.’ Nevertheless, this word, and a few other
words used to denote interior spaces, on examination will be found to
have different grammatical or paradigmatic properties from the words for
architectural elements or structural members which we have just noted.
They do not seem to be nouns in the strict sense at least. The word for
‘room’ [Whorf_p257a], has no nominative or objective case and no
construct state; one cannot say, based on this stem, ‘my room,’ whereas
one CAN say ‘my door’ or ‘my ceiling’ even though these expressions have
no socially functioning meaning, for Hopi society does not reveal any
individual proprietorship or retainership of rooms, doors, OR ceilings.
Here we see the difference between a purely linguistic or formulaic
meaning, which could be said but probably would not be said, like ‘my
ceiling,’ and the case of a cultural and practically recognizable
meaning which also coincides with linguistic meaning, like ‘my house.’
On the contrary, an expression formally equivalent to English ‘my room’
DOES NOT EXIST, or have even a formulaic meaning; there is a gap here in
the language as compared to ours. If the Hopi should borrow from us the
custom of having individual “own” rooms, or should rent individual rooms
when they visited other Hopi villages, they would STILL be unable to say
‘my room.’ What they would probably do would be to coin a new expression
for this need. There are many ways they could do this. They could say
for instance ‘my ceiling,’ ‘my door,’ or ‘my floor,’ and in time the
word ‘ceiling,’ ‘door,’ or ‘floor,’ as the case might be, would acquire
the extended meaning of an individual person’s own room, like French
foyer ‘hearth’ meaning one’s home. This slight digression from the main
topic will serve to illustrate the conservativism of grammatical
patterns and their resistance to change as compared to simple lexical
items.

Returning to the word for ‘room’ [Whorf_p257a], let us examine its case
properties. Though it has not the noun cases nominative and objective,
it has the cases locative, illative, and ablative [Whorf_p258a],
case-relations which are found among pronouns, along with a number of
others of similar nature called the locational cases. But pronouns have
the nominative and objective cases also, as well as other peculiar
properties all their own. It will be found that [Whorf_p257a] belongs to
a part of speech called LOCATORS, which include such words as ‘here,
there, above, below, in front, in back, north, south, east, west,’ and a
good many others, among them the Hopi geographical names, such as
Oraibi, Walpi, Shipaulovi. These all have a paradigm of locational
cases, and every form ends in suffix; there is no bare-stem form such as
exists in nouns and therein forms the nominative. In saying ‘north’ it
is necessary to say ‘in the north, from the north, to the north,’ etc.
These are forms that all belong in the predicate, while something else
serves as the subject, or else there is no subject. In other words they
are adverbial forms. The word translated ‘room’ means ‘in a house, room,
or other enclosed chamber’ or, more precisely, ‘in an architectural
interior,’ or ‘into’ such an interior, or ‘from’ such an interior, etc.,
according to the case suffix. The -vε[Whorf_p146n3a] suffix in
[Whorf_p257a] is the locative. There is also a quasilocative suffix -vi
or -pi which cannot be applied to the stem [Whorf_p258b], nor to most of
these locationals, but can be applied to geographical place names and
one or two other special words for ‘room.’ Its locative sense is so weak
that it can be used as a nominative or objective noun, though this use
is rare. The chief other word for interior space in a building is
locative yé·mòkvi, illative yé·mòk, often translated ‘the other room’ or
‘the next room’—but it is also used equivalent to ‘back room, closet,
recess, spare room, storeroom.’ Perhaps the closest semantic effect in
English would be ‘inner room,’ though this must be construed ‘inner’ in
the sense of the Hopi illative, which would include ‘further room’ or
‘adjoining room.’ It is any chamber one goes INTO from another interior
which is the point of reference. One of the most common room plans of a
Hopi house is shown in Figure 14.1.

[Figure 14.1]

Figure 14.1

This is in line with the way Hopi and, in fact, most or all Uto-Aztecan
languages represent location in space, or regions of space. They are not
set up as entities that can function in a sentence like terms for
people, animals, or masses of matter having characteristic form, or,
again, human groups and human relations, but are treated as PURELY
RELATIONAL CONCEPTS, of an adverbial type. Thus hollow spaces like room,
chamber, hall, are not really named as objects are, but are
rather LOCATED; i.e. positions of other things are specified so as to
show their location in such HOLLOW SPACES. Contrasted with the
considerable number of terms for solid architectural members, there
seems at first a remarkable paucity of terms for architectural hollow
spaces, with only two stems of any practical importance. At first one
might be led to ascribe this to something culturally peculiar in Hopi
architecture—their concepts of building construction are limited and
one-sided as a given cultural fact, we might suppose. On more intimate
knowledge of the language we see that it has nothing to do with the
architecture that there is this paucity of terms where we have a rich
array of terms; it is a matter of the structure of the language. It is
not the two stems that determine paucity or richness of expression, but
the large array of suffixes with locational case-endings which may be
used on these stems, because they belong to the locator group. In the
locator group the number of initial stems is not an important criterion
of vocabulary richness; it is rather the profusion of suffixes, which in
this group are in effect noninitial stems.

Now there is still a third class of architectural terms to be
considered—terms for different types of buildings. There are certainly
different structural types of building among the Hopi. The three main
types may be illustrated by diagrams (Figure 14.2).

[Figure 14.2]

Figure 14.2

These buildings are put to various specialized uses. Most are dwellings,
but the so-called piki-houses are used only as bakeries for baking piki
or Hopi corn wafers; others are used only for storehouses, the kivas
only for ceremonies. Since white influence there are buildings occupied
solely as stores, churches, and schools. Now we, and many peoples much
less sophisticated architecturally than the Hopi, have a vocabulary of
different terms for buildings: we have the terms ‘house, building,
cottage, castle, fort, temple, church, chapel, palace, theater, school,
store, inn, hotel, barn, shed, garage, stable, hut, shack, shanty,
prison, jail, tower, station, depot’ and so on. Many of the terms denote
occupancy-types; others structural types. It might be noted, from a
detached viewpoint, that this English list is quite a miscellany and has
practically no system to it. However, it seems to us the natural thing,
for a people who have a building technology at least as diversified as
the Hopi.

Yet the fact is that, except for a few marginal terms of extremely
restricted application (below), the Hopi language has only one word for
a building; and it may be said, without any qualifications, that the
language has no architectural terminology that classifies buildings into
types—in spite of the fact that it does have a considerable
architectural terminology serving another purpose. There is only the
word ki·he ‘house’ (as usually translated), which really means
‘building’ of any kind. This word is a noun, but the only noun of its
kind in the language. This word ‘house,’ though not compounds ending in
‘-house,’ can serve as base or initial stem for suffixing the vocabulary
of locational suffixes terminating in locational case endings, as if it
were a pronoun or a locator. Certain other nouns can take a few of these
suffixes, but ‘house’ is the only one that can take the entire set. In
this respect it is like a place pronoun, but it is not a pronoun, for it
has the construct state forms which only nouns have, so that one can say
‘my house,’ ‘your house,’ etc.

The marginal cases which might possibly be considered terms for building
other than ki·he may be cited, and it will be seen that these hardly
denote true buildings in the usual sense: mecávki ‘tent,’ lit. ‘cloth
house’—a foreign object to the Hopi, and denoted by a compound of
‘house’; té·tèska ‘shrine’—a small, crude enclosure of stones, covered
over and located outdoors; kiska ‘tunnel’—also a covered outdoor passage
with walls and roof, usually connecting different buildings.

One reason for the great paucity of Hopi building terms is that the Hopi
either do not use occupancy terms as synonymous with the term for the
building housing the occupancy, or, if they do this, they have begun to
do it only recently, and few terms of this sort have accumulated. They
do not have, at least not firmly rooted, the pattern which is so natural
to us, in which ‘a church,’ i.e. an institution, is a term that merges
quite imperceptibly into ‘a church’ meaning a type of building used as a
meeting place for this institution, with the distinction hardly felt
until attention is called to it; or in which ‘a school,’ the
institution, is hardly distinguished from ‘a school,’ i.e. a
schoolhouse, or ‘garage’ denoting a kind of occupancy from ‘garage’ the
building housing this occupancy, or ‘hospital’ the occupancy from
‘hospital’ the building, or ‘the theater’ in the sense of ‘the dramatic
art’ from ‘the theater,’ a building. The Hopi language does not have
this imperceptible fusion, but rather a distinction between the two. The
occupancy and the spot of ground or floor on which the occupancy occurs
is called simply ‘the building,’ a ki·he. This is not a matter of
stylistics, for it is not variable by the artistic modulations of the
speaker, but of linguistics, for it is a form which the native speaker
must follow willy-nilly, just as much as he must follow matters of
grammar. The occupancy of a piki-house is called by a term which means
‘place where the griddle is set up,’ but it would be called that if set
up outdoors, and there is no term for the piki-house itself, except in
English, although the piki-house is a rather distinct architectural
type.

The fact that occupancy terms can be used in conjunction with the
separate and uncombined word ‘building,’ with its array of inflected
forms, to specify all sorts of places both outside and inside of given
buildings, makes up for the lack of building terms, so far as fluency of
expression goes. However, it seems rather queer that there should be no
terms for such distinctly different shapes of buildings as e.g. the
one-story building, the two-story setback building, and the kiva; this
fact has to be recorded as a peculiar datum of the language not
explainable either from other patterns in the language or from anything
in the architecture or anything else in the culture.

It seems especially queer from the standpoint of our ways of thinking
that there should be no name for the kiva, that structure so highly
typical of pueblo culture and so intimately connected with their
religion.

Many people know that our word kiva is taken from Hopi, but they think
that it is the Hopi word for a kiva, which it is not.

Terminology of Hopi Building Construction

Unanalyzable stems: [Whorf_p258b] ‘interior,’ [Whorf_p257a] ‘at the
inside’; [Whorf_p256b] ‘door,’ [Whorf_p263a] ‘at the door’;
[Whorf_p146n3a]éci ‘closure, partition’; sa[SINGLE HIGH-REVERSED-9
QUOTATION MARK]qa ‘ladder’; té[SINGLE HIGH-REVERSED-9 QUOTATION MARK]kwa
‘something built of stones, but not finished building, erection of
stones, unfinished wall, standing portion of a ruin’; té·wi ‘ledge,
shelf’ (natural or architectural); wéna ‘a timber, board, plank.’

ki·he ‘building, house.’

Compounds with -ki: occupancy terms: hé·yaNki ‘store, trading post’;
té·teqàyki ‘school.’

Locator suffixes: [Whorf_p263b] ‘roof,’ [Whorf_p263c] ‘from the roof,’
[Whorf_p263d] ‘to the roof’; yé·mok ‘into another enclosure, room,
closet,’ etc., yé·mokvì ‘far inside.’

Compounds and miscellaneous architectural terms: ki[LATIN SMALL LETTER
ENG]a, ki·het [LATIN SMALL LETTER ENG]a[GLOTTAL STOP]at ‘foundation
(root of the house)’; kiska ‘tunnel, covered way’; kí·coki ‘village’;
kí·sonvi ‘plaza’; [Whorf_p263e] ciwa ‘opening, doorway’; [Whorf_p263f]
‘ceiling’; kiqálmo ‘eaves, cornice’; [Whorf_p263g] ‘lowest story of a
house, cave’; [Whorf_p263h] ‘viga, beam, roof support’; mecávki ‘tent’;
nayávε ‘adobe’; [Whorf_p263i] qa ‘plastering clay’; panávca ‘window,
glass, mirror’; poksö ‘vent hole, chimney, window hole’; tek^(w)ni
‘roofed wall, stone fence’; tek^(w)ánmère ‘enclosing wall, corral.’

 

Reprinted from Int. J. Amer. Linguistics, 19:141–145 (1953). This
article was prepared by Whorf for presentation to the New York and Yale
informal linguistic group at its meeting on February 25, 1940. The
manuscript was among the papers left by Whorf to George L. Trager. It
was checked by Edward A. Kennard.

15

Science and Linguistics

Every normal person in the world, past infancy in years, can and does
talk. By virtue of that fact, every person—civilized or
uncivilized—carries through life certain naive but deeply rooted ideas
about talking and its relation to thinking. Because of their firm
connection with speech habits that have become unconscious and
automatic, these notions tend to be rather intolerant of opposition.
They are by no means entirely personal and haphazard; their basis is
definitely systematic, so that we are justified in calling them a system
of natural logic—a term that seems to me preferable to the term common
sense, often used for the same thing.

According to natural logic, the fact that every person has talked
fluently since infancy makes every man his own authority on the process
by which he formulates and communicates. He has merely to consult a
common substratum of logic or reason which he and everyone else are
supposed to possess. Natural logic says that talking is merely an
incidental process concerned strictly with communication, not with
formulation of ideas. Talking, or the use of language, is supposed only
to “express” what is essentially already formulated nonlinguistically.
Formulation is an independent process, called thought or thinking, and
is supposed to be largely indifferent to the nature of particular
languages. Languages have grammars, which are assumed to be merely norms
of conventional and social correctness, but the use of language is
supposed to be guided not so much by them as by correct, rational, or
intelligent THINKING.

Thought, in this view, does not depend on grammar but on laws of logic
or reason which are supposed to be the same for all observers of the
universe—to represent a rationale in the universe that can be “found”
independently by all intelligent observers, whether they speak Chinese
or Choctaw. In our own culture, the formulations of mathematics and of
formal logic have acquired the reputation of dealing with this order of
things: i.e., with the realm and laws of pure thought. Natural logic
holds that different languages are essentially parallel methods for
expressing this one-and-the-same rationale of thought and, hence, differ
really in but minor ways which may seem important only because they are
seen at close range. It holds that mathematics, symbolic logic,
philosophy, and so on are systems contrasted with language which deal
directly with this realm of thought, not that they are themselves
specialized extensions of language. The attitude of natural logic is
well shown in an old quip about a German grammarian who devoted his
whole life to the study of the dative case. From the point of view of
natural logic, the dative case and grammar in general are an extremely
minor issue. A different attitude is said to have been held by the
ancient Arabians: Two princes, so the story goes, quarreled over the
honor of putting on the shoes of the most learned grammarian of the
realm; whereupon their father, the caliph, is said to have remarked that
it was the glory of his kingdom that great grammarians were honored even
above kings.

[Figure 15.1]

Figure 15.1

Languages dissect nature differently. The different isolates of meaning
(thoughts) used by English and Shawnee in reporting the same experience,
that of cleaning a gun by running the ramrod through it. The pronouns
‘I’ and ‘it’ are not shown by symbols, as they have the same meaning in
each language. In Shawnee ni- equals ‘I’; -a equals ‘it.’

The familiar saying that the exception proves the rule contains a good
deal of wisdom, though from the standpoint of formal logic it became an
absurdity as soon as “prove” no longer meant “put on trial.” The old saw
began to be profound psychology from the time it ceased to have standing
in logic. What it might well suggest to us today is that, if a rule has
absolutely no exceptions, it is not recognized as a rule or as anything
else; it is then part of the background of experience of which we tend
to remain unconscious. Never having experienced anything in contrast to
it, we cannot isolate it and formulate it as a rule until we so enlarge
our experience and expand our base of reference that we encounter an
interruption of its regularity. The situation is somewhat analogous to
that of not missing the water till the well runs dry, or not realizing
that we need air till we are choking.

For instance, if a race of people had the physiological defect of being
able to see only the color blue, they would hardly be able to formulate
the rule that they saw only blue. The term blue would convey no meaning
to them, their language would lack color terms, and their words denoting
their various sensations of blue would answer to, and translate, our
words “light, dark, white, black,” and so on, not our word “blue.” In
order to formulate the rule or norm of seeing only blue, they would need
exceptional moments in which they saw other colors. The phenomenon of
gravitation forms a rule without exceptions; needless to say, the
untutored person is utterly unaware of any law of gravitation, for it
would never enter his head to conceive of a universe in which bodies
behaved otherwise than they do at the earth’s surface. Like the color
blue with our hypothetical race, the law of gravitation is a part of the
untutored individual’s background, not something he isolates from that
background. The law could not be formulated until bodies that always
fell were seen in terms of a wider astronomical world in which bodies
moved in orbits or went this way and that.

Similarly, whenever we turn our heads, the image of the scene passes
across our retinas exactly as it would if the scene turned around us.
But this effect is background, and we do not recognize it; we do not see
a room turn around us but are conscious only of having turned our heads
in a stationary room. If we observe critically while turning the head or
eyes quickly, we shall see, no motion it is true, yet a blurring of the
scene between two clear views. Normally we are quite unconscious of this
continual blurring but seem to be looking about in an unblurred world.
Whenever we walk past a tree or house, its image on the retina changes
just as if the tree or house were turning on an axis; yet we do not see
trees or houses turn as we travel about at ordinary speeds. Sometimes
ill-fitting glasses will reveal queer movements in the scene as we look
about, but normally we do not see the relative motion of the environment
when we move; our psychic makeup is somehow adjusted to disregard whole
realms of phenomena that are so all-pervasive as to be irrelevant to our
daily lives and needs.

[Figure 15.2]

Figure 15.2

Languages classify items of experience differently. The class
corresponding to one word and one thought in language A may be regarded
by language B as two or more classes corresponding to two or more words
and thoughts.

Natural logic contains two fallacies: First, it does not see that the
phenomena of a language are to its own speakers largely of a background
character and so are outside the critical consciousness and control of
the speaker who is expounding natural logic. Hence, when anyone, as a
natural logician, is talking about reason, logic, and the laws of
correct thinking, he is apt to be simply marching in step with purely
grammatical facts that have somewhat of a background character in his
own language or family of languages but are by no means universal in all
languages and in no sense a common substratum of reason. Second, natural
logic confuses agreement about subject matter, attained through use of
language, with knowledge of the linguistic process by which agreement is
attained: i.e., with the province of the despised (and to its notion
superfluous) grammarian. Two fluent speakers, of English let us say,
quickly reach a point of assent about the subject matter of their
speech; they agree about what their language refers to. One of them, A,
can give directions that will be carried out by the other, B, to A’s
complete satisfaction. Because they thus understand each other so
perfectly, A and B, as natural logicians, suppose they must of course
know how it is all done. They think, e.g., that it is simply a matter of
choosing words to express thoughts. If you ask A to explain how he got
B’s agreement so readily, he will simply repeat to you, with more or
less elaboration or abbreviation, what he said to B. He has no notion of
the process involved. The amazingly complex system of linguistic
patterns and classifications, which A and B must have in common before
they can adjust to each other at all, is all background to A and B.

These background phenomena are the province of the grammarian—or of the
linguist, to give him his more modern name as a scientist. The word
linguist in common, and especially newspaper, parlance means something
entirely different, namely, a person who can quickly attain agreement
about subject matter with different people speaking a number of
different languages. Such a person is better termed a polyglot or a
multilingual. Scientific linguists have long understood that ability to
speak a language fluently does not necessarily confer a linguistic
knowledge of it, i.e., understanding of its background phenomena and its
systematic processes and structure, any more than ability to play a good
game of billiards confers or requires any knowledge of the laws of
mechanics that operate upon the billiard table.

The situation here is not unlike that in any other field of science. All
real scientists have their eyes primarily on background phenomena that
cut very little ice, as such, in our daily lives; and yet their studies
have a way of bringing out a close relation between these unsuspected
realms of fact and such decidedly foreground activities as transporting
goods, preparing food, treating the sick, or growing potatoes, which in
time may become very much modified, simply because of pure scientific
investigation in no way concerned with these brute matters themselves.
Linguistics presents a quite similar case; the background phenomena with
which it deals are involved in all our foreground activities of talking
and of reaching agreement, in all reasoning and arguing of cases, in all
law, arbitration, conciliation, contracts, treaties, public opinion,
weighing of scientific theories, formulation of scientific results.
Whenever agreement or assent is arrived at in human affairs, and whether
or not mathematics or other specialized symbolisms are made part of the
procedure, THIS AGREEMENT IS REACHED BY LINGUISTIC PROCESSES, OR ELSE IT
IS NOT REACHED.

As we have seen, an overt knowledge of the linguistic processes by which
agreement is attained is not necessary to reaching some sort of
agreement, but it is certainly no bar thereto; the more complicated and
difficult the matter, the more such knowledge is a distinct aid, till
the point may be reached—I suspect the modern world has about arrived at
it—when the knowledge becomes not only an aid but a necessity. The
situation may be likened to that of navigation. Every boat that sails is
in the lap of planetary forces; yet a boy can pilot his small craft
around a harbor without benefit of geography, astronomy, mathematics, or
international politics. To the captain of an ocean liner, however, some
knowledge of all these subjects is essential.

When linguists became able to examine critically and scientifically a
large number of languages of widely different patterns, their base of
reference was expanded; they experienced an interruption of phenomena
hitherto held universal, and a whole new order of significances came
into their ken. It was found that the background linguistic system (in
other words, the grammar) of each language is not merely a reproducing
instrument for voicing ideas but rather is itself the shaper of ideas,
the program and guide for the individual’s mental activity, for his
analysis of impressions, for his synthesis of his mental stock in trade.
Formulation of ideas is not an independent process, strictly rational in
the old sense, but is part of a particular grammar, and differs, from
slightly to greatly, between different grammars. We dissect nature along
lines laid down by our native languages. The categories and types that
we isolate from the world of phenomena we do not find there because they
stare every observer in the face; on the contrary, the world is
presented in a kaleidoscopic flux of impressions which has to be
organized by our minds—and this means largely by the linguistic systems
in our minds. We cut nature up, organize it into concepts, and ascribe
significances as we do, largely because we are parties to an agreement
to organize it in this way—an agreement that holds throughout our speech
community and is codified in the patterns of our language. The agreement
is, of course, an implicit and unstated one, BUT ITS TERMS ARE
ABSOLUTELY OBLIGATORY; we cannot talk at all except by subscribing to
the organization and classification of data which the agreement decrees.

[Figure 15.3]

Figure 15.3

Contrast between a “temporal” language (English) and a “timeless”
language (Hopi). What are to English differences of time are to Hopi
differences in the kind of validity.

This fact is very significant for modern science, for it means that no
individual is free to describe nature with absolute impartiality but is
constrained to certain modes of interpretation even while he thinks
himself most free. The person most nearly free in such respects would be
a linguist familiar with very many widely different linguistic systems.
As yet no linguist is in any such position. We are thus introduced to a
new principle of relativity, which holds that all observers are not led
by the same physical evidence to the same picture of the universe,
unless their linguistic backgrounds are similar, or can in some way be
calibrated.

This rather startling conclusion is not so apparent if we compare only
our modern European languages, with perhaps Latin and Greek thrown in
for good measure. Among these tongues there is a unanimity of major
pattern which at first seems to bear out natural logic. But this
unanimity exists only because these tongues are all Indo-European
dialects cut to the same basic plan, being historically transmitted from
what was long ago one speech community; because the modern dialects have
long shared in building up a common culture; and because much of this
culture, on the more intellectual side, is derived from the linguistic
backgrounds of Latin and Greek. Thus this group of languages satisfies
the special case of the clause beginning “unless” in the statement of
the linguistic relativity principle at the end of the preceding
paragraph. From this condition follows the unanimity of description of
the world in the community of modern scientists. But it must be
emphasized that “all modern Indo-European-speaking observers” is not the
same thing as “all observers.” That modern Chinese or Turkish scientists
describe the world in the same terms as Western scientists means, of
course, only that they have taken over bodily the entire Western system
of rationalizations, not that they have corroborated that system from
their native posts of observation.

When Semitic, Chinese, Tibetan, or African languages are contrasted with
our own, the divergence in analysis of the world becomes more apparent;
and, when we bring in the native languages of the Americas, where speech
communities for many millenniums have gone their ways independently of
each other and of the Old World, the fact that languages dissect nature
in many different ways becomes patent. The relativity of all conceptual
systems, ours included, and their dependence upon language stand
revealed. That American Indians speaking only their native tongues are
never called upon to act as scientific observers is in no wise to the
point. To exclude the evidence which their languages offer as to what
the human mind can do is like expecting botanists to study nothing but
food plants and hothouse roses and then tell us what the plant world is
like!

Let us consider a few examples. In English we divide most of our words
into two classes, which have different grammatical and logical
properties. Class 1 we call nouns, e.g., ‘house, man’; class 2, verbs,
e.g., ‘hit, run.’ Many words of one class can act secondarily as of the
other class, e.g., ‘a hit, a run,’ or ‘to man (the boat),’ but, on the
primary level, the division between the classes is absolute. Our
language thus gives us a bipolar division of nature. But nature herself
is not thus polarized. If it be said that ‘strike, turn, run,’ are verbs
because they denote temporary or short-lasting events, i.e., actions,
why then is ‘fist’ a noun? It also is a temporary event. Why are
‘lightning, spark, wave, eddy, pulsation, flame, storm, phase, cycle,
spasm, noise, emotion’ nouns? They are temporary events. If ‘man’ and
‘house’ are nouns because they are long-lasting and stable events, i.e.,
things, what then are ‘keep, adhere, extend, project, continue, persist,
grow, dwell,’ and so on doing among the verbs? If it be objected that
‘possess, adhere’ are verbs because they are stable relationships rather
than stable percepts, why then should ‘equilibrium, pressure, current,
peace, group, nation, society, tribe, sister,’ or any kinship term be
among the nouns? It will be found that an “event” to us means “what our
language classes as a verb” or something analogized therefrom. And it
will be found that it is not possible to define ‘event, thing, object,
relationship,’ and so on, from nature, but that to define them always
involves a circuitous return to the grammatical categories of the
definer’s language.

In the Hopi language, ‘lightning, wave, flame, meteor, puff of smoke,
pulsation’ are verbs—events of necessarily brief duration cannot be
anything but verbs. ‘Cloud’ and ‘storm’ are at about the lower limit of
duration for nouns. Hopi, you see, actually has a classification of
events (or linguistic isolates) by duration type, something strange to
our modes of thought. On the other hand, in Nootka, a language of
Vancouver Island, all words seem to us to be verbs, but really there are
no classes 1 and 2; we have, as it were, a monistic view of nature that
gives us only one class of word for all kinds of events. ‘A house
occurs’ or ‘it houses’ is the way of saying ‘house,’ exactly like ‘a
flame occurs’ or ‘it burns.’ These terms seem to us like verbs because
they are inflected for durational and temporal nuances, so that the
suffixes of the word for house event make it mean long-lasting house,
temporary house, future house, house that used to be, what started out
to be a house, and so on.

Hopi has one noun that covers every thing or being that flies, with the
exception of birds, which class is denoted by another noun. The former
noun may be said to denote the class (FC–B)—flying class minus bird. The
Hopi actually call insect, airplane, and aviator all by the same word,
and feel no difficulty about it. The situation, of course, decides any
possible confusion among very disparate members of a broad linguistic
class, such as this class (FC–B). This class seems to us too large and
inclusive, but so would our class ‘snow’ to an Eskimo. We have the same
word for falling snow, snow on the ground, snow packed hard like ice,
slushy snow, wind-driven flying snow—whatever the situation may be. To
an Eskimo, this all-inclusive word would be almost unthinkable; he would
say that falling snow, slushy snow, and so on, are sensuously and
operationally different, different things to contend with; he uses
different words for them and for other kinds of snow. The Aztecs go even
farther than we in the opposite direction, with ‘cold,’ ‘ice,’ and
‘snow’ all represented by the same basic word with different
terminations; ‘ice’ is the noun form; ‘cold,’ the adjectival form; and
for ‘snow,’ “ice mist.”

What surprises most is to find that various grand generalizations of the
Western world, such as time, velocity, and matter, are not essential to
the construction of a consistent picture of the universe. The psychic
experiences that we class under these headings are, of course, not
destroyed; rather, categories derived from other kinds of experiences
take over the rulership of the cosmology and seem to function just as
well. Hopi may be called a timeless language. It recognizes
psychological time, which is much like Bergson’s “duration,” but this
“time” is quite unlike the mathematical time, T, used by our physicists.
Among the peculiar properties of Hopi time are that it varies with each
observer, does not permit of simultaneity, and has zero dimensions;
i.e., it cannot be given a number greater than one. The Hopi do not say,
“I stayed five days,” but “I left on the fifth day.” A word referring to
this kind of time, like the word day, can have no plural. The puzzle
picture (Fig. 15.3) will give mental exercise to anyone who would like
to figure out how the Hopi verb gets along without tenses. Actually, the
only practical use of our tenses, in one-verb sentences, is to
distinguish among five typical situations, which are symbolized in the
picture. The timeless Hopi verb does not distinguish between the
present, past, and future of the event itself but must always indicate
what type of validity the SPEAKER intends the statement to have: (a)
report of an event (situations 1, 2, 3 in the picture); (b) expectation
of an event (situation 4); (c) generalization or law about events
(situation 5). Situation 1, where the speaker and listener are in
contact with the same objective field, is divided by our language into
the two conditions, 1a and 1b, which it calls present and past,
respectively. This division is unnecessary for a language which assures
one that the statement is a report.

Hopi grammar, by means of its forms called aspects and modes, also makes
it easy to distinguish among momentary, continued, and repeated
occurrences, and to indicate the actual sequence of reported events.
Thus the universe can be described without recourse to a concept of
dimensional time. How would a physics constructed along these lines
work, with no T (time) in its equations? Perfectly, as far as I can see,
though of course it would require different ideology and perhaps
different mathematics. Of course V (velocity) would have to go too. The
Hopi language has no word really equivalent to our ‘speed’ or ‘rapid.’
What translates these terms is usually a word meaning intense or very,
accompanying any verb of motion. Here is a clue to the nature of our new
physics. We may have to introduce a new term I, intensity. Every thing
and event will have an I, whether we regard the thing or event as moving
or as just enduring or being. Perhaps the I of an electric charge will
turn out to be its voltage, or potential. We shall use clocks to measure
some intensities, or, rather, some RELATIVE intensities, for the
absolute intensity of anything will be meaningless. Our old friend
acceleration will still be there but doubtless under a new name. We
shall perhaps call it V, meaning not velocity but variation. Perhaps all
growths and accumulations will be regarded as V’s. We should not have
the concept of rate in the temporal sense, since, like velocity, rate
introduces a mathematical and linguistic time. Of course we know that
all measurements are ratios, but the measurements of intensities made by
comparison with the standard intensity of a clock or a planet we do not
treat as ratios, any more than we so treat a distance made by comparison
with a yardstick.

A scientist from another culture that used time and velocity would have
great difficulty in getting us to understand these concepts. We should
talk about the intensity of a chemical reaction; he would speak of its
velocity or its rate, which words we should at first think were simply
words for intensity in his language. Likewise, he at first would think
that intensity was simply our own word for velocity. At first we should
agree, later we should begin to disagree, and it might dawn upon both
sides that different systems of rationalization were being used. He
would find it very hard to make us understand what he really meant by
velocity of a chemical reaction. We should have no words that would fit.
He would try to explain it by likening it to a running horse, to the
difference between a good horse and a lazy horse. We should try to show
him, with a superior laugh, that his analogy also was a matter of
different intensities, aside from which there was little similarity
between a horse and a chemical reaction in a beaker. We should point out
that a running horse is moving relative to the ground, whereas the
material in the beaker is at rest.

One significant contribution to science from the linguistic point of
view may be the greater development of our sense of perspective. We
shall no longer be able to see a few recent dialects of the
Indo-European family, and the rationalizing techniques elaborated from
their patterns, as the apex of the evolution of the human mind, nor
their present wide spread as due to any survival from fitness or to
anything but a few events of history—events that could be called
fortunate only from the parochial point of view of the favored parties.
They, and our own thought processes with them, can no longer be
envisioned as spanning the gamut of reason and knowledge but only as one
constellation in a galactic expanse. A fair realization of the
incredible degree of diversity of linguistic system that ranges over the
globe leaves one with an inescapable feeling that the human spirit is
inconceivably old; that the few thousand years of history covered by our
written records are no more than the thickness of a pencil mark on the
scale that measures our past experience on this planet; that the events
of these recent millenniums spell nothing in any evolutionary wise, that
the race has taken no sudden spurt, achieved no commanding synthesis
during recent millenniums, but has only played a little with a few of
the linguistic formulations and views of nature bequeathed from an
inexpressibly longer past. Yet neither this feeling nor the sense of
precarious dependence of all we know upon linguistic tools which
themselves are largely unknown need be discouraging to science but
should, rather, foster that humility which accompanies the true
scientific spirit, and thus forbid that arrogance of the mind which
hinders real scientific curiosity and detachment.

 

Reprinted from Technol. Rev., 42:229–231, 247–248, no. 6 (April 1940).

16

Linguistics as an Exact Science

The revolutionary changes that have occurred since 1890 in the world of
science—especially in physics but also in chemistry, biology, and the
sciences of man—have been due not so much to new facts as to new ways of
thinking about facts. The new facts themselves of course have been many
and weighty; but, more important still, the realms of research where
they appear—relativity, quantum theory, electronics, catalysis, colloid
chemistry, theory of the gene, Gestalt psychology, psychoanalysis,
unbiased cultural anthropology, and so on—have been marked to an
unprecedented degree by radically new concepts, by a failure to fit the
world view that passed unchallenged in the great classical period of
science, and by a groping for explanations, reconciliations, and
restatements.

I say new ways of THINKING about facts, but a more nearly accurate
statement would say new ways of talking about facts. It is this USE OF
LANGUAGE UPON DATA that is central to scientific progress. Of course, we
have to free ourselves from that vague innuendo of inferiority which
clings about the word ‘talk,’ as in the phrase ‘just talk’; that false
opposition which the English-speaking world likes to fancy between talk
and action. There is no need to apologize for speech, the most human of
all actions. The beasts may think, but they do not talk. ‘Talk’ OUGHT TO
BE a more noble and dignified word than ‘think.’ Also we must face the
fact that science begins and ends in talk; this is the reverse of
anything ignoble. Such words as ‘analyze, compare, deduce, reason,
infer, postulate, theorize, test, demonstrate’ mean that, whenever a
scientist does something, he talks about this thing that he does. As
Leonard Bloomfield has shown, scientific research begins with a set of
sentences which point the way to certain observations and experiments,
the results of which do not become fully scientific until they have been
turned back into language, yielding again a set of sentences which then
become the basis of further exploration into the unknown. This
scientific use of language is subject to the principles or the laws of
the science that studies all speech—linguistics.

As I was concerned to point out in a previous article, “Science and
linguistics,” in the Review for April, we all hold an illusion about
talking, an illusion that talking is quite untrammeled and spontaneous
and merely “expresses” whatever we wish to have it express. This
illusory appearance results from the fact that the obligatory phenomena
within the apparently free flow of talk are so completely autocratic
that speaker and listener are bound unconsciously as though in the grip
of a law of nature. The phenomena of language are background phenomena,
of which the talkers are unaware or, at the most, very dimly aware—as
they are of the motes of dust in the air of a room, though the
linguistic phenomena govern the talkers more as gravitation than as dust
would. These automatic, involuntary patterns of language are not the
same for all men but are specific for each language and constitute the
formalized side of the language, or its “grammar”—a term that includes
much more than the grammar we learned in the textbooks of our school
days.

From this fact proceeds what I have called the “linguistic relativity
principle,” which means, in informal terms, that users of markedly
different grammars are pointed by their grammars toward different types
of observations and different evaluations of externally similar acts of
observation, and hence are not equivalent as observers but must arrive
at somewhat different views of the world. (A more formal statement of
this point appears in my article of last April.) From each such
unformulated and naïve world view, an explicit scientific world view may
arise by a higher specialization of the same basic grammatical patterns
that fathered the naïve and implicit view. Thus the world view of modern
science arises by higher specialization of the basic grammar of the
Western Indo-European languages. Science of course was not CAUSED by
this grammar; it was simply colored by it. It appeared in this group of
languages because of a train of historical events that stimulated
commerce, measurement, manufacture, and technical invention in a quarter
of the world where these languages were dominant.

The participants in a given world view are not aware of the idiomatic
nature of the channels in which their talking and thinking run, and are
perfectly satisfied with them, regarding them as logical inevitables.
But take an outsider, a person accustomed to widely different language
and culture, or even a scientist of a later era using somewhat different
language of the same basic type, and not all that seems logical and
inevitable to the participants in the given world view seems so to him.
The reasons that officially pass current may strike him as consisting
chiefly of highly idiomatic “façons de parler.” Consider the answers
that were at one time given even by learned men to questions about
nature: Why does water rise in a pump? Because nature abhors a vacuum.
Why does water quench fire? Because water is wet or because the fiery
principle and the watery principle are antithetical. Why do flames rise?
Because of the lightness of the element fire. Why can one lift a stone
with a leather sucker? Because the suction draws the stone up. Why does
a moth fly toward a light? Because the moth is curious or because light
attracts it. If once these sentences seemed satisfying logic, but today
seem idiosyncrasies of a peculiar jargon, the change did not come about
because science has discovered new facts. Science has adopted new
linguistic formulations of the old facts, and, now that we have become
at home in the new dialect, certain traits of the old one are no longer
binding upon us.

We moderns are not yet in a position to poke fun at the wiseacres of old
who explained various properties of water by its wetness. The
terminology which we apply to language and cultural phenomena is often
of a piece with the wetness of water and nature’s abhorrence of a
vacuum. The researches of linguists into the ways of languages many and
diverse are needed if we are to think straight and escape the errors
which unconscious acceptance of our language background otherwise
engenders. An increasing contribution from linguistics to the general
philosophy of science is demanded by the new ways of thinking implied by
those new realms of science cited at the beginning of this essay. It is
needed for science’s next great march into the unknown.

The situation is not likely to be aided by the philosophical and
mathematical analyst who may try to exploit the field of higher
linguistic symbolism with little knowledge of linguistics itself.
Unfortunately the essays of most modern writers in this field suffer
from this lack of apprenticeship training. To strive at higher
mathematical formulas for linguistic meaning while knowing nothing
correctly of the shirt-sleeve rudiments of language is to court
disaster. Physics does not begin with atomic structures and cosmic rays,
but with motions of ordinary gross physical objects and symbolic
(mathematical) expressions for these movements. Linguistics likewise
does not begin with meaning nor with the structure of logical
propositions, but with the obligatory patterns made by the gross audible
sounds of a given language and with certain symbolic expressions of its
own for these patterns. Out of these relatively simple terms dealing
with gross sound patterning are evolved the higher analytical procedures
of the science, just as out of the simple experiments and mathematics
concerning falling and sliding blocks of wood is evolved all the higher
mathematics of physics up into quantum theory. Even the facts of sound
patterning are none too simple. But they illustrate the unconscious,
obligatory, background phenomena of talking as nothing else can.

[Figure 16.1]

Figure 16.1

Structural formula of the monosyllabic word in English (standard
midwestern American). The formula can be simplified by special symbols
for certain groups of letters, but this simplification would make it
harder to explain. The simplest possible formula for a monosyllabic word
is C + V, and some languages actually conform to this. Polynesian has
the next most simple formula, O, C + V. Contrast this with the intricacy
of English word structure, as shown above.

For instance, the structural formula for words of one syllable in the
English language (Fig. 16.1) looks rather complicated; yet for a
linguistic pattern it is rather simple. In the English-speaking world,
every child between the ages of two and five is engaged in learning the
pattern expressed by this formula, among many other formulas. By the
time the child is six, the formula has become ingrained and automatic;
even the little nonsense words the child makes up conform to it,
exploring its possibilities but venturing not a jot beyond them. At an
early age the formula becomes for the child what it is for the adult; no
sequence of sounds that deviates from it can even be articulated without
the greatest difficulty. New words like “blurb,” nonsense words like
Lewis Carroll’s “mome raths,” combinations intended to suggest languages
of savages or animal cries, like “glub” and “squonk”—all come out of the
mold of this formula. When the youth begins to learn a foreign language,
he unconsciously tries to construct the syllables according to this
formula. Of course it won’t work; the foreign words are built to a
formula of their own. Usually the student has a terrible time. Not even
knowing that a formula is back of all the trouble, he thinks his
difficulty is his own fault. The frustrations and inhibitions thus set
up at the start constantly block his attempts to use foreign tongues. Or
else he even HEARS by the formula, so that the English combinations that
he makes sound to him like real French, for instance. Then he suffers
less inhibition and may become what is called a “fluent” speaker of
French—bad French!

[Figure 16.2]

Figure 16.2

Variables and alternants: A shows by graph and by mathematical formula
(equation) an interrelation of variables. B illustrates by extensible
examples and by a pattern formula an interrelation of alternants. The
formula means that the English suffix which is theoretically (“by root,”
[square root symbol]) a final ‘s’ is actualized in any given case by one
of four alternants: after a sibilant-ending consonant, by ‘-iz’; after
any sonant (vowel or consonant), by ‘-z,’ after any voiceless
(nonsonant) consonant by ‘-s’; except that, after the special alternant
‘f#,’ it is actualized by ‘-z,’ the ‘f#’ alternating to ‘v.’

If, however, he is so fortunate as to have his elementary French taught
by a theoretic linguist, he first has the patterns of the English
formula explained in such a way that they become semiconscious, with the
result that they lose the binding power over him which custom has given
them, though they remain automatic as far as English is concerned. Then
he acquires the French patterns without inner opposition, and the time
for attaining command of the language is cut to a fraction (see Fig.
16.3). To be sure, probably no elementary French is ever taught in this
way—at least not in public institutions. Years of time and millions of
dollars’ worth of wasted educational effort could be saved by the
adoption of such methods, but men with the grounding in theoretic
linguistics are as yet far too few and are chiefly in the higher
institutions.

[Figure 16.3]

Figure 16.3

Flow sheet of improved process for learning French without tears.
Guaranteed: no bottlenecks in production.

Let us examine the formula for the English monosyllabic word (Fig.
16.1). It looks mathematical, but it isn’t. It is an expression of
pattern symbolics, an analytical method that grows out of linguistics
and bears to linguistics a relation not unlike that of higher
mathematics to physics. With such pattern formulas, various operations
can be performed, just as mathematical expressions can be added,
multiplied, and otherwise operated with; only the operations here are
not addition, multiplication, and so on, but are meanings that apply to
linguistic contexts. From these operations, conclusions can be drawn and
experimental attacks directed intelligently at the really crucial points
in the welter of data presented by the language under investigation.
Usually the linguist does not need to manipulate the formulas on paper
but simply performs the symbolic operations in his mind and then says:
“The paradigm of class A verbs can’t have been reported right by the
previous investigator”; or “Well, well, this language must have
alternating stresses, though I couldn’t hear them at first”; or “Funny,
but d and l must be variants of the same sound in this language,” and so
on. Then he investigates by experimenting on a native informant and
finds that the conclusion is justified. Pattern-symbolic expressions are
exact, as mathematics is, but are not quantitative. They do not refer
ultimately to number and dimension, as mathematics does, but to pattern
and structure. Nor are they to be confused with theory of groups or with
symbolic logic, though they may be in some ways akin.

Returning to the formula, the simplest part of it is the eighth term
(the terms are numbered underneath), consisting of a V between plus
signs. This means that every English word contains a vowel (not true of
all languages). As the V is unqualified by other symbols, any one of the
English vowels can occur in the monosyllabic word (not true of all
syllables of the polysyllabic English word). Next we turn to the first
term, which is a zero and which means that the vowel may be preceded by
nothing; the word may begin with a vowel—a structure impossible in many
languages. The commas between the terms mean “or.” The second term is C
minus a long-tailed n. This means that a word can begin with any single
English consonant except one—the one linguists designate by a
long-tailed n, which is the sound we commonly write ng, as in “hang.”
This ng sound is common at the ends of English words but never occurs at
the beginnings. In many languages, such as Hopi, Eskimo, or Samoan, it
is a common beginning for a word. Our patterns set up a terrific
resistance to articulation of these foreign words beginning with ng, but
as soon as the mechanism of producing ng has been explained and we learn
that our inability has been due to a habitual pattern, we can place the
ng wherever we will and can pronounce these words with the greatest of
ease. The letters in the formula thus are not always equivalent to the
letters by which we express our words in ordinary spelling but are
unequivocal symbols such as a linguist would assign to the sounds in a
regular and scientific system of spelling.

According to the third term, which consists of two columns, the word can
begin with any consonant of the first column followed by r, or with g,
k, f, or b followed by l. The s with a wedge over it means sh. Thus we
have ‘shred,’ but not shled. The formula represents the fact that shled
is un-English, that it will suggest a Chinese pronunciation of ‘shred’
or a German’s of ‘sled’ (sl is permitted by term 7). The Greek theta
means th; so we have ‘thread’ but not thled, which latter suggests
either a Chinese saying ‘thread’ or a child lisping ‘sled.’ But why
aren’t tr, pr, and pl in this third term? Because they can be preceded
by s and so belong in term 6. The fourth term similarly means that the
word can begin with a consonant of the first column followed by w. Hw
does not occur in all dialects of English; in ordinary spelling it is
written backwards, wh. If the dialect does not have hw, it pronounces
the spelled wh simply as w. Thw occurs in a few words, like ‘thwack’ and
‘thwart,’ and gw, oddly enough, only in proper names, like ‘Gwen’ or
‘Gwynn.’ Kw, ordinarily spelled qu, can have s before it and therefore
belongs in term 6.

The fifth term indicates that the word may begin with one of the
first-column consonants followed by y, but only when the vowel of the
word is u; thus we have words like ‘hue’ (hyuw), ‘cue, few, muse.’ Some
dialects have also tyu, dyu, and nyu (e.g., in ‘tune,’ ‘due,’ and
‘new’), but I have set up the formula for the typical dialects of the
northern United States, which have simple tu, du, nu in these words. The
sixth term indicates pairs that can commence a word either alone or
preceded by s, that is, k, t, or p followed by r, also kw and pl (think
of ‘train, strain; crew, screw; quash, squash; play, splay’). The
seventh term, which means the word can begin with s followed by any one
of the consonants of the second column, completes the parts of the word
that can precede its vowel.

The terms beyond the eighth show what comes after the vowel. This
portion is rather more complex than the beginning of the word, and it
would take too long to explain everything in detail. The general
principles of the symbolism will be clear from the preceding
explanations. The ninth term, with its zero, denotes that a vowel can
end the word if the vowel is a—which means (1) the vowel of the article
‘a’ and the exclamation ‘huh?’ and (2) the vowel of ‘pa, ma,’ and the
exclamations ‘ah!’ and ‘bah!’—or the vowel can end the word if it is the
aw sound, as in ‘paw, thaw.’ In some dialects (eastern New England,
southern United States, South British) the vowel ending occurs in words
which are SPELLED with ar, like ‘car, star’ (ka, sta, in these
dialects), but in most of the United States dialects and in those of
Ireland and Scotland these words end in an actual r. In eastern New
England and South British dialects, but not in southern United States,
these words cause a linking r to appear before a vowel beginning a
following word. Thus for ‘far off’ your Southerner says fa of; your
Bostonian and your Britisher say fa rof, with a liquid initial r; but
most of the United States says far of, with a rolled-back r. For some
dialects, term 9 would be different, showing another possible final
vowel, namely, the peculiar sound which the Middle Westerner may notice
in the Bostonian’s pronunciation of ‘fur, cur’ [Whorf_p291a] and no
doubt may find very queer. This funny sound is common in Welsh, Gaelic,
Turkish, Ute, and Hopi, but I am sure Boston did not get it from any of
these sources.

Can one-syllable words end in e, i, o, or u? No, not in English. The
words so spelled end in a consonant sound, y or w. Thus, ‘I,’ when
expressed in formula pattern, is ay, ‘we’ is wiy, ‘you’ is yuw, ‘how’ is
haw, and so on. A comparison of the Spanish no with the English ‘No!’
shows that, whereas the Spanish word actually ends with its o sound
trailing in the air, the English equivalent closes upon a w sound. The
patterns to which we are habituated compel us to close upon a consonant
after most vowels. Hence when we learn Spanish, instead of saying como
no, we are apt to say kowmow now; instead of si, we say our own word
‘see’ (siy). In French, instead of si beau, we are apt to say ‘see bow.’

Term 10 means that r, w, or y may be interpolated at this point except
when the interpolation would result in joining w and y with each other.
Term 11 means that the word may end in any single English consonant
except h; this exception is most unlike some languages, e.g., Sanskrit,
Arabic, Navaho, and Maya, in which many words end in h. The reader can
figure out terms 12, 13, and 14 if he has stuck so far. A small c means
ch as in ‘child’; j is as in ‘joy.’ Term 13, which contains these
letters, expresses the possibility of words like ‘gulch, bulge, lunch,
lounge.’ Term 14 represents the pattern of words like ‘health, width,
eighth’ (eytθ), ‘sixth, xth’ (eksθ). Although we can say ‘nth’ power or
‘fth’ power, it takes effort to say the unpermitted ‘sth’ power or ‘hth’
power. ‘Hth’ would be symbolized *eycθ, the star meaning that the form
does not occur. Term 14, however, allows both mθ and mpf, the latter in
words like ‘humph’ or the recent ‘oomph’ (umpf ). The elements of term
15 may be added after anything—the t and s forms after voiceless sounds,
the d and z after voiced sounds. Thus ‘towns’ is tawnz, with wnz
attained by term 10 plus 11 plus 15; whereas ‘bounce’ is bawns, with wns
by 10 plus 12. Some of the combinations resulting in this way are
common; others are very rare but still are possible English forms. If
Charlie McCarthy should pipe up in his coy way, “Thou oomphst, dost thou
not?”; or, a Shakespearean actor should thunder out, “Thou triumphst!”
the reason would be that the formula yields that weird sputter mpfst by
term 14 plus term 15. Neither Mr. Bergen nor Mr. Shakespeare has any
power to vary the formula.

The overriding factor applicable to the whole expression is a
prohibition of doubling. Notwithstanding whatever the formula says, the
same two consonants cannot be juxtaposed. While by term 15 we can add t
to ‘flip’ and get ‘flipt (flipped),’ we can’t add t to ‘hit’ and get
hitt. Instead, at the point in the patterns where hitt might be
expected, we find simply ‘hit (I hit it yesterday, I flipt it
yesterday).’ Some languages, such as Arabic, have words like hitt, fadd,
and so on, with both paired consonants distinct. The Creek Indian
language permits three, e.g. nnn.

The way the patterns summarized in this formula control the forms of
English words is really extraordinary. A new monosyllable turned out,
say, by Walter Winchell or by a plugging adman concocting a name for a
new breakfast mush, is struck from this mold as surely as if I pulled
the lever and the stamp came down on his brain. Thus linguistics, like
the physical sciences, confers the power of prediction. I can predict,
within limits, what Winchell will or won’t do. He may coin a word thrub,
but he will not coin a word srub, for the formula cannot produce a sr. A
different formula indicates that, if Winchell invents any word beginning
with th, like thell or therg, the th will have the sound it has in
‘thin,’ not the sound it has in ‘this’ or ‘there.’ Winchell will not
invent a word beginning with this latter sound.

We can wheeze forth the harshest successions of consonants if they are
only according to the patterns producing the formula. We easily say
‘thirds’ and ‘sixths,’ though ‘sixths’ has the very rough sequence of
four consonants, ksθs. But the simpler sisths is against the patterns
and so is harder to say. ‘Glimpst (glimpsed)’ has gl by term 3, i by 8,
mpst by 12 plus 15. But dlinpfk is eliminated on several counts: Term 3
allows for no dl, and by no possible combination of terms can one get
npfk. Yet the linguist can say dlinpfk as easily as he can say
‘glimpsed.’ The formula allows for no final mb; so we do not say ‘lamb’
as it is spelled, but as lam. ‘Land,’ quite parallel but allowed by the
formula, trips off our tongues as spelled. It is not hard to see why the
“explanation,” still found in some serious textbooks, that a language
does this or that “for the sake of euphony” is on a par with nature’s
reputed abhorrence of a vacuum.

The exactness of this formula, typical of hundreds of others, shows
that, while linguistic formulations are not those of mathematics, they
are nevertheless precise. We might bear in mind that this formula,
compared with the formulation of some of the English (or other)
grammatical patterns that deal with meaning, would appear like a simple
sum in addition compared with a page of calculus. It is usually more
convenient to treat very complex patterns by successive paragraphs of
precise sentences and simpler formulas, so arranged that each additional
paragraph presupposes the previous ones, than to try to embrace all in
one very complex formula.

Linguistics is also an experimental science. Its data result from long
series of observations under controlled conditions, which, as they are
systematically altered, call out definite, different responses. The
experiments are directed by the theoretic body of knowledge, just as
with physics or chemistry. They usually do not require mechanical
apparatus. In place of apparatus, linguistics uses and develops
TECHNIQUES. Experimental need not mean quantitative. Measuring,
weighing, and pointer-reading devices are seldom needed in linguistics,
for quantity and number play little part in the realm of pattern, where
there are no variables but, instead, abrupt alternations from one
configuration to another. The mathematical sciences require exact
measurement, but what linguistics requires is, rather, exact
“patternment”—an exactness of relation irrespective of dimensions.
Quantity, dimension, magnitude are metaphors since they do not properly
belong in this spaceless, relational world. I might use this simile:
Exact measurement of lines and angles will be needed to draw exact
squares or other regular polygons, but measurement, however precise,
will not help us to draw an exact circle. Yet it is necessary only to
discover the principle of the compass to reach by a leap the ability to
draw perfect circles. Similarly, linguistics has developed techniques
which, like compasses, enable it without any true measurement at all to
specify EXACTLY the patterns with which it is concerned. Or I might
perhaps liken the case to the state of affairs within the atom, where
also entities appear to alternate from configuration to configuration
rather than to move in terms of measurable positions. As alternants,
quantum phenomena must be treated by a method of analysis that
substitutes a point in a pattern under a set of conditions for a point
in a pattern under another set of conditions—a method similar to that
used in analysis of linguistic phenomena.

Physics and chemistry, dealing with inanimate matter, require chiefly
inanimate apparatus and substances for their experiments. As conducted
today upon a large scale, they require highly wrought physical equipment
at every step, immense investments in physical plant. Their experiments
are costly to conduct, both absolutely and relatively to the number of
scientists. Experimental biology uses much inanimate apparatus, too, but
its fundamental apparatus is its experimental animals and plants and
their food, housing, and growth facilities. These also are expensive in
the quantities needed. No one grudges the expense, either here or in the
physical sciences, so long as an increase in human knowledge and welfare
is promised.

The apparatus of linguistics is much less expensive than that of these
sciences, but it, too, costs money. The experimental linguist, like the
biologist, uses and must have experimental animals. Only, his “animals”
are human. They are his informants and must be paid for working with
him. Sometimes he must make trips to Indian reservations or African
villages where his informants live; at other times it is more economical
to transport them to him. They provide the field for experimental
investigation. They are apparatus, not teachers. It is as important to
study in this way languages of Indians, Africans, and other aborigines
as it is to study the English dialects of Brooklyn, Boston, Richmond, or
London.

While informants are the basic apparatus, the linguist can improve and
speed up his work with the aid of mechanical tools, just as the
biologist studies his animals and plants with the aid of microscopes,
X-ray machines, and other costly instruments. The linguist is aided by
judicious use of good phonographic reproducing devices. Much could also
be done with the help of business machines.

Although linguistics is a very old science, its modern experimental
phase, which stresses the analysis of unwritten speech, could be called
one of the newest. So far as our knowledge goes, the science of
linguistics was founded, or put on its present basis, by one Panini in
India several centuries before Christ. Its earliest form anticipated its
most recent one. Panini was highly algebraic, i.e., pattern-symbolic, in
his treatment; he used formulas in a very modern way for expressing the
obligatory patterns of Sanskrit. It was the Greeks who debased the
science. They showed how infinitely inferior they were to the Hindus as
scientific thinkers, and the effect of their muddling lasted two
thousand years. Modern scientific linguistics dates from the rediscovery
of Panini by the Western world in the early nineteenth century.

Yet linguistics is still in its infancy so far as concerns wherewithal
for its needed equipment, its supply of informants, and the minimum of
tools, books, and the like. Money for mechanical aids, such as I
referred to above, is at present only a happy dream. Perhaps this
condition results from lack of the publicity the other sciences receive
and, after all, fairly earn. We all know now that the forces studied by
physics, chemistry, and biology are powerful and important. People
generally do not yet know that the forces studied by linguistics are
powerful and important, that its principles control every sort of
agreement and understanding among human beings, and that sooner or later
it will have to sit as judge while the other sciences bring their
results to its court to inquire into what they mean. When this time
comes, there will be great and well-equipped laboratories of linguistics
as there are of other exact sciences.

 

Reprinted from Technol. Rev., 43:61–63, 80–83 (December 1940).

17
