On the Connection of Ideas

320 Wolcott Hill Road

Wethersfield, Conn.

July 12, 1927

Dear Dr. English:

I have been intending to write you in regard to your little dictionary
and especially to ask you for a name by which to denote a certain
psychological concept, but I have not found a chance until the present,
and I don’t know whether this season will find you at your Middletown
address. I must say that I appreciate that dictionary; it is not only
actually interesting—a rare thing for a dictionary—but valuable as well.
But I have not been able to find in it or in any other source a
recognized term for one of the phenomena in which I am interested and
would like to know if you know of such a term or could suggest one.

I have not been able to find a term that I need to denote a kind of
connection or relation, approximation, closeness, allied character,
between ideas. The only psychological term I know of that expresses
connection between ideas is “association,” but this has quite a definite
meaning and one that will not do for the meaning I have in mind. The
“connection” of ideas, as I call it in the absence of any other term, is
quite another thing from the “association” of ideas. In making
experiments on the connecting of ideas, it is necessary to eliminate the
“associations,” which have an accidental character not possessed by the
“connections.” The subject must not jump at the first idea that comes to
mind as in a “free association” experiment; hence the experiment might
be considered a form of “controlled association”; yet it may be quite
“free” in its own sphere, for any connection may be permitted.

“Connection” is important from a linguistic standpoint because it is
bound up with the communication of ideas. One of the necessary criteria
of a connection is that it be intelligible to others, and therefore the
individuality of the subject cannot enter to the extent that it does in
free association, while a correspondingly greater part is played by the
stock of conceptions common to people. The very existence of such a
common stock of conceptions, possibly possessing a yet unstudied
arrangement of its own, does not yet seem to be greatly appreciated; yet
to me it seems to be a necessary concomitant of the communicability of
ideas by language; it holds the principle of this communicability, and
is in a sense the universal language, to which the various specific
languages give entrance.

For an example of connection, consider first the idea ‘down,’ and then
the following ideas: ‘set, sink, drag, drop, fall, hollow, depress,
lie.’ I will call these group A. It is clear that there is a
“connection” between ‘down’ and each of the ideas in group A. Consider
now group C, consisting of the ideas: ‘upright, heave, hoist, tall, air,
uphold, swell.’ There is a “connection” between these ideas and the idea
‘up.’ Now in a connection experiment the subject, on receiving the idea
‘down’ would be free to connect with any of the ideas in group A or
others like them but could not give any of the ideas in group C or the
like. Yet, if it were a question of ASSOCIATIONS only, he might
associate an idea in group C with ‘down.’ He might for instance have had
an unpleasant experience in a boat when there was a heavy ‘swell’ on,
from which he retained a vivid impression of continually going down. But
this association would not be a connection. It would pertain to his own
personal experience rather than to the social or collective experience
which is embodied in the common linguistic stock of concepts, and the
reason for the association would not be intelligible immediately without
explanation; it would require an explanation bringing in his personal
experience. In this sense of immediate intelligibility, ‘swell’ is
connected with ‘up’ or the like, and is distinctly removed from ‘down.’
So, in further definition of this concept of connection, it may be said
that connections must be intelligible without reference to individual
experiences and must be immediate in their relationship. Mediate
connections, i.e., connections through the medium of other connections,
are to be called rather chains or paths of connection, or possibly
“communications.”

It is possible to formulate another group of ideas, group B, which
mediate between A and C, so that we can pass, by means of various chains
or paths of connective communication, from A to C and hence from ‘down’
to ‘up’ entirely in a connective way and without the aid of association.
For instance:

[Whorf_001_fig_001]

Subjects feeling their own way through the congeries of ideas between
‘down’ and ‘up’ do not always follow these paths but often find others.
For instance, subject M. F. went as follows: ‘set—heavy—swell—up.’ Asked
to explain the connection ‘set—heavy,’ it appeared that ‘set’ entailed a
strong notion of fixation or fixity, and suggested ‘rigidification,
congelation, stiffening, thickening,’ as in the setting of jelly, while
‘heavy’ implied to the subject not merely ‘weight’ but ‘body, density,
viscosity,’ an idea closely similar to the preceding ‘set.’ This is a
true connection, although it was not instantly intelligible to the
experimenter, but it was quickly understood without reference to any
personal experience. The connection ‘heavy—swell’ also was not instantly
perceived, but it developed that ‘heavy’ conveyed essentially the idea
of quantity or mass, including ‘massiveness, size, increase’: hence
‘enlarge, expand, swell.’ This again is a true connection. The same
subject starting with ‘up’ traversed the path ‘up—hoist—pull—drag—down.’
Subject W. W. gave ‘down—drop—heavy—hoist—up.’ Asked to explain the
connection ‘heavy—hoist,’ it appeared that heavy suggested the feeling
or bearing of weight, the ‘hefting’ of a thing, essentially as lifting
action. If the word ‘heave’ had been more familiar to the subject, he
might have chosen it in preference to ‘hoist.’

But a different and nonconnective process appeared when a young man
having reached an idea ‘past’ took as the next step ‘hiding,’
overlooking an obvious ‘before’ in the same group. This still might be a
connection if it yielded a satisfactory explanation, but the best
explanation he could give was that one’s past was usually unpleasant and
so one would prefer not to remember it; hence it was in hiding. This
might perhaps be only an awkward way of expressing the connection, but
it appeared not. He did not respond to the suggestions that ‘past’ meant
‘receded, withdrawn, retired, concealed,’ or that it meant ‘gone,
vanished, invisible, concealed,’ or that it meant ‘existent (in memory)’
but not ‘apparent, stored up, hoarded,’ etc., but persisted in this
quite extraneous idea of the unpleasantness of the past. Hence I
concluded either that an unpleasant past really had colored his way of
thinking, or that he wished to pose as somewhat of a misanthrope or
cynic, or that he had been reading psychoanalysis: that in any case we
had to do here with something personal, which was indeed an ASSOCIATION
yet not a CONNECTION. In telling him that I wanted connections that had
nothing to do with personal experiences, he admitted that this might not
apply to his association, and then chose ‘before.’

Sometimes a subject will jump to a true connection by association and
then get the connection later; e.g., W. W., a college freshman with
intelligence distinctly above the average, said he thought the
connection between ‘drag’ and ‘down’ was like this: ‘drag’ meant ‘pull’
and things went ‘down’ because PULLED by the ATTRACTION of gravity. He
had just taken an examination in physics. I asked him whether he could
have recognized a connection if he had never heard of gravity and he
supposed not. I suggested that gravity might prove to be a compacting
together due to a kind of external pressure, and then what would become
of the connection? A mere hint was sufficient to lead him to the true
connection, which is simply one of linguistic meaning, i.e., ‘drag’ =
‘trail, dangle’; what is ‘dragging’ is in general ‘down,’ not ‘up.’ This
is an interesting commentary on the inability to distinguish theory from
fact in what is learned, even in an exceptionally intelligent student.
(Or perhaps especially in such a one? That is, if intelligent means
quick to learn, perhaps it also means receptive and hence too
credulous?)

Can you suggest any better term for this sort of affinity than
“connection”? I might say that my mental image of the relation is not at
all one of ideas hitched together by bonds of attachment which they
possess like miniature hooks and eyes. It is more a concept of
continuity, with the ideas as relative locations in a continuous medium.
Take an idea like “up,” and say it corresponds to a certain location
where we are. Now I can conceive that something like motion may happen
to us. The idea “up” is a sort of neighborhood, and we are leaving that
neighborhood. We cannot tell exactly where any neighborhood leaves off.
We know that the idea UP is assuming a different nuance: it is growing
to be like the idea RISE. But, after a certain amount of this change or
“motion” has taken place, we know that we are in a different spot; the
idea is now definitely ‘rise,’ not ‘up.’ Motion continues, and ‘rise’
becomes ‘left.’ ‘Left’ insensibly becomes ‘carry,’ and this becomes
‘sustain.’ We are now definitely out of the vicinity of ‘up.’ Any one of
these ideas might have become something else by varying the “direction”
of motion. ‘Sustain’ might become ‘nourish,’ or it might become
‘continue.’ ‘Nourish’ might become ‘feed,’ and ‘continue’ might become
‘long.’

 

This unpublished essay was found by me among Whorf’s papers as a partly
typewritten, partly handwritten draft of a letter, dated July 12, 1927,
to the psychologist Dr. Horace B. English, then of Wesleyan University,
who had just published a dictionary of psychological terms. There is
some question whether the letter was ever finished and sent, but Dr.
English, now at The Ohio State University, has a vague recollection of
receiving something like it. I have made minor editorial emendations and
alterations where necessary.

2

On Psychology

Psychology has developed a field of research that may no doubt be useful
or valuable in itself, but it throws little or no light on problems of
the normal human mind or soul. The person who wishes to understand more
fully the laws and, so to speak, topography, of the inner or mental life
is as much thrown back on his own difficultly acquired store of wisdom
and his native judgments, intuitions, sympathies, and common sense as
though the science of psychology did not exist. Such a one, for
instance, is the teacher, educator, sociologist, anthropologist,
trainer, coach, salesman, preacher, manager, diplomat, executive: anyone
who must deal with human intangibles, especially the man concerned in
leadership of any sort. If he seeks aid from books, he will get far more
information about this field from literature not intended to be
scientific, that is, from the best works of the novelists, playwrights,
and poets, than he will from any textbook of psychology. There are
certain courses that psychology has elected to follow that have
estranged it, perhaps permanently, from the truly mental field.

First, the “old school” of experimental laboratory psychology has rather
definitely assumed the character of a branch of physiology. Its findings
and their value all redound back to physiology. It is undoubtedly
valuable to the student of mental phenomena to know the mechanisms of
the body, but rather in the character of auxiliary information than
anything else; and knowledge about the oxidation of the blood and the
details of brain and nerve responses, sense perceptions, and association
times are equally of this character. Moreover, one is impressed (and
depressed) by the appalling sterility of the vast mass of minutiae that
this science accumulates, and the dearth of integrating principles.

Second, the school of behaviorism has begun to appear in its true
character as simply the old experimental psychology over again in a more
pick-and-shovel aspect. That it is in many ways an improvement on the
old school and has enlarged our understanding in certain fields I
personally believe. It has been of service by teaching us to think more
in terms of behavior, but, when all is said and done, it can teach us
little that is new. It has shown us how behavior may be conditioned by
physical means, but along much the same lines that we already knew
although they have been more systematically explained. It has become
apparent that we may “condition” either with or against the cooperation
of truly psychic considerations. This we already knew, but we are
particularly interested in “conditioning” with the cooperation of and in
accordance with the particular laws of the psychic. No doubt the same
process of stimulus and response “conditions” a man into being a
scientist or a maniac, a leader of men or a nervous wreck, a good
workman or one who cannot hold a job, an inspiring helper or a resentful
cog in the machine; but behaviorism does not show us which lines to work
upon in order to be really in accord with human intangibles, except by
way of announcing in behavioristic terms things already obvious to
common sense.

Gestalt psychology does seem to me to have discovered an important truth
about mind, the importance of configurations in the mental domain. At
the same time the Gestalt psychologists have their hands full with the
manifold mechanical, experimental, and personal data required to develop
this large subject, most of which data are chiefly valid on the animal
level. When we attempt to apply the configurative principle to the
understanding of human life, we immediately strike the cultural and the
linguistic (part of the cultural), especially the latter, as the great
field par excellence of the configurative on the human level. Here the
Gestalt psychologists let the matter drop. They have neither the time
nor the linguistic training required to penetrate this field; moreover
their ideas and terminology inherited from the old laboratory psychology
are a liability rather than an asset.

Psychoanalysis is the one school that really deals with mental material,
and it sometimes gets results, but it works only in the sphere of the
abnormal and the deranged, and it is becoming evident that the abnormal
is not the key to the normal. Moreover, it is so resolute in its
determination to deal with intangibles that it shows almost a contempt
for the external world and strays continually into the realms of
phantasm. It is too heavily stamped with the signature of its founder,
Freud, an erratic genius with a faculty of apperceiving deep but obscure
truths, and is notion-obsessed and cluttered with weird dogma. As an
empirical tool for the clinic it may serve for a while, but I do not see
how it can possibly be a means for the careful scientific scrutiny of
the normal mind.

All the schools then have been surveyed and found wanting, and the
seeker for knowledge about the human mind is forced to fall back on the
long-collected mass of empirical observations sometimes called “the
wisdom of the ages,” on the works of keenly intuitive authors, on his
own insight, and on what few general truths he can cull here and there
from all the above schools.

One fact that stands out to a detached viewpoint, but is not stressed by
any of the schools, is the great and perhaps basic importance of the
principle we denote by the word “meaning.” Meaning will be found to be
intimately connected with the linguistic: its principle is symbolism,
but language is the great symbolism from which other symbolisms take
their cue.

 

This hitherto unpublished note was found by me among Whorf’s papers as a
rough handwritten manuscript. The date of its composition is unknown,
although I would hazard a guess that it was written about the same time
as the letter to English, that is, about 1927. The latter part of the
note is extremely sketchy; perhaps this is only the outline of a longer
paper which Whorf contemplated writing. I have supplied a title and made
extremely minor editorial changes.

3

A Central Mexican Inscription Combining Mexican and Maya Day Signs

When in Mexico during the winter of 1930, engaged in Nahuatl linguistic
research, I visited the village of Tepoztlan in the state of Morelos and
while there made the accompanying sketch (Figure 3.1) of a band of
sculptured figures in the ruined temple of the Tepoztecatl, the ancient
tutelary deity, which stands on a great rock pinnacle overlooking the
town.

[Figure 3.1]

Figure 3.1

Inscription in the Temple of the Tepoztecatl, Tepoztlan, Morelos,
Mexico.

The temple has been described by Saville,¹ Seler,² and Novelo,³ but
nowhere do any of them discuss the figures dealt with herein. The
structure bears indications⁴ of dating from the reign of the Aztec king
Ahuitzotl, who died in 1502; but, as the figures in question show
likenesses to forms known to be over a thousand years more ancient than
this, it may be that in the building of the temple they were carved in
obedience to artistic traditions, or copied from older architectural
work of this region. They form a band extending along the top of a much
more conspicuous frieze of larger carvings on the inner walls of the
inner room or court. My sketch and remarks apply only to a clearly
preserved portion of the band in the southern half of the court.

Stylistically and on the basis of general probabilities, the figures
would, I think, strike any student as a band of the day signs of the
tonalamatl, such as one sees continued interminably along with the
successions of pictures in the Mexican codices. But many of the signs
bear little resemblance to their Mexican form, the form corresponding to
the Aztec names Cipactli, Ehecatl, Calli, etc. Nevertheless, as we shall
presently see, the signs Acatl, Malinalli, and Atl are in practically
their regular Mexican forms, and to clinch the matter are precisely the
correct number of signs apart. But moreover, and here the unusual
enters, some of the signs bear an unmistakable likeness to the quite
un-Mexican-looking Maya forms, corresponding to the Maya names Imix, Ik,
Akbal, etc., and these signs, too, are in exactly their proper places.
The ruin is of course far removed from historical Maya territory, being
only about forty miles from Mexico City in a region of Toltec and
post-Toltec influence.

As I sketched the figures, their general un-Aztec look quickly struck
me, but the first clear impression that I was drawing a MAYA HIEROGLYPH
came when I began to copy the sign Figure 3.1, no. 10. Comparison with a
very common Maya hieroglyph, whose most usual form is that shown in
Figure 3.2, no. 10, indicates the similarity. The Maya sign is a hand
having the distinctive characteristics of a prominent thumb more or less
opposed toward the fingers, and having invariably on the wrist a circle
usually with a central dot and a small taglike projection from the rim.
The fingers are usually bent toward the thumb, but there are forms on
the Maya monuments in which they are extended straight as in the
Tepoztlan figure. This sign is a hieroglyphic element of wide and varied
use, but it is especially a grapheme⁵ that stands for the day sign
Manik. In the Mexican day-sign system there is no grapheme even remotely
resembling a hand. The sign corresponding to Manik is called Mazatl, and
its grapheme is a deer’s head (Figure 3.2, no. 9).

[Figure 3.2]

Figure 3.2

The Mexican and Maya day signs from Coatl–Chicchan to Cozcaquauhtli–Cib
in their order. Bibliographic references: 1, 9, 11, 15, 17, 19, 23, and
26 from Sahagun manuscript; 2 and 5 from Zouche Codex; 12 and 31 from
Fejervary-Mayer manuscript; 14 from Codex Telleriano-Remensis; 21, 24,
and 29 from Seler’s Caractère des inscriptions; 3, 4, 6, 13, 16, 18, 20,
22, 25, 27, 28, 30, 33 from Morley’s Introduction to Maya hieroglyphs
(3, 18, and 28 inscription forms from p. 38, 33 an inscription form from
p. 95, the others codex forms from p. 39); 7, hieroglyph of death god,
from Dresden Codex, p. 15; 8, representation of human skeleton from
Uxmal, from Spinden’s Maya art, and 32, Codex Peresianus, from Spinden’s
Maya art, p. 94; 10, from Codex Tro-Cortesianus; 18a, Maya hieroglyph
based on dog’s head and related to Oc (18), from Dresden Codex.

Can it be that this Tepoztlan hand figure represents Manik–Mazatl? Do
the other signs fall into the proper places required by such an
assumption? Let us see. In both day-sign systems the sign before
Manik–Mazatl is called by a similar name, Cimi in Maya and Miquiztli in
Aztec, both meaning “death.” The grapheme in both systems is a death’s
head or head of the death god, stylistically different, however, in the
two systems. Figure 3.2, no. 5 shows the Aztec type of grapheme, a
fleshless skull; Figure 3.2, no. 6, the Maya type; and Figure 3.2, no.
7, the hieroglyph of the Maya death god as it appears in the Maya
codices. Now the direction of Aztec and Maya writing is like our own,
from left to right. The figure to the left of the hand (Figure 3.1, no.
9) bears no resemblance to Miquiztli or Cimi. But the figure to the
right of the hand (Figure 3.1, no. 11), strange to say, shows a most
curious likeness to the hieroglyph of the Maya death god. The two
prefixes attached to the head are especially characteristic of this
grapheme, indeed are found nowhere else. The Tepoztlan glyph however has
a suffix that is not found in the death-god grapheme, but is an element
in other Maya hieroglyphs. It is particularly characteristic of the
month sign Kankin, and according to Seler represents a human skeleton.
It seems to be related to the skeletal representation shown in Figure
3.2, no. 8, taken from Figure 115, page 86 of Spinden’s Maya Art, where
Spinden treats of the artistic symbolism of bones and death among the
Maya.

The fact is, as will soon be proved, that we have here an inscription
which for some unknown reason is written in reverse order, from right to
left, and this death-god sign stands for Cimi–Miquiztli. Once this is
realized, the student of the subject will soon notice another
out-and-out Maya sign, namely the ninth figure to the left of the hand,
Figure 3.1, no. 1. In the Mexican system the ninth sign after Mazatl is
called Cozcaquauhtli, and its grapheme is the head of a vulture (Figure
3.2, no. 31) or of an eagle wearing a collar. In the Maya system the
ninth sign after Manik is called Cib, and its grapheme (Figure 3.2, nos.
32 and 33) is a curved line like a question mark or sometimes rather
like a letter C turned over or turned backward. This last is the form of
the Tepoztlan figure.

The two dots beside the curve are not found in the Maya Cib, but they
nevertheless confirm the identification. Seler, from the fact that the
sign Cib was often represented on liquor vessels, connected it with a
similar sign placed by the Aztec on their drinking vessels and called
ometoch, from the god of intoxication Ome Tochtli, literally ‘Two
Rabbit.’ This god is often represented (e.g., Sahagun Madrid Manuscript,
under his name Totochtin) carrying a shield with a sign very similar to
the Tepoztlan figure. An Aztec note on the Sahagun picture says that the
god bears an ometoch-chimalli, that is, ‘shield with the device Two
Rabbit.’ In our present case the two dots are merely the usual
expression of the number part of such a name as Two Rabbit. Ome Tochtli
and Tepoztecatl are considered to be the same or related deities, so
that their especial cult in Tepoztlan might perhaps employ their emblem
as a day-sign grapheme when it would not be so employed elsewhere. The
point is that they should have employed it, not for Tochtli or ‘Rabbit,’
but for Cozcaquauhtli or ‘Vulture,’ of all signs the one corresponding
in position to Maya Cib.

Let us check the positions of the other signs proceeding from no. 10, or
Manik, toward Cib. Number 9 is too worn to be distinctly recognizable as
anything; yet, by comparison with the form of the Mexican sign Tochtli,
shown in Figure 3.2, no. 12, it will be seen to resemble a worn-down
carving of this form.

The next sign, no. 8, is crowded against the following sign no. 7 and is
placed in an angle where the band turns the corner of the wall. If it is
compared with the grapheme of the Aztec sign Atl (‘Water’) shown in
Figure 3.2, no. 14, the likeness will be evident.

Number 7, the next figure, occupies the place of the Aztec Itzcuintli
(‘Dog’) and the Maya Oc. It shows a head that looks more like a toucan
or some such bird than a dog. It certainly shows little resemblance to
the naturalistic dog’s head (Figure 3.2, no. 17), the grapheme for this
day sign in the Mexican system. Now a toucan-like conventional head,
shown in Figure 3.2, no. 18a, is one of the commonest hieroglyphic
elements in the Maya codices, and Beyer⁶ has shown that this
conventionalized head is derived from that of the dog. The Maya day sign
corresponding to Itzcuintli is called Oc, and has two distinct forms of
grapheme. The form of the codices has no resemblance to the Tepoztlan.
The form of the Maya inscriptions, shown in Figure 3.2, no. 18, may be
compared with the Tepoztlan form. The dog hieroglyph may be further
compared in that it always bears a suffix containing a two-lobed figure,
while the Tepoztlan glyph shows suffixed to the head a square frame
containing a two-lobed figure.

Sign 6 shows a certain resemblance to the Maya Chuen, Figure 3.2, no.
20, and is quite unlike the naturalistic monkey head of the Aztec
Ozomatli (Fig. 3.2, no. 19).

Sign 5 agrees with the Aztec grapheme for the same position. Although it
is much worn and a cavity in the stone seems to have been scooped out of
a part of it, the brush of tonguelike streamers characteristic of
Malinalli is recognizable (cf. the form of Malinalli shown in Fig. 3.2,
no. 21). Here there is no trace of the Maya form (Eb, Fig. 3.2, no. 22).

Sign 4 shows in proper position the distinctive features of certain
forms of the Mexican Acatl. (Cf. especially the form shown in Fig. 3.2,
no. 24.) The Maya Ben, Figure 3.2, no. 25, is quite different.

Sign 3 however is a very strange one. It is certainly nothing like the
Mexican Ocelotl, a jaguar head, Figure 3.2, no. 26. Nor is there any
external resemblance to the Maya Ix, Figure 3.2, nos. 27 and 28. And yet
it contains in a curious way two elements of the Ix grapheme. The really
essential element of the grapheme is the three dots, and the Tepoztlan
figure displays very prominently three large dots on the left and three
smaller dots on the right. Distinctive of the codex form of Ix are the
two converging dotted lines, and the Tepoztlan sign bears a
shield-shaped figure on which are two similarly placed lines.

Sign 2 bears no resemblance to the Maya Men (Fig. 3.2, no. 30) nor to
the ordinary form of the Aztec Quauhtli, an eagle’s head. But Seler⁷
pictures a form of Quauhtli (Fig. 3.2, no. 29) in which the eagle wears
a headdress that compares interestingly in its main features with the
Tepoztlan figure. This brings us to sign 1, or Cib, which we have
already discussed. There is a sign beyond this which I have not shown,
as it is worn and hard to make out, and I did not secure a good drawing.
It shows no likeness to the unmistakable Aztec Olin or to the Maya
Caban.

What does the band show to the right of sign 11, or Cimi? A blank space
where the stone has been broken away. Beyond this space appears one more
sign, no. 12. Of course we do not know whether any signs were inscribed
in this space, or if so how many, though I should say the space would
contain only two. Allowing two signs for the space would make no. 12
become no. 14, the position of the Aztec Calli or the Maya Akbal,
neither of which has any resemblance to it. It is a conventionalized
serpent jaw, a common Middle American art motive. Therefore I think that
no signs need be allotted to the broken space and that we have here the
day sign before Cimi–Miquiztli, which is the Maya Chicchan (Fig. 3.2,
nos. 3 and 4), the Aztec Coatl (Serpent) (Fig. 3.2, nos. 1 and 2). The
common Aztec form is not conventionalized to the degree of this figure.

It is perhaps these figures to which Novelo refers in his words:

——hay otros jeroglíficos cuya interpretacion no ha sido posible de
hacer, alguno de los cuales tienen cierta semejanza con los mayas.

Moreover he refers to the Maya influence in these terms:

——parece existir en los relieves de origen tlahuica (Tepoztlan y
Xochicalco) cierta influencia maya cuya cultura floreció en Mexico, como
se sabe, en los primeros siglos de la Era Cristiana.

He also tells us that pilgrims from far-away Chiapas and Guatemala,
regions once of Maya culture, were accustomed to visit the sanctuary of
Tepoztlan.

Yet it is certainly unexpected to encounter here, not far from Mexico
City, definite day signs denoted by graphemes which, like Cib and Manik,
were being carved on the structures of the old Maya Empire in distant
Central America a millennium and more before the date of the Aztec
temple on which they appear interchangeably with ordinary Aztec forms.
And why was the sign series recorded backward? Here again the only
comparable thing that I can think of is a Maya one, the fact that the
Maya inscriptions record a number series in reverse order when it is
counting back into the past: that is, when its total is to be subtracted
from, and not added to, a beginning date, in order to reach a second
date. Does this Tepoztlan inscription seek to show the tonalamatl
receding into the past?

We have here for the first time evidence of a definite, clearly
demonstrable rapport between Nahuatl hieroglyphs and early Maya ones.
The whole subject of the relation of Mexican and Maya graphemes, as it
reveals itself in other places, is something of which I hope to treat
extensively and from a linguistic viewpoint at another time.

 

Reprinted from Amer. Anthrop., 34:296–302 (1932).

1. Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist. (1896); also Monum. Records, February
1898.

2. Bull. 28, Bur. Amer. Ethnol., 347; “Die Wandskulpturen im Tempel des
Pulquegottes von Tepoztlan,” Gesamm. Abh., 3:487.

3. “Guia para visitar las principales ruinas arqueologicas del estado de
Morelos,” Pub. Sec. Educacion, Publica, 3 (1929).

4. See Seler, Bull. 28, Bur. Amer. Ethnol.

5. Grapheme is a word formed on the analogy of morpheme, semanteme, to
denote any written symbol, especially as a linguistic factor, in place
of “ideogram,” “pictograph,” or the ambiguous “character.” In discussing
hieroglyphs it is desirable to have a term that does not presuppose
anything about the nature of the denotative process employed.

6. Amer. Anthrop., 31 (1929).

7. Caractère des inscriptions Aztèques et Mayas.

4

The Punctual and Segmentative Aspects of Verbs in Hopi

Verbs in the Hopi language are noteworthy for their very rich and
expressive development of verbal aspects and voices. I shall say nothing
in this paper of the nine voices (intransitive, transitive, reflexive,
passive, semipassive, resultative, extended passive, possessive, and
cessative); and of the nine aspects (punctual, durative, segmentative,
punctual–segmentative, inceptive, progressional, spatial, projective,
and continuative) I shall deal with only two. It may be noted that there
are no perfective and imperfective aspects; in fact Hopi does not in any
way formalize as such the contrast between completion and incompletion
of action. Its aspects formalize different varieties of the contrast
between point-locus and extent-locus of phenomena, indifferently in time
or space, or in both. Hopi also has three tenses: factual or
present–past, future, and generalized or usitative. Hopi verbs belong to
seven classes or conjugations having slightly different inflectional
systems. Class 1, the largest and most creative class, contains a few
categories not found in the other classes, among them the segmentative
aspect.

The simplex of the class-1 verb is a bare root of the form CVCV, and is
in the third person singular intransitive voice, punctual aspect, and
present–past tense. The segmentative aspect is formed by final
reduplication of this root plus the durative suffix -ta, and produces a
change in the meaning of the simplex of the following character: the
phenomenon denoted by the root, shown in the punctual aspect as
manifested about a point, becomes manifested as a series of repeated
interconnected segments of one large phenomenon of a stretched-out
segmental character, its extension usually being predominantly in one
dimension, indifferently of space or time or both. The nature of the
change can best be shown by examples.

[image]

In these and similar examples, the phenomenon is such that it requires a
rigid or semirigid substance for its field of manifestation. When this
is the case the punctual intransitive has somewhat the character of a
passive,¹ and the segmentative shows the phenomenon multiplied along one
dimension of space, like a candle flame between mirrors. In both
aspects, the phenomenon shows up as an effect established and thereafter
retained in the rigid substance, so that we are presented with a static
tableau of this effect as it is disposed in space.

Suppose, however, that the phenomenon denoted by the verb root is such
as to require a nonrigid or mobile substance for its field of
manifestation, for example a liquid or a swarm of mobile particles. In
that case a deformation of substance such as is denoted by the root will
not be a permanent deformation but will result in a vibrative or
pulsative agitation of the substance. The intransitive will no longer
seem like a passive from our English-speaking viewpoint but will be
decidedly active, and the punctual will denote one pulse of the
deformation or disturbance, while the segmentative will refer to the
entire train or field of the vibrations, both as extending in space and
as continuing in time. Thus, for instance:

[image]

Note that with mobile-substance phenomena the segmentative is both
durative in time, in contrast to the momentaneous punctual, and extended
in space, in contrast to the definitely “spotted” location of the
punctual. Some phenomena are capable of manifestation in both mobile and
rigid substances, especially those defined in terms of a certain type of
contour; e.g. ta′ho ‘it exhibits one wavelike curve, or makes one
undulation’; taho′hota referring to a mobile substance means ‘it is
undulating’ (for example a liquid surface, a snake, a shaken rope), to a
nonmobile substance ‘it is scalloped’ or ‘it forms a wave pattern.’

But suppose again that the phenomenon denoted by the stem is one
resulting from the type of force known in physics as torque (tendency to
produce rotation), which in order for any effect to be apparent requires
that the substance be a body with at least a certain degree of rigidity
and yet capable of certain degrees of motion relative to other bodies.
In this case a single deformation or displacement as denoted by the
punctual will be either a single oscillation or a single turning of this
body according to the degree of freedom implied in the root-meaning;
while, if the effect continues, it will continue as a train of
oscillations or a continued rotation and may or may not involve an
advance through space at the same time: this, then, will be the meaning
of the segmentative. Examples of this type of meaning are:

  ------------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------
  wa′ya                          makes a waving shake (like a small tree shaken)
  [LATIN SMALL LETTER ENG]a′ya   makes a sway from one side to the other
  pï·′ya                         makes a flap like a pair of wings
  ta′ya                          makes a racking shake
  [LATIN SMALL LETTER ENG]ö′ya   makes a circuit (axial turning combined with advance in an arc)
  ro′ya                          makes a turn or twist
  ri′ya                          makes a quick spin
  ------------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------

It is interesting to note that a great many (though not all) of these
torque movements are denoted by stems ending in -ya. The segmentatives
of this type correspond to English durative forms denoting vibrative or
rotative motion, e.g.:

[image]

In the case of mï′ma ‘rolls over,’ where necessarily a lateral motion
accompanies the turning, we get this phase of the action necessarily
extended in mïma′mata ‘it is rolling along.’

Another type of this general class of phenomena is one which manifests
punctually as a shock, jar, or other sudden disturbance necessarily
momentary in nature, and is related to a pulsative phenomenon also
occurring in the natural world as a rapid succession of such shocks.
Here English generally employs two different stems, but Hopi simply uses
the punctual and segmentative of the same stem. An example from
inanimate nature is ti′li ‘it receives a slight jar,’ tili′lita ‘it is
vibrating’ (like an engine, a wagon, an automobile). But Hopi also
discerns a great many such phenomena in the animate world, for example:

[image]

Often, again, such verb forms are applied to rhythmical movements of the
body and limbs:

[image]

Again, the phenomenon may be one of disturbance at a point in a subtle
medium, that is one that would be scientifically classed as gaseous or
etheric. Such a medium gives little or no evidence of either motion or
extension in space, and the segmentative in these cases denotes only
pulsation in time:

[image]

Finally, there is one class of events to which the segmentative is not
applied. It is not applied to “mental,” “emotional,” or other “inner” or
“psychological” experiences. It concerns only the world of external
observation.

All this has a wider interest than the mere illustration of an
aspect-form. It is an illustration of how language produces an
organization of experience. We are inclined to think of language simply
as a technique of expression, and not to realize that language first of
all is a classification and arrangement of the stream of sensory
experience which results in a certain world-order, a certain segment of
the world that is easily expressible by the type of symbolic means that
language employs. In other words, language does in a cruder but also in
a broader and more versatile way the same thing that science does. We
have just seen how the Hopi language maps out a certain terrain of what
might be termed primitive physics. We have observed how, with very
thorough consistency and not a little true scientific precision, all
sorts of vibratile phenomena in nature are classified by being referred
to various elementary types of deformation process. The analysis of a
certain field of nature which results is freely extensible, and
all-in-all so harmonious with actual physics that such extension could
be made with great appropriateness to a multiplicity of phenomena
belonging entirely to the modern scientific and technical
world—movements of machinery and mechanism, wave processes and
vibrations, electrical and chemical phenomena—things that the Hopi have
never known or imagined, and for which we ourselves lack definite names.
The Hopi actually have a language better equipped to deal with such
vibratile phenomena than is our latest scientific terminology. This is
simply because their language establishes a general contrast between two
types of experience, which contrast corresponds to a contrast that, as
our science has discovered, is all-pervading and fundamental in nature.
According to the conceptions of modern physics, the contrast of particle
and field of vibrations is more fundamental in the world of nature than
such contrasts as space and time, or past, present, and future, which
are the sort of contrasts that our own language imposes upon us. The
Hopi aspect-contrast which we have observed, being obligatory upon their
verb forms, practically forces the Hopi to notice and observe vibratory
phenomena, and furthermore encourages them to find names for and to
classify such phenomena. As a matter of fact the language is
extraordinarily rich in terms for vibratory phenomena and for the
punctual events to which they are related.

 

Reprinted from Language 12:127–131 (1936). The paper was read before the
Linguistic Society of America in December 1935.

1. It is not a true passive because it does not imply any external
agent; it is not a static (at least not in the ordinary sense) because
it does not imply duration in time; it is not a true active because
activity and result are presented as one.

5

An American Indian Model of the Universe

I find it gratuitous to assume that a Hopi who knows only the Hopi
language and the cultural ideas of his own society has the same notions,
often supposed to be intuitions, of time and space that we have, and
that are generally assumed to be universal. In particular, he has no
general notion or intuition of time as a smooth flowing continuum in
which everything in the universe proceeds at an equal rate, out of a
future, through a present, into a past; or, in which, to reverse the
picture, the observer is being carried in the stream of duration
continuously away from a past and into a future.

After long and careful study and analysis, the Hopi language is seen to
contain no words, grammatical forms, constructions or expressions that
refer directly to what we call “time,” or to past, present, or future,
or to enduring or lasting, or to motion as kinematic rather than dynamic
(i.e. as a continuous translation in space and time rather than as an
exhibition of dynamic effort in a certain process), or that even refer
to space in such a way as to exclude that element of extension or
existence that we call “time,” and so by implication leave a residue
that could be referred to as “time.” Hence, the Hopi language contains
no reference to “time,” either explicit or implicit.

At the same time, the Hopi language is capable of accounting for and
describing correctly, in a pragmatic or operational sense, all
observable phenomena of the universe. Hence, I find it gratuitous to
assume that Hopi thinking contains any such notion as the supposed
intuitively felt flowing of “time,” or that the intuition of a Hopi
gives him this as one of its data. Just as it is possible to have any
number of geometries other than the Euclidean which give an equally
perfect account of space configurations, so it is possible to have
descriptions of the universe, all equally valid, that do not contain our
familiar contrasts of time and space. The relativity viewpoint of modern
physics is one such view, conceived in mathematical terms, and the Hopi
Weltanschauung is another and quite different one, nonmathematical and
linguistic.

Thus, the Hopi language and culture conceals a metaphysics, such as our
so-called naïve view of space and time does, or as the relativity theory
does; yet it is a different metaphysics from either. In order to
describe the structure of the universe according to the Hopi, it is
necessary to attempt—insofar as it is possible—to make explicit this
metaphysics, properly describable only in the Hopi language, by means of
an approximation expressed in our own language, somewhat inadequately it
is true, yet by availing ourselves of such concepts as we have worked up
into relative consonance with the system underlying the Hopi view of the
universe.

In this Hopi view, time disappears and space is altered, so that it is
no longer the homogeneous and instantaneous timeless space of our
supposed intuition or of classical Newtonian mechanics. At the same
time, new concepts and abstractions flow into the picture, taking up the
task of describing the universe without reference to such time or
space–abstractions for which our language lacks adequate terms. These
abstractions, by approximations of which we attempt to reconstruct for
ourselves the metaphysics of the Hopi, will undoubtedly appear to us as
psychological or even mystical in character. They are ideas which we are
accustomed to consider as part and parcel either of so-called animistic
or vitalistic beliefs, or of those transcendental unifications of
experience and intuitions of things unseen that are felt by the
consciousness of the mystic, or which are given out in mystical and (or)
so-called occult systems of thought. These abstractions are definitely
given either explicitly in words—psychological or metaphysical terms—in
the Hopi language, or, even more, are implicit in the very structure and
grammar of that language, as well as being observable in Hopi culture
and behavior. They are not, so far as I can consciously avoid it,
projections of other systems upon the Hopi language and culture made by
me in my attempt at an objective analysis. Yet, if MYSTICAL be perchance
a term of abuse in the eyes of a modern Western scientist, it must be
emphasized that these underlying abstractions and postulates of the
Hopian metaphysics are, from a detached viewpoint, equally (or to the
Hopi, more) justified pragmatically and experientially, as compared to
the flowing time and static space of our own metaphysics, which are au
fond equally mystical. The Hopi postulates equally account for all
phenomena and their interrelations, and lend themselves even better to
the integration of Hopi culture in all its phases.

The metaphysics underlying our own language, thinking, and modern
culture (I speak not of the recent and quite different relativity
metaphysics of modern science) imposes upon the universe two grand
COSMIC FORMS, space and time; static three-dimensional infinite space,
and kinetic one-dimensional uniformly and perpetually flowing time—two
utterly separate and unconnected aspects of reality (according to this
familiar way of thinking). The flowing realm of time is, in turn, the
subject of a threefold division: past, present, and future.

The Hopi metaphysics also has its cosmic forms comparable to these in
scale and scope. What are they? It imposes upon the universe two grand
cosmic forms, which as a first approximation in terminology we may call
MANIFESTED and MANIFESTING  (or, UNMANIFEST) or, again, OBJECTIVE and
SUBJECTIVE. The objective or manifested comprises all that is or has
been accessible to the senses, the historical physical universe, in
fact, with no attempt to distinguish between present and past, but
excluding everything that we call future. The subjective or manifesting
comprises all that we call future, BUT NOT MERELY THIS; it includes
equally and indistinguishably all that we call mental—everything that
appears or exists in the mind, or, as the Hopi would prefer to say, in
the HEART, not only the heart of man, but the heart of animals, plants,
and things, and behind and within all the forms and appearances of
nature in the heart of nature, and by an implication and extension which
has been felt by more than one anthropologist, yet would hardly ever be
spoken of by a Hopi himself, so charged is the idea with religious and
magical awesomeness, in the very heart of the Cosmos, itself.¹ The
subjective realm (subjective from our viewpoint, but intensely real and
quivering with life, power, and potency to the Hopi) embraces not only
our FUTURE, much of which the Hopi regards as more or less predestined
in essence if not in exact form, but also all mentality, intellection,
and emotion, the essence and typical form of which is the striving of
purposeful desire, intelligent in character, toward manifestation—a
manifestation which is much resisted and delayed, but in some form or
other is inevitable. It is the realm of expectancy, of desire and
purpose, of vitalizing life, of efficient causes, of thought thinking
itself out from an inner realm (the Hopian HEART) into manifestation. It
is in a dynamic state, yet not a state of motion—it is not advancing
toward us out of a future, but ALREADY WITH US in vital and mental form,
and its dynamism is at work in the field of eventuating or manifesting,
i.e. evolving without motion from the subjective by degrees to a result
which is the objective. In translating into English, the Hopi will say
that these entities in process of causation ‘will come’ or that they—the
Hopi—‘will come to’ them, but, in their own language, there are no verbs
corresponding to our ‘come’ and ‘go’ that mean simple and abstract
motion, our purely kinematic concept. The words in this case translated
‘come’ refer to the process of eventuating without calling it
motion—they are ‘eventuates to here’ (pew’i) or ‘eventuates from it’
(angqö) or ‘arrived’ (pitu, pl. öki) which refers only to the terminal
manifestation, the actual arrival at a given point, not to any motion
preceding it.

This realm of the subjective or of the process of manifestation, as
distinguished from the objective, the result of this universal process,
includes also—on its border but still pertaining to its own realm—an
aspect of existence that we include in our present time. It is that
which is beginning to emerge into manifestation; that is, something
which is beginning to be done, like going to sleep or starting to write,
but is not yet in full operation. This can be and usually is referred to
by the same verb form (the EXPECTIVE form in my terminology of Hopi
grammar) that refers to our future, or to wishing, wanting, intending,
etc. Thus, this nearer edge of the subjective cuts across and includes a
part of our present time, viz. the moment of inception, but most of our
present belongs in the Hopi scheme to the objective realm and so is
indistinguishable from our past. There is also a verb form, the
INCEPTIVE which refers to this edge of emergent manifestation in the
reverse way—as belonging to the objective, as the edge at which
objectivity is attained; this is used to indicate beginning or starting,
and in most cases there is no difference apparent in the translation
from the similar use of the expective. But, at certain crucial points,
significant and fundamental differences appear. The inceptive, referring
to the objective and result side, and not like the expective to the
subjective and causal side, implies the ending of the work of causation
in the same breath that it states the beginning of manifestation. If the
verb has a suffix which answers somewhat to our passive, but really
means that causation impinges upon a subject to effect a certain
result—i.e. ‘the food is being eaten,’ then addition of the INCEPTIVE
suffix in such a way as to refer to the basic action produces a meaning
of causal cessation. The basic action is in the inceptive state; hence
whatever causation is behind it is ceasing; the causation explicitly
referred to by the causal suffix is hence such as WE would call past
time, and the verb includes this and the incepting and the decausating
of the final state (a state of partial or total eatenness) in one
statement. The translation is ‘it stops getting eaten.’ Without knowing
the underlying Hopian metaphysics, it would be impossible to understand
how the same suffix may denote starting or stopping.

If we were to approximate our metaphysical terminology more closely to
Hopian terms, we should probably speak of the subjective realm as the
realm of HOPE or HOPING. Every language contains terms that have come to
attain cosmic scope of reference, that crystallize in themselves the
basic postulates of an unformulated philosophy, in which is couched the
thought of a people, a culture, a civilization, even of an era. Such are
our words ‘reality, substance, matter, cause,’ and as we have seen
‘space, time, past, present, future.’ Such a term in Hopi is the word
most often translated ‘hope’—tunátya—‘it is in the action of hoping, it
hopes, it is hoped for, it thinks or is thought of with hope,’ etc. Most
metaphysical words in Hopi are verbs, not nouns as in European
languages. The verb tunátya contains in its idea of hope something of
our words ‘thought,’ ‘desire,’ and ‘cause,’ which sometimes must be used
to translate it. The word is really a term which crystallizes the Hopi
philosophy of the universe in respect to its grand dualism of objective
and subjective; it is the Hopi term for SUBJECTIVE. It refers to the
state of the subjective, unmanifest, vital and causal aspect of the
Cosmos, and the fermenting activity toward fruition and manifestation
with which it seethes—an action of HOPING; i.e. mental-causal activity,
which is forever pressing upon and into the manifested realm. As anyone
acquainted with Hopi society knows, the Hopi see this burgeoning
activity in the growing of plants, the forming of clouds and their
condensation in rain, the careful planning out of the communal
activities of agriculture and architecture, and in all human hoping,
wishing, striving, and taking thought; and as most especially
concentrated in prayer, the constant hopeful praying of the Hopi
community, assisted by their exoteric communal ceremonies and their
secret, esoteric rituals in the underground kivas—prayer which conducts
the pressure of the collective Hopi thought and will out of the
subjective into the objective. The inceptive form of tunátya, which is
tunátyava, does not mean ‘begins to hope,’ but rather ‘comes true, being
hoped for.’ Why it must logically have this meaning will be clear from
what has already been said. The inceptive denotes the first appearance
of the objective, but the basic meaning of tunátya is subjective
activity or force; the inceptive is then the terminus of such activity.
It might then be said that tunátya ‘coming true’ is the Hopi term for
objective, as contrasted with subjective, the two terms being simply two
different inflectional nuances of the same verbal root, as the two
cosmic forms are the two aspects of one reality.

As far as space is concerned, the subjective is a mental realm, a realm
of no space in the objective sense, but it seems to be symbolically
related to the vertical dimension and its poles the zenith and the
underground, as well as to the ‘heart’ of things, which corresponds to
our word ‘inner’ in the metaphorical sense. Corresponding to each point
in the objective world is such a vertical and vitally INNER axis which
is what we call the wellspring of the future. But to the Hopi there is
no temporal future; there is nothing in the subjective state
corresponding to the sequences and successions conjoined with distances
and changing physical configurations that we find in the objective
state. From each subjective axis, which may be thought of as more or
less vertical and like the growth-axis of a plant, extends the objective
realm in every physical direction, though these directions are typified
more especially by the horizontal plane and its four cardinal points.
The objective is the great cosmic form of extension; it takes in all the
strictly extensional aspects of existence, and it includes all intervals
and distances, all seriations and number. Its DISTANCE includes what we
call time in the sense of the temporal relation between events which
have already happened. The Hopi conceive time and motion in the
objective realm in a purely operational sense—a matter of the complexity
and magnitude of operations connecting events—so that the element of
time is not separated from whatever element of space enters into the
operations. Two events in the past occurred a long ‘time’ apart (the
Hopi language has no word quite equivalent to our ‘time’) when many
periodic physical motions have occurred between them in such a way as to
traverse much distance or accumulate magnitude of physical display in
other ways. The Hopi metaphysics does not raise the question whether the
things in a distant village exist at the same present moment as those in
one’s own village, for it is frankly pragmatic on this score and says
that any ‘events’ in the distant village can be compared to any events
in one’s own village only by an interval of magnitude that has both time
and space forms in it. Events at a distance from the observer can only
be known objectively when they are ‘past’ (i.e. posited in the
objective) and the more distant, the more ‘past’ (the more worked upon
from the subjective side). Hopi, with its preference for verbs, as
contrasted to our own liking for nouns, perpetually turns our
propositions about things into propositions about events. What happens
at a distant village, if actual (objective) and not a conjecture
(subjective) can be known ‘here’ only later. If it does not happen ‘at
this place,’ it does not happen ‘at this time’; it happens at ‘that’
place and at ‘that’ time. Both the ‘here’ happening and the ‘there’
happening are in the objective, corresponding in general to our past,
but the ‘there’ happening is the more objectively distant, meaning, from
our standpoint, that it is further away in the past just as it is
further away from us in space than the ‘here’ happening.

As the objective realm displaying its characteristic attribute of
extension stretches away from the observer toward that unfathomable
remoteness which is both far away in space and long past in time, there
comes a point where extension in detail ceases to be knowable and is
lost in the vast distance, and where the subjective, creeping behind the
scenes as it were, merges into the objective, so that at this
inconceivable distance from the observer—from all observers—there is an
all-encircling end and beginning of things where it might be said that
existence, itself, swallows up the objective and the subjective. The
borderland of this realm is as much subjective as objective. It is the
abysm of antiquity, the time and place told about in the myths, which is
known only subjectively or mentally—the Hopi realize and even express in
their grammar that the things told in myths or stories do not have the
same kind of reality or validity as things of the present day, the
things of practical concern. As for the far distances of the sky and
stars, what is known and said about them is supposititious,
inferential—hence, in a way subjective—reached more through the inner
vertical axis and the pole of the zenith than through the objective
distances and the objective processes of vision and locomotion. So the
dim past of myths is that corresponding distance on earth (rather than
in the heavens) which is reached subjectively as myth through the
vertical axis of reality via the pole of the nadir—hence it is placed
BELOW the present surface of the earth, though this does not mean that
the nadir-land of the origin myths is a hole or cavern as we should
understand it. It is Palátkwapi ‘At the Red Mountains,’ a land like our
present earth, but to which our earth bears the relation of a distant
sky—and similarly the sky of our earth is penetrated by the heroes of
tales, who find another earthlike realm above it.

It may now be seen how the Hopi do not need to use terms that refer to
space or time as such. Such terms in our language are recast into
expressions of extension, operation, and cyclic process provided they
refer to the solid objective realm. They are recast into expressions of
subjectivity if they refer to the subjective realm—the future, the
psychic-mental, the mythical period, and the invisibly distant and
conjectural generally. Thus, the Hopi language gets along perfectly
without tenses for its verbs.

 

The manuscript of this article, together with pertinent linguistic
notes, was among the papers left by Whorf at his death and turned over
to George L. Trager. Dr. Trager and Dr. E. A. Kennard edited the
manuscript for publication, making no substantial changes, and the paper
is presented here in the form in which it appeared in the Int. J. Amer.
Linguistics, 16:67–72 (1950). Internal evidence and certain comments
found in Whorf’s correspondence suggest that the paper was written in
about 1936.

1. This idea is sometimes alluded to as the ‘spirit of the Breath’
(hikwsu) and as the ‘Mighty Something’ [Whorf_p76n1] although these
terms may have lower and less cosmic though always awesome connotations.

6

A Linguistic Consideration of Thinking in Primitive Communities

I

The ethnologist engaged in studying a living primitive culture must
often have wondered: “What do these people think? How do they think? Are
their intellectual and rational processes akin to ours or radically
different?” But thereupon he has probably dismissed the idea as a
psychological enigma and has sharply turned his attention back to more
readily observable matters. And yet the problem of thought and thinking
in the native community is not purely and simply a psychological
problem. It is quite largely cultural. It is moreover largely a matter
of one especially cohesive aggregate of cultural phenomena that we call
a language. It is approachable through linguistics, and, as I hope to
show, the approach requires a rather new type of emphasis in
linguistics, now beginning to emerge through the work of Sapir, Leonard
Bloomfield, and others, though Boas enunciated it decades ago in his
introduction to the Handbook of American Indian languages.

One of the clearest characterizations of thinking is that of Carl Jung,
who distinguishes four basic psychic functions: sensation, feeling
(Gefühl), thinking, and intuition.¹ It is evident to a linguist that
thinking, as defined by Jung, contains a large linguistic element of a
strictly patterned nature, while feeling is mainly nonlinguistic, though
it may use the vehicle of language, albeit in a way quite different from
thinking. Thinking may be said to be language’s own ground, whereas
feeling deals in feeling values which language indeed possesses but
which lie rather on its borderland. These are Jung’s two rational
functions, and by contrast his two irrational functions, sensation and
intuition, may fairly be termed nonlinguistic. They are, it is true,
involved in the processes of talking, hearing, and understanding, but
only in an infinitesimal part of their entire range. We are thus able to
distinguish thinking as the function which is to a large extent
linguistic.²

The linguistic side of SILENT thinking, thinking without speaking, is of
a nature as yet little appreciated. Silent thinking is basically not
suppressed talking or inaudibly mumbled words or silent laryngeal
agitations as some have supposed.³ Such an explanation merely appears
plausible to the linguistically unsophisticated “common sense” view.
“Common sense” is unaware that talking itself means using a complex
cultural organization, just as it is unaware of cultural organizations
in general. Sense or meaning does not result from words or morphemes but
from patterned relations between words or morphemes. Isolations of a
morpheme, like “John!” or “Come!” are themselves patterns or formulas of
a highly specialized type, not bare units.⁴ Words and morphemes are
motor reactions, but the factors of linkage between words and morphemes,
which make the categories and patterns in which linguistic meaning
dwells, are not motor reactions; they correspond to neural processes and
linkages of a nonmotor type, silent, invisible, and individually
unobservable.⁵ It is not words mumbled, but rapport between words, which
enables them to work together at all to any semantic result. It is this
rapport that constitutes the real essence of thought insofar as it is
linguistic, and that in the last resort renders the mumbling, laryngeal
quiverings, etc., semantically de trop. The nonmotor processes that are
the essential thing are, of their nature, in a state of linkage
according to the structure of a particular language, and activations of
these processes and linkages in any way, with, without, or aside from
laryngeal behavior, in the forefront of consciousness, or in what has
been called “the deep well of unconscious cerebration,” are all
linguistic patterning operations, and all entitled to be called
thinking.

Moreover, an analysis of silent thinking into motor quiverings
corresponding to suppressed words and morphemes would no more be a real
analysis of thinking than the analysis of a language into actual words
and morphemes would be a real analysis of the language. The crudest and
most amateurish grammar analyzes more effectively than that, and any
scientific grammar is necessarily a deep analysis into relations.

For example, gender in English is a system of relations that has an
almost minimal outward representation in morphemes. Its only motor
reactions are the two pronouns ‘he’ and ‘she.’⁶ The motor processes
which actualize the gender-linked nouns are undifferentiated in gender,
but the linkage between such a motor process and another motor process
actualizing the proper pronoun, ‘he’ or ‘she,’ is (1) differentiated in
gender, (2) a nonmotor process, since the two motor processes are
discrete and may even be separated by a prolonged period of rest. The
gender nouns, such as boy, girl, father, wife, uncle, woman, lady,
including thousands of given names like George, Fred, Mary, Charlie,
Isabel, Isadore, Jane, John, Alice, Aloysius, Esther, Lester bear no
distinguishing mark of gender like the Latin -us or -a within each motor
process; but nevertheless each of these thousands of words has an
invariable linkage-bond connecting it with absolute precision either to
the word ‘he’ or the word ‘she,’ which however does not come into the
overt-behavior picture until and unless special situations of discourse
require it.⁷ These thousands of linkage processes rallying around the
common point of the pronoun and ramifying to all the thousands of nouns
of one gender form a sort of psychic complex belonging to (1) the
nonmotor and nonactualized realm, (2) the thinking function in Jung’s
definition, (3) the linguistic and cultural order.

There is no evident reason why such a complex should not enter into
various functional relations with other material of thought without
necessarily requiring the activation of any of the individual words or
class marks with which it is connected. We can be thinking of, say, the
division of labor between the sexes in a certain culture without having
to think of the rather bookish words ‘female’ and ‘male’ and to refer
continually to them in our meditations upon such a subject. What we more
probably do as we run over such a question in our minds is sift the
facts in terms of a sort of habitual consciousness of two sex classes as
a standing classificatory fact in our thought-world, something which is
quite different from sex as a concept or sex as a feeling-value. The
basis of this shadowy, abstract, and wordless adumbration of a sex
classification is not a word like ‘sex’ or ‘female’ or ‘women’; it is a
linguistic RAPPORT as distinguished from a linguistic UTTERANCE. In
English it is probably a rising toward fuller consciousness of the two
great complexes of linkage bonds pertaining to the linguistic sex-gender
system. It is, one might say, the total pronominal-linkage pressure of
the George, Dick, and William class of words, or of the Jane, Sue, and
Betty class, that functions in the meditation and not a VERBAL concept
like ‘male’ or ‘female.’ But in a language without sex gender, like
Chinese or Hopi, any thinking in terms of a sex classification could not
be of this nature; it would presumably operate around a word, or a
feeling, or a sexual image, or a symbol, or something else.

A linguistic classification like English gender, which has no overt mark
actualized along with the words of the class but which operates through
an invisible “central exchange” of linkage bonds in such a way as to
determine certain other words which mark the class, I call a COVERT
class, in contrast to an OVERT class, such as gender in Latin. Navaho
has a covert classification of the whole world of objects based partly
on animation and partly on shape. Inanimate bodies fall into two classes
which linguists have styled “round objects” and “long objects.”⁸ These
names, of course, misrepresent; they attempt to depict the subtle in
terms of the gross, and fail. Navaho itself has no terms which
adequately depict the classes. A covert concept like a covert gender is
as definable and in its way as definite as a verbal concept like
‘female’ or feminine, but is of a very different kind; it is not the
analog of a word but of a rapport-system, and awareness of it has an
intuitive quality; we say that it is sensed rather than comprehended. It
is possibly the kind of concept or idea which in Hindu philosophy is
called ar[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa, formless. The Navaho
so-called “round” and “long” nouns are not marked in themselves nor by
any pronouns. They are marked only in the use of certain very important
verb stems, in that a different stem is required for a “round” or a
“long” subject or object. Many other verb stems are indifferent to the
distinction. A new object, for which the Navaho has no name, will be put
into one or the other class by analogy, not analogy as it would seem to
us, but as guided by the contents of the two Navaho complexes.

A covert linguistic class may not deal with any grand dichotomy of
objects, it may have a very subtle meaning, and it may have no overt
mark other than certain distinctive “reactances” with certain overtly
marked forms. It is then what I call a CRYPTOTYPE. It is a submerged,
subtle, and elusive meaning, corresponding to no actual word, yet shown
by linguistic analysis to be functionally important in the grammar. For
example, the English particle UP meaning ‘completely, to a finish,’ as
in ‘break it up, cover it up, eat it up, twist it up, open it up’ can be
applied to any verb of one or two syllables initially accented,
EXCEPTING verbs belonging to four special cryptotypes. One is the
cryptotype of dispersion without boundary; hence one does not say
‘spread it up, waste it up, spend it up, scatter it up, drain it up, or
filter it up.’⁹ Another is the cryptotype of oscillation without
agitation of parts; we don’t say ‘rock up a cradle, wave up a flag,
wiggle up a finger, nod up one’s head,’ etc.¹⁰ The third is the
cryptotype of nondurative impact which also includes psychological
reaction: kill, fight, etc., hence we don’t say ‘whack it up, tap it up,
stab it up, slam it up, wrestle him up, hate him up.’¹¹ The fourth is
the verbs of directed motion, move, lift, pull, push, put, etc., with
which UP has the directional sense, ‘upward,’ or derived senses, even
though this sense may be contradicted by the verb and hence produce an
effect of absurdity, as in ‘drip it up.’ Outside this set of
cryptotypes, UP may be freely used with transitives in the
completive-intensive sense.

Another English cryptotype is that of the transitive verbs of a
covering, enclosing, and surface-attaching meaning, the reactance of
which is that UN- may be prefixed to denote the opposite. Hence we say
‘uncover, uncoil, undress, unfasten, unfold, unlock, unroll, untangle,
untie, unwind,’ but not ‘unbreak, undry, unhang, unheat, unlift, unmelt,
unopen, unpress, unspill.’ With the exception of a few words mostly
semiarchaic, e.g., ‘unsay, unthink, unmake,’ the use of UN- as a
reversive prefix in true verbs coincides with the centripetal enclosing
and attaching meaning.¹² We have no single word in the language which
can give us a proper clue to this meaning or into which we can compress
this meaning; hence the meaning is subtle, intangible, as is typical of
cryptotypic meanings. Nevertheless this formless idea delimits a quite
definite class of words and grammatical forms, and may be dredged up
from its own plane of thought formations and grasped in a semi-intuitive
way. To do this, one needs only meditate on the meaning of the
cryptotype, e.g. of the typical verbs which take un-, or to use methods
of free-analogizing akin to the “free-association” methods of Freud and
Jung. Thus I can imagine a newly coined verb flimmick. If flimmick
means, let us say, ‘tie a tin can to,’ then it falls into the cryptotype
and I can say, e.g., ‘he unflimmicked the dog.’ But, if it means ‘to
take apart,’ there will be no tendency for anyone to make a form
unflimmick meaning ‘put together’; e.g., ‘he unflimmicked the set of
radio parts.’ Such a form will appear strange and unacceptable.
Similarly a knowledge of this cryptotype previous to the adoption of the
new words ‘camouflage’ and ‘wangle’ would have enabled us to predict
that it would be possible to say ‘uncamouflage it,’ but not ‘unwangle
it.’

In contrast to the cryptotype I give the name PHENOTYPE to the
linguistic category with a clearly apparent class meaning and a formal
mark or morpheme which accompanies it; i.e., the phenotype is the
“classical” morphological category. The meanings of ‘up’ and ‘un-’ are
phenotypes, and so are the various tenses, aspects, voices, modes, and
other marked forms which all grammars study. Grammatical research up to
the present time has been concerned chiefly with study of phenotypes. A
certain type of grammar proceeds as if linguistic meaning dwelt wholly
in them. The anthropologist should not be satisfied with such a grammar,
any more than with an ethnology that described only positive behavior
and ignored the patterning of taboos and avoidances. It can be shown
that, in some languages at least, linguistic meaning results from the
interplay of phenotypes and cryptotypes, not from phenotypes alone.

Thus in Hopi the use of the aspect and tense forms is often governed by
cryptotypes. They govern, for instance, the way of expressing the
beginning of an action or state, the English ‘begins to do,’ or ‘begins
to be’ form. First, a different form (phenotype) is used, depending on
whether the verb is active or inactive (either passive or static), and
this is a cryptotypic distinction, for the formal apparatus of Hopi
grammar does not set up any active-versus-inactive contrast. Hopi,
moreover, classes being ‘in, at, over,’ or in some other spatial
relationship as ACTIVE, but being ‘red, long, little, pretty, turned
around, shot,’ as INACTIVE. Causal and incausal are really better terms
here than active and passive. Next, if the verb is active, the phenotype
for beginning depends on which of three active cryptotypes is involved.
With most verbs one can use either the inceptive aspect or the future
tense. Analysis seems to indicate that Hopi regards the subject of these
verbs as working into and through the action by a process of dynamic
adjustment. The subject progressively adjusts himself into the action,
and throughout the action is maintaining this adjustment either to
develop or to stabilize and continue the effect. Hopi includes here¹³
sleeping, dying, laughing, eating, as well as most organic functions and
most alterative operations, e.g., cutting, bending, covering, placing,
and thousands of others. The second cryptotype uses only future tense to
express beginning, and includes verbs of straight-line uniform motion,
running, fleeing, going, coming, being in or at a place or in any
spatial relationship, opening, closing, and certain others. Analysis
indicates that here the subject is classed as instantly assuming a
full-fledged new status, not as dynamically working into and through a
process. The third cryptotype expresses beginning by means of the
projective aspect, a phenotype which used elsewhere means ‘does with a
forward movement.’ This cryptotype implies that the subject is seized
and assimilated by a field of influence, carried away by it, as it were;
and it consists of gravitational and moving-inertia phenomena; ‘falling,
tumbling, spilling, jumping, whirling,’ and also, strange though it
seems to us, ‘going out’ and ‘going in.’ According to the logic of Hopi
linguistics, a person about to enter a house or go outdoors launches off
and yields himself to a new influence like one who falls or leaps.

What needs to be clearly seen by anthropologists, who to a large extent
may have gotten the idea that linguistics is merely a highly specialized
and tediously technical pigeonhole in a far corner of the
anthropological workshop, is that linguistics is essentially the quest
of MEANING. It may seem to the outsider to be inordinately absorbed in
recording hair-splitting distinctions of sound, performing phonetic
gymnastics, and writing complex grammars which only grammarians read.
But the simple fact is that its real concern is to light up the thick
darkness of the language, and thereby of much of the thought, the
culture, and the outlook upon life of a given community, with the light
of this “golden something,” as I have heard it called, this transmuting
principle of meaning. As I have tried to show, this amounts to far more
than learning to speak and understand the language as the practical
language teacher conceives these ends. The investigator of culture
should hold an ideal of linguistics as that of a heuristic approach to
problems of psychology which hitherto he may have shrunk from
considering—a glass through which, when correctly focused, will appear
the TRUE SHAPES of many of those forces which hitherto have been to him
but the inscrutable blank of invisible and bodiless thought.

II

Awareness of psychological undercurrents is the last thing to arrive in
the conquest of linguistic understanding, both in the individual and in
history. The attempt to teach one’s language to a foreigner results in
some awareness of OVERT formal patterns: paradigms and inflected stems.
The earliest grammars known are cuneiform wordlists of this kind, giving
equivalents as between Sumerian and the Semitic Akkadian. A further step
did not occur until philosophy, in both Greece and India, discovered a
relation between reasoning and linguistic patterns; this resulted for
philosophy in a formal logic, and for grammar in the discovery of at
least the more outstanding categories in the classical Indo-European
tongues. In the Semitic world, grammar remained largely formal, the
classical Hebrew and Arabic grammars consisting mostly of paradigms,
known by code names which made no attempt even to characterize, much
less penetrate, the meanings of these linguistic classes. Even Latin
grammar, with its terms like indicative, subjunctive, passive, etc., was
psychological by comparison. The discovery of ancient Hindu grammar by
Western scholars in the early nineteenth century impressed these
scholars chiefly by its formal perfection. But it also revealed certain
psychological subtleties, such as the recognition of different covert
ideas within word-compounding technique, and the classification of
compounds as tatpurusha, dvandva, bahuvrihi, and so on.¹⁴

Even the greatest European grammarians of the nineteenth century did not
go much beyond formal and overt structures except for riding the
classical grammatical and philosophical concepts to the limits of travel
in the languages they studied. To this statement there is one grand
exception—one of those amazing geniuses who baffle their contemporaries
and leave no successors. The real originator of such ideas as
rapport-systems, covert classes, cryptotypes, psycholinguistic
patterning, and language as part and parcel of a culture was, so far as
I can learn, a French grammarian of the early nineteenth century,
Antoine Fabre d’Olivet (1768–1825),¹⁵ who investigated Semitic languages
and particularly Hebrew, though his work, like that of Mendel in
genetics, made no impress whatsoever on the thought of his time.
Unfortunately for its comprehension either then or now, its author was a
mystical and religious metaphysician who mingled this side of his nature
with the workings of one of the most powerful linguistic intellects of
any age. The result was to produce a mystical and gnostic “translation”
of Genesis, or rather, an Upanishadic paraphrase that was like some
shocking vision of cosmic space alive with terrific hieroglyphs—that got
itself promptly placed on the Index. Nor did this repudiation by
orthodoxy win any encomiums from what was then the radical left, for his
Biblical views were at the same time too iconoclastic and too
transcendental to satisfy any possible school of exegesis. But the
strictly linguistic part of Fabre d’Olivet’s work, embodied in La langue
hébraïque restituée, which appeared in 1815–16,¹⁶ when separated from
his extraordinary Upanishad upon Genesis, can be seen today to be based
on purely linguistic criteria and to show great psychological
penetration, and ideas far in advance of his time. It must be added
that, although mystical almost to the point of a Jacob Boehme or a
William Blake, Fabre d’Olivet steered absolutely clear of the cabalistic
and numerological hocus-pocus with which the old Jewish tradition of
Hebrew was laden. And, while he threw overboard the whole formalistic
Hiphil-Hophal conception of grammar, he also declined to foist Latin and
Greek patterns upon Hebrew. His Hebrew stands on its own feet as
completely as does Boas’s Chinook. He reorganized the treatment of verb
conjugations on a psycholinguistic basis, considered individual prefixes
and suffixes from the standpoint of their meaning and function, went
into the semantics of vowel patterns and the semantic coloring of
vowels, and showed how many Hebrew stems can be resolved into meaningful
fractions, as, e.g., such English words as ‘flash, flicker, clash,
click, clack, crack, crash, lick, lash’ can be so resolved. Refusing to
identify the letters of Hebrew writing with the actual phonetic elements
and yet perceiving that these elements are not mere sounds, but
stereotyped, codified, and patterned semantic sounds, he advanced to a
conception of the phoneme, which he called the “sign” or the “vocal
sign”—struggling with terminology but showing real insight into
linguistic actualities. He stressed the fact of a complex rapport
between signs and between words. A phoneme may assume definite semantic
duties as part of its rapport. In English the phoneme [Latin small
letter eth] (the voiced sound of th) occurs initially only in the
cryptotype of demonstrative particles (the, this, there, than, etc.).
Hence there is a psychic pressure against accepting the voiced sound of
th in new or imaginary words: thig, thag, thob, thuzzle, etc. not having
demonstrative meanings. Encountering such a new word (e.g. thob) on a
page, we will “instinctively” give it the voiceless sound θ of th in
“think.” But it is no “instinct.” Just our old friend linguistic rapport
again. Assign a demonstrative meaning, let thag equal ‘over the fence,’
for instance, and we will substitute the voiced phoneme [Latin small
letter eth] of “there.” Fabre d’Olivet knew all about such things.

Moreover, Fabre d’Olivet thought in an anthropological and not simply a
grammatical way; to him, speech was not a “faculty” exalted on its own
perch, but something to be understood in the light of human behavior and
culture, of which it was a part, specialized but involving no different
principle from the rest. The vocal sign (phoneme) was a highly
specialized gesture or symbolic act, language a development of total
somatic behavior becoming symbolic and then diverting its symbolism more
and more into the vocal channel—such is his teaching put into the modern
idiom.

No figure so significant for the linguistic approach to thinking again
appears until we come to the Irish linguist James Byrne (1820–97). His
studies were based on the exceedingly valuable idea of a worldwide
survey of grammatical structures in all languages known. His great
work—it at least deserves to be called great in conception, even though
perhaps not in execution—in two volumes, called General principles of
structure of language, appeared in 1885.¹⁷ It had the remarkable feature
of presenting condensed grammatical sketches of languages all over the
globe, from Chinese to Hottentot. Almost every linguistic stock outside
of America is represented, and a good number of American ones. On this
survey Byrne based his psychological theory. And it seems to me at least
rather significant that Byrne found, on the basis of language structure,
a similar contrast of two fundamental psychological types to that which
Jung much later found from psychiatry and called the types of
extraversion and introversion. Jung also showed how, all down through
history, the irreconcilable opposition of two such types has resulted in
fundamental controversies and schisms in successive philosophies and
religions. Byrne independently found, or thought he found, a correlation
between language structure and two types of mentality, one
quick-reacting, quick-thinking, and volatile, the other slow-reacting,
slow-thinking, but more profound and phlegmatic. His slow-thinking
mentality, suggestive of Jung’s introvert, he thought went, on the
whole, with languages of a synthetic type having a complex overt
morphology and much derivation and word-building, the extreme of the
type being polysynthesis. His quick-thinking (extraverted) type went, on
the whole, with a simpler morphology, lack of synthesis, an analytic or
in the extreme an isolating type of language.

But, while I am sympathetic to the possibility of such a finding, which
would indeed be a mighty achievement, and also impressed by Byrne’s
anticipation of Jung, I find Byrne’s general thesis unconvincing,
chiefly because I can see how Byrne was working with utterly inadequate
materials. It is of the greatest importance to man’s knowledge of his
own intellectual makeup, especially in future times, that the really
colossal task that Byrne so rashly attempted be done as well as
possible. This would require not only a survey of many more languages,
particularly American ones, than Byrne used, but a grammar of each
language worked out scientifically and on the basis of the language’s
own patterns and classes, and as free as possible from any general
presuppositions about grammatical logic. Byrne got his materials from
old-fashioned grammars, formal and even “classical” in cut. These
grammars might at any juncture quarter a regiment of alien patterns and
ideas on the unfortunate tongue. Not one of these grammarians, nor Byrne
himself, could have made a sui generis configurative report on a
language as Fabre d’Olivet had done; that ability had died. But until it
again lives as a well-developed scientific technique and is applied to
another world survey and comparison, man will remain ignorant of the
roots of his intellectual life. He will be debarred from any
consideration of human thought on a planetary scale, of what it is in
respect to the species.

That ability began to live again with and after the attack made by Boas
on the American Indian languages, and especially his statement of
principles, and ideals of method, in his justly celebrated introduction
to the Handbook.¹⁸ And, with Boas, it reappeared in a modern scientific
form, and in terms of the acceptable science CULTUS, not as before in
terms of an exuberant mystically disposed creative imagination. Boas
showed for the second time in history, but for the first in a scientific
manner, how a language could be analyzed sui generis and without forcing
the categories of “classical” tradition upon it. The development of an
adequate technique for this new outlook had to come haltingly. When
under Boas the American languages first began to reveal the unparalleled
complexity and subtlety of their thought categories, the phonemic
calculus was still unborn. The American field linguist could not, like
Fabre, intuit the phoneme and morphophoneme in a brilliant tour de force
of imaginative insight. He had to wait for these concepts to be
developed by specialized phoneticians, working at first in the
modern-language field, and at first he lacked in psychological
penetration.

The new era passes into a second phase, into the truly modern linguistic
point of view, with the appearance on the scene of Sapir, and
particularly with the publication of his Language in 1921.¹⁹ Sapir has
done more than any other person to inaugurate the linguistic approach to
thinking and make it of scientific consequence, and moreover to
demonstrate the importance of linguistics to anthropology and
psychology. From this point on it would be a task to mention individual
contributors to this dawning realization and growing idea that
linguistics is fundamental to the theory of thinking and in the last
analysis to ALL HUMAN SCIENCES. The interested reader is referred to the
partial and very incomplete bibliography appended.

III

This linguistic consideration of thinking as applied to primitive
communities is of significance for anthropology in two ways. First, the
ethnological and the psychological-linguistic insights into the same
primitive community, especially if made by the same investigator, can be
reasonably expected to have a very fertilizing effect upon each other.
We have the testimony and the enlightening teaching of Sapir and others
that this is so. The very essence of linguistics is the quest for
meaning, and, as the science refines its procedure, it inevitably
becomes, as a matter of this quest, more psychological and cultural,
while retaining that almost mathematical precision of statement which it
gets from the highly systematic nature of the linguistic realm of fact.

Let us suppose that an ethnologist discovers that the Hopi speak about
clouds in their rain prayers, etc., as though clouds were alive. He
would like to know whether this is some metaphor or special religious or
ceremonial figure of speech, or whether it is the ordinary and usual way
of thinking about clouds. Here is the sort of problem to which language
might be able to give a very meaningful answer, and we immediately turn
to it to see if it has a gender system that distinguishes living from
nonliving things, and, if so, how it classes a cloud. We find that Hopi
has no gender at all. The traditional grammar of the pre-Boas period
would stop at this point and think it had given an answer. But the
correct answer can only be given by a grammar that analyzes covert as
well as overt structure and meaning. For Hopi does distinguish an
animate class of nouns AS A CRYPTOTYPE and only as a cryptotype. The
crucial reactance is in the way of forming the plural. When members of
the Flute Society, e.g., are spoken of as Flutes, this (covertly)
inanimate noun is pluralized in the animate way. But the word
[Whorf_p102] ‘cloud,’ is always pluralized in the animate way; it has no
other plural; it definitely belongs to the cryptotype of animateness.
And so the question whether the animation of clouds is a figure or
formality of speech or whether it stems from some more deep and subtly
pervasive undercurrent of thought is answered, or at the least given a
flood of new meaning.

Language thus should be able to analyze some, if probably not all, of
the differences, real or assumed, between the mentality of so-called
primitive peoples and modern civilized man. Whether the primitives
constitute a unit class of mentality over against modern man, apart from
the differences between their cultures and his, as is implied in
Lévy-Bruhl’s concept of PARTICIPATION MYSTIQUE²⁰ and in the equation of
“primitive” to “infantile” used by Freud and Jung; or whether (again
apart from general culture) the CIVILIZED MODERN is the unit class of
mentality because of the great structural similarity of all the modern
civilized Western languages, while over against it are many diverse
types of mentality reflecting a rich diversity of speech structure: This
is only one of the great psychological world-questions that fall into
the domain of linguistics and await the impersonal and positive type of
answer that linguistic research can give. We are accustomed to think of
such a mentality as is implied by PARTICIPATION MYSTIQUE as less of a
thinking mentality, as less rational, than ours. Yet many American
Indian and African languages abound in finely wrought, beautifully
logical discriminations about causation, action, result, dynamic or
energic quality, directness of experience, etc., all matters of the
function of thinking, indeed the quintessence of the rational. In this
respect they far outdistance the European languages.²¹ The most
impressively penetrating distinctions of this kind often are those
revealed by analyzing to the covert and even cryptotypic levels. Indeed,
covert categories are quite apt to be more rational than overt ones.
English unmarked gender is more rational, closer to natural fact, than
the marked genders of Latin or German. As outward marks become few, the
class tends to crystallize around an idea—to become more dependent on
whatever synthetizing principle there may be in the meanings of its
members. It may even be true that many abstract ideas arise in this way;
some rather formal and not very meaningful linguistic group, marked by
some overt feature, may happen to coincide very roughly with some
concatenation of phenomena in such a way as to suggest a rationalization
of this parallelism. In the course of phonetic change, the
distinguishing mark, ending, or what not is lost, and the class passes
from a formal to a semantic one. Its reactance is now what distinguishes
it as a class, and its idea is what unifies it. As time and use go on,
it becomes increasingly organized around a rationale, it attracts
semantically suitable words and loses former members that now are
semantically inappropriate. Logic is now what holds it together, and its
logic becomes a semantic associate of that unity of which the
CONFIGURATIVE aspect is a bundle of nonmotor linkages mooring the whole
fleet of words to their common reactance. Semantically it has become a
deep persuasion of a principle behind phenomena, like the ideas of
inanimation, of “substance,” of abstract sex, of abstract personality,
of force, of causation—not the overt concept (lexation) corresponding to
the WORD causation but the covert idea, the “sensing,” or, as it is
often called (but wrongly, according to Jung), the “feeling” that there
must be a principle of causation. Later this covert idea may be more or
less duplicated in a word and a lexical concept invented by a
philosopher: e.g., CAUSATION. From this point of view many preliterate
(“primitive”) communities, far from being subrational, may show the
human mind functioning on a higher and more complex plane of rationality
than among civilized men. We do not know that civilization is synonymous
with rationality. These primitive tribes may simply have lacked
philosophers, the existence of whom may depend on an economic prosperity
that few cultures in the course of history have reached. Or perhaps too
much rationality may defeat itself, or arouse some strong compensatory
principle. These are all questions, essentially anthropological, to
which a liaison between ethnology and psychological linguistics would
seem to offer the soundest approach.

The second way in which linguistic consideration of thinking is
significant for anthropology has more reference to the future, and
perhaps most of all to the far distant future of the human species when
it will have developed into something other, and let us hope far higher,
than present-day man. Turning first to the nearer future, it is
desirable that anthropology collaborate in preparation for the time,
which cannot be too far postponed, when it will be both possible and
urgently necessary to make the cultural and psychological world-survey
of languages that is envisioned in the work of James Byrne—this time in
a way which will enrich our science with the prodigal wealth of new
truth that lies in that field waiting to be discovered.

As time goes on, the type of knowledge that such a survey would unlock
becomes more and more a matter of concern and interest outside the world
of scholarly pursuits—for it may play a very important part in world
history that is now in the making. The problems of achieving mutual
understanding, of language barriers, of propaganda and advertising, of
education, of the technique of managing human affairs without undue
friction, of an intelligence in human relations that can keep pace with
the changes brought about by the physical sciences, all run afoul of
this matter of language and thought. Everyone is naturally interested in
questions of language, although they either do not know it, or know it
and think they know all about it. There is for example a movement for
the extended use of Ogden’s ingenious artificial language called Basic
English, which has met with much sympathy among businessmen, educators,
people interested in international affairs, and social prophets like H.
G. Wells. There is no use sitting aloof and loftily condemning such
linguistic movements as unscientific. Unscientific or not, they are
linguistic phenomena of today, and why should linguistic science, which
alone can handle the vital underlying principles of such movements,
stand by in sequestered unconcern and let them blunder along, exercising
their crude but vast power to change the thinking of tomorrow? Basic
English appeals to people because it seems simple. But those to whom it
seems simple either know or think they know English—there’s the rub!
Every language of course seems simple to its own speakers because they
are unconscious of structure. But English is anything but simple—it is a
bafflingly complex organization, abounding in covert classes,
cryptotypes, taxemes of selection, taxemes of order,²² significant
stress patterns and intonation patterns of considerable intricacy.
English is indeed almost in a class by itself as regards prosodic
complexity, being one of the most complex languages on earth in this
respect; on the whole, it is as complicated as most polysynthetic
languages of America, which fact most of us are blissfully unaware of.
The complex structure of English is largely covert, which makes it all
the harder to analyze. Foreigners learning English have to absorb it
unconsciously—a process requiring years—by dint of constant exposure to
bombardment by spoken English in large chunks; there exists at this
moment no grammar that can teach it. As with Basic English, so with
other artificial languages—underlying structures and categories of a few
culturally predominant European tongues are taken for granted; their
complex web of presuppositions is made the basis of a false simplicity.
We say ‘a large black and white hunting dog’ and assume that in Basic
English one will do the same. How is the speaker of a radically
different mother tongue supposed to know that he cannot say ‘hunting
white black large a dog’? The English adjectives belong to cryptotypes
having definite position assignments, and their formula is a definite
and complex one, but lo, the poor Indian organizes his thinking quite
differently. The person who would use Basic English must first know or
learn the immensely intricate covert structure of actual “English as she
is spoke.”

We see here the error made by most people who attempt to deal with such
social questions of language—they naïvely suppose that speech is nothing
but a piling up of LEXATIONS, and that this is all one needs in order to
do any and every kind of rational thinking; the far more important
thought materials provided by structure and configurative rapport are
beyond their horizons. It may turn out that the simpler a language
becomes overtly, the more it becomes dependent upon cryptotypes and
other covert formations, the more it conceals unconscious
presuppositions, and the more its lexations become variable and
indefinable. Wouldn’t this be a pretty kettle of fish for the would-be
advocates of a “simple” international tongue to have had a hand in
stewing up! For sound thinking in such fields we greatly need a
competent world-survey of languages.

IV

And now, turning to the more distant future, one may perhaps be
permitted to essay a broader view, to look at the subject of linguistics
and its bearing upon thinking from the standpoint of the whole human
species. In order to do this we must not be afraid to begin with a
platitude. Man is distinguished from other animals by language, and by
his great development of thinking. So far as we can envision his future,
we must envision it in terms of mental growth. We cannot but suppose
that the future developments of thinking are of primary importance to
the human species. They may even determine the duration of human
existence on the planet earth or in the universe. The possibilities open
to thinking are the possibilities of recognizing relationships and the
discovery of techniques of operating with relationships on the mental or
intellectual plane, such as will in turn lead to ever wider and more
penetratingly significant systems of relationships. These possibilities
are inescapably bound up with systems of linguistic expression. The
story of their evolution in man is the story of man’s linguistic
development—of the long evolution of thousands of very different systems
of discerning, selecting, organizing, and operating with relationships.
Of the early stages of this evolutionary process, the REALLY PRIMITIVE
ROOTS of language, we know nothing. What we are at least in a position
to find out is the results of this evolution as they exist broadcast
about the planet in our present day. Only the beginnings of such a
knowledge of worldwide linguistic taxonomy are in evidence. In our
armchair generalizations about grammar, and the related fields of logic
and thought-psychology, we are in the same position as pre-Linnaean
botany. We have not yet got anything like a description of existing
linguistic species, to use a biological metaphor.

Fortunately for biology, a worldwide systematic taxonomy preceded and
laid a foundation for the historical and evolutionary approach. In
linguistics as in other cultural studies, we have had unfortunately the
reverse situation. The evolutionary concept, having been dumped upon
modern man while his notions of language and thought were based on
knowledge of only a few types out of the hundreds of very diverse
linguistic types existing, has abetted his provincial linguistic
prejudices and fostered the grandiose hokum that his type of thinking
and the few European tongues on which it is based represent the
culmination and flower of the evolution of language! This is as if a
pre-Linnaean botanist who had conceived the idea of evolution should
suppose that our cultivated wheat and oats represent a higher
evolutionary stage than a rare aster restricted to a few sites in the
Himalayas. From the standpoint of a matured biology, it is precisely the
rare aster which has the better claim to high evolutionary eminence; the
wheat owes its ubiquity and prestige merely to human economics and
history.

The eminence of our European tongues and thinking habits proceeds from
nothing more. The relatively few languages of the cultures which have
attained to modern civilization promise to overspread the globe and
cause the extinction of the hundreds of diverse exotic linguistic
species, but it is idle to pretend that they represent any superiority
of type. On the contrary, it takes but little real scientific study of
preliterate languages, especially those of America, to show how much
more precise and finely elaborated is the system of relationships in
many such tongues than is ours.²³ By comparison with many American
languages, the formal systematization of ideas in English, German,
French, or Italian seems poor and jejune. Why, for instance, do we not,
like the Hopi, use a different way of expressing the relation of channel
of sensation (seeing) to result in consciousness, as between ‘I see that
it is red’ and ‘I see that it is new’? We fuse the two quite different
types of relationship into a vague sort of connection expressed by
‘that,’ whereas the Hopi indicates that in the first case seeing
presents a sensation ‘red,’ and in the second that seeing presents
unspecified evidence from which is drawn the inference of newness. If we
change the form to ‘I hear that it is red’ or ‘I hear that it is new,’
we European speakers still cling to our lame ‘that,’ but the Hopi now
uses still another relater and makes no distinction between ‘red and
‘new,’ since, in either case, the significant presentation to
consciousness is that of a verbal report, and neither a sensation per se
nor inferential evidence. Does the Hopi language show here a higher
plane of thinking, a more rational analysis of situations, than our
vaunted English? Of course it does. In this field and in various others,
English compared to Hopi is like a bludgeon compared to a rapier. We
even have to think and boggle over the question for some time, or have
it explained to us, before we can see the difference in the
relationships expressed by ‘that’ in the above examples, whereas the
Hopi discriminates these relationships with effortless ease, for the
forms of his speech have accustomed him to doing so.

Bibliography

[At the end of the manuscript appears a section entitled “Bibliography
(Notes)” which is merely a skeleton of a bibliography; it consists
chiefly of names. I have already given footnote references for the
following names: Bloomfield, Boas, Byrne, Fabre d’Olivet, Jung, Sapir,
Watkins, and Watson. Below I give the citations that Whorf most probably
had in mind for the other names; in several cases he was explicit.—JBC]

 

De Angulo, Jaime. “Tone patterns and verb forms in a dialect of
Zapotek.” Language 2:238–250 (1926).

Flournoy, Théodore. Métaphysique et psychologie. Geneva, 1890. [? This
may not be the relevant work.]

Haas, Mary. [Whorf probably referred to unpublished material which he
had seen. See her sketch of Tunica, an American Indian language, in H.
Hoijer, Linguistic structures of native America. New York, 1946. —JBC]

Jones, William, and Truman Michelson. “Algonquian (Fox).” Pp. 735–873 in
Boas, F. (editor), Handbook of American Indian languages, Part 1.
Washington: Government Printing Office, 1911.

Koffka, K. Principles of Gestalt Psychology. New York: Harcourt, Brace &
Co, 1935.

Lowes, John Livingston. Road to Xanadu. Harvard University Press, 1927.
[Whorf misremembered the author’s name as Dickinson. He comments,
“Interesting for illustrations of the dredging up of linguistic material
from the unconscious.”]

Murdock, George P. Our Primitive Contemporaries. New York: Macmillan,
1934.

Newman, Stanley S. A grammar of Yokuts, an American Indian language of
California. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Yale Univ. 1932. Also,
Yokuts language of California. New York, 1944. (Viking Fund Publication
in Anthropology, no. 2.)

Morice, Adrian C. The Carrier language (Dene family); a grammar and
dictionary combined. St. Gabriel-Modling near Vienna, Austria, 1932.

Ogden, Charles K. Basic English: a general introduction with rules and
grammar. London: K. Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1930. [Whorf’s citation is to
Ogden and Richards, but I believe he meant to refer to this book about
Basic English.]

Swadesh, Morris. [Whorf probably referred to unpublished material which
he had seen. See Swadesh’s sketch of South Greenland Eskimo in H.
Hoijer, Linguistic structures of native America. New York, 1946.—JBC]

Trager, George L. “The phonemes of Russian.” Language 10:334–344 (1934).

 

This paper was found by me [JBC] in handwritten manuscript form,
undated, among the papers left by Whorf to his wife and recently turned
over to his son, Robert Whorf. The manuscript appeared to be complete
(except for certain footnotes), but it was generally in a somewhat
unfinished state, necessitating some editorial work on my part. Notes on
the manuscript indicate that Whorf intended to prepare it for
publication. He even listed individuals to whom he planned to send
reprints including Jung, N(ayán) L(ouise) Redfield, Sapir, Carroll,
Wayne Dennis, (Claude) Bragdon, H. G. Wells, and H. L. Mencken. We may
date the writing of this article as taking place about late 1936, from
two facts: first, it must have occurred after the publication, in early
1936, of his article, “The punctual and segmentative aspects of verbs in
Hopi,” to which he refers, and, second, it probably preceded the writing
(in late 1937) of his article, “Grammatical categories,” which gives a
somewhat more fully developed notion of cryptotype than occurs in the
present paper.

1. To the reader who may not be prepared to accept all of Jung’s views,
I might say that his conception of these functions is essentially that
of earlier psychologists such as Wundt, to which, however, he adds his
own penetrative insight and clarification of fundamentals. A distinctive
feature in Jung’s viewpoint is that his four functions are distinguished
not merely qualitatively but as separate energy systems of operation of
an energic principle, the Jungian libido, which feature contrasts them
with mere processes and complexes. (They are relatively closed systems.)
In other words, if I understand Jung rightly, none of the libido or
energy available for thinking can pass over into the form of feeling or
sensation and vice versa, except by going into the unconscious and
receding so far therein that it reaches the primitive undifferentiated
state. This libido concept has proved itself of psychiatric value, and
it may also have significance for the “linguistics of thinking” if it is
true that the psychic energy available for linguistic processes
(included in the thinking function) is a differentiated energy,
entrained in a closed system and not transferable between such systems.
However, such a Jungian viewpoint is by no means necessary for the
linguistic approach to thinking which I am here dealing with. [These
views of Jung will be found in his Psychological types (trans. by
Baynes, New York and London, 1923).—JBC]

2. Some have supposed thinking to be entirely linguistic. Watson, I
believe, holds or held this view, and the great merit of Watson in this
regard is that he was one of the first to point out and teach the very
large and unrecognized linguistic element in silent thinking. His error
lies in going the whole hog; also, perhaps, in not realizing or at least
not emphasizing that the linguistic aspect of thinking is not a
biologically organized process, “speech” or “language,” but a cultural
organization, i.e., a language. Some linguists may also hold the idea
that thinking is entirely linguistic.

3. [No text is available for this footnote. Whorf may have intended to
refer again to Watson, who identified thought with subvocal movements of
the speech musculature. See his article, “Is thinking merely the action
of language mechanisms? (V),” Brit. J. Psychol., 11:87–104 (1920).—JBC]

4. Apparent isolations of words in a vocabulary list also derive what
meaning they have from the patterned “potentials of linkage,” which
ramify from them and connect them with complex patterns of linguistic
formulation.

5. The pronounced materialist may still be granted leave to regard this
matrix of relations as consisting of paths and chains of brain cells or
what-not which link and relate themselves by physicochemical processes,
but no clue to the nature of the RAPPORT, the structure of the matrix
relations, can be obtained in this way, any more than the social
organization of a tribe could be worked out from the blood groups of its
individuals. It can only be determined by a penetrating study of the
LANGUAGE spoken by the individual whose thinking process we are
concerned with, and it will be found to be FUNDAMENTALLY DIFFERENT for
individuals whose languages are of fundamentally different types. Just
as cultural facts are only culturally determined, not biologically
determined, so linguistic facts, which are likewise cultural, and
include the linguistic element of thought, are only linguistically
determined. They are determined not merely by language, but by
languages. If the thinkers who are being studied speak our own language
(let us say English), then the necessary penetrating study of the
English language which is required can be made only by an investigator
who has studied and is able to contrast widely differing types of
language from English, for only in this way can there be brought into
the forefront of consciousness an awareness of the existence of mere
bare RELATIONS that do not correspond to any verbalized concepts but
nevertheless govern absolutely the linkages of morphemes and shape the
channels of thinking. [This footnote is extracted from a preliminary
draft, and appears to represent what Whorf intended at this point.—JBC]

6. Including, of course, their inflections ‘his, him, her, hers.’

7. [A marginal note in the MS shows that Whorf intended to point out, in
a footnote, that use of gender-linked nouns is not dependent upon
knowing any particular individual to which they may refer, although it
inevitably classifies such individuals as to sex.—JBC]

8. [Actually, the Navaho verb system provides for MORE than two classes
of inanimate bodies, a fact which makes Whorf’s point, if anything, more
valid.—JBC]

9. ‘Burst’ belongs to this cryptotype; the colloquial ‘bust’ does not.

10. [In a marginal note, Whorf cites ‘shake up,’ apparently to point out
that this verb implies agitation of parts. The reader should note,
incidentally, that this whole discussion concerns only transitive verbs,
as is made explicit at the end of the paragraph.—JBC]

11. [In a marginal note, Whorf alludes to such expressions as ‘strike up
(a band),’ ‘hit it up,’ but states that they are not true transitives
and are not considered. He also refers to verbs such as ‘sing, shout,
cry’ in the same way.—JBC]

12. [From a marginal note, it is evident that Whorf intended to consider
the words ‘unstart,’ ‘unbalance,’ and ‘undo’ in a footnote. Whorf might
also have cautioned the reader against being misled by participial or
adjectival forms such as ‘unbroken, unheated, unopened,’ etc. in which
the prefix ‘un-’ does not denote the reverse of an action, but of an
adjectivally expressed condition. It is interesting to speculate on the
possibility that the reason that words such as ‘unsay, unthink, unmake’
are now obsolete may be precisely the fact that they had to yield to the
pressure of the cryptotype represented by such words as ‘uncover,
uncoil, undress,’ etc.—JBC]

13. [Marginally, Whorf notes that this is “strange at first, but
illuminating.”]

14. [The tatpurusha compounds are those in which one member modifies the
other, as in such English words as ‘self-made, footsoldier,’ etc.; the
dvandva compounds are those containing coordinate members, the nearest
English example being a phrase like ‘bread and butter,’ which would have
been rendered in Sanskrit by a single compound word; the bahuvrihi
compounds are adjectival compounds implying a possessive meaning, and
may be exemplified by a Sanskrit word which means ‘possessing the
brightness of the sun.’ See William Dwight Whitney, Sanskrit grammar
(Harvard University Press, 1931, Chapter XVIII).—JBC]

15. [I have supplied the dates, which Whorf intended to fill in. They
are as given in the Grand dictionnaire universal du XIX^(e) siècle. Note
that the surname is Fabre d’Olivet, not d’Olivet.—JBC]

16. [I have supplied the dates, which Whorf left blank in the
manuscript. The full title of this scarce work is La langue hébraïque
restituée, et le véritable sens des mots hébreux rétabli et prouvé par
leur analyse radicale. Copies are to be seen in the Library of Congress,
the Cornell University Library, and perhaps a few other libraries in the
United States. It is probable that Whorf knew the work chiefly from the
translation into English by Nayán Louise Redfield, The Hebraic tongue
restored (New York and London, G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1921).—JBC]

17. [I have supplied the date, as also the dates of Byrne’s life. Here
and later in the manuscript Whorf gives the name as Thomas Byrne, but
this must have been due to a lapse of memory.—JBC]

18. [Boas, Franz (ed.). Handbook of American Indian languages (Parts 1
and 2). Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1911–22. (Bull.
40, Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Smithsonian Institution.)—JBC]

19. [I have supplied the date. The full reference is: Sapir, Edward.
Language; an introduction to the study of speech. New York: Harcourt
Brace Co., 1921, vii, 238 pp.—JBC]

20. [Lévy-Bruhl, Lucien. Les fonctions mentales dans les sociétés
inférieures, Paris 1912. “Participation mystique” refers to a special
kind of psychological relationship with the object, in which the
individual cannot clearly perceive a separation between himself and the
object.—JBC]

21. See for example the Hopi treatment of repetitive and vibrational
phenomena in my paper, “The punctual and segmentative aspects of verbs
in Hopi,” or the instances of [lacuna] in Watkins’ Chichewa. [Probably
Whorf intended to allude to the Chichewa verb system, which is extremely
sensitive to the causative aspects of acts. For example, there are
several past tenses, use of which depends not only on the remoteness of
the past time being referred to (before or since last night) but also on
whether the act continues to have an influence on the present. There are
also seven “voices,” which express different kinds of relations among
subject, verb, and predicate (including object). See pp. 49–57, 72–81 in
A grammar of Chichewa, a Bantu language of British Central Africa, by
Mark Hanna Watkins, Language Dissertation no. 24, 1937. See also Whorf’s
later discussion in his article, “Language, mind, and reality” (p. 265
f.). —JBC]

22. [The marginal notation appears: “memberships in covert categories of
a certain type,” and there is a reference to Leonard Bloomfield,
Language (New York, 1933) where the subject of taxemes is taken up in
Chapters 10, 12, and elsewhere.—JBC]

23. [At this point in the manuscript appears a marginal notation:
“Conclusion—error supposing function of language to be only the
COMMUNICATION of thought.” By emphasizing the word communication, Whorf
apparently meant to convey the implication that language not only
communicates thought but functions in its very inception, a conclusion
to which we are forced if we accept the main thesis of this
article.—JBC]

7
