Foreword

Stephen C. Levinson

Whorf’s Claims and Their Reception

This little book has had an extraordinary career.¹ Initially admired,
then reviled, then rehabilitated, then once again attacked, it has
proved unsinkable. This is all the more surprising given the contents: a
handful of rather dated papers on Amerindian linguistics, a couple on
ancient Mesoamerican writing systems (also now dated), four papers for a
general audience about language differences, and some unfinished
manuscripts found among the papers of the author after his premature
death. This is not the kind of material that one would have expected to
inflame the passions or rouse phlegmatic scholars of linguistics and
psychology from their detailed and meticulous pursuits. How surprising,
then, that Pinker (1994, 57) announces, “But it is wrong, all wrong,” or
that Deutscher (2010, 21) calls Whorf “that most notorious of con men.”
(For the other side of the story, see Lucy 1992a; Lee 1996, 2000.)

Why has this book caused such a row, a flaming controversy that
continues over a half century later? One reason is that the ideas
sketched in the book suggest that the structuring of particular
languages is altogether too interesting to be left to the plodding
philologists, and specifically that the implicit patterning in languages
might have something to do with how we think, whatever the psychologists
tell us. Simple exposure to this message has turned on generation after
generation of students; suddenly the arbitrary rules and conventional
clothing of languages seem to have a new significance. Over a beer, many
eminent researchers in the language sciences will confess that they were
first drawn into the study of language through the ideas associated with
Benjamin Lee Whorf. In short, a seductive, revolutionary set of ideas is
buried in these pages, and they are in a form that permits enough
latitude of interpretation to rekindle the flames of controversy at any
point.

Before we proceed, something should be said about how the book came
about. Whorf’s combined career, as businessman and linguist, is outlined
in the introduction by John B. Carroll. Whorf had died in 1941 at
forty-four. A dozen years earlier, when just a boy, Carroll had fallen
under Whorf’s spell, meeting him in the library where Whorf liked to
work (Lee 1996, 8). When, after World War II, a number of conferences
met to discuss ideas at the intersection of psychology and language—and
thus inevitably Whorf’s own ideas—the need for such a volume became
apparent, and Carroll, now a psychologist, was the natural editor. Whorf
published some thirty papers in his lifetime, many of which were
concerned with ancient Mesoamerica, including one of the first works
(Whorf 1933, not republished here) to argue systematically for the
phonetic character of the ancient Mayan script.² Whorf’s published
oeuvre on the topical ideas about the connections between linguistics
and psychology, including four popular papers, was thus relatively
slight, and Carroll supplemented it with unpublished material (see Lee
1996 for supplementary information, including what Lee calls the Yale
Report, an important manuscript that clarifies Whorf’s position on many
counts and is included in this second edition of his writings). The book
we have consists of the fragments from the pen of a part-time academic
whose life was cut tragically short. The fragments span some fourteen
years, during the middle of which his work became much more
sophisticated through personal contact with Edward Sapir, and the ideas
are therefore not entirely consistent from beginning to end. This
hampers both sympathetic exegesis and determined condemnation, since it
is often possible to find an exclusion clause on the other side of the
argument.

Apart from the fragmentary picture presented by the papers reprinted
here, our reading of Whorf is hindered not only because we inhabit a
distant intellectual clime but also because Whorf was not a
characteristic child of his times. For example, the psychology of the
time was heavily behavioristic (as was Leonard Bloomfield’s linguistics,
the leading theory of the day), and although Whorf admired Bloomfield
and presumed the importance of conditioning (as in his emphasis on
habitual language use and a kind of proto-connectionism he sketches), he
drew more extensively on Gestalt psychology, as Lee (1996, 2000) shows
in detail. Whorf, a chemical engineer by first training, was widely read
and eclectic, and it is not easy to identify all the intellectual
currents in his thought (for a review of the relevant contemporary
thought, see Koerner 2002 and Levelt 2012).

With these caveats, let us try to identify some of the central ideas
surrounding the notion of “linguistic relativity” that have made this
book so provocative. The doctrine has the following central tenets (with
page references to the current volume):

1. Thought and perception have a certain independence from language
(207–208).

2. Nevertheless some aspects of thinking are deeply interconnected with
language and the concepts it provides (84–87).

3. Some of these interconnections are backgrounded because the concepts
are implicit in grammatical distinctions. Some grammatical concepts are
especially covert in that they do not have direct exponents in surface
forms. Such concepts may highlight specific percepts (e.g., number or
shape of referents) and group them at the expense of others that may be
prominent in other languages (116–119). They are recurrent categories
that, given the structure of the language, we cannot fail to use
(70–71).

4. Nevertheless such grammatical concepts, especially when they are
covert, exist beyond our conscious awareness and may influence our
classifications and reactions (133–134, 174).

5. These grammatical distinctions form an interconnecting web of
concepts, which may represent in a partial and fragmented way (187–190)
a particular take on the perceptual world associated with a language and
culture.

6. The ways in which languages offer different such takes make them
invaluable correctives to our own commonsense views about the nature of
human experience (313–314).

From these premises, Whorf derives “‘the linguistic relativity
principle,’ which means, in informal terms, that users of markedly
different grammars are pointed by their grammars towards different types
of observations and different evaluations of externally similar acts of
observation” (282–283).

This perspective on language has had the polarizing effect described
earlier. It suggests that linguistic difference is fundamentally
interesting and important; that formal difference tends to imply
conceptual difference; that conceptual distinctions may cohere in a
system; and that when we lose a minor language (as we are now doing at
the rate of one a week), we lose a different protoscientific take on the
world, something inestimably valuable.

This contrasts markedly with Chomsky’s or Fodor’s view that what is
centrally interesting about language is universal, that formal
differences are superficial, lack conceptual resonance, and mask
underlying conceptual uniformity. The loss of languages arguably has no
substantial impact on the goals of linguistics, which are to unearth the
innate, underlying machinery.

These two diametrically opposed views account for much of the
controversy surrounding this book. Is the diversity in our communication
system, unique among animals, its essential hallmark or merely a smoke
screen obscuring its essence (see Evans and Levinson 2009 for
discussion)?

The flames have been further fanned by a systematic misreading of Whorf
as an extreme empiricist. Whorf’s language (“kaleidoscopic flux of
impressions,” “flux of experience,” etc.) has suggested to many
observers that he held that the “external world was essentially
unstructured from the point of view of the speaker” (Lucy 1992a, 42).
But Lee (1996, 89) shows that this is a serious misinterpretation, and
indeed Whorf could hardly be clearer when he says that “the apprehension
of space is given in substantially the same form by experience
irrespective of language” (203) or “visual perception is basically the
same for all normal persons past infancy, and conforms to definite laws”
(209). His point was that the way in which percepts are organized
conceptually, and thus given “meaning,” relies crucially on language.
Whorf’s enthusiastic support for Gestalt principles shows clearly that
he presupposed innate psychological principles (which led to muted
reception of his ideas in the 1950s). An incomplete draft paper on
cognitive universals unfortunately could not be completed before he died
(Lee 1996, 220). The idea that Whorf claimed that “thought is the same
thing as language” (Pinker 1994, 57) is not based on a careful reading
of this book. For these reasons, Whorf never remotely subscribed to what
has been called “the strong version” of linguistic relativity, under
which a language exerts a wholly deterministic effect on thinking, so
that we are all locked in the infernal grip of our languages.

Part of the vituperation against Whorf is based on that crucial
misreading. Part is also based on his analysis of Hopi, which he appeals
to frequently in these pages as an example of a radically different
organization of grammatical categories and their underlying
conceptualizations, especially in the domain of time. Malotki (1983)
published a long monograph on the temporal concepts encoded in Hopi
grammar and lexis, in which he argued that Whorf’s claims about Hopi
were empirically wrong in most details. Nearly every empirical scientist
undergoes the discomfort of being proved wrong as science advances, and
Whorf would undoubtedly have been pleased that Malotki had taken the
trouble to get to the bottom of the facts. Whorf, it seems, was
definitely wrong about the lack of spatial metaphors for time in Hopi
(although we must remember that Whorf was working a half century
earlier, when Hopi was less influenced by English). But Hopi does in
fact use a highly unusual system of temporal reference, namely, a
future–nonfuture tense system (Malotki 1983, 624). Now, as Lyons (1968,
306–311) points out, it is often questionable whether a future tense is
actually a tense as opposed to a modal marker of irrealis, especially in
the absence of any other tense notions, and this is exactly what Whorf
was getting at (he was completely clear that there were tenselike
morphemes; the question hung on their proper interpretation). Many other
of Whorf’s points were correct. The word for “day” is, Malotki (1983,
241) admits, “quite remarkable” in being both nominal and verbal (thus,
according to Whorf, belonging to a special word class) and co-occurs
normally not with cardinal numbers but with ordinals, as Whorf
suggested. Readers should thus not take either Pinker’s (1994, 63) or
Deutscher’s (2010, 143) casual dismissals of Whorf’s claims to be well
founded; they will find more careful treatment in the work of Lee (1991;
1996,136–142).³

Whorf was a complex, multistranded thinker, and critics who rush (often
without reading this book) to demonize or defend him usually do so for
ideological reasons of their own, motivated by the great divide between
those who wish to see deep significance in the structure of the ancient
languages we have inherited and those who view those languages as mere
variant clothings on a universally innate conceptual structure. Readers
would do well to approach this book from a more neutral perspective,
bearing in mind that the final four chapters were written for a popular
audience.

Language and Thought: The Legacy

As mentioned earlier, Whorf’s ideas provoked substantial discussion in
the postwar years. Part of this discussion concerned the revival of
ideas about “worldview” and possible correlations between language and
culture (see Lucy 1992a, 69–95). These concerns play little role in
debate today (though see Everett 2005 for a revival). A second strand of
work has much more contemporary resonance, in which Whorfian ideas are
put to experimental test. Brown and Lenneberg (1954) argued that to
explore the relations between language and thought, the two must be
independently assessed, and correlations demonstrated. They chose the
color domain and showed that the ease of remembering color patches
correlated with the ease of describing them in the language (English, in
this case, but a follow-up study by Lenneberg and Roberts [1956]
extended the demonstration to Zuni). Thus began a long tradition of work
that explored language-specific coding in a domain and its effects on
memory and recognition, to which we will return.

As Lucy (1992a) and Lee (1996) pointed out, Brown and Lenneberg’s
explorations of interrelations between language and thought do not draw
in any detail on Whorf’s ideas, which focused on implicit categories in
grammar. Carroll, the editor of this book, followed up directly with an
experiment that exploited the shape specification in Navajo verbs:
Navajo-speaking and English-speaking children on the Navajo reservation
were tested in a triads task where shape was pitted against color, and
yielded a result in the predicted direction (Carroll and Casagrande
1958), although other nonlinguistic factors were also clearly at work.
Only a thin strand of work on grammatical categories and their effects
on cognition followed this until Lucy (1992b) systematically tested the
effects of grammatical number in English versus Yucatec: he showed that
true Whorfian effects could be found in memory; lack of plural coding
correlates with failure to notice the numbers of entities.

With the rise of the cognitive science movement in the late 1950s,
interest in Whorfian ideas was more or less fully eclipsed for the
reasons already sketched: mental life, it was argued, is built on a
great foundation of innate cognitive machinery on which language
difference could be expected to have only the most superficial impact.
Our thoughts, indeed, are supposed to be couched in a universal
mentalese (Fodor 1975). One specific study was thought to bury Whorf:
Berlin and Kay (1969) showed that underlying the apparent “kaleidoscopic
flux” of the color spectrum there seem to be clear universal perceptual
attractors, which channel the possible color categories recognized by
different languages. Actually, this study hardly engaged with Whorf’s
position, since he recognized perceptual universals and downplayed the
importance of lexical distinctions; but by now few were reading him
carefully, and “Whorfianism” came to stand for an extreme empiricism and
a view of unbounded linguistic variation that he never held. Whorf thus
became a bogeyman and whipping boy, branded an incompetent amateur,
mystic, or worse.⁴

It was not until the 1990s that general interest revived in language
difference and its possible effects on cognition, spearheaded by
anthropological linguists, but running parallel with the growth of
linguistic typology and a growing interest in mapping language
variation. A Wenner-Gren conference in 1991 seriously reopened the
issues (Gumperz and Levinson 1996), and Lucy’s (1992a,b) review of the
issues and demonstration of the cognitive effects of grammatical coding
showed the feasibility of such research, based on careful linguistic
analysis and cross-cultural comparison. Brown and Levinson (1993) showed
systematic effects of spatial language on memory and inference for
spatial scenes, work that was taken seriously in psychology (Levinson
1996). A long-running controversy began over the role of linguistic
distinctions in spatial thinking (see Li and Gleitman 2002; Levinson et
al. 2002; Levinson 2003a; Haun et al. 2011; Li et al. 2011).

Meanwhile another strand of work was showing the impact of linguistic
categories during child development (Bowerman 1996), as reflected in a
broad conference in 1995 (Bowerman and Levinson 2001), in which the
special role that language may play in connecting domains and forming
concepts was explored from many different angles. Bowerman and Choi
(2001), for example, summarize a series of studies showing that by as
early as eighteen to twenty-one months, children learning English versus
Korean become sensitive to cross-cutting spatial semantic distinctions:
in versus on (containment versus support) for English and kkita versus
nehta (tight fit versus loose fit) for Korean. Further work using
nonlinguistic behavioral measures showed that while prelinguistic
infants from both language backgrounds can discriminate between
“tight-fit containment” and “loose-fit containment,” learners of English
gradually lose sensitivity to this distinction, while learners of Korean
retain it (Choi 2006; McDonough, Choi, and Mandler 2003). This suggests
an early specialization toward the categories of the target language.

This work fitted well with new considerations coming from
psycholinguistic processing, where it was clear that online language
production requires a regimentation of thinking in the categories
specific to the language (Levelt 1989), so that cross-linguistic
differences must exist in “thinking for speaking” (Slobin 1987, 1996).
These ideas are quite close to Whorf’s, who (in an often-misunderstood
passage [272–274]) emphasized the “obligatory” nature of grammatical
coding, a point also made by Boas and others. Whorf went on to predict
that we should be able to identify different patterns of gesturing
according to the online categories required (198). We now know that
different gestural patterns indeed correspond to the grammatical
distinctions made in languages (Kita and Özyürek 2003). One theoretical
argument also suggests that these language differences must have more
than temporary, online effects during speaking; language use is our most
practiced skill, and long-term repercussions are bound to arise from the
need to code experience in language-specific ways (Levinson 1997,
2003b).

These developments served to reopen the discussion of possible relations
between languages and thinking in productive ways. The subsequent
strands of work are ongoing. One strand has focused on lexical
difference, and in particular on color (Davidoff, Davies, and Robeson
1999). Careful work has shown that speakers of languages that make
different color distinctions perceptually warp the color space (Winawer
et al. 2007), owing to participation of the left hemisphere of the
brain, where language circuitry is predominant (Gilbert et al. 2005;
Regier and Kay 2009). Further, this left-hemisphere effect kicks in only
when infants acquire the relevant linguistic terms (Franklin et al.
2008). Such work makes clear that even if language diversity is
constrained by universal factors, the available differences are
sufficient to generate cognitive diversity.

Color categories make a remarkable parallel with the findings from sound
systems. Here it is uncontroversial that learning a language changes
one’s perceptual sensitivities in early childhood, so that it becomes
increasingly hard to discriminate alien sound distinctions crucial to
another language (Kuhl 2004). Whorf, the inventor of the concept of the
allophone, was keenly aware of the relativity of speech sounds both
across languages and within languages (Lee 1996, 46; 2000, 50), but as
we saw, he insisted on a language-independent raw perception and so
refrained from making the analogy between speech sounds and conceptual
categories.

The effects of language on cognition have now been reported from many
different domains, as we have partially reviewed, including space and
motion, time, number (both grammatical and lexical), gender, mass/count
distinctions, color, and so forth (Boroditsky 2003; Wolff and Holmes
2010; Gentner and Goldin-Meadow 2003), although the interpretations are
by no means undisputed (Gleitman and Papafragou 2005).

Still, Whorf might be disappointed that so much of the work on the
relation of language to cognition has focused on lexical coding. He was
more interested in the grammatical coding of concepts because he felt
that it was especially here that the unseen hand of language could
direct our thoughts, and because in this domain a single set of
distinctions (as in gender, number, tense) might recur in different
parts of the linguistic system. Here research remains relatively slight
to this day (see though Bowerman 1982 on un-prefixation in English child
language). The idea of covert categories with grammatical “reactances”
is also little explored, although research with some resonance to
Whorf’s ideas can be found in studies of the lexicon. For example,
detailed work on the grammar of verbs reveals covert semantic
distinctions at work (Levin and Rappaport Hovav 2005), and large-scale
structures in the lexicon appear to show underlying implicit semantic
oppositions that recur in different parts of the language (Levinson and
Burenhult 2009).

Whorf’s papers for general audiences had the specific aim of opening
readers’ eyes to the wonders of alien tongues (cf. Evans 2010). Whorf
believed passionately in the virtues of linguistic diversity for what it
can teach us about the limitations of our selves. He would have deplored
the accelerating loss of languages and been a powerful advocate for the
documentation of endangered languages, now more urgent than ever.

A Note on the Second Edition

This book reissues all the Whorf papers of the first edition, the text
of which has been rekeyed, the artwork rescanned, and the pages reset
with a new interior design and new cover. It also includes the original
introduction by John B. Carroll, which incorporates the core
biographical details about Whorf’s life used as a starting point by most
later commentators. In addition, this edition also contains the “Yale
Report,” authored solely by Whorf, although George Trager, whose name
appears as coauthor, was probably intended to revise it. Lee (1996, 130)
argues that this report is a central document in Whorf’s mature oeuvre,
even though it exists only in semi-draft form; her edited version of the
manuscript first appeared in Lee 1996, 251–276. We thank Yale Library
Manuscripts and Archives and John Benjamins Publishing Company for
permission to reprint it here. Penny Lee also provided key words for the
indexes, the first edition having none, and took responsibility for the
expanded and updated list of publications relevant to Whorf and his
ideas selected from bibliographic searches by Karin Kastens at the MPI
for Psycholinguistics. She would like to extend her very sincere thanks
to E. F. Konrad Koerner and John E. Joseph for their much-valued and
timely assistance with the name index (which would have been a much
sketchier thing without the depth and detail of their historical
knowledge) and, more importantly, for their support and consistent
interest over some fifteen years in the possibility of a new edition of
Whorf’s writings.

1. This foreword replaces the original by Stuart Chase, whom Whorf
viewed as a dubious champion (Lee 1996, 16). I am grateful for
suggestions from colleagues, especially Penelope Brown, Melissa
Bowerman, Mark Dingemanse, Nick Enfield, Penny Lee, and Pim Levelt.

2. Whorf was wrong about many details, but as Tozzer put it in the
introduction to the monograph, “With great acumen and courage Whorf
dares to re-open the phonetic question” against the received view of the
time (Danien and Sharer 1992, 35). Moreover, “his assumption that Maya
writing recorded a Mayan language proved to be crucial to decipherment”
(Sharer and Traxler 2006, 141).

3. Internal evidence makes it clear that, while accusing Whorf of
unscholarly behavior (Pinker 1994, 63; Deutscher 2010, 142), neither
Pinker nor Deutscher has actually read this book with any care.
Deutscher (2010, 142), for example, claims that Whorf never visited the
Hopi, whereas Carroll in his introduction (this vol., 21) makes it clear
that he did; and Pinker (1994, 60–61) wrongly attributes some of Whorf’s
examples to Apache, pointing out that Whorf “did not actually study any
Apaches; it is not clear he ever met one” (the examples at the bottom of
Pinker’s p. 60, in fact, come from Nootka [302, 310] and Shawnee
[215–216, 267]). Detractors like Pinker often remark on Whorf’s amateur
status, but amateurism is not the right gloss for a man who published
three or more scholarly papers a year, often in the top journals of his
profession, taught at Yale, enjoyed the regard of the leading scholars
of his day, and contributed enduring terminology to the discipline. Like
Darwin, Whorf simply preferred the comfort and independence of his own
means.

4. “No one is really sure how Whorf came up with his outlandish claims,
but his limited, badly analyzed sample of Hopi speech and his long-time
leanings toward mysticism must have contributed” (Pinker 1994, 63).

References

Berlin, B., and P. Kay. 1969. Basic Color Terms: Their Universality and
Evolution. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Boroditsky, L. 2003. Linguistic relativity. In Encyclopedia of Cognitive
Science, ed. L. Nadel, 917–921. London: Macmillan.

Bowerman, M. 1982. Reorganizational processes in lexical and syntactic
development. In Language Acquisition: The State of the Art, ed. E.
Wanner and L. R. Gleitman, 320–346. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Bowerman, M. 1996. The origins of children’s spatial semantic
categories: Cognitive versus linguistic determinants. In Rethinking
Linguistic Relativity, ed. J. J. Gumperz and S. C. Levinson, 145–176.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bowerman, M., and S. Choi. 2001. Shaping meanings for language:
Universal and language specific in the acquisition of spatial semantic
categories. In Language Acquisition and Conceptual Development, ed. M.
Bowerman and S. C. Levinson, 475–511. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Bowerman, M., and S. C. Levinson (eds.). 2001. Language Acquisition and
Conceptual Development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Brown, P., and S. C. Levinson. 1993. Explorations in Mayan cognition.
Working Paper 24, Cognitive Anthropology Research Group, Max Planck
Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands.

Brown, R., and E. H. Lenneberg. 1954. A study in language and cognition.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 49:454–462.

Carroll, J., and J. Casagrande. 1958. The function of language
classifications in behavior. In Readings in Social Psychology, ed. E.
Maccoby, T. Newcomb, and E. Hartley, 18–31. New York: Henry Holt.

Choi, S. 2006. Influence of language-specific input on spatial
cognition: Categories of containment. First Language 26:207–232.

Danien, E., and R. Sharer. 1992. New Theories on the Ancient Maya.
Philadelphia: University Museum.

Davidoff, J., I. Davies, and D. Robeson. 1999. Colour categories in a
stone-age tribe. Nature 398:203–204.

Deutscher, G. 2010. Through the Language Glass. New York: Metropolitan
Books.

Evans, N. 2010. Dying Words: Endangered Languages and What They Have to
Tell Us. New York: Wiley-Blackwell.

Evans, N., and S. C. Levinson. 2009. The myth of language universals:
Language diversity and its importance for cognitive science. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 32 (5):429–492.

Everett, D. 2005. Cultural constraints on grammar and cognition in
Pirahã. Current Anthropology 46:621–646.

Fodor, J. A. 1975. The Language of Thought. New York: Crowell.

Franklin, A., G. Drivonikou, A. Clifford, P. Kay, T. Regier, and I.
Davies. 2008. Lateralization of categorical perception of color changes
with color term acquisition. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 105:18221–18225.

Gentner, D., and S. Goldin-Meadow, eds. 2003. Language in Mind: Advances
in the Study of Language and Cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Gilbert, A., T. Regier, P. Kay, and R. Ivry. 2005. Whorf hypothesis is
supported in the right visual field but not the left. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
103:489–494.

Gleitman, L., and A. Papafragou. 2005. Language and thought. In The
Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning, ed. K. Holyoak and B.
Morrison, 633–661. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Gumperz, J. J., and S. C. Levinson, eds. 1996. Rethinking Linguistic
Relativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Haun, D. B. M., C. Rapold, G. Janzen, and S. C. Levinson. 2011.
Plasticity of human spatial cognition: Spatial language and cognition
covary across cultures. Cognition 119:70–80.

Kita, S., and A. Özyürek. 2003. What does cross-linguistic variation in
semantic coordination of speech and gesture reveal? Evidence for an
interface representation of spatial thinking and speaking. Journal of
Memory and Language 48 (1):16–32.

Koerner, E. F. K. 2002. Toward a History of American Linguistics.
Routledge Studies in the History of Linguistics. London: Routledge.

Kuhl, P. 2004. Early language acquisition: Cracking the speech code.
Nature Neuroscience Reviews 5:832–843.

Lee, P. 1991. Whorf’s Hopi tensors: Subtle articulators in the
language/thought nexus? Cognitive Linguistics 2 (2):123–147.

Lee, P. 1996. The Whorf Theory Complex: A Critical Reconstruction.
Amsterdam: Benjamins.

Lee, P. 2000. When is linguistic relativity Whorf’s linguistic
relativity? In Explorations in Linguistic Relativity, ed. M. Pütz and M.
J. Verspoor, 45–68. Amsterdam: Benjamins.

Lenneberg, E. H., and J. Roberts. 1956. The language of experience: A
study in methodology. Memoir 13 of International Journal of American
Linguistics (suppl. to vol. 22).

Levelt, W. J. M. 1989. Speaking: From Intention to Articulation.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Levelt, W. J. M. 2012. Historical Roots of Psycholinguistics. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Levin, B., and M. Rappaport Hovav. 2005. Argument Realization. Research
Surveys in Linguistics Series. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Levinson, S. C. 1996. Frames of reference and Molyneux’s question:
Cross-linguistic evidence. In Language and Space, ed. P. Bloom, M.
Peterson, L. Nadel, and M. Garrett, 109–169. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Levinson, S. C. 1997. Language and cognition: The cognitive consequences
of spatial description in Guugu Yimithirr. Journal of Linguistic
Anthropology 7 (1):98–131.

Levinson, S. C. 2003a. Language and cognition: Linguistic relativity in
modern perspective. In International Encyclopedia of Linguistics, 2nd
ed., ed. W. Frawley, 459–463. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Levinson, S. C. 2003b. Language and mind: Let’s get the issues straight!
In Language in Mind: Advances in the Study of Language and Cognition,
ed. D. Gentner and S. Goldin-Meadow, 25–46. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Levinson, S. C., and N. Burenhult. 2009. Semplates: A new concept in
lexical semantics? Language 85:153–174.

Levinson, S. C., S. Kita, D. B. M. Haun, and B. H. Rasch. 2002.
Returning the tables: Language affects spatial reasoning. Cognition 84
(2):155–188.

Li, P., L. Abarbanell, L. Gleitman, and A. Papafragou. 2011. Spatial
reasoning in Tenejapan Mayans. Cognition 120:33–53.

Li, P., and L. Gleitman. 2002. Turning the tables: Language and spatial
reasoning. Cognition 83:265–294.

Lucy, J. 1992a. Language Diversity and Thought: A Reformulation of the
Linguistic Relativity Hypothesis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lucy, J. 1992b. Grammatical Categories and Cognition: A Case Study of
the Linguistic Relativity Hypothesis. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Lyons, J. 1968. Introduction to Theoretical Linguistics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Malotki, E. 1983. Hopi Time: A Linguistic Analysis of the Temporal
Categories in the Hopi Language. Berlin: Mouton.

McDonough, L., S. Choi, and J. M. Mandler. 2003. Understanding spatial
relations: Flexible infants, lexical adults. Cognitive Psychology
46:229–259.

Pinker, S. 1994. The Language Instinct. New York: William Morrow.

Regier, T., and P. Kay. 2009. Language, thought, and color: Whorf was
half right. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 13:439–446.

Sharer, R., and L. Traxler. 2006. History and Maya Civilization.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Slobin, D. I. 1987. Thinking for speaking. In Proceedings of the
Thirteenth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, 435–444.

Slobin, D. 1996. From “thought and language” to “thinking for speaking.”
In Rethinking Linguistic Relativity, ed. J. J. Gumperz and S. C.
Levinson, 70–96. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Whorf, B. 1933. The Phonetic Value of Certain Characters in Maya
Writing. Papers of the Peabody Museum 13 (2). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Winawer, J., N. Witthoft, M. C. Frank, L. Wu, A. R. Wade, and L.
Boroditsky. 2007. Russian blues reveal effects of language on color
discrimination. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 104 (19):7780–7785.

Wolff, P., and K. J. Holmes. 2010. Linguistic relativity. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science. DOI 10.1002/wcs.104.

Introduction

John B. Carroll

I

The career of Benjamin Lee Whorf might, on the one hand, be described as
that of a businessman of specialized talents—one of those individuals
who by the application of out-of-the-ordinary training and knowledge
together with devotion and insight can be so useful to any kind of
business organization. On the other hand, his career could be described
as that of an unusually competent and diligent research worker in
several otherwise almost completely neglected fields of inquiry—the
study of the lost writing system of the Mayas and the study of the
languages of the Aztecs of Mexico and the Hopis of Arizona. Neither
description, of itself, would mark him as a particularly engaging
subject for biographical treatment. When it is realized, however, that
he combined both these careers, achieving recognition in his business
activities at the very same time that he advanced to high eminence in
scholarly work—without even having undergone the usual preliminaries of
formal academic study signalized by an advanced degree—and in addition
injected into contemporary discussions on the study of man and his
culture a challenging set of hypotheses concerning the relation of
language to thinking and cognition, his biography becomes a matter of
more than passing interest.

He was born in Winthrop, Massachusetts, on April 24, 1897, the son of
Harry Church and Sarah Edna (Lee) Whorf. He was a scion of an old
American stock, his ancestors having come from England to settle in
Provincetown and other parts of the Bay Colony soon after the landing of
the Pilgrims. In England, the Whorf name had been found most frequently
in West Riding, in Yorkshire, and there may be some obscure connection
with the name of the Wharfe River in that locality.

Benjamin was very much the child of his father, as were also his two
younger brothers, each in his own way. Benjamin was the “intellectual,”
the more bookish and idea-centered. John, born in 1903, became a
well-known artist, particularly noted for his watercolors. Richard, born
in 1906, has distinguished himself as an actor and director on the
legitimate stage and in motion pictures.

Intellectual, artist, dramatist—the father was all three. After a brief
career as a rather indifferent student at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (it is said that he did not care to apply himself to his
engineering studies), Harry Church Whorf drifted into commercial art, or
what he liked to call “designing,” an occupation which drew upon his
talents in draftsmanship as well as his fertile imagination. In this
work he was very successful. Among his productions which survive even
today is the chain of little Dutch girls which encircles each tin of a
well-known brand of cleansing powder. He made himself a master of the
then rapidly developing art of photolithography. But he was not content
to remain within the confines of his occupation. He lent his artistic
talents to numerous enterprises, stage designing being the foremost of
these. He also wrote and directed plays for church groups and charitable
organizations, and he wrote the libretto for Bobby Shaftoe, a musical
comedy which was once given a performance in Boston. He enjoyed giving
illustrated lectures on various subjects, and apparently had a knack of
pleasing an audience. At the time of his death in 1934, he was at work
on a manuscript concerning the Massachusetts littoral—its geology,
history, fauna and flora, and so forth.

Even before the birth of their first child, Harry Whorf and his wife had
taken up residence in a modest house in Winthrop, a residential suburb
situated on a peninsula which flanks Boston harbor on the north. With
the collections of drawings, books, manuscripts, chemicals, photographic
equipment, and odds and ends which the father had accumulated, the house
provided a stimulating environment for three abnormally curious and
inquisitive boys, all endowed with talents with which to take advantage
of it. Like his brothers after him, Benjamin early acquired some
considerable skill in drawing, but the chemicals, dyes, and photographic
apparatus intrigued him most. He loved to perform such experiments as
the one in which liquids of various colors are made to form different
layers in a single vessel. It may have been his early experiences with
chemicals which led Benjamin later to choose to study chemical
engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

He went to the public schools of Winthrop, through the high school,
where we are told he did well. We are further told that he developed his
powers of concentration at this time—even to the extent of apparent
absentmindedness. Once, on being sent to the cellar to fill the coal
hod, he brought it, filled, all the way back to his room rather than to
its place beside the kitchen stove. (Later in his life, friends
occasionally complained that he passed them on the street without even a
sign of recognition.) While not especially strong, he had sufficient
confidence in his physical prowess to protect his younger brothers from
neighborhood bullies. Particularly with John, who was six years his
junior, he liked to play intellectual games. A favorite was the game of
secret codes; Benjamin could nearly always solve even the most complex
ciphers his brother could devise. In the meantime, while alone, Benjamin
read voraciously and amused himself with composing humorous verse.

After graduation from Winthrop High School in 1914, he entered the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, majoring in chemical engineering
(Course X). His academic performance there appears to have been of only
average quality; his record shows no marks in the highest category (H,
corresponding to what is now ordinarily called A), even in English
composition or in French. This is, of course, a commentary on the
precarious relationship which exists between performance rated in
college and performance in later life. In the fall term of his senior
year, a mysterious illness acquired in an ROTC summer camp forced Whorf
to be absent from classes; the necessity of making up deficiencies the
following summer delayed his obtaining the degree of Bachelor of Science
in Chemical Engineering until October 1918.

We do not know what sort of professional career Whorf planned for
himself while a student at M.I.T. Most probably, he hoped to find
employment as an engineer in some type of chemical production plant or
factory. His professional career was to prove most unusual, for he
emerged as a specialist in a line of work which, as he once complained
in a letter to his M.I.T. alumni organization, was at the time hardly
recognized as a distinct field of engineering even by his alma mater. In
1919, not long after his graduation from M.I.T., he was selected as a
trainee in fire prevention engineering by the company which employed him
for twenty-two years, up to the time of his death. According to an
account prepared by C. S. Kremer, Chairman of the Board, Hartford Fire
Insurance Company, “he was selected by an officer of the company, Mr. F.
C. Moore, who was himself an M.I.T. graduate and had charge of the
underwriting and handling of the insurance on buildings equipped with
automatic sprinklers.” After graduating from the company school which
Mr. Moore conducted for fire prevention engineers, Whorf was assigned to
the home office of the company, in Hartford, to assist in fire
prevention inspection of properties insured by the company in the
northeastern part of the country. The company was starting to develop
what was then a new idea in the business, namely, fire-prevention
engineering inspections as a service to the property owner and policy
holder. In this work, which necessitated constant travel, he became
extremely skillful. “In no time at all,” writes Kremer, “he became in my
opinion as thorough and fast a fire prevention inspector as there ever
has been. . . . He was intensely practical and taught what he knew as
facts to engineers and skillful men in various manufacturing
businesses.” He specialized more and more in the inspection of plants
which utilized chemical processes in manufacturing.

On one occasion while inspecting a chemical plant he was refused
admission to a certain building on the ground that it housed a secret
process. Even the head of the plant, to whom he was referred, insisted
that no outsider could inspect this building. Whorf said, “You are
making such-and-such a product?” The answer was “Yes,” whereupon Whorf
picked up a pad, quickly wrote down a chemical formula, and handed it to
the head of the plant, saying, “I think this is what you are doing.” The
surprised manufacturer replied, “How in the world did you know, Mr.
Whorf?”, to which Whorf answered calmly, “You couldn’t do it in any
other way.” Needless to say, he was admitted to the building which
contained the secret process.

He was so much respected among chemical manufacturers that his advice
was eagerly sought. In an inspection of a very complicated chemical
plant in Connecticut, he suggested to the management that a certain
process be abandoned until it could be made safer, and indicated how
this could be done. Some time later, after the suggested improvements
had been made, the management delayed starting the process for several
days until Whorf could return to the plant and approve going ahead.

He was admired not only for his technical skill but also, strange as it
may seem to anyone who may know only Whorf’s linguistic work, for his
ability to attract business for his company. He was once asked to make a
fire prevention inspection of some public schools on which the company
had only a trifling amount of business. The recommendations which he
submitted so impressed the school board that they decided to appoint
Whorf’s company as the manager of their insurance account, quite to the
surprise of the local agent, who had found this particular school board
difficult to approach.

The value put on Whorf’s services by his employer was signalized by his
appointment in 1928 as Special Agent, and by his election in 1940 as
Assistant Secretary of his company. It may have been that the company
was proud of his accomplishments in linguistics and anthropology, and we
know that it was liberal in granting him occasional leaves to carry on
these activities,¹ but he was valued primarily for his actual services
to his employer, which must have been of a high order, far beyond the
ordinary. It is truly remarkable that he was able to achieve distinction
in two entirely separate kinds of work. During certain periods of his
life, his scholarly output was enough to equal that of many a full-time
research professor; yet he must have been at the same time spending some
eight hours every working day in his business pursuits. His friends
often speculated on why he chose to remain in his occupation. Although
several offers of academic or scholarly research positions were made to
him during the latter years of his life, he consistently refused them,
saying that his business situation afforded him a more comfortable
living and a freer opportunity to develop his intellectual interests in
his own way.

As if his insurance work, his linguistic studies, and his extensive
reading were not enough to occupy him, he found time for certain
community activities, such as serving on a fire prevention committee of
the Hartford Chamber of Commerce. From about 1928 on, he became
increasingly popular as a lecturer before men’s clubs, historical
societies, and the like.²

In 1920 he married Celia Inez Peckham, by whom he had three children,
Raymond Ben, Robert Peckham, and Celia Lee. In somewhat the same way
that his father had done for him, he was able to arouse in his children,
as if by magnetic induction, something like his delightful curiosity and
his unhesitating imagination.

By his own account, Whorf did not become interested in linguistics until
1924, but one can trace a distinct succession of intellectual
enthusiasms which led him to this. Even as a boy, along with his
preoccupation with chemistry experiments, he was an avid reader. He
became interested in Middle American prehistory through reading (several
times, we are told) Prescott’s Conquest of Mexico. On one occasion his
father was engaged in doing the stage designs for a play which he had
written about a Maya princess, and in this connection assembled all
manner of books about Maya archaeology. Young Ben was intrigued with the
resulting display of stage designs, which doubtless portrayed ornate
façades of Maya temples, and he may have begun to wonder about the
meaning of Maya hieroglyphs. The interest in secret ciphers, mentioned
earlier, may have reinforced this curiosity, but, if so, it lay dormant
until a somewhat later period. Instead, he began to spend a good deal of
time on a variety of scientific topics. He became interested in botany,
and learned the English and Latin names for thousands of plants and
trees. (This was a lasting interest; on his trip to Mexico in 1930 he
took copious notes on Mexican flora, and as late as 1936 we find him
filling several pages of one of his linguistic notebooks with a “quiz”
on botanical terminology and curiosities.) As if to contrast with this,
he was for a time intensely interested in astrology and amused himself
with casting horoscopes for his friends. At some time in his adolescence
he began to manifest what might seem an almost pathological graphomania,
for at the age of 17 he began to keep a diary, a practice which he
continued throughout his life. He contrived some sort of secret writing
which he occasionally used to conceal some of the contents of his
diaries, and which he also used to record his dreams in a series of
“dreambooks.”

Shortly after settling in Hartford, Whorf became increasingly concerned
about the supposed conflict between science and religion. It seems that
he had been deeply impressed by the fundamentalist shadings of his
Methodist Episcopal religious background, which at times seemed to
controvert the current doctrines in science. He became so deeply
preoccupied with this issue that he wrote a 130,000-word manuscript on
the subject, described as a book of religious philosophy in the form of
a novel. This manuscript, completed in 1925, was submitted to several
publishers and was promptly rejected by them, even over his protests.
Another, briefer manuscript prepared about this time was entitled “Why I
have discarded evolution.” An eminent geneticist to whom it was
submitted for comment made a very courteous reply, starting with the
admission that, although the manuscript at first appeared to be the work
of a crank, its skill and perceptiveness soon marked it as otherwise,
but continuing with a point-by-point rebuttal of Whorf’s arguments.

In the meantime, Whorf’s reading led him to believe that the key to the
apparent discrepancy between the Biblical and the scientific accounts of
cosmogony and evolution might lie in a penetrating linguistic exegesis
of the Old Testament. For this reason, in 1924 he turned his mind to the
study of Hebrew.

It may come as a surprise to some that Whorf’s interest in linguistics
stemmed from one in religion. The reader may incidentally be reminded of
the considerable connection which has long existed between linguistic
and religious enterprises—the philological work represented in the
Septuagint, in Ulfilas’s creation of the written Gothic into which he
could translate the Bible, in the study of hundreds of non-European
languages by missionaries in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
and in the thoroughly scientific investigations being carried out by
contemporary linguistic missionaries. Whorf, however, was not interested
in any translation of the Bible, at least not in any ordinary sense; he
seriously believed that fundamental human and philosophical problems
could be solved by taking a new sounding of the semantics of the Bible.
Whether this conviction was independently reached by him we do not know.
We do know that sometime during 1924 there came to his attention a book
which could have buttressed his beliefs, and which at any rate drew him
closer to linguistics. He himself gives testimony of this in a hitherto
unpublished paper which appears in the present collection. This book,
hardly known to contemporary scholars, was by a French dramatist,
philologist, and mystic of the early nineteenth century, Antoine Fabre
d’Olivet (1767–1825). It was entitled La langue hébraïque restituée, and
was published in two volumes in Paris in 1815–16. Whorf most probably
read an English translation of this scarce work published in 1921, for
the name of the translator, Nayán Louise Redfield, appears in his
notes.³

According to the Grand dictionnaire universel du XIX^(e) siècle, Fabre
d’Olivet died “avec le reputation d’un fou ou d’un visionnaire.” A
rather indifferent dramatist, he retired in his later life to extensive
philological lucubrations. In La langue hébraïque, his major work in
this field, he attempted to show that the hidden meanings of the Book of
Genesis could be elucidated by an analysis au fond of the structure of
the triliteral Hebrew root. Each letter of the Hebrew alphabet,
according to him, contained an inherent meaning; for example, the letter
Aleph was to him “the sign of the power and stability of ideas, of unity
and the principle which determines it.” The letter Yodh was a sign of
“manifestation”; thus the partial root Aleph-Yodh “designates,” wrote
Fabre d’Olivet, “the center towards which the will tends, the place
where it enfixes itself, the sphere of activity in which it operates.”
Since he concluded that the letter Tsadhe denoted “termination,” he was
not surprised to find that the triliteral root Aleph-Yodh(or Waw)-Tsadhe
meant “any desire tending toward an end.” The principle of the rootsign
was applied to all parts of Hebrew grammar, and to the interpretation of
several hundred Hebrew roots. The whole was offered as partly a
linguistic study to illuminate the principles of language (he claimed
having been hard put to choose whether Chinese, Sanskrit, or Hebrew
would be the basis for his project), and partly as the fulfilment of his
desire to discover the secret meaning of the cosmogony of Moses. In the
English translation which Fabre d’Olivet himself obligingly provided,
the first verse of the Bible comes out as follows:
‘At-FIRST-IN-PRINCIPLE, he-created, Ælohim (he caused to be, he brought
forth in principle, HE-the-Gods, the-Being-of-Beings),
the-selfsameness-of-heavens, and-the-selfsameness-of-earth.’ He tosses
off the comment that this is not a mere result of some system he has
established on the basis of “more or less happy conjectures or
probabilities,” but “the very language of Moses which I have interpreted
according to its structural principles, which I have taken pains to
develop to a satisfactory point.”

Despite the dubiety of Fabre d’Olivet’s startling results, his book
seems to have made a strong impression on Whorf, who later characterized
him as having been “one of the most powerful linguistic intellects of
any age.” Whorf maintained that, while the Biblical exegesis attempted
by Fabre d’Olivet could not be taken seriously, his “root-sign” was
really a foreshadowing of what is nowadays called the phoneme. What
intrigued Whorf was Fabre d’Olivet’s method. For example, in arriving at
his “meanings” of the letters of the Hebrew alphabet, Fabre d’Olivet had
systematically compared and contrasted a wide variety of roots in which
they occurred, much as one might attempt to obtain a “meaning” for the
letter M in English by educing the common meaning in all English words
beginning in M. We may permit ourselves to imagine that Fabre d’Olivet
could have found a common element even in such opposite words as
‘mother’ and ‘murder’! There are limits to which such a method can be
pushed, which Fabre d’Olivet far exceeded; nevertheless, it remains true
that such a technique of identifying isolates is in essence similar to
the procedures of contemporary linguistics in identifying phonemes and
morphemes. As we shall see, however, Whorf’s methods in certain spheres
of his work closely paralleled those of Fabre d’Olivet. This is
illustrated in his early efforts to read Maya hieroglyphs, as well as in
some of his unpublished work on the structure of Aztec. Another and
perhaps a more profound way in which his methods resembled Fabre
d’Olivet’s is represented in his always bold and penetrating search for
inner meanings. Just as Fabre d’Olivet pushed imagination to the limit
in looking for an underlying significance in a segment of a Hebrew root,
so Whorf persisted in the struggle to wrest from the bare linguistic
fact its ultimate purport.

The discovery of the work by Fabre d’Olivet stimulated Whorf to read
more widely and deeply on the subject of language. He made use of the
rich collections of the Watkinson Library, a scholarly research library
in Hartford founded in 1857 under the provisions of the will of a
wealthy English-born Hartford merchant who wanted the city to have a
general library of reference. Visited chiefly by an occasional
genealogist or art historian who sought access to its
hundred-thousand-odd dusty volumes, the library was housed in the upper
reaches of a fortress-like building known as the Wadsworth Atheneum,
which also contained the Hartford Public Library and the collections of
the Connecticut Historical Society.⁴ At least during the period that
Whorf was in the habit of frequenting it after his business hours, its
extreme stillness and bookish odor were conducive to deep concentration.
Its first librarian had been James Hammond Trumbull, who was among other
things a scholar in American Indian lore. During his service as
librarian from 1863 to 1893, Trumbull had built up the library’s
collections in American Indian ethnology, folklore, and language to an
extent that would be considered unusual except for a large university
library. This collection reawakened Whorf’s interest in Mexican
antiquities and lore, and directed his attention especially to the Aztec
(Nahuatl) language and, later, to Maya hieroglyphs. Just what prompted
Whorf to study Aztec, in particular, we do not know. Conceivably he
chanced upon an account of Nahuatl which reminded him of the ideas he
had found in La langue hébraïque. Be that as it may, Whorf began
studying Aztec in 1926; he probably did not work seriously on Maya until
1928. He worked not only at the Watkinson Library, but also at any
library he could profitably visit on his numerous business trips away
from Hartford. He made rapid progress, and began corresponding with
various scholars in Mexican archaeology and linguistics, including
Herbert J. Spinden of the Brooklyn Museum and Alfred M. Tozzer of
Harvard University. At Dr. Spinden’s suggestion he addressed himself to
an attempt to work out a translation of a page of an old Mexican
manuscript, a photographic reproduction of which was to be found in the
Peabody Museum of Harvard University. The result was a paper read before
the Twenty-Third International Congress of Americanists in September
1928 and a corresponding first scholarly publication, “An Aztec account
of the period of the Toltec decline” (1928),⁵ which shows an
antiquarian’s interest in the details of Toltec history and chronology
as well as a linguist’s pride in forcing a cranky Aztec word “to yield
up its secret,” as Whorf himself put it. This paper, as read before the
Congress, attracted a considerable amount of attention and publicity for
the young insurance agent, who was hailed in newspaper reports for his
having “unlocked mysteries” which had “baffled” other scholars. About
the same time there was completed another Aztec translation, published
in 1929 under the title “The reign of Huemac.”

These publications were, however, only the first and easy fruits of a
period of study in which Whorf was also delving into comparative
linguistics, presumably without any tutoring other than the necessarily
brief contacts he may have had with such men as Spinden and Tozzer, and,
in addition, J. Alden Mason of the University of Pennsylvania, whom he
met during a visit to the first Linguistic Institute, held in the summer
of 1928. At the International Congress of Americanists, Whorf had read
another paper besides the one on Toltec history. It attracted much less
attention, but was closer to his true interests; entitled simply “Aztec
linguistics,” it reported his assertion that Aztec was what he called an
oligosynthetic language, that is, that all its words were built up out
of a relatively few elements, perhaps as few as fifty basic monosyllabic
roots, “each conveying a general notion capable of wide modulation
without loss of the basic sense” (or so he wrote in the published
abstract of the paper). On looking into whether the same roots he found
in Aztec would show up also in languages related to Aztec, he was
immediately gratified by the results. Toward the end of 1928 the work he
had done on the familial relationships among Tepecano, Piman, and
Aztec—all Mexican languages—appeared so promising to Tozzer and Spinden
that they advised him to seek a research fellowship from the Social
Science Research Council to enable him to obtain needed materials and
work more intensively. Whorf countered with the proposal that he use
such a fellowship to make a field trip to Mexico to locate old Aztec
manuscripts for the Watkinson Library, one of the trustees of that
library having expressed a desire to build up its collection of Aztec
materials. Tozzer opined, however, that if he wanted to go to Mexico he
would be better advised to investigate modern Nahuatl, a suggestion to
which Whorf readily assented. In a letter to Mason dated December 6,
1928, Whorf commented, in reference to the fellowship for which he was
applying, “It is a question whether I get it, because these Fellowships
are supposed to be for men with Ph.D. degrees, and while they sometimes
make exceptions, these exceptions are rare and hard to get, requiring
very good recommendations.” His application to the Social Science
Research Council was accompanied, first, by a general statement of his
scholarly plans, and second, by a nearly completed article entitled
“Notes on the oligosynthetic comparison of Nahuatl and Piman, with
special reference to Tepecano.” In the first of these documents, Whorf
revealed himself as avowedly visionary, but he may have felt its content
necessary to win the interest of the committee which reviewed his
fellowship application:

With the aid of this Research Fellowship if possible I plan to do and
publish sufficient work on Mexican linguistics to make the principle of
oligosynthesis a live topic and to interest other investigators in the
basic substratum of language to which it belongs.

After I have become better known in this way the next step will be to
arouse interest in the phenomenon that I call binary grouping in Hebrew
and the Semitic languages. I am of course still working on this and will
continue right along to bring it to the attention of Semitic
researchers.

After binary grouping has also become a live topic I will begin to make
a union between this principle and that of oligosynthesis and thereby
reach the still deeper principle underlying the Hebrew and Semitic
languages.

The next step will be to use these principles in working out the
primitive underlying basis of all speech behavior. This will amount to
laying the foundations of a new science, and although this consummation
lies some little time in the future I feel that it is quite distinctly
in sight. Still further ahead are the possible applications of such a
science restoring a possible original common language of the human race
or in perfecting an ideal natural tongue constructed of the original
psychological significance of sounds, perhaps a future common speech
into which all our varied languages may be assimilated, or, putting it
differently, to whose terms they may all be reduced. This may seem at
the present time very visionary, but it would be no more remarkable than
what science has already done in other fields when it has got hold of
sound principles to point the way, and I believe my work is tending to
unfold such principles. And with the ultimate development of these
researches will come manifestation of the deeper psychological,
symbolic, and philosophical sense contained in the cosmology of the
Bible, the starting point and original inspiration of these studies.

Oligosynthesis is explained further in the first few paragraphs of the
second document which accompanied Whorf’s fellowship application:

Oligosynthesis is a name for that type of language structure in which
all or nearly all of the vocabulary may be reduced to a very small
number of roots or significant elements, irrespective of whether these
roots or elements are to be regarded as original, standing anterior to
the language as we know it, or as never having had independent
existence, theirs being an implicit existence as parts in words that
were always undissociated wholes.

Such a structure was recognized by the writer in the Nahuatl or Aztec
language of Mexico, in which he has made numerous studies and the term
oligosynthesis was thereupon proposed by him. . . . Briefly, the
conclusions are that nearly all and probably quite all the present known
native vocabulary of Nahuatl is derived from the varied combination and
varied semantic development of no more than thirty-five roots, for which
the writer prefers the name of “elements,” each of which elements stands
for a certain general idea, including something of the surrounding field
of related ideas into which this central idea insensibly shades off.
These thirty-five elements (it now begins to seem very unlikely that
their number will be increased) have been obtained by extensive
stem-analysis and are listed . . . in the appendix of the present
article. They explain the meaning of thousands of Nahuatl words,
including great numbers of words learned recently, which have had the
meaning that would be expected from their elements. Furthermore, it is
becoming increasingly evident to me that these elements are to be
regarded as original roots anterior and ancestral to the present
language, and my previous view that they might be the result of
assimilative back-formation is becoming less and less of a serious
claimant for consideration. Obviously we have here a structure, a
point-to-point correspondence between the path of ideation and the
successions of lip, tongue, and glottal activities (i.e. consonants and
vowels) that may be of great linguistic, glottogonic, and psychological
significance.

Binary grouping referred to a principle which Whorf believed to inhere
in the structure of Hebrew roots, as may be seen in the following
quotation from an unpublished manuscript: “A binary group is a group of
Semitic roots having in common a certain sequence of two consonants,
containing all the roots with this sequence in one language, and having
these roots with but few exceptions allocated to a few certain kinds of
meaning.”

These quotations are of special interest when viewed in the light of
Whorf’s early enthusiasm for Fabre d’Olivet. As a further note, it
should be added that Whorf started to extend the application of the
oligosynthetic principle to his first work with Maya, concerning which
he read a paper before the Linguistic Society of America (of which he
had just become a member) in December 1929, “Stem series in Maya.” In
the abstract of this paper submitted to the program committee of the
Linguistic Society, we find Whorf pointing out that the majority of Maya
stems beginning QE- bear the meaning ‘turn.’ He writes further: “So
other series, e.g. QI-, radiate, glow, burn, scatter; QO-, QU-, inward;
BI-, move; TA-, connect; TZA-, come or bring together; MA-, pass. In
other words, ‘ideology follows phoneticism.’”

The response of the SSRC to his application for a research fellowship
being favorable, Whorf set about making arrangements for his field trip
to Mexico. He obtained a few weeks’ leave from his company and left for
Mexico City with Mrs. Whorf and her mother in January 1930. En route he
spent a few days researching in the library of the Department of Middle
American Research at Tulane University of Louisiana. On arrival in
Mexico City, he sought the assistance of several Mexican specialists in
Aztec, especially Professor Mariano Rojas of the National Museum of
Mexico. Partly with their aid, he gained access to several excellent
informants who spoke a form of Aztec which was believed to approximate,
as closely as one could expect over the years, the classical dialect of
Aztec once spoken in Tenochtitlan (now Mexico City) at the time of
Montezuma. These individuals lived in an outlying suburb in the Federal
District, known as Milpa Alta, and it is their dialect of which Whorf
made a detailed linguistic analysis, published posthumously in 1946 in
Hoijer’s Linguistic structures of native America. In the meantime, Whorf
poked around the Mexican countryside in search of suggestive
archaeological material. In a ruined temple overlooking the village of
Tepoztlan, where he conducted further linguistic studies, he came upon,
apparently quite by chance, a band of sculptured figures which had
previously escaped the close attention of scholars. His sharp
observation and close familiarity with both Aztec and Maya graphic art
enabled him to recognize almost immediately that these figures deviated
from their usual forms as “day signs” of the Aztec calendar and showed
certain resemblances to Mayan characters. This discovery of “a definite,
clearly demonstrable rapport between Nahuatl hieroglyphs and early Maya
ones,” as Whorf regarded it, was the basis of one of the papers
reprinted in the present collection, “A central Mexican inscription
combining Mexican and Maya day signs.” It furnishes an excellent example
of Whorf’s methods of work, and is also his earliest publication
pointing toward his later researches into Maya hieroglyphs.

For several years after his return from Mexico, Whorf occupied himself
with working up the data amassed during the Mexican sojourn. Not only
was it necessary to sketch out the linguistic analysis of the Milpa Alta
Nahuatl; it was also urgent to follow up the leads provided by the
discoveries concerning Mexican and Maya day signs, which had had the
effect of confirming or modifying certain hunches he had developed
previously. A major series of publications concerning Maya hieroglyphs
started about this time, first with a monograph published by the Peabody
Museum of Harvard, “The phonetic value of certain characters in Maya
writing” (1933) and later with an article, “Maya writing and its
decipherment” (1935). In the earlier publication, which Professor Tozzer
of Harvard urged him to prepare, he set forth in detail and with his
evidence his thesis that Maya writing was at least partly phonetic, and
he offered a specimen translation of a simple Maya text from one of the
codices. Since the hypothesis of phoneticism in Maya writing had been
all but abandoned by Maya scholars at least fifty years previously,
Whorf’s materials must have been exceedingly impressive, at least at the
time, to have gotten published at all. The later publication, “Maya
writing and its decipherment,” was a reply to a critique published by
Richard C. E. Long in the journal Maya Research. Besides taking issue
with many points of detail raised by Mr. Long, Whorf attempted to
explain why he regarded Long’s approach as fundamentally mistaken; he
also offered another specimen translation of a Maya text. In this
article, furthermore, he mentioned that he had been working on a
manuscript, “First steps in the decipherment of Maya writing,” which he
then hoped to publish within a short time. This manuscript, found among
Whorf’s papers, has thus far remained unfinished and unpublished, though
some parts of it are reflected in a paper which Whorf read before a
scientific congress in 1940 and which is reprinted in the present
collection, “Decipherment of the linguistic portion of the Maya
hieroglyphs.” Whorf was bitterly disappointed by the rather cool
reception generally accorded his work by Maya scholars after 1933; he
was entirely confident that his linguistic approach held the key to the
interpretation of Maya hieroglyphs. The paper he read in 1940 was
apparently a last-ditch effort to win support for his approach.

Up to the time of the Mexican trip, Whorf seems to have had very little
contact, either face-to-face or by correspondence, with any of the
persons who were later to be his close colleagues in the field of
linguistics. His scholarly relations had been chiefly with a group of
specialists in Mexican archaeology, none of whom were particularly well
qualified in, or concerned with, general linguistics. In view of this,
the competence that Whorf had achieved in general linguistics and
linguistic field methods, purely on the strength of his own untutored
study, was remarkable. Nevertheless, his talents might never have fully
matured if he had not eventually met Edward Sapir (1884–1939), a
foremost authority not only on American Indian languages but also on the
general science of language. Whorf had, of course, been aware of Sapir’s
work, and he had doubtless read Sapir’s book Language (New York, 1921)
with intense interest. He first met Sapir, though only briefly, at the
September 1928 International Congress of Americanists, and talked with
him further at subsequent meetings of scientific societies in 1929 and
1930. He could not, however, make any close contact with Sapir until the
latter came from the University of Chicago in the fall of 1931 to take
his post at Yale as Professor of Anthropology to teach linguistics.
Whorf lost no time in enrolling in Sapir’s first course at Yale in
American Indian linguistics; among the Whorf papers can be found a
manuscript entitled “The structure of the Athabaskan languages,” a term
paper which Sapir awarded a grade of A and much praise. Although Whorf
nominally enrolled for a program of studies leading to the doctorate, he
never sought or obtained any higher degree; he pursued his studies for
pure intellectual ends. The effects of Whorf’s first formal studies in
linguistics were noticeable and demonstrable. His early interests in
“oligosynthesis,” “binary grouping,” and other unusual linguistic
theories became tempered at least to the extent that he was brought to
see them in the light of the accumulated experience of men like Sapir.
(I can find no mention of the idea of oligosynthesis, as such, in any of
Whorf’s writings after 1931.) More important, Whorf was put in close
touch with the linguistic theories and techniques which were most
advanced at that time, as well as with the problems which were currently
considered the most essential to solve. Finally, his studies at Yale
brought him into contact with a small but earnest band of Sapir’s
students, including such individuals as Morris Swadesh, Stanley Newman,
George Trager, Charles Voegelin, Mary Haas, and Walter Dyk, all of whom
have since made important contributions to linguistics or anthropology.
In 1937–38, Whorf was a Lecturer in Anthropology at Yale.

Whorf’s association with Sapir thus served to intensify his desire to
develop further the field of American Indian linguistics. In the
monograph about Maya hieroglyphs published in 1933, we find Whorf
crediting Sapir with certain suggestions about the interpretation of the
zero sign. Sapir was probably more influential, however, in encouraging
Whorf to expand his work on the Uto-Aztecan languages (a large stock of
languages whose relationships Sapir had established), in particular to
take up the study of the Hopi language, a distant relative of Aztec. In
December 1932 Whorf read a paper entitled “The characteristics of the
Uto-Aztecan stock” at the meeting of the Linguistic Society of America
held at New Haven. His further work on Uto-Aztecan linguistics
(exclusive of Hopi) is represented by a review (1935) of Kroeber’s
Uto-Aztecan languages of Mexico, and several articles, “The comparative
linguistics of Uto-Aztecan” (1935), “The origin of Aztec TL” (1937), and
(with G. L. Trager) “The relationship of Uto-Aztecan and Tanoan” (1937).
In these articles, Whorf recognized a superfamily language stock which
he proposed to call Macro-Penutian, to include Penutian, Uto-Aztecan,
Mayan, and Mixe-Zoque-Huave. Later, he used this structuring in
preparing a revision of Sapir’s classification of American Indian
languages.

In linguistic work as such, Whorf was best known for his studies of
Hopi. Perhaps through the good offices of Sapir, he made contact with a
native speaker of Hopi, who then lived, conveniently enough, in New York
City. Beginning in the spring of 1932 and with the support of a small
research subvention obtained for him by Sapir, Whorf worked intensely on
developing a linguistic analysis of Hopi, utilizing field research
methods in which he had received instruction from Sapir. Whorf and his
informant exchanged visits in New York and Wethersfield (where Whorf
resided); in 1938 Whorf was able to spend a short time on the Hopi
reservation in Arizona. By 1935 he had prepared a tentative grammar and
dictionary of Hopi. Except for the brief sketch of Hopi grammar in
Hoijer’s Linguistic structures of native America (1946)—a sketch
prepared by Whorf in late 1939—the major outcomes of these studies
remain unpublished. Nevertheless, one can be grateful for the two brief
but very influential technical articles about Hopi which Whorf published
during his lifetime: “The punctual and segmentative aspects of verbs in
Hopi’’ (published in 1936, first read as a paper before the Linguistic
Society of America in December 1935), and “Some verbal categories of
Hopi” (1938). In these papers one can see how their author was beginning
to be fired with the notion, developed more extensively in later
popularized papers, that the strange grammar of Hopi might betoken a
different mode of perceiving and conceiving things on the part of the
native speaker of Hopi. In the first, he asserted that “the Hopi
actually have a language better equipped to deal with . . . vibratile
phenomena than is our latest scientific terminology.” This was followed
by “An American Indian model of the universe” (probably written in 1936
but not published until 1950), which explores the implications of the
Hopi verb system with regard to the Hopi conception of space and time.
The work with Hopi must have also influenced the writing, about this
same time, of the paper entitled “A linguistic consideration of thinking
in primitive communities” (published in the present collection for the
first time). “Some verbal categories of Hopi” (1938) discusses several
interesting distinctions which Hopi makes between kinds and modes of
happening which English treats as the same, and “Linguistic factors in
the terminology of Hopi architecture” (written in early 1940 and not
published until 1953) contains the thesis that the Hopi mind
automatically separates the “occupancy” or spot of ground or floor on
which the occupancy occurs from the use to which the occupancy is put,
whereas the speaker of English tends to merge these, as where “school”
is thought of as both an institution and a building. (Indeed, do we not
almost instinctively feel that an institution must of necessity be
housed in some kind of building?) Whorf is probably best known for the
article “The relation of habitual thought and behavior to language,”
written in 1939, and for the three articles which were published in 1940
and 1941 in the Technology Review—all based to a considerable extent
upon his research in Hopi. What is important to note is that, first,
these latter papers were grounded upon a solid foundation of linguistic
analysis done much earlier, and, second, that the ideas of linguistic
relativity expressed therein were by no means new in Whorf’s mind; on
the contrary, the seeds of these ideas were already apparent in
materials prepared as early as 1935, if not earlier.

The three articles written for the Technology Review of M.I.T. and the
article entitled “Language, mind, and reality” and published in an
Indian journal of theosophy were addressed to lay audiences. Undoubtedly
Whorf had it in mind to bring linguistics before the general public in a
manner that had scarcely ever been attempted; in fact, he may be
credited with being the first popularizer of modern linguistic science.
He realized, however, that it would be impossible to popularize
linguistics, and there would be little purpose in doing so, unless
linguistics held a message of popular appeal. This message, Whorf
believed, was that linguistics has much to say about how and what we
think.

It may be of interest to recount what led to the writing of the articles
for the Technology Review. As early as 1932 there was an exchange of
correspondence between Whorf and the editor of the Technology Review, J.
R. Killian Jr. (now president of M.I.T.), to whose attention Whorf’s
article on the Mexican day signs had come. Killian invited Whorf to
write an account of his trip to Mexico, and asked whether he had
unearthed any material relating to “the history of engineering,
architecture, and the practical sciences.” Almost disdainfully Whorf
replied that this trip had “no bearing on engineering, architecture, or
the practical sciences”—that “the investigation was conducted thoroughly
in the spirit of scientific research, but it was in the social sciences,
not the physical sciences.” Nevertheless, he did eventually agree to
prepare an article on his trip, but for some reason such an article does
not seem to have been written. The next exchange was between Whorf and
President Karl T. Compton, in late 1939. Whorf initiated this
correspondence as a result of “a slight difficulty” he had had in
filling out some sort of questionnaire sent him by the Register of
Former Students—namely, that the questionnaire omitted any mention of
insurance, insurance engineering, fire prevention, or the like, fields
which Whorf felt ought to receive recognition as engineering
professions. He wanted to bring this apparent omission to President
Compton’s attention, and proceeded to describe in detail the nature of
his own work. In this same letter, he took occasion to mention other
activities of his which did not quite fit the list of rubrics on the
questionnaire, to wit, his research on American Indian languages.
President Compton’s reply, after explaining that the apparent omission
on the questionnaire form was the result of abbreviation rather than
deliberate exclusion, expressed interest in Whorf’s avocational work and
asked permission to submit his letter for publication in the Technology
Review. Permission was granted, and the letter (in much condensed form)
is to be seen in the January 1940 issue of the Review. In the course of
ensuing correspondence, the editor of the Review, then F. G. Fassett,
Jr., wrote Whorf on November 14, 1939: “Your linguistic studies offer a
very interesting and provocative possibility to anyone responsible for a
magazine. ‘Inasmuch as the analysis of reality is a matter of language,
and the relativity of such analyses can only be appreciated through
studies that show the immense range of possible diversity in linguistic
expression it will be seen that there is a connection here with the
attempts of science to understand the universe and man’—I think it would
be very interesting to see the ideas implicit in this statement from
your October letter expanded in an article aimed at the Review group. Is
this prospect of interest?” Evidently it was, for Whorf was able to
submit the first article, “Science and linguistics,” as early as January
30, 1940, and it was printed in the Review shortly thereafter. The
exceedingly warm reception this article got, both from regular readers
of the Review and from the recipients of reprints, pointed to the
desirability of further articles. The second article, “Linguistics as an
exact science,” was submitted on September 16, 1940, and the third and
last, “Languages and logic,” on February 14, 1941, at a time when
Whorf’s health was failing and his physical weakness was already
apparent in his handwriting.

Even in the year when he was writing these brilliant articles on
linguistics and at the same time fighting off ill health, Whorf became
consumed with still another interest. On account of a lecture which his
oldest son attended and described to him, Whorf became acquainted with
Fritz Kunz, a well-known speaker and writer, at present the executive
vice-president of the Foundation for Integrated Education, Inc. Kunz and
Whorf had many common interests, especially (as Mr. Kunz has written me)
in the philosophy and metaphysics of India, and it was this that brought
them to work together quite closely. One result of this friendship was
Kunz’s suggestion that Whorf write an article about linguistics for a
theosophical journal published at Madras, India; the article entitled
“Language, mind, and reality” was the result. Kunz was on the point of
founding a new journal, Main Currents in Modern Thought, and Whorf was
of great help in putting out the first few issues, in late 1940 and
early 1941. The journal (still published today, but in a different
format) was of an interesting and unusual character; it was intended as
a clearing house of ideas and information in all sorts of fields in
natural science, social science, the humanities, mathematics, logic, and
philosophy; it was to be written chiefly by its subscribers. Published
in those days in mimeographed form, the varied colors of its pages were
keyed to subject matter. Whorf wrote literally dozens of pages in the
first volume, doing highly creative book reviews and contributing little
abstracts on such diverse subjects as “The Hurrians of old Chaldea,”
“Shrinking glass,” and “Notes on the demonstration of ‘wetter’ water.”
One of his reviews is based on two books on the economics of primitive
societies, and is provocatively titled “We may end the war that is
within all wars that are waged to end all war.” “These books,” Whorf
wrote, “are outstanding examples of a type of investigation that is
gradually unsettling the old-style materialistic theory of economics.
And since both Marxian communism and private capitalism are based on a
stereotyped materialistic formulation of economics, such irrefutable
scientific expositions of the fact that economic behavior is conditioned
by culture, not by mechanistic reactions, may be the forerunner of a new
era.” This quotation is only one of many that could be cited to show
Whorf’s broad humanism and concern for the commonweal. Nor did Whorf
neglect to bring the implications of linguistics to the attention of
readers of Main Currents. Reporting several interesting facts which had
appealed to his interest at a scientific meeting, he wrote, in a piece
entitled “A brotherhood of thought”:

There is no word for ‘word’ in Chinese. The nearest thing is the element
tsz, which is translated ‘word’ but means rather ‘syllable’ or ‘syllabic
element.’ Many such elements never occur free but only in a few
combinations, like the ‘pyr-’ in ‘pyrometer.’ Words in the sense of
vocabulary units exist as either of one or two syllables, a fact
obscured by the traditional Chinese system of writing, which keeps every
syllable separate. This was pointed out by Dr. Y. R. Chao of Yale in a
paper “Word conceptions in Chinese” at the meeting of the Linguistic
Society of America in Providence, R. I., 12/30/40. The nature of Chinese
grammar is only just beginning to be understood; Dr. Chao and others
have exploded the idea that Chinese is a monosyllabic language. At the
same meeting Dr. G. A. Kennedy of Yale, analyzing “Complex attributive
expressions in Chinese,” showed that Chinese has no relative clauses,
and that a different kind of order-system rules the logic of such
relationships. If the element te used in this logic be translated
‘-ish,’ then “The House that Jack Built” would go in Chinese: ‘This is
Jack-ish build-ish house; this is Jack-ish build-ish house-ish in-ish
lie-ish malt,’ etc.

It is not sufficiently realized that the ideal of worldwide fraternity
and cooperation fails if it does not include ability to adjust
intellectually as well as emotionally to our brethren of other
countries. The West has attained some emotional understanding of the
East through the esthetic and belles-lettres type of approach, but this
has not bridged the intellectual gulf; we are no nearer to understanding
the types of logical thinking which are reflected in truly Eastern forms
of scientific thought or analysis of nature. This requires linguistic
research into the logics of native languages, and realization that they
have equal scientific validity with our own thinking habits.

After a long and lingering illness, during which he valiantly struggled
to keep up his study and his writing, Whorf succumbed on July 26, 1941,
at the age of 44. He had accomplished more than he knew, yet only a
small part of what he might have done. His passing was taken notice of
by editorial obituaries not only in the local newspapers but also in
such papers as the New York Times, and later, of course, in several
scholarly journals.

I cannot close this biographical memoir without a few remarks about
Whorf’s personality and habits of work. Above all he was capable of
extremely deep and steadfast concentration in everything he did. Nothing
was treated lightly or carelessly. His penciled manuscripts, in
beautifully neat and always legible handwriting, exemplify his
meticulousness; it is also exceedingly rare to find an error in his
typescripts (he nearly always did his own typing of scholarly
manuscripts and correspondence). He was willing to work almost
endlessly; his published writings represent but a small fraction of the
manuscript material he produced, and his notebooks are truly voluminous.
Without hesitation, he would if necessary go to the trouble of copying
out, in longhand or script printing, page after page of detailed
linguistic texts. In writing, he was able to express himself
artistically, convincingly, and effortlessly; in many cases, his first
draft—with a minimum of emendations—was final. Yet, he nearly always
made a pencil draft preparatory to typing, even for correspondence. This
tireless devotion to scholarship undoubtedly took its toll of Whorf’s
strength and health, although he never appeared visibly fatigued. He
habitually worked late into the night, relaxing himself only by taking
short catnaps or by playing a few rolls of classical music on his
mechanical grand piano. He was somewhat casual about his hours at the
office, being dilatory in both arrival and departure on many occasions,
but he accomplished much while there. For exercise, he enjoyed walking,
often making the four- or five-mile trip from his office to his home in
Wethersfield on foot, with perhaps a stop at the Watkinson Library en
route.

Social life held little significance for him except when it involved his
linguistic colleagues, to whom he was always a delight. He maintained an
air of cheerful curiosity, and continually had interesting and novel
things to say. As I have recalled elsewhere, “Whorf was a quiet,
contemplative teacher; he would not stop at remaining silent for a
seemingly interminable time while searching his mind to recall something
or to think through a problem. Yet, when he became prompted to tell me
of some new insight he had reached, the smoothness and lucidity of his
remarks were little short of awesome. His mode of behavior was that of
neither the scholar nor the businessman—he gave only the impression of
calm, unhurried, effortless inspiration. Self-seeking was entirely alien
to him and it is a tribute to him that he was so generous in sharing his
remarkable perspectives with others.”

II

The title of this volume, Language, thought, and reality, is the title
of a book that Whorf hoped to write, and for which a brief outline is to
be found among the papers left at his death. The book would have been
dedicated to the memory of Edward Sapir and Antoine Fabre d’Olivet, and
would have attempted to present the implications of linguistics for the
clarification of our thinking about the external world of reality. The
notes indicate that the book, designed as a college textbook and
provided with suitable chapter-end quizzes, would have included in its
appendix language sketches of Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Kota, Aztec, Hopi,
Shawnee, Russian, Taos, Chinese, and Japanese. This book, of course, was
never written, but I believe its title is a fitting one for the present
edition, which includes nearly all of Whorf’s writings which are
pertinent to what he called the principle of linguistic relativity,
which states, at least as a hypothesis, that the structure of a human
being’s language influences the manner in which he understands reality
and behaves with respect to it. This edition also includes what are
believed to be the most interesting and useful writings of Whorf in
Middle American linguistics and in general linguistics.

A study of the whole procession of Whorf’s writings discloses an
underlying theme which had its roots in his very early thinking, perhaps
concurrently with his first steps in linguistic work. We have already
seen how Whorf tried, as early as 1925, to verify the theories of the
French mystic and Hebrew scholar, Fabre d’Olivet—theories which proposed
that certain Hebrew letters and combinations of letters contained
mysterious, fundamental root-ideas. In order to verify these, Whorf
found himself playing with subtle, below-the-surface similarities
between seemingly unrelated ideas. This was the first step—to penetrate
beneath the veneer of dry, brittle, isolated words which might conceal
fundamental concepts. We see Whorf’s concern with basic mental
operations, and his seeming discomfort with the straitjacket represented
by language, in a short essay which I have entitled “On the connection
of ideas.” This essay, printed here for the first time, was written in
1927 as a letter to the psychologist Horace B. English, who had just
authored a dictionary of psychological terms; Whorf was appealing to
English to supply him with a term for a new kind of association of
ideas. Whorf was groping toward concepts or terms of a more general or
abstract nature than those provided by any language. None of the
psychological schools on the contemporary scene were of any real help,
as Whorf complained in a short unpublished note which, supplied with the
wholly arbitrary title “On psychology,” is also printed here. Yet, much
of Whorf’s work is extremely close to psychology. The search for
root-ideas led Whorf on many a byway, even in his work with Aztec and
Maya linguistics. The two papers on Maya hieroglyphs included here give
only a glimpse of this fact, but it would have emerged very obviously if
it had been thought desirable to print here, for example, the
unpublished paper “Stem series in Maya and certain Maya hieroglyphs,” to
which reference has already been made. Unfortunately, one has the
suspicion that Whorf occasionally allowed himself too many liberties in
arraying together ideas which to another would appear totally unrelated.
For example, at one point in his “Stem series” paper, he cites a series
of Maya roots which he believed contained “all sorts of ideas of
dispersal: be dispersed, disappear, spread, radiate, shine.” Edward
Sapir, to whom Whorf at one time submitted the manuscript, pinned this
comment to it: “I am sorry, but I cannot honestly say I feel the
cohesiveness of the sa-set as clearly as you do. ‘Sand,’ ‘white,’ ‘weave
cloth,’ ‘much,’ and ‘dislocate,’ for instance, on the basis of
fundamental ‘dispersal’ seems to be a purely subjective construction.”⁶
Whorf became aware of the need for objectifying semantic inferences;
there is to be found among his unpublished papers a brief proposal for
an experiment in which an individual would be presented with a series of
Aztec words, together with their English meanings, all involving the
letters ZE-. The subject was to be asked to arrive at some sort of
semantic grouping for these words; he was to be told that he might
decide (1) that ZE- has a single meaning throughout, or (2) that there
are two, three, or more ZE-’s with distinct and quite unconnected
meanings, or (3) that ZE- has no connection with the meanings
whatsoever. Apparently, Whorf never performed this experiment.

It will also be recalled that Whorf early noticed, or believed he
noticed, that Hebrew, Aztec, and Maya seemed to be built on a different
plan from that of English and other languages which he later called
“SAE” (standard average European) languages. He called them
“oligosynthetic” languages, that is, languages whose vocabularies were
built up out of a very small number of elements. “Each element,” he
stated in a paper concerning Aztec linguistics read in 1928, “is, first,
a very simple piece of articulation-behavior, and, second, a broad idea
or complex of related ideas that goes with this piece of behavior.” He
thought he had been able to analyze the Aztec vocabulary into no more
than thirty-five such roots. “It should now be noted,” he continued,
“that this oligosynthetic phenomenon opens up certain new territories in
the little-explored field of language-psychology. In it we see the whole
ideational field of a language partitioned out among or shared between
some thirty-five elementary notions, so as to give us for the first time
a map or plan of an actual realm of ideas. Previously when ideas have
been distributed among a set of categories, those categories have been
the result of some philosopher’s introspection, but not so this idea-map
of a language—we come upon it as we do upon the facts of nature, and its
as yet dimly seen configuration challenges us to investigate it by
experimental and inductive methods.” In these somewhat daring ideas we
may see, first, a certain appeal to the notion of phonetic symbolism,
the notion that there may be inherent relations (over and above the
arbitrary relations established in any given language) between sounds
and meanings, and, second, the faint suggestion of a theory of
linguistic relativity. The problem of phonetic symbolism has long
challenged both linguists and psychologists. Edward Sapir, who was
sympathetic to the notion, performed an experiment which pointed in a
positive direction,⁷ and the problem is still alive among contemporary
psychologists. With reference to the theory of linguistic relativity
foreshadowed in Whorf’s theory of oligosynthesis, the key is the notion
of a “broad idea or complex of related ideas” which might be associated
with a linguistic element, for from this it is but a short step to the
notion that languages with different collocations of semantic ideas
might provide different “maps” of the realm of possible ideas, or, as
Whorf put it much later, that different languages might provide
different “segmentations of experience.”

The idea of linguistic relativity did not emerge in a full-fledged form
until after Whorf had started studying with Sapir. Not until he began to
analyze Hopi, a language with a grammar much more complex and subtle
than that of Aztec or even that of Maya, did he begin to appreciate that
the notion of linguistic relativity could be developed in a much more
telling and effective way by noticing differences not only in “lexation”
but also in grammatical structure. The various papers on Hopi which are
published in this collection will speak for themselves; in them Whorf
tells of his provocative discoveries in the tense and aspect systems of
the Hopi verb, in the Hopi treatment of noun classes, and so on.

Whorf’s whole outlook in linguistics, apart from his early religious
concerns, stemmed from his concern with fundamental problems of meaning,
or, as I like to think, with fundamental intellectual operations. In the
very interesting and revealing paper written about 1936 and printed for
the first time in this volume, “A linguistic consideration of thinking
in primitive communities,” Whorf insists that “linguistics is
essentially the quest for MEANING.” The “real concern” of linguistics,
he writes, “is to light up the thick darkness of the language, and
thereby of much of the thought, the culture, and the outlook upon life
of a given community with the light of this ‘golden something,’ as I
have heard it called, this transmuting principle of meaning.” Whorf was
concerned more with substance than with process. That is, he was more
interested in what, in some abstract sense, was being thought about than
with the mental processes by which one might think, and this outlook led
him to linguistics, full of “content,” rather than to psychology,
relatively “contentless” in its concern with generalized
stimulus-response mechanisms. Whorf appeared to believe, indeed, that
the content of thought influences the process of thought, or that
differing contents produce differing species of process, so that
generalization about process becomes impossible without content’s being
taken into account. It was his belief that differences in thought
content and their corresponding effects on thought processes and
behavior in general would be spectacularly revealed by comparison of
different language structures. He was extremely ingenious in ferreting
out both the obvious and the subtle differences in language structures,
and fully demonstrable differences they were, at least on the linguistic
level. He did not stop there, however; he attempted also to adduce
evidence of behavior variations associated with different language
phenomena. While this attempt may not have been wholly successful, it
was at any rate embodied in the article written in the summer of 1939
for the Sapir volume, “The relation of habitual thought and behavior to
language.” It was the last article he wrote on the subject which was
addressed chiefly to his colleagues. The principle of linguistic
relativity was stated in the most appealing terms, however, in the
articles which appear as the last four of this collection; they were
written primarily for lay audiences.

Whorf’s principle of linguistic relativity, or, more strictly, the
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis (since Sapir most certainly shared in the
development of the idea) has, it goes without saying, attracted a great
deal of attention. Through various reprintings of one or the other of
the Technology Review articles, beginning as early as 1941 (in
Hayakawa’s Language in action, a Book of the Month Club selection), the
material has been brought to the notice of a wide public as well as of
linguists, anthropologists, and psychologists. One wonders, indeed, what
makes the notion of linguistic relativity so fascinating even to the
nonspecialist. Perhaps it is the suggestion that all one’s life one has
been tricked, all unaware, by the structure of language into a certain
way of perceiving reality, with the implication that awareness of this
trickery will enable one to see the world with fresh insight. Surely, at
any rate, it would have been farthest from Whorf’s wishes to condone any
easy appeal to linguistic relativity as a rationalization for a failure
of communication between cultures or between nations. Rather, he would
hope that a full awareness of linguistic relativity might lead to
humbler attitudes about the supposed superiority of standard average
European languages and to a greater disposition to accept a “brotherhood
of thought” among men, as he wrote in the short article of that title
quoted above. But, even if research in native languages is not for the
purpose of helping to bridge intellectual gulfs between cultures, Whorf
would nevertheless aver that the investigation of the “logics” of those
languages will contribute to our understanding of our own thinking
habits.

In truth, the validity of the linguistic relativity principle has thus
far not been sufficiently demonstrated; neither has it been flatly
refuted. It seems to be agreed that languages differ in many strange and
striking ways, but it is a moot point whether such differences in
language structure are associated with actual differences in ways of
perceiving and conceiving the world. Among the writers who are most
impressed with the possibilities of such an association are Kluckhohn
and Leighton (1946), Laura Thompson (1950), Hoijer (1953), and Kluckhohn
(1954). Kluckhohn and Leighton, for example, state that the Navaho
tongue is so radically different from ours that an understanding of
Navaho linguistic structure is virtually a prerequisite to understanding
the Navaho mind; they cite the tremendous translation difficulties
existing between Navaho and English, and imply that the two languages
almost literally operate in different worlds. Hoijer claims to have
found a suggestion of a correlation between the world view implied by
the Navaho verb system (that people only “participate” or “get involved”
in acts rather than initiate them) and the passivity and general
restlessness or fatefulness of Navaho mythology.

Two sharp critics of Whorf’s methodology and conclusions, on the other
hand, have been Lenneberg (1953) and Feuer (1953). Lenneberg attacks
chiefly the methodology. First, he criticizes on several grounds the
technique of translation which Whorf so often employed to demonstrate
differences in languages; large differences in the linguistic handling
of an event like cleaning of a gun do not necessarily imply
corresponding differences in the perception of that event, and may
merely result from metaphorical developments in the language, of which
the speakers may not ordinarily be aware (just as we do not ordinarily
think of “breakfast” as breaking a fast). Second, Lenneberg insists that
linguistic and nonlinguistic events must be separately observed and
described before they can be correlated, and that the usual canons of
evidence must be applied in demonstrating any association between such
events. Otherwise, the linguistic relativity principle becomes
embarrassingly circular, or at least tautological, in that the only
evidence for differences in “world view” turns out to be the linguistic
differences. Feuer, a social philosopher, believes that on a priori
grounds one would not expect cultures speaking different languages to
have different ways of perceiving space, time, causation, and other
fundamental elements of the physical world, because a correct perception
of these elements is necessary to survival.

Since these and other logical, methodological, and psychological
difficulties have recently received a thorough discussion at the hands
of a special conference of linguists, anthropologists, psychologists,
and philosophers (Hoijer, 1954), it seems pointless to labor them here.
It is perhaps desirable to counteract, however, the essentially
negative, pessimistic tone which pervaded this conference, by pointing
out that extremely little research of an appropriate character has thus
far been conducted on the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis. Except for the
experiment reported by Brown and Lenneberg (1954), which showed that
differences in ability to recognize and remember colors were associated
with availability of specific color names, there have been virtually no
researches which have adequately tested the existence of correlations
between linguistic structure and nonlinguistic behavior. Numerous
suggestions pointing toward such research have been made in a monograph
edited by Osgood and Sebeok (1954).

There is a further consideration which has not been sufficiently
stressed in the various discussions of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis,
namely, that the principle of linguistic relativity may not be so
tautological as it has been made to appear. It has been said that one
merely states a tautology when one appeals to differences in languages
as showing differences in behavior, in “world view.” It has also been
said that it is necessary to find nonlinguistic behaviors which are
correlated with the linguistic differences. This would doubtless be
desirable, but there is something to be said for being interested in
linguistic differences as such, regardless of nonlinguistic behavioral
correlates. If we assume that there is such a thing as covert, implicit
behavior, consisting of mental states, sets, attitudes, “meditational
processes,” and the like, we shall have to grant that such behavior is
largely inaccessible to public observation save through the medium of
verbal report. Whether or not, in fact, we assume any mental processes
standing behind then, we are led to put a high value on verbal responses
in their manifold forms as the chief data relating to perception and
cognition.

Suppose, now, we found that, by varying certain environmental
conditions, we could produce corresponding changes in the verbal reports
made by speakers of a given language. For example, we might be able to
find that we could in this way control which of several words (each
standing for one of several environmental stimuli) was used as the
subject of a sentence reporting the situation. Suppose further that,
upon experimenting with speakers of another language, we found it
impossible to produce changes in sentence structure corresponding to the
varying environmental conditions—that all speakers invariably used the
linguistic expression for one of the several stimuli as the subject of a
sentence reporting the situations, and that, upon being questioned, the
speakers of this language stated that it would be “unnatural” or
“nonsense” to use any other linguistic expression in subject position in
the sentence. The difference between the language behaviors would then
be of interest in itself; we would have to conclude that we must take
language structure into account in describing the verbal behavior of
speakers in selecting the subject component of sentences. If, further,
we had some fundamental knowledge about the grammatical meaning of
sentence subject, we might be able to make some comparisons of the
cognitive processes of speakers of the two languages. For example,
suppose that the grammatical meaning of sentence subject were to be
“entity perceived as a potential agent,” then we might be permitted to
conclude that the speakers of the second language in our illustration do
not readily perceive certain stimuli as “potential agents.”

This illustration has had to be somewhat far-fetched in several
respects: partly that we do not yet know whether differences of the sort
described could be found between speakers of different languages, and
partly that we do not know very well how to specify behavioral
correlates of grammatical categories. Yet, it is this kind of language
difference which Whorf offers on an intuitive basis. He assumes that
differences between languages would be found to correspond to
differences in ways of reporting events, and that we can feel
intuitively the grammatical and behavior forces underlying the
linguistic phenomena which he describes. It must be granted that we have
only begun to obtain detailed information about language differences and
the behavioral pressures exerted by these differences, but, even when we
get this information, much of it will be strictly in the realm of verbal
behavior and the environmental stimulus complexes which evoke this
verbal behavior.

One caution that needs to be stated in connection with the linguistic
relativity principle, regardless of whether it is valid or not, is that
the interest it has aroused and will continue to arouse should not be
allowed to distract attention from the importance of language
universals. Language universals, phenomena found in all languages, would
be of as much interest psychologically as language differences. Is it
true that all languages have subject-predicate construction in
sentences? Do all languages have some type of noun-verb contrast? What
features of verb-tense system are common to all languages? Answers to
such questions would assist in the development of a generalized
psychology of cognitive functions.

Because Whorf is chiefly known for his ideas on linguistic relativity,
this volume features those of his writings which are most relevant to
this problem. His studies in at least two other areas deserve
recognition, however.

Whorf’s early work in translating obscure Aztec documents was
undoubtedly brilliant and made a distinctive contribution to a neglected
corner of Middle American research. His interest in translating Aztec
shortly gave way, however, to the quest for a means of reading the
noncalendrical portions of Maya hieroglyphic writings. Here the validity
of Whorf’s work is at least highly controversial. There is no gainsaying
that his observations in this area were exceedingly acute, and his
“detective work” searching and clever. It is not for a nonspecialist to
say how much Whorf actually accomplished toward the interpretation of
the Maya hieroglyphs. There is certainly a great deal of plausibility in
the translation processes which he presents, as in the paper reprinted
here (“Decipherment of the linguistic portion of the Maya hieroglyphs”),
and Whorf was too objective and intelligent a scholar to present mere ad
hoc constructions which could not be tested and generalized. Yet,
objections have been raised by several Maya scholars—during Whorf’s
lifetime by Long (1935, 1936) and Andrews (1938), and, most recently and
also most severely, by J. Eric S. Thompson (1950). Nevertheless, the
criticisms of Long and Andrews related chiefly to minor points, some of
which Whorf was subsequently able to adjust, and Thompson does not seem
to have answered fully the deeply rooted complaint of Whorf that the
tradition in Maya hieroglyph research has been to ignore linguistic
evidence. As late as 1939, Tozzer (1939) was willing to state his belief
that there were considerable phonetic components of Maya hieroglyphs, as
Whorf urged, and we are told that the eminent Maya scholar, Herbert J.
Spinden, was enthusiastic about the paper which Whorf read at the Eighth
American Scientific Congress in May 1940. This paper is included here
because so little progress has been made in reading Maya hieroglyphs and
because it so well presents Whorf’s notions about the problem and about
writing systems in general.

Finally, Whorf’s contributions to general linguistics should not be
underestimated. His early theories of “oligosynthesis” and “binary
grouping” were, to be sure, certainly overdrawn, and, except as might be
implied by his continued admiration for the work of Fabre d’Olivet, he
ceased to appeal to any such theories after he became a student of
Sapir. Nevertheless, Whorf developed his theory of oligosynthesis with
characteristic originality and acumen, and it is perhaps unfortunate
that he never was able to bring himself to publish any full and mature
description of the theory, for it is at least conceivable that there are
languages, of which Aztec and Maya are possible examples, in which
submorphemic elements are more productive throughout the whole of the
vocabulary than the occasional “phonesthemes” which have been noted in
English (such as the sp in ‘spit, splash, spray, spout, sputter,
splatter,’ etc., which has seemed, to some, to carry the notion of
“forceful outward motion”).

Whorf was, at any rate, a master of straight linguistic description. His
sketches of Milpa Alta Aztec and Mishongnovi Hopi as published by Hoijer
(1946) are exemplary; they are characterized not only by the customary
minute phonological and morphological descriptions but also by an
unusual emphasis on seeking to find the meaning of grammatical
categories. Some of this sort of approach can be seen in papers
published in the present volume; for Hopi, in the paper “Some verbal
categories of Hopi,” and for English, or for languages in general, in
the paper “Grammatical categories,” in which he introduced a distinction
between overt and covert grammatical categories, and first applied the
term “cryptotype.” I believe it can fairly be said that contemporary
linguists have only begun to explore the full implications of Whorf’s
concept of cryptotype.

Even when Whorf worked on purely phonetic and phonemic problems, he was
highly original. He was apparently the first to propose the term
“allophone,” now in common use among linguistic scientists. His model of
the English monosyllable, as presented in his paper “Linguistics as an
exact science,” was at the time an original synthesis of facts about
English sound clusters. He wrote an interesting paper on the phonemics
of his own (Boston) dialect of English, published posthumously in 1943.

Whorf was everywhere an exceedingly acute observer of interesting and
subtle phenomena in language structures. For example, in his hands a
massive compilation of information about Shawnee, a language which he
had not previously studied, was able to suggest several novel
perspectives on figure-ground relationships as exemplified in Shawnee
word formation; the reader is referred to the paper “Gestalt technique
of stem composition in Shawnee,” printed in this volume. As if to roll
up in one package all the bases of his insights into language structure,
Whorf once had occasion to prepare an outline which he thought
anthropological field workers could use in collecting information about
new languages. The outline was referred to in a publication by Murdock,
“Outlines of cultural materials” (1938), but it has never before been
published. In the belief that it will still be useful, even though its
publication is belated, I have included it in the present collection
under Whorf’s title “Language: plan and conception of arrangement.” It
will doubtless demand considerable linguistic sophistication on the part
of the reader to catch the meanings which are often only vaguely
suggested by its outline form and sketchy phraseology, but at least it
may serve in this way to stimulate in the reader some of the productive
imagination which was characteristic of Whorf in whatever he touched.

* * *

Special Note

The reader is cautioned that the phonetic orthography for Hopi used in
this volume varies according to the particular system employed in each
individual paper. To have attempted to regularize this orthography would
have required a major linguistic investigation, which the editor was not
prepared to accomplish.

* * *

Acknowledgments

Acknowledgment is here made for permission to include in this volume
various writings of Whorf previously published elsewhere:

To Dr. Sol Tax, editor, for “A central Mexican inscription combining
Mexican and Maya day signs” from the American Anthropologist, vol. 34,
no. 2.

To Dr. Bernard Bloch, editor, for “The punctual and segmentative aspects
of verbs in Hopi,” “Some verbal categories of Hopi,” and “Grammatical
categories” from Language, vol. 12, no. 2; vol. 14, no. 4; and vol. 21,
no. 1, respectively.

To Dr. C. F. Voegelin, editor, for “An American Indian model of the
universe” and “Linguistic factors in the terminology of Hopi
architecture” from the International Journal of American Linguistics,
vol. 16, no. 2, and vol. 19, no. 2.

To Leslie Spier, editor, for “The relation of habitual thought and
behavior to language” from Language, Culture, and Personality, pp. 75–93
(Menasha, Wis.; Sapir Memorial Publication Fund, 1941).

To Dr. Leonard Carmichael, secretary, Smithsonian Institution, for
“Decipherment of the linguistic portion of the Maya hieroglyphs” from
The Smithsonian Report for 1941, pp. 479–502.

To Dr. N. Sri Ram, president, the Theosophical Society, for “Language,
mind, and reality” from The Theosophist, January 1942.

The illustrations for several of Whorf’s papers in this volume have been
specially redrawn by J. Martin Rosse, who prepared illustrations for
Whorf’s Technology Review papers in 1940 and 1941 from rough sketches
which Whorf himself had supplied.

I am indebted to several persons for furnishing information and
documents which were necessary to the preparation of this edition. Dr.
George L. Trager helped me decide which of Whorf’s writings should be
included. Professor C. F. Voegelin supplied numerous scarce reprints,
and a manuscript copy of “Language: plan and conception of arrangement”
was lent by Professor Norman McQuown. Professor Herbert Hackett provided
several bibliographical items which I might have otherwise missed.

I am particularly grateful to several members of the Whorf family for
their kindness in granting me interviews: to Whorf’s widow, Mrs. Celia
Peckham Whorf, and to his brother, John Whorf of Provincetown,
Massachusetts. Special thanks are due to Whorf’s son, Robert Peckham
Whorf, for allowing me to spend several days at his home examining
Whorf’s papers and correspondence, and for permitting me to borrow a
number of his manuscripts, some of which are printed in this volume for
the first time.

Arlington, Massachusetts

June, 1955

 

1. Nevertheless, Whorf often combined business with science on these
trips. In the course of the field trip to Mexico in 1930, he inspected
the Mexico City agency of the company and wrote a comprehensive report
of his findings and recommendations.

2. My own acquaintance with Whorf developed as a consequence of my
attending a lecture he gave at the Children’s Museum of Hartford,
December 1, 1929. The title of the lecture, announced as a “chalk talk,”
was “The Aztec and Maya Indians of Mexico.”

3. Miss Redfield, for some years a resident of Hartford, also translated
several other works by Fabre d’Olivet.

4. In 1952 the Watkinson Library was removed to spacious and modern
quarters at Trinity College in Hartford.

5. See the bibliography of Whorf’s writings, pp. 377–383 in this volume.

6. The material on the sa- group was considerably reworked before
publication in the monograph “The phonetic value of certain characters
in Maya writing” (1933), p. 11.

7. Edward Sapir, “A study in phonetic symbolism,” J. exp. Psychol.,
12:225–239 (1929).

1
