Languages and Logic

In English, the sentences ‘I pull the branch aside’ and ‘I have an extra
toe on my foot’ have little similarity. Leaving out the subject pronoun
and the sign of the present tense, which are common features from
requirements of English syntax, we may say that no similarity exists.
Common, and even scientific, parlance would say that the sentences are
unlike because they are talking about things which are intrinsically
unlike. So Mr. Everyman, the natural logician, would be inclined to
argue. Formal logic of an older type would perhaps agree with him.

If, moreover, we appeal to an impartial scientific English-speaking
observer, asking him to make direct observations upon cases of the two
phenomena to see if they may not have some element of similarity which
we have overlooked, he will be more than likely to confirm the dicta of
Mr. Everyman and the logician. The observer whom we have asked to make
the test may not see quite eye to eye with the old-school logician and
would not be disappointed to find him wrong. Still he is compelled sadly
to confess failure. “I wish I could oblige you,” he says, “but try as I
may, I cannot detect any similarity between these phenomena.”

By this time our stubborn streak is aroused; we wonder if a being from
Mars would also see no resemblance. But now a linguist points out that
it is not necessary to go as far as Mars. We have not yet scouted around
this earth to see if its many languages all classify these phenomena as
disparately as our speech does. We find that in Shawnee these two
statements are, respectively, ni-l’θawa-’ko-n-a and ni-l’θawa-’ko-θite
(the θ here denotes th as in ‘thin’ and the apostrophe denotes a
breath-catch). The sentences are closely similar; in fact, they differ
only at the tail end. In Shawnee, moreover, the beginning of a
construction is generally the important and emphatic part. Both
sentences start with ni- (‘I’), which is a mere prefix. Then comes the
really important key word, l’θawa, a common Shawnee term, denoting a
forked outline, like Fig. 17.1, no. 1. The next element, -’ko, we cannot
be sure of, but it agrees in form with a variant of the suffix -a’kw or
-a’ko, denoting tree, bush, tree part, branch, or anything of that
general shape. In the first sentence, -n- means ‘by hand action’ and may
be either a causation of the basic condition (forked outline) manually,
an increase of it, or both. The final -a means that the subject (‘I’)
does this action to an appropriate object. Hence the first sentence
means ‘I pull it (something like branch of tree) more open or apart
where it forks.’ In the other sentence, the suffix -θite means
‘pertaining to the toes,’ and the absence of further suffixes means that
the subject manifests the condition in his own person. Therefore the
sentence can mean only ‘I have an extra toe forking out like a branch
from a normal toe.’

[Figure 17.1]

Figure 17.1

Suggested above are certain linguistic concepts which, as explained in
the text, are not easily definable.

Shawnee logicians and observers would class the two phenomena as
intrinsically similar. Our own observer, to whom we tell all this,
focuses his instruments again upon the two phenomena and to his joy sees
at once a manifest resemblance. Figure 17.2 illustrates a similar
situation: ‘I push his head back’ and ‘I drop it in water and it
floats,’ though very dissimilar sentences in English, are similar in
Shawnee. The point of view of linguistic relativity changes Mr.
Everyman’s dictum: Instead of saying, “Sentences are unlike because they
tell about unlike facts,” he now reasons: “Facts are unlike to speakers
whose language background provides for unlike formulation of them.”

[Figure 17.2]

Figure 17.2

The English sentences ‘I push his head back’ and ‘I drop it in water and
it floats’ are unlike. But in Shawnee the corresponding statements are
closely similar, emphasizing the fact that analysis of nature and
classification of events as like or in the same category (logic) are
governed by grammar.

Conversely, the English sentences, ‘The boat is grounded on the beach’
and ‘The boat is manned by picked men,’ seem to us to be rather similar.
Each is about a boat; each tells the relation of the boat to other
objects—or that’s OUR story. The linguist would point out the
parallelism in grammatical pattern thus: “The boat is xed preposition
y.” The logician might turn the linguist’s analysis into “A is in the
state x in relation to y,” and then perhaps into fA = xRy. Such symbolic
methods lead to fruitful techniques of rational ordering, stimulate our
thinking, and bring valuable insight. Yet we should realize that the
similarities and contrasts in the original sentences, subsumed under the
foregoing formula, are dependent on the choice of mother tongue and that
the properties of the tongue are eventually reflected as peculiarities
of structure in the fabric of logic or mathematics which we rear.

In the Nootka language of Vancouver Island, the first “boat” statement
is tlih-is-ma; the second, lash-tskwiq-ista-ma. The first is thus
I-II-ma; the second, III-IV-V-ma; and they are quite unlike, for the
final -ma is only the sign of the third-person indicative. Neither
sentence contains any unit of meaning akin to our word ‘boat’ or even
‘canoe.’ Part I, in the first sentence, means ‘moving pointwise,’ or
moving in a way like the suggestion of the outline in Fig. 17.1, no. 2;
hence ‘traveling in or as a canoe,’ or an event like one position of
such motion. It is not a name for what we should call a “thing,” but is
more like a vector in physics. Part II means ‘on the beach’; hence
I-II-ma means ‘it is on the beach pointwise as an event of canoe
motion,’ and would normally refer to a boat that has come to land. In
the other sentence, part III means ‘select, pick,’ and IV means
‘remainder, result,’ so that III-IV means ‘selected.’ Part V means ‘in a
canoe (boat) as crew.’ The whole, III-IV-V-ma, means either ‘they are in
the boat as a crew of picked men’ or ‘the boat has a crew of picked
men.’ It means that the whole event involving picked ones and boat’s
crew is in process.

As a hang-over from my education in chemical engineering, I relish an
occasional chemical simile. Perhaps readers will catch what I mean when
I say that the way the constituents are put together in these sentences
of Shawnee and Nootka suggests a chemical compound, whereas their
combination in English is more like a mechanical mixture. A mixture,
like the mountaineer’s potlicker, can be assembled out of almost
anything and does not make any sweeping transformation of the overt
appearance of the material. A chemical compound, on the other hand, can
be put together only out of mutually suited ingredients, and the result
may be not merely soup but a crop of crystals or a cloud of smoke.
Likewise the typical Shawnee or Nootka combinations appear to work with
a vocabulary of terms chosen with a view not so much to the utility of
their immediate references as to the ability of the terms to combine
suggestively with each other in manifold ways that elicit novel and
useful images. This principle of terminology and way of analyzing events
would seem to be unknown to the tongues with which we are familiar.

It is the analysis of nature down to a basic vocabulary capable of this
sort of evocative recombination which is most distinctive of
polysynthetic languages, like Nootka and Shawnee. Their characteristic
quality is not, as some linguists have thought, a matter of the
tightness or indissolubility of the combinations. The Shawnee term
l’θawa could probably be said alone but would then mean ‘it (or
something) is forked,’ a statement which gives little hint of the novel
meanings that arise out of its combinations—at least to our minds or our
type of logic. Shawnee and Nootka do not use the chemical type of
synthesis exclusively. They make large use of a more external kind of
syntax, which, however, has no basic structural priority. Even our own
Indo-European tongues are not wholly devoid of the chemical method, but
they seldom make sentences by it, afford little inkling of its
possibilities, and give structural priority to another method. It was
quite natural, then, that Aristotle should found our traditional logic
wholly on this other method.

Let me make another analogy, not with chemistry but with art—art of the
pictorial sort. We look at a good still-life painting and seem to see a
lustrous porcelain bowl and a downy peach. Yet an analysis that screened
out the totality of the picture—as if we were to go over it carefully,
looking through a hole cut in a card—would reveal only oddly shaped
patches of paint and would not evoke the bowl and fruit. The synthesis
presented by the painting is perhaps akin to the chemical type of
syntax, and it may point to psychological fundamentals that enter into
both art and language. Now the mechanical method in art and language
might be typified by no. 3A in Fig. 17.1. The first element, a field of
spots, corresponds to the adjective ‘spotted,’ the second corresponds to
the noun ‘cat.’ By putting them together, we get ‘spotted cat.’ Contrast
the technique in Fig. 17.1, no. 3B. Here the figure corresponding to
‘cat’ has only vague meaning by itself—“chevron-like,” we might
say—while the first element is even vaguer. But, combined, these evoke a
cylindrical object, like a shaft casting.

The thing common to both techniques is a systematic synthetic use of
pattern, and this is also common to all language techniques. I have put
question marks below the elements in Fig. 17.1, no. 3B, to point out the
difficulty of a parallel in English speech and the fact that the method
probably has no standing in traditional logic. Yet examination of other
languages and the possibility of new types of logic that has been
advanced by modern logicians themselves suggest that this matter may be
significant for modern science. New types of logic may help us
eventually to understand how it is that electrons, the velocity of
light, and other components of the subject matter of physics appear to
behave illogically, or that phenomena which flout the sturdy common
sense of yesteryear can nevertheless be true. Modern thinkers have long
since pointed out that the so-called mechanistic way of thinking has
come to an impasse before the great frontier problems of science. To rid
ourselves of this way of thinking is exceedingly difficult when we have
no linguistic experience of any other and when even our most advanced
logicians and mathematicians do not provide any other—and obviously they
cannot without the linguistic experience. For the mechanistic way of
thinking is perhaps just a type of syntax natural to Mr. Everyman’s
daily use of the western Indo-European languages, rigidified and
intensified by Aristotle and the latter’s medieval and modern followers.

As I said in an article, “Science and linguistics,” in the Review for
April 1940, the effortlessness of speech and the subconscious way we
picked up that activity in early childhood lead us to regard talking and
thinking as wholly straightforward and transparent. We naturally feel
that they embody self-evident laws of thought, the same for all men. We
know all the answers! But, when scrutinized, they become dusty answers.
We use speech for reaching agreements about subject matter: I say,
“Please shut the door,” and my hearer and I agree that ‘the door’ refers
to a certain part of our environment and that I want a certain result
produced. Our explanations of how we reached this understanding, though
quite satisfactory on the everyday social plane, are merely more
agreements (statements) about the same subject matter (door, and so on),
more and more amplified by statements about the social and personal
needs that impel us to communicate. There are here no laws of thought.
Yet the structural regularities of our sentences enable us to sense that
laws are SOMEWHERE in the background. Clearly, explanations of
understanding such as “And so I ups and says to him, says I; see here,
why don’t you . . . !” evade the true process by which ‘he’ and ‘I’ are
in communication. Likewise psychological-social descriptions of the
social and emotional needs that impel people to communicate with their
fellows tend to be learned versions of the same method and, while
interesting, still evade the question. In similar case is evasion of the
question by skipping from the speech sentence, via physiology and
“stimuli” to the social situation.

The WHY of understanding may remain for a long time mysterious; but the
HOW or logic of understanding—its background of laws or regularities—is
discoverable. It is the grammatical background of our mother tongue,
which includes not only our way of constructing propositions but the way
we dissect nature and break up the flux of experience into objects and
entities to construct propositions about. This fact is important for
science, because it means that science CAN have a rational or logical
basis even though it be a relativistic one and not Mr. Everyman’s
natural logic. Although it may vary with each tongue, and a planetary
mapping of the dimensions of such variation may be necessitated, it is,
nevertheless, a basis of logic with discoverable laws. Science is not
compelled to see its thinking and reasoning procedures turned into
processes merely subservient to social adjustments and emotional drives.

Moreover, the tremendous importance of language cannot, in my opinion,
be taken to mean necessarily that nothing is back of it of the nature of
what has traditionally been called “mind.” My own studies suggest, to
me, that language, for all its kingly role, is in some sense a
superficial embroidery upon deeper processes of consciousness, which are
necessary before any communication, signaling, or symbolism whatsoever
can occur, and which also can, at a pinch, effect communication (though
not true AGREEMENT) without language’s and without symbolism’s aid. I
mean “superficial” in the sense that all processes of chemistry, for
example, can be said to be superficial upon the deeper layer of physical
existence, which we know variously as intra-atomic, electronic, or
subelectronic. No one would take this statement to mean that chemistry
is UNIMPORTANT—indeed the whole point is that the more superficial can
mean the more important, in a definite operative sense. It may even be
in the cards that there is no such thing as “Language” (with a capital
L) at all! The statement that “thinking is a matter of LANGUAGE” is an
incorrect generalization of the more nearly correct idea that “thinking
is a matter of different tongues.” The different tongues are the real
phenomena and may generalize down not to any such universal as
“Language,” but to something better—called “sublinguistic” or
“superlinguistic”—and NOT ALTOGETHER unlike, even if much unlike, what
we now call “mental.” This generalization would not diminish, but would
rather increase, the importance of intertongue study for investigation
of this realm of truth.

Botanists and zoologists, in order to understand the world of living
species, found it necessary to describe the species in every part of the
globe and to add a time perspective by including the fossils. Then they
found it necessary to compare and contrast the species, to work out
families and classes, evolutionary descent, morphology, and taxonomy. In
linguistic science a similar attempt is under way. The far-off event
toward which this attempt moves is a new technology of language and
thought. Much progress has been made in classifying the languages of
earth into genetic families, each having descent from a single
precursor, and in tracing such developments through time. The result is
called “comparative linguistics.” Of even greater importance for the
future technology of thought is what might be called “contrastive
linguistics.” This plots the outstanding differences among tongues—in
grammar, logic, and general analysis of experience.

As I said in the April 1940 Review, segmentation of nature is an aspect
of grammar—one as yet little studied by grammarians. We cut up and
organize the spread and flow of events as we do, largely because,
through our mother tongue, we are parties to an agreement to do so, not
because nature itself is segmented in exactly that way for all to see.
Languages differ not only in how they build their sentences but also in
how they break down nature to secure the elements to put in those
sentences. This breakdown gives units of the lexicon. “Word” is not a
very good “word” for them; “lexeme” has been suggested, and “term” will
do for the present. By these more or less distinct terms we ascribe a
semifictitious isolation to parts of experience. English terms, like
‘sky, hill, swamp,’ persuade us to regard some elusive aspect of
nature’s endless variety as a distinct THING, almost like a table or
chair. Thus English and similar tongues lead us to think of the universe
as a collection of rather distinct objects and events corresponding to
words. Indeed this is the implicit picture of classical physics and
astronomy—that the universe is essentially a collection of detached
objects of different sizes.

The examples used by older logicians in dealing with this point are
usually unfortunately chosen. They tend to pick out tables and chairs
and apples on tables as test objects to demonstrate the object-like
nature of reality and its one-to-one correspondence with logic. Man’s
artifacts and the agricultural products he severs from living plants
have a unique degree of isolation; we may expect that languages will
have fairly isolated terms for them. The real question is: What do
different languages do, not with these artificially isolated objects but
with the flowing face of nature in its motion, color, and changing form;
with clouds, beaches, and yonder flight of birds? For, as goes our
segmentation of the face of nature, so goes our physics of the Cosmos.

Here we find differences in segmentation and selection of basic terms.
We might isolate something in nature by saying ‘It is a dripping
spring.’ Apache erects the statement on a verb ga: ‘be white (including
clear, uncolored, and so on).’ With a prefix n[LATIN SMALL LETTER O WITH
MACRON]- the meaning of downward motion enters: ‘whiteness moves
downward.’ Then tó, meaning both ‘water’ and ‘spring’ is prefixed. The
result corresponds to our ‘dripping spring,’ but synthetically it is ‘as
water, or springs, whiteness moves downward.’ How utterly unlike our way
of thinking! The same verb, ga, with a prefix that means ‘a place
manifests the condition’ becomes gohlga: ‘the place is white, clear; a
clearing, a plain.’ These examples show that some languages have means
of expression—chemical combination, as I called it—in which the separate
terms are not so separate as in English but flow together into plastic
synthetic creations. Hence such languages, which do not paint the
separate-object picture of the universe to the same degree as English
and its sister tongues, point toward possible new types of logic and
possible new cosmical pictures.

The Indo-European languages and many others give great prominence to a
type of sentence having two parts, each part built around a class of
word—substantives and verbs—which those languages treat differently in
grammar. As I showed in the April 1940 Review, this distinction is not
drawn from nature; it is just a result of the fact that every tongue
must have some kind of structure, and those tongues have made a go of
exploiting this kind. The Greeks, especially Aristotle, built up this
contrast and made it a law of reason. Since then, the contrast has been
stated in logic in many different ways: subject and predicate, actor and
action, things and relations between things, objects and their
attributes, quantities and operations. And, pursuant again to grammar,
the notion became ingrained that one of these classes of entities can
exist in its own right but that the verb class cannot exist without an
entity of the other class, the “thing” class, as a peg to hang on.
“Embodiment is necessary,” the watchword of this ideology, is seldom
strongly questioned. Yet the whole trend of modern physics, with its
emphasis on “the field,” is an implicit questioning of the ideology.
This contrast crops out in our mathematics as two kinds of symbols—the
kind like 1, 2, 3, x, y, z and the kind like +, −, ÷, [square root
symbol], log —, though, in view of 0, ½, ¾, π, and others, perhaps no
strict two-group classification holds. The two-group notion, however, is
always present at the back of the thinking, although often not overtly
expressed.

Our Indian languages show that with a suitable grammar we may have
intelligent sentences that cannot be broken into subjects and
predicates. Any attempted breakup is a breakup of some English
translation or paraphrase of the sentence, not of the Indian sentence
itself. We might as well try to decompose a certain synthetic resin into
Celluloid and whiting because the resin can be imitated with Celluloid
and whiting. The Algonkian language family, to which Shawnee belongs,
does use a type of sentence like our subject and predicate but also
gives prominence to the type shown by our examples in the text and in
Fig. 17.1. To be sure, ni- is represented by a subject in the
translation but means ‘my’ as well as ‘I,’ and the sentence could be
translated thus: ‘My hand is pulling the branch aside.’ Or ni- might be
absent; if so, we should be apt to manufacture a subject, like ‘he, it,
somebody,’ or we could pick out for our English subject an idea
corresponding to any one of the Shawnee elements.

When we come to Nootka, the sentence without subject or predicate is the
only type. The term “predication” is used, but it means “sentence.”
Nootka has no parts of speech; the simplest utterance is a sentence,
treating of some event or event-complex. Long sentences are sentences of
sentences (complex sentences), not just sentences of words. In Fig. 17.3
we have a simple, not a complex, Nootka sentence. The translation, ‘he
invites people to a feast,’ splits into subject and predicate. Not so
the native sentence. It begins with the event of ‘boiling or cooking,’
tl’imsh; then comes -ya (‘result’) = ‘cooked’; then -’is ‘eating’ =
‘eating cooked food’; then -ita (‘those who do’) = ‘eaters of cooked
food’; then -’itl (‘going for’); then -ma, sign of third-person
indicative, giving tl’imshya’isita’itlma, which answers to the crude
paraphrase, ‘he, or somebody, goes for (invites) eaters of cooked food.’

[Figure 17.3]

Figure 17.3

Here are shown the different ways in which English and Nootka formulate
the same event. The English sentence is divisible into subject and
predicate; the Nootka sentence is not, yet it is complete and logical.
Furthermore, the Nootka sentence is just one word, consisting of the
root tl’imsh with five suffixes.

The English technique of talking depends on the contrast of two
artificial classes, substantives and verbs, and on the bipartitioned
ideology of nature, already discussed. Our normal sentence, unless
imperative, must have some substantive before its verb, a requirement
that corresponds to the philosophical and also naïve notion of an actor
who produces an action. This last might not have been so if English had
had thousands of verbs like ‘hold,’ denoting positions. But most of our
verbs follow a type of segmentation that isolates from nature what we
call “actions,” that is, moving outlines.

Following majority rule, we therefore read action into every sentence,
even into ‘I hold it.’ A moment’s reflection will show that ‘hold’ is no
action but a state of relative positions. Yet we think of it and even
see it as an action because language formulates it in the same way as it
formulates more numerous expressions, like ‘I strike it,’ which deal
with movements and changes.

We are constantly reading into nature fictional acting entities, simply
because our verbs must have substantives in front of them. We have to
say ‘It flashed’ or ‘A light flashed,’ setting up an actor, ‘it’ or
‘light,’ to perform what we call an action, “to flash.” Yet the flashing
and the light are one and the same! The Hopi language reports the flash
with a simple verb, rehpi: ‘flash (occurred).’ There is no division into
subject and predicate, not even a suffix like -t of Latin tona-t ‘it
thunders.’ Hopi can and does have verbs without subjects, a fact which
may give that tongue potentialities, probably never to be developed, as
a logical system for understanding some aspects of the universe.
Undoubtedly modern science, strongly reflecting western Indo-European
tongues, often does as we all do, sees actions and forces where it
sometimes might be better to see states. On the other hand, ‘state’ is a
noun, and as such it enjoys the superior prestige traditionally
attaching to the subject or thing class; therefore science is
exceedingly ready to speak of states if permitted to manipulate the
concept like a noun. Perhaps, in place of the ‘states’ of an atom or a
dividing cell, it would be better if we could manipulate as readily a
more verblike concept but without the concealed premises of actor and
action.

I can sympathize with those who say, “Put it into plain, simple
English,” especially when they protest against the empty formalism of
loading discourse with pseudolearned words. But to restrict thinking to
the patterns merely of English, and especially to those patterns which
represent the acme of plainness in English, is to lose a power of
thought which, once lost, can never be regained. It is the “plainest”
English which contains the greatest number of unconscious assumptions
about nature. This is the trouble with schemes like Basic English, in
which an eviscerated British English, with its concealed premises
working harder than ever, is to be fobbed off on an unsuspecting world
as the substance of pure Reason itself. We handle even our plain English
with much greater effect if we direct it from the vantage point of a
multilingual awareness. For this reason I believe that those who
envision a future world speaking only one tongue, whether English,
German, Russian, or any other, hold a misguided ideal and would do the
evolution of the human mind the greatest disservice. Western culture has
made, through language, a provisional analysis of reality and, without
correctives, holds resolutely to that analysis as final. The only
correctives lie in all those other tongues which by aeons of independent
evolution have arrived at different, but equally logical, provisional
analyses.

In a valuable paper, “Modern logic and the task of the natural
sciences,” Harold N. Lee says: “Those sciences whose data are subject to
quantitative measurement have been most successfully developed because
we know so little about order systems other than those exemplified in
mathematics. We can say with certainty, however, that there are other
kinds, for the advance of logic in the last half century has clearly
indicated it. We may look for advances in many lines in sciences at
present well founded if the advance of logic furnishes adequate
knowledge of other order types. We may also look for many subjects of
inquiry whose methods are not strictly scientific at the present time to
become so when new order systems are available.”¹ To which may be added
that an important field for the working out of new order systems, akin
to, yet not identical with, present mathematics, lies in more
penetrating investigation than has yet been made of languages remote in
type from our own.

 

Reprinted from Technol. Rev., 43:250–252, 266, 268, 272 (April 1941).

1. Sigma Xi Quart., 28:125 (Autumn 1940).

18

Language, Mind, and Reality

I

It needs but half an eye to see in these latter days that science, the
Grand Revelator of modern Western culture, has reached, without having
intended to, a frontier. Either it must bury its dead, close its ranks,
and go forward into a landscape of increasing strangeness, replete with
things shocking to a culture-trammeled understanding, or it must become,
in Claude Houghton’s expressive phrase, the plagiarist of its own past.
The frontier was foreseen in principle very long ago, and given a name
that has descended to our day clouded with myth. That name is Babel. For
science’s long and heroic effort to be strictly factual has at last
brought it into entanglement with the unsuspected facts of the
linguistic order. These facts the older classical science had never
admitted, confronted, or understood as facts. Instead they had entered
its house by the back door and had been taken for the substance of
Reason itself.

What we call “scientific thought” is a specialization of the western
Indo-European type of language, which has developed not only a set of
different dialectics, but actually a set of different dialects. THESE
DIALECTS ARE NOW BECOMING MUTUALLY UNINTELLIGIBLE. The term ‘space,’ for
instance, does not and cannot mean the same thing to a psychologist as
to a physicist. Even if psychologists should firmly resolve, come hell
or high water, to use “space” only with the physicist’s meaning, they
could not do so, any more than Englishmen could use in English the word
‘sentiment’ in the meanings which the similarly spelled but functionally
different French utterance le sentiment has in its native French.

Now this does not simply breed confusions of mere detail that an expert
translator could perhaps resolve. It does something much more
perplexing. Every language and every well-knit technical sublanguage
incorporates certain points of view and certain patterned resistances to
widely divergent points of view. This is especially so if language is
not surveyed as a planetary phenomenon, but is as usual taken for
granted, and the local, parochial species of it used by the individual
thinker is taken to be its full sum. These resistances not only isolate
artificially the particular sciences from each other; they also restrain
the scientific spirit as a whole from taking the next great step in
development—a step which entails viewpoints unprecedented in science and
a complete severance from traditions. For certain linguistic patterns
rigidified in the dialectics of the sciences—often also embedded in the
matrix of European culture from which those sciences have sprung, and
long worshipped as pure Reason per se—have been worked to death. Even
science senses that they are somehow out of focus for observing what may
be very significant aspects of reality, upon the due observation of
which all further progress in understanding the universe may hinge.

  

Thus one of the important coming steps for Western knowledge is a
re-examination of the linguistic backgrounds of its thinking, and for
that matter of all thinking. My purpose in developing this subject
before a Theosophical audience is not to confirm or affirm any
Theosophical doctrines. It is rather that, of all groups of people with
whom I have come in contact, Theosophical people seem the most capable
of becoming excited about ideas—new ideas. And my task is to explain an
idea to all those who, if Western culture survives the present welter of
barbarism, may be pushed by events to leadership in reorganizing the
whole human future.

This idea is one too drastic to be penned up in a catch phrase. I would
rather leave it unnamed. It is the view that a noumenal world—a world of
hyperspace, of higher dimensions—awaits discovery by all the sciences,
which it will unite and unify, awaits discovery under its first aspect
of a realm of PATTERNED RELATIONS, inconceivably manifold and yet
bearing a recognizable affinity to the rich and systematic organization
of LANGUAGE, including au fond mathematics and music, which are
ultimately of the same kindred as language. The idea is older than
Plato, and at the same time as new as our most revolutionary thinkers.
It is implied in Whitehead’s world of prehensive aspects, and in
relativity physics with its four-dimensional continuum and its
Riemann-Christoffel tensor that sums up the PROPERTIES OF THE WORLD at
any point-moment; while one of the most thought-provoking of all modern
presentations, and I think the most original, is the Tertium Organum of
Ouspensky. All that I have to say on the subject that may be new is of
the PREMONITION IN LANGUAGE of the unknown, vaster world—that world of
which the physical is but a surface or skin, and yet which we ARE IN,
and BELONG TO. For the approach to reality through mathematics, which
modern knowledge is beginning to make, is merely the approach through
one special case of this relation to language.

This view implies that what I have called patterns are basic in a really
cosmic sense, and that patterns form wholes, akin to the Gestalten of
psychology, which are embraced in larger wholes in continual
progression. Thus the cosmic picture has a serial or hierarchical
character, that of a progression of planes or levels. Lacking
recognition of such serial order, different sciences chop segments, as
it were, out of the world, segments which perhaps cut across the
direction of the natural levels, or stop short when, upon reaching a
major change of level, the phenomena become of quite different type, or
pass out of the ken of the older observational methods.

But in the science of linguistics, the facts of the linguistic domain
compel recognition of serial planes, each explicitly given by an order
of patterning observed. It is as if, looking at a wall covered with fine
tracery of lacelike design, we found that this tracery served as the
ground for a bolder pattern, yet still delicate, of tiny flowers, and
that upon becoming aware of this floral expanse we saw that multitudes
of gaps in it made another pattern like scrollwork, and that groups of
scrolls made letters, the letters if followed in a proper sequence made
words, the words were aligned in columns which listed and classified
entities, and so on in continual cross-patterning until we found this
wall to be—a great book of wisdom!

  

First, the plane “below” the strictly linguistic phenomena is a
physical, acoustic one, phenomena wrought of sound waves; then comes a
level of patterning in rippling muscles and speech organs, the
physiological-phonetic plane; then the phonemic plane, patterning that
makes a systematic set of consonants, vowels, accents, tones, etc. for
each language; then the morphophonemic plane in which the “phonemes” of
the previous level appear combined into “morphemes” (words and subwords
like suffixes, etc.); then the plane of morphology; then that of the
intricate, largely unconscious patterning that goes by the meaningless
name of syntax; then on to further planes still, the full import of
which may some day strike and stagger us.

Speech is the best show man puts on. It is his own “act” on the stage of
evolution, in which he comes before the cosmic backdrop and really “does
his stuff.” But we suspect the watching Gods perceive that the order in
which his amazing set of tricks builds up to a great climax has been
stolen—from the Universe!

The idea, entirely unfamiliar to the modern world, that nature and
language are inwardly akin, was for ages well known to various high
cultures whose historical continuity on the earth has been enormously
longer than that of Western European culture. In India, one aspect of it
has been the idea of the MANTRAM and of a MANTRIC ART. On the simplest
cultural level, a mantram is merely an incantation of primitive magic,
such as the crudest cultures have. In the high culture it may have a
different, a very intellectual meaning, dealing with the inner affinity
of language and the cosmic order. At a still higher level, it becomes
“Mantra Yoga.” Therein the mantram becomes a manifold of conscious
patterns, contrived to assist the consciousness into the noumenal
pattern world—whereupon it is “in the driver’s seat.” It can then set
the human organism to transmit, control, and amplify a thousandfold
forces which that organism normally transmits only at unobservably low
intensities.

Somewhat analogously, the mathematical formula that enables a physicist
to adjust some coils of wire, tinfoil plates, diaphragms, and other
quite inert and innocent gadgets into a configuration in which they can
project music to a far country puts the physicist’s consciousness on to
a level strange to the untrained man, and makes feasible an adjustment
of matter to a very strategic configuration, one which makes possible an
unusual manifestation of force. Other formulas make possible the
strategic arrangement of magnets and wires in the powerhouse so that,
when the magnets (or rather the field of subtle forces, in and around
the magnets) are set in motion, force is manifested in the way we call
an electric current. We do not think of the designing of a radio station
or a power plant as a linguistic process, but it is one nonetheless. The
necessary mathematics is a linguistic apparatus, and, without its
correct specification of essential patterning, the assembled gadgets
would be out of proportion and adjustment, and would remain inert. But
the mathematics used in such a case is a SPECIALIZED formula-language,
contrived for making available a specialized type of force manifestation
through metallic bodies only, namely, ELECTRICITY as we today define
what we call by that name. The mantric formula-language is specialized
in a different way, in order to make available a different type of force
manifestation, by repatterning states in the nervous system and
glands—or again rather in the subtle “electronic” or “etheric” forces in
and around those physical bodies. Those parts of the organism, until
such strategic patterning has been effected, are merely “innocent
gadgets,” as incapable of dynamic power as loose magnets and loose
wires, but IN THE PROPER PATTERN they are something else again—not to be
understood from the properties of the unpatterned parts, and able to
amplify and activate latent forces.

  

In this way I would link the subtle Eastern ideas of the mantric and
yogic use of language with the configurative or pattern aspect which is
so basic in language. But this brings me to the most important part of
my discussion. We must find out more about language! Already we know
enough about it to know it is not what the great majority of men, lay or
scientific, think it is. The fact that we talk almost effortlessly,
unaware of the exceedingly complex mechanism we are using, creates an
illusion. We think we know how it is done, that there is no mystery; we
have all the answers. Alas, what wrong answers! It is like the way a
man’s uncorrected sense impressions give him a picture of the universe
that is simple, sensible, and satisfying, but very wide of the truth.

Consider how the world appears to any man, however wise and experienced
in human life, who has never heard one word of what science has
discovered about the Cosmos. To him the earth is flat; the sun and moon
are shining objects of small size that pop up daily above an eastern
rim, move through the upper air, and sink below a western edge;
obviously they spend the night somewhere underground. The sky is an
inverted bowl made of some blue material. The stars, tiny and rather
near objects, seem as if they might be alive, for they “come out” from
the sky at evening like rabbits or rattlesnakes from their burrows, and
slip back again at dawn. “Solar system” has no meaning to him, and the
concept of a “law of gravitation” is quite unintelligible—nay, even
nonsensical. For him bodies do not fall because of a law of gravitation,
but rather “because there is nothing to hold them up”—i.e., because he
cannot imagine their doing anything else. He cannot conceive space
without an “up” and “down” or even without an “east” and “west” in it.
For him the blood does not circulate; nor does the heart pump blood; he
thinks it is a place where love, kindness, and thoughts are kept.
Cooling is not a removal of heat but an addition of “cold”; leaves are
green not from the chemical substance chlorophyll in them, but from the
“greenness” in them. It will be impossible to reason him out of these
beliefs. He will assert them as plain, hard-headed common sense; which
means that they satisfy him because they are completely adequate as a
SYSTEM OF COMMUNICATION between him and his fellow men. That is, they
are adequate LINGUISTICALLY to his social needs, and will remain so
until an additional group of needs is felt and is worked out in
language.

But as this man is in conception of the physical universe, of whose
scope and order he has not the faintest inkling, so all of us, from rude
savage to learned scholar, are in conception of language. Only the
science of linguistics has begun to penetrate a little into this realm,
its findings still largely unknown to the other disciplines. Natural
man, whether simpleton or scientist, knows no more of the linguistic
forces that bear upon him than the savage knows of gravitational forces.
He supposes that talking is an activity in which he is free and
untrammeled. He finds it a simple, transparent activity, for which he
has the necessary explanations. But these explanations turn out to be
nothing but statements of the NEEDS THAT IMPEL HIM TO COMMUNICATE. They
are not germane to the process by which he communicates. Thus he will
say that he thinks something, and supplies words for the thoughts “as
they come.” But his explanation of why he should have such and such
thoughts before he came to utter them again turns out to be merely the
story of his social needs at that moment. It is a dusty answer that
throws no light. But then he supposes that there need be no light thrown
on this talking process, since he can manipulate it anyhow quite well
for his social needs. Thus he implies, wrongly, that thinking is an
obvious, straightforward activity, the same for all rational beings, of
which language is the straightforward expression.

 

Actually, thinking is most mysterious, and by far the greatest light
upon it that we have is thrown by the study of language. This study
shows that the forms of a person’s thoughts are controlled by inexorable
laws of pattern of which he is unconscious. These patterns are the
unperceived intricate systematizations of his own language—shown readily
enough by a candid comparison and contrast with other languages,
especially those of a different linguistic family. His thinking itself
is in a language—in English, in Sanskrit, in Chinese.¹ And every
language is a vast pattern-system, different from others, in which are
culturally ordained the forms and categories by which the personality
not only communicates, but also analyzes nature, notices or neglects
types of relationship and phenomena, channels his reasoning, and builds
the house of his consciousness.

This doctrine is new to Western science, but it stands on unimpeachable
evidence. Moreover, it is known, or something like it is known, to the
philosophies of India and to modern Theosophy. This is masked by the
fact that the philosophical Sanskrit terms do not supply the exact
equivalent of my term “language” in the broad sense of the linguistic
order. The linguistic order embraces all symbolism, all symbolic
processes, all processes of reference and of logic. Terms like N[LATIN
SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]ma refer rather to subgrades of this
order—the lexical level, the phonetic level. The nearest equivalent is
probably Manas, to which our vague word ‘mind’ hardly does justice.
Manas in a broad sense is a major hierarchical grade in the
world-structure—a “manasic plane” as it is indeed explicitly called.
Here again “mental plane” is apt to be misleading to an English-speaking
person. English “mental” is an unfortunate word, a word whose function
in our culture is often only to stand in lieu of an intelligent
explanation, and which connotes rather a foggy limbo than a cosmic
structural order characterized by patterning. Sometimes Manas is used to
mean, however, simply the personal psyche; this according to Mr. Fritz
Kunz is the case in the famous saying of The Voice of the Silence: “The
mind is the great slayer of the real.”

It is said that in the plane of Manas there are two great levels, called
the R[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa and Ar[LATIN SMALL LETTER U
WITH MACRON]pa levels. The lower is the realm of “name and form,”
N[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]ma and R[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH
MACRON]pa. Here “form” means organization in space (“our”
three-dimensional space). This is far from being coextensive with
pattern in a universal sense. And N[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]ma,
‘name,’ is not language or the linguistic order, but only one level in
it, the level of the process of “lexation” or of giving words (names) to
parts of the whole manifold of experience, parts which are thereby made
to stand out in a semi-fictitious isolation. Thus a word like ‘sky,’
which in English can be treated like ‘board’ (the sky, a sky, skies,
some skies, piece of sky, etc.), leads us to think of a mere optical
apparition in ways appropriate only to relatively isolated solid bodies.
‘Hill’ and ‘swamp’ persuade us to regard local variations in altitude or
soil composition of the ground as distinct THINGS almost like tables and
chairs. Each language performs this artificial chopping up of the
continuous spread and flow of existence in a different way. Words and
speech are not the same thing. As we shall see, the patterns of sentence
structure that guide words are more important than the words.

Thus the level of R[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa and N[LATIN
SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]ma—shape-segmentation and vocabulary—is part
of the linguistic order, but a somewhat rudimentary and not
self-sufficient part. It depends upon a higher level of organization,
the level at which its COMBINATORY SCHEME appears. This is the Ar[LATIN
SMALL LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa level—the pattern world par excellence.
Ar[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa, ‘formless,’ does not mean
without linguistic form or organization, but without reference to
spatial, visual shape, marking out in space, which as we saw with ‘hill’
and ‘swamp’ is an important feature of reference on the lexical level.
Ar[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa is a realm of patterns that can
be “actualized” in space and time in the materials of lower planes, but
are themselves indifferent to space and time. Such patterns are not like
the meanings of words, but they are somewhat like the way meaning
appears in sentences. They are not like individual sentences but like
SCHEMES of sentences and designs of sentence structure. Our personal
conscious “minds” can understand such patterns in a limited way by using
mathematical or grammatical FORMULAS into which words, values,
quantities, etc., can be substituted. A rather simple instance will be
given presently.

It is within the possibilities of the “culture of consciousness” that
the Ar[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa level of the “mental” plane
may be contacted directly in an expansion of consciousness. In
Ouspensky’s book, A New Model of the Universe, there are arresting
glimpses of extraordinary mental states which that philosopher attained
—adumbrations only, for these completely “nonlexical” vistas cannot be
well put into words. He speaks of realms of “moving hieroglyphs”
composed entirely of “mathematical relations,” and of the expansion and
ramification of such a “hieroglyph” till it covered a whole aspect of
the universe. Ouspensky’s mathematical predilections and his study of
such things as non-Euclidean geometries, hyperspace, and the relation
between time and consciousness may have led him to stress mathematical
analogies. Mathematics is a special kind of language, expanded out of
special sentences containing the numeral words, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . x, y,
z, etc. But every other type of sentence of every language is also the
potential nucleus of a far-reaching system. To very few is it granted to
attain such consciousness as a durable state; yet many mathematicians
and scientific linguists must have had the experience of “seeing,” in
one fugitive flash, a whole system of relationships never before
suspected of forming a unity. The harmony and scientific beauty in the
whole vast system momently overwhelms one in a flood of aesthetic
delight. To “see,” for instance, how all the English elementary sounds
(“phonemes”) and their groupings are coordinated by an intricate yet
systematic law into all possible forms of English monosyllabic words,
meaningful or nonsensical, existent or still unthought of, excluding all
other forms as inevitably as the chemical formula of a solution
precludes all but certain shapes of crystals from emerging—this might be
a distinct experience.

 

To show the full formula for this law or pattern—a so-called
“morphophonemic structural formula”—I should need a large piece of
paper. I can however set up a condensed form of it as²

O,C − ng,C₁C₂,C₃C₄, etc. . . .

s ± C_(m)C_(n) + V + (V₁) O, ± (r, w, y);

C − h, C′₁C′₂, C′₃C′₄, etc. . . .

C′_(m)C′_(n) ± (t/d, s/z, st/zd).

This formula requires that the English words be symbolized or “spelt”
according to standard phonemic spelling of the type described by Leonard
Bloomfield in his book Language. In this system the diphthongal vowels
must be represented by a pure vowel (V) followed by w or y from the term
(r, w, y), so that ‘note’ is symbolized nowt (or newt, depending on the
dialect), ‘date’ is deyt, ‘ice’ is ays. That this is correct analysis on
the physical or acoustic level is shown by the fact that, if we reverse
a phonographic recording of ‘ice’ we get a sound like sya, and, if we
say sya properly into the phonograph and reverse it, the machine will
say ‘ice.’ For English this analysis happens to be exact also on the
structural level two stages above the acoustic one, for the ys of ays
(ice) is seen to be on the same line of pattern as the ls of els (else),
the ns of sins (since), the ts of hats, etc.—it is part of a general
architectonic scheme of having two consonants together.

Now, by reading the commas in the formula as “or,” we see that the
formula is equivalent to a large series of subsidiary formulas. One of
the simplest of these is O + V + C – h (see how it is contained in the
big formula) which means that the word can begin without a consonant and
with any one vowel, followed by any one consonant except h—giving us
words like ‘at, or, if.’ Changing the first term to the next symbol in
the big formula, we get C – ng + V + C – h, which means that the word,
ending as before, can begin with any single English consonant except the
ng sound as in ‘sing’ (this sound ought to be written with ONE  symbol,
but, in deference to the printer, I shall employ the usual digraph).
This pattern gives us the long array of words like ‘hat, bed, dog, man,’
and permits us to coin new ones like ‘tig, nem, zib’—but not, be it
noted, ngib or zih.

So far the patterns are simple. From now on they become intricate! The
formula in this abbreviated form needs along with it a series of lists
of assorted consonants, like so many laundry lists, each list being
represented by one of the symbols C₁, C₂, etc. The formula C₁C₂ means
that you can begin the word with any consonant out of list C₁ and follow
it with any from list C₂, which happens to contain only r and l. Since
C₁ contains p, b, f, for instance, we can have words like ‘pray, play,
brew, blew, free, flee,’ and the nonsensical ‘frig, blosh,’ etc. But
suppose we want a word beginning with sr, zr, tl, or dl. We go to our
list C₁, but to our surprise there is no s, z, t, or d, on it. We appear
to be stumped! We pick up our other lists, but are no better off. There
is no way of combining our lists according to the formula to get these
initial combinations. Evidently there just aren’t any such English
words; and what is more, any budding Lewis Carrolls or Edward Lears will
somehow mysteriously refuse to coin such words. This shows that
word-coining is no act of unfettered imagination, even in the wildest
flights of nonsense, but a strict use of already patterned materials. If
asked to invent forms not already prefigured in the patternment of his
language, the speaker is negative in the same manner as if asked to make
fried eggs without the eggs!

 

Thus the formula sums up every combination that English one-syllable
words or wordlike forms have, and bars out every one they do not and
cannot have. Contained in it is the mpst of ‘glimpsed,’ the ksths of
‘sixths,’ the ftht of ‘he fifthed it,’ the nchst of the queer but
possible ‘thou munchst it greedily,’ and multitudes of other “rugged
sounds which to our mouths grow sleek,” but which would have “made
Quintilian stare and gasp.” At the same time the formula bars out
numerous smooth but to us difficult (because unpatterned) combinations,
like litk, fpat, nwelng, dzogb, and a myriad more, all possible and easy
to some languages, but not to English.

It will be evident that implicit in our one-syllable words is an
undreamed-of complexity of organization, and that the old gag, “say it
in words of one syllable,” as a metaphor of simplicity, is from the
standpoint of a more penetrative insight the most arrant nonsense! Yet
to such insight this old cliché bears unconscious witness to the truth
that those who easily and fluently use the intricate systems of language
are utterly blind and deaf to the very existence of those systems, until
the latter have been, not without some difficulty, pointed out.

And the adage “as above, so below” applies strongly here. As below, on
the phonological plane of language, significant behavior is ruled by
pattern from outside the focus of personal consciousness, so is it on
the higher planes of language that we call expression of the thought. As
we shall see in Part II, thinking also follows a network of tracks laid
down in the given language, an organization which may concentrate
systematically upon certain phases of reality, certain aspects of
intelligence, and may systematically discard others featured by other
languages. The individual is utterly unaware of this organization and is
constrained completely within its unbreakable bonds.

II

We saw in Part I that, in linguistic and mental phenomena, significant
behavior (or what is the same, both behavior and significance, so far as
interlinked) are ruled by a specific system or organization, a
“geometry” of form principles characteristic of each language. This
organization is imposed from outside the narrow circle of the personal
consciousness, making of that consciousness a mere puppet whose
linguistic maneuverings are held in unsensed and unbreakable bonds of
pattern. It is as if the personal mind, which selects words but is
largely oblivious to pattern, were in the grip of a higher, far more
intellectual mind which has very little notion of houses and beds and
soup kettles, but can systematize and mathematize on a scale and scope
that no mathematician of the schools ever remotely approached.

And now appears a great fact of human brotherhood—that human beings are
all alike in this respect. So far as we can judge from the systematics
of language, the higher mind or “unconscious” of a Papuan headhunter can
mathematize quite as well as that of Einstein; and conversely, scientist
and yokel, scholar and tribesman, all use their personal consciousness
in the same dim-witted sort of way, and get into similar kinds of
logical impasse. They are as unaware of the beautiful and inexorable
systems that control them as a cowherd is of cosmic rays. Their
understanding of the processes involved in their talk and ratiocination
is a purely superficial, pragmatic one, comparable to little Sue Smith’s
understanding of the radio, which she turns on in such a way as to evoke
a bedtime story. Men even show a strong disposition to make a virtue of
this ignorance, to condemn efforts at a better understanding of the
mind’s workings as “impractical,” or as “theories” if the condemner
happens to be a yokel, or as “metaphysics” or “mysticism” or
“epistemology” if he happens to be wearing the traditionally correct
turnout of a scientist. Western culture in particular reserves for the
investigators of language its most grudging meed of recognition and its
meagerest rewards, even though it has to counter the natural human
tendency to find language, mysterious as it is, the most fascinating of
subjects—one about which men love to talk and speculate
unscientifically, to discuss endlessly the meaning of words, or the odd
speech of the man from Boston as it appears to the man of Oshkosh, or
vice versa.

The higher mind would seem to be able to do any kind of purely
intellectual feat, but not to “be conscious” on the personal level. That
is, it does not focus on practical affairs and on the personal ego in
its personal, immediate environment. Certain dreams and exceptional
mental states may lead us to suppose it to be conscious on its own
plane, and occasionally its consciousness may “come through” to the
personality; but, barring techniques like Yoga, it ordinarily makes no
nexus with the personal consciousness. We could call it a higher ego,
bearing in mind a distinctive trait, appearing through every language,
and its one striking resemblance to the personal self; namely, that it
organizes its systems around a nucleus of three or more pronominal
“person” categories, centered upon one we call the first-person
singular. It can function in any linguistic system—a child can learn any
language with the same readiness, from Chinese, with its separately
toned and stressed monosyllables, to Nootka of Vancouver Island, with
its frequent one-word sentences such as mamamamamahln’iqk’okmaqama—‘they
each did so because of their characteristic of resembling white
people.’³

 

Because of the systematic, configurative nature of higher mind, the
“patternment” aspect of language always overrides and controls the
“lexation” (N[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]ma) or name-giving
aspect. Hence the meanings of specific words are less important than we
fondly fancy. Sentences, not words, are the essence of speech, just as
equations and functions, and not bare numbers, are the real meat of
mathematics. We are all mistaken in our common belief that any word has
an “exact meaning.” We have seen that the higher mind deals in symbols
that have no fixed reference to anything, but are like blank checks, to
be filled in as required, that stand for “any value” of a given
variable, like the C’s and V’s in the formula cited in Part I, or the x,
y, z of algebra. There is a queer Western notion that the ancients who
invented algebra made a great discovery, though the human unconscious
has been doing the same sort of thing for eons! For the same reason the
ancient Mayas or the ancient Hindus, in their staggering cycles upon
cycles of astronomical numbers, were simply being human. We should not
however make the mistake of thinking that words, even as used by the
lower personal mind, represent the opposite pole from these variable
symbols, that a word DOES  have an exact meaning, stands for a given
thing, is only ONE value of a variable.

Even the lower mind has caught something of the algebraic nature of
language; so that words are in between the variable symbols of pure
patternment (Ar[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa) and true fixed
quantities. That part of meaning which is in words, and which we may
call “reference,” is only relatively fixed. Reference of words is at the
mercy of the sentences and grammatical patterns in which they occur. And
it is surprising to what a minimal amount this element of reference may
be reduced. The sentence “I went all the way down there just in order to
see Jack” contains only one fixed concrete reference: namely, “Jack.”
The rest is pattern attached to nothing specifically; even “see”
obviously does not mean what one might suppose, namely, to receive a
visual image.

Or, again, in word reference we deal with size by breaking it into size
classes—small, medium, large, immense, etc.—but size objectively is not
divided into classes, but is a pure continuum of relativity. Yet we
think of size constantly as a set of classes because language has
segmented and named the experience in this way. Number words may refer
not to number as counted, but to number classes with elastic boundaries.
Thus English ‘few’ adjusts its range according to the size, importance
or rarity of the reference. A ‘few’ kings, battleships, or diamonds
might be only three or four, a ‘few’ peas, raindrops, or tea leaves
might be thirty or forty.

You may say, “Yes, of course this is true of words like large, small,
and the like; they are obviously relative terms, but words like dog,
tree, house, are different—each names a specific thing.” Not so; these
terms are in the same boat as ‘large’ and ‘small.’ The word ‘Fido’ said
by a certain person at a certain time may refer to a specific thing, but
the word ‘dog’ refers to a class with elastic limits. The limits of such
classes are different in different languages. You might think that
‘tree’ means the same thing, everywhere and to everybody. Not at all.
The Polish word that means ‘tree’ also includes the meaning ‘wood.’ The
context or sentence pattern determines what sort of object the Polish
word (or any word, in any language) refers to. In Hopi, an American
Indian language of Arizona, the word for ‘dog,’ pohko, includes pet
animal or domestic animal of any kind. Thus ‘pet eagle’ in Hopi is
literally ‘eagle-dog’; and having thus fixed the context a Hopi might
next refer to the same eagle as so-and-so’s pohko.

 

But lest this be dismissed as the vagary of a “primitive” language (no
language is “primitive”), let us take another peep at our own beloved
English. Take the word “hand.” In ‘his hand’ it refers to a location on
the human body, in ‘hour hand’ to a strikingly dissimilar object, in
‘all hands on deck’ to another reference, in ‘a good hand at gardening’
to another, in ‘he held a good hand (at cards)’ to another, whereas in
‘he got the upper hand’ it refers to nothing but is dissolved into a
pattern of orientation. Or consider the word ‘bar’ in the phrases: ‘iron
bar, bar to progress, he should be behind bars, studied for the bar, let
down all the bars, bar of music, sand bar, candy bar, mosquito bar, bar
sinister, bar none, ordered drinks at the bar’!

But, you may say, these are popular idioms, not scientific and logical
use of language. Oh, indeed? “Electrical” is supposed to be a scientific
word. Do you know what its referent is? Do you know that the
“electrical” in “electrical apparatus” is not the same “electrical” as
the one in “electrical expert”? In the first it refers to a current of
electricity in the apparatus, but in the second it does not refer to a
current of electricity in the expert. When a word like “group” can refer
either to a sequence of phases in time or a pile of articles on the
floor, its element of reference is minor. Referents of scientific words
are often conveniently vague, markedly under the sway of the patterns in
which they occur. It is very suggestive that this trait, so far from
being a hallmark of Babbittry, is most marked in intellectual talk,
and—mirabile dictu—in the language of poetry and love! And this needs
must be so, for science, poetry, and love are alike in being “flights”
above and away from the slave-world of literal reference and humdrum
prosaic details, attempts to widen the petty narrowness of the personal
self’s outlook, liftings toward Ar[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa,
toward that world of infinite harmony, sympathy and order, of unchanging
truths and eternal things. And while all words are pitiful enough in
their mere “letter that killeth,” it is certain that scientific terms
like ‘force, average, sex, allergic, biological’ are not less pitiful,
and in their own way no more certain in reference than ‘sweet, gorgeous,
rapture, enchantment, heart and soul, star dust.’ You have probably
heard of ‘star dust’—what is it? Is it a multitude of stars, a sparkling
powder, the soil of the planet Mars, the Milky Way, a state of
daydreaming, poetic fancy, pyrophoric iron, a spiral nebula, a suburb of
Pittsburgh, or a popular song? You don’t know, and neither does anybody.
The word—for it is one LEXATION, not two—has no reference of its own.
Some words are like that.⁴ As we have seen, reference is the lesser part
of meaning, patternment the greater. Science, the quest for truth, is a
sort of divine madness like love. And music—is it not in the same
category? Music is a quasilanguage based entirely on patternment,
without having developed lexation.

 

Sometimes the sway of pattern over reference produces amusing results,
when a pattern engenders meanings utterly extraneous to the original
lexation reference. The lower mind is thrown into bewilderment, cannot
grasp that compelling formulas are at work upon it, and resorts wildly
and with glad relief to its favorite obvious type of explanation, even
“seeing things” and “hearing things” that help out such explanation. The
word ‘asparagus,’ under the stress of purely phonetic English patterns
of the type illustrated in the formula cited in Part I, rearranges to
‘sparagras’; and then since ‘sparrer’ is a dialectical form of
‘sparrow,’ we find ‘sparrow grass’ and then religiously accepted
accounts of the relation of sparrows to this ‘grass.’ ‘Cole slaw’ came
from German Kohlsalat, ‘cabbage salad,’ but the stress of the pattern
tending to revamp it into ‘cold slaw’ has in some regions produced a new
lexation ‘slaw,’ and a new dish ‘hot slaw’! Children of course are
constantly repatterning, but the pressure of adult example eventually
brings their language back to the norm; they learn that Mississippi is
not Mrs. Sippy, and the equator is not a menagerie lion but an imaginary
line. Sometimes the adult community does not possess the special
knowledge needed for correction. In parts of New England, Persian cats
of a certain type are called Coon cats, and this name has bred the
notion that they are a hybrid between the cat and the ‘coon’ (raccoon).
This is often firmly believed by persons ignorant of biology, since the
stress of the linguistic pattern (animal-name 1 modifying animal-name 2)
causes them to “see” (or as the psychologists say “project”) objective
raccoon quality as located on the body of the cat—they point to its
bushy tail, long hair, and so on. I knew of an actual case, a woman who
owned a fine “Coon cat,” and who would protest to her friend: “Why, just
LOOK at him—his tail, his funny eyes—can’t you see it?” “Don’t be
silly!” quoth her more sophisticated friend. “Think of your natural
history! Coons cannot breed with cats; they belong to a different
family.” But the lady was so sure that she called on an eminent
zoologist to confirm her. He is said to have remarked, with unwavering
diplomacy, “If you like to think so, just think so.” “He was even more
cruel than you!” she snapped at her friend, and remained convinced that
her pet was the outcome of an encounter between a philandering raccoon
and a wayward cat! In just such ways on a vaster scale is woven the web
of M[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]y[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH
MACRON], illusion begotten of intrenched selfhood. I am told that Coon
cats received their name from one Captain Coon, who brought the first of
these Persian cats to the State of Maine in his ship.

In more subtle matters we all, unknowingly, project the linguistic
relationships of a particular language upon the universe, and SEE them
there, as the good lady SAW a linguistic relation (Coon = raccoon) made
visible in her cat. We say ‘see that wave’—the same pattern as ‘see that
house.’ But without the projection of language no one ever saw a single
wave. We see a surface in everchanging undulating motions. Some
languages cannot say ‘a wave’; they are closer to reality in this
respect. Hopi say walalata, ‘plural waving occurs,’ and can call
attention to one place in the waving just as we can. But, since actually
a wave cannot exist by itself, the form that corresponds to our
singular, wala, is not the equivalent of English ‘a wave,’ but means ‘a
slosh occurs,’ as when a vessel of liquid is suddenly jarred.

English pattern treats ‘I hold it’ exactly like ‘I strike it,’ ‘I tear
it,’ and myriads of other propositions that refer to actions effecting
changes in matter. Yet ‘hold’ in plain fact is no action, but a state of
relative positions. But we think of it, even see it, as an action,
because language sets up the proposition in the same way as it sets up a
much more common class of propositions dealing with movements and
changes. We ASCRIBE action to what we call “hold” because the formula,
substantive + verb = actor + his action, is fundamental in our
sentences. Thus we are compelled in many cases to read into nature
fictitious acting-entities simply because our sentence patterns require
our verbs, when not imperative, to have substantives before them. We are
obliged to say ‘it flashed’ or ‘a light flashed,’ setting up an actor
IT, or A LIGHT, to perform what we call an action, FLASH. But the
flashing and the light are the same; there is no thing which does
something, and no doing. Hopi says only rehpi. Hopi can have verbs
without subjects, and this gives to that language power as a logical
system for understanding certain aspects of the cosmos. Scientific
language, being founded on western Indo-European and not on Hopi, does
as we do, sees sometimes actions and forces where there may be only
states. For do you not conceive it possible that scientists as well as
ladies with cats all unknowingly project the linguistic patterns of a
particular type of language upon the universe, and SEE them there,
rendered visible on the very face of nature? A change in language can
transform our appreciation of the Cosmos.

 

All this is typical of the way the lower personal mind, caught in a
vaster world inscrutable to its methods, uses its strange gift of
language to weave the web of M[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]y[LATIN
SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON] or illusion, to make a provisional analysis
of reality and then regard it as final. Western culture has gone
farthest here, farthest in determined thoroughness of provisional
analysis, and farthest in determination to regard it as final. The
commitment to illusion has been sealed in western Indo-European
language, and the road out of illusion for the West lies through a wider
understanding of language than western Indo-European alone can give.
This is the “Mantra Yoga” of the Western consciousness, the next great
step, which it is now ready to take. It is probably the most suitable
way for Western man to begin that “culture of consciousness” which will
lead him to a great illumination.

Again, through this sort of understanding of language is achieved a
great phase of human brotherhood. For the scientific understanding of
very diverse languages—not necessarily to speak them, but to analyze
their structure—is a lesson in brotherhood which is brotherhood in the
universal human principle—the brotherhood of the “Sons of Manas.” It
causes us to transcend the boundaries of local cultures, nationalities,
physical peculiarities dubbed “race,” and to find that in their
linguistic systems, though these systems differ widely, yet in the
order, harmony, and beauty of the systems, and in their respective
subtleties and penetrating analysis of reality, all men are equal. This
fact is independent of the state of evolution as regards material
culture, savagery, civilization, moral or ethical development, etc., a
thing most surprising to the cultured European, a thing shocking to him,
indeed a bitter pill! But it is true; the crudest savage may
unconsciously manipulate with effortless ease a linguistic system so
intricate, manifoldly systematized, and intellectually difficult that it
requires the lifetime study of our greatest scholars to describe its
workings. The manasic plane and the “higher ego” have been given to all,
and the evolution of human language was complete, and spread in its
proud completeness up and down the earth, in a time far anterior to the
oldest ruin that molders in the soil today.

Linguistic knowledge entails understanding many different beautiful
systems of logical analysis. Through it, the world as seen from the
diverse viewpoints of other social groups, that we have thought of as
alien, becomes intelligible in new terms. Alienness turns into a new and
often clarifying way of looking at things. Consider Japanese. The view
of the Japanese that we get outwardly from their governmental policy
seems anything but conducive to brotherhood. But to approach the
Japanese through an aesthetic and scientific appreciation of their
language transforms the picture. that is to realize kinship on the
cosmopolitan levels of the spirit. One lovely pattern of this language
is that its sentence may have two differently ranked subjects. We are
familiar with the idea of two ranks of OBJECTS for our verbs, an
immediate and a more remote goal, or direct and indirect object as they
are commonly called. We have probably never thought of the possibilities
of a similar idea applied to SUBJECTS. This idea is put to work in
Japanese. The two subjects—call them subject 1 and subject 2—are marked
by the particles wa and ga, and a diagram might show them with a line
drawn from each subject word, the two lines converging upon the same
predication, whereas our English sentence could have only one subject
with one line to the predicate. An example would be the way of saying
“Japan is mountainous”: “Japan₁ mountain₂ (are) many”;⁵ or: “Japan, in
regard to its mountains are many.” “John is long-legged” would be “John₁
leg₂ (are) long.” This pattern gives great conciseness at the same time
with great precision. Instead of the vagueness of our “mountainous,” the
Japanese can, with equal compactness of formulation, distinguish
“mountainous” meaning that mountains not always high are abundant, from
“mountainous” meaning that mountains not abundant relative to the whole
area are high. We see how the logical uses of this pattern would give to
Japanese great power in concise scientific operations with ideas, could
this power be properly developed.

 

The moment we begin scientific, unbiased RESEARCH into language we find,
in people and cultures with the most unprepossessing exteriors,
beautiful, effective, and scientific devices of expression unknown to
western Indo-European tongues or mentalities. The Algonkian languages
are spoken by very simple people, hunting and fishing Indians, but they
are marvels of analysis and synthesis. One piece of grammatical finesse
peculiar to them is called the obviative. This means that their pronouns
have four persons instead of three, or from our standpoint two third
persons. This aids in compact description of complicated situations, for
which we should have to resort to cumbersome phraseology. Let us
symbolize their third and fourth persons by attaching the numerals 3 and
4 to our written words. The Algonkians might tell the story of William
Tell like this: “William Tell called his₃ son and told him₄ to bring
him₃ his₃ bow and arrow, which₄ he₄ then brought to him₃. He₃ had him₄
stand still and placed an apple on his₄ head, then took his₃ bow and
arrow and told him₄ not to fear. Then he₃ shot it₄ off his₄ head without
hurting him₄.” Such a device would greatly help in specifying our
complex legal situations, getting rid of “the party of the first part”
and “the aforesaid John Doe shall, on his part, etc.”

Chichewa, a language related to Zulu, spoken by a tribe of unlettered
Negroes in East Africa, has two past tenses, one for past events with
present result or influence, one for past without present influence. A
past as recorded in external situations is distinguished from a past
recorded only in the psyche or memory; a new view of TIME opens before
us. Let 1 represent the former and 2 the latter; then ponder these
Chichewa nuances: I came₁ here; I went₂ there; he was₂ sick; he died₁;
Christ died₂ on the cross; God created₁ the world. “I ate₁” means I am
not hungry; “I ate₂” means I am hungry. If you were offered food and
said: “No, I have eaten₁” it would be all right, but if you used the
other past tense you would be uttering an insult. A Theosophical speaker
of Chichewa might use tense 1 in speaking of the past involution of
Monads, which has enabled the world to be in its present state, while he
might use tense 2 for, say, long-past planetary systems now
disintegrated and their evolution done. If he were talking about
Reincarnation, he would use 2 for events of a past incarnation simply in
their own frame of reference, but he would use 1 in referring to or
implying their “Karma.” It may be that these primitive folk are equipped
with a language which, if they were to become philosophers or
mathematicians, could make them our foremost thinkers upon TIME.

Or take the Coeur d’Alene language, spoken by the small Indian tribe of
that name in Idaho. Instead of our simple concept of “cause,” founded on
our simple “makes it (him) do so,” the Coeur d’Alene grammar requires
its speakers to discriminate (which of course they do automatically)
among three causal processes, denoted by three causal verb-forms: (1)
growth, or maturation of an inherent cause, (2) addition or accretion
from without, (3) secondary addition, i.e., of something affected by
process 2. Thus, to say “it has been made sweet” they would use form 1
for a plum sweetened by ripening, form 2 for a cup of coffee sweetened
by dissolving sugar in it, and form 3 for griddle cakes sweetened by
syrup made by dissolving sugar. If, given a more sophisticated culture,
their thinkers erected these now unconscious discriminations into a
theory of triadic causality, fitted to scientific observations, they
might thereby produce a valuable intellectual tool for science. WE could
imitate artificially such a theory, perhaps, but we could NOT apply it,
for WE are not habituated to making such distinctions with effortless
ease in daily life. Concepts have a basis in daily talk before
scientific workers will attempt to use them in the laboratory. Even
relativity has such a basis in the western Indo-European languages (and
others)—the fact that these languages use many space words and patterns
for dealing with time.

 

Language has further significance in other psychological factors on a
different level from modern linguistic approach but of importance in
music, poetry, literary style, and Eastern mantram. What I have been
speaking of thus far concerns the plane of Manas in the more
philosophical sense, the “higher unconscious” or the “soul” (in the
sense as used by Jung). What I am about to speak of concerns the
“psyche” (in the sense as used by Freud), the “lower” unconscious, the
Manas which is especially the “slayer of the real,” the plane of K[LATIN
SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]ma, of emotion or rather feeling (Gefühl). In
a serial relation containing the levels of N[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH
MACRON]ma-R[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa and Ar[LATIN SMALL
LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa, this level of the unconscious psyche is on the
other side of N[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]ma-R[LATIN SMALL LETTER
U WITH MACRON]pa from Ar[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa, and
N[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]ma or lexation mediates in a sense
between these extremes. Hence the psyche is the psychological
correlative of the phonemic level in language, related to it not
structurally as is N[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]ma or lexation,
not by using it as building blocks, as word-making uses the phonemes
(vowels, consonants, accents, etc.), but related as the feeling-content
of the phonemes. There is a universal, Gefühl-type way of linking
experiences, which shows up in laboratory experiments and appears to be
independent of language—basically alike for all persons.

Without a serial or hierarchical order in the universe it would have to
be said that these psychological experiments and linguistic experiments
contradict each other. In the psychological experiments human subjects
seem to associate the experiences of bright, cold, sharp, hard, high,
light (in weight), quick, high-pitched, narrow, and so on in a long
series, with each other; and conversely the experiences of dark, warm,
yielding, soft, blunt, low, heavy, slow, low-pitched, wide, etc., in
another long series. This occurs whether the words for such associated
experiences resemble or not, but the ordinary person is likely to NOTICE
a relation to words only when it is a relation of likeness to such a
series in the vowels or consonants of the words, and when it is a
relation of contrast or conflict it is passed unnoticed. The noticing of
the relation of likeness is an element in sensitiveness to literary
style or to what is often rather inaccurately called the “music” of
words. The noticing of the relation of conflict is much more difficult,
much more a freeing oneself from illusion, and though quite “unpoetical”
it is really a movement toward Higher Manas, toward a higher symmetry
than that of physical sound.

What is significant for our thesis is that language, through lexation,
has made the speaker more acutely conscious of certain dim psychic
sensations; it has actually produced awareness on lower planes than its
own: a power of the nature of magic. There is a yogic mastery in the
power of language to remain independent of lower-psyche facts, to
override them, now point them up, now toss them out of the picture, to
mold the nuances of words to its own rule, whether the psychic ring of
the sounds fits or not. If the sounds fit, the psychic quality of the
sounds is increased, and this can be noticed by the layman. If the
sounds do not fit, the psychic quality changes to accord with the
linguistic meaning, no matter how incongruous with the sounds, and this
is not noticed by the layman.

Thus the vowels a (as in ‘father’), o, u, are associated in the
laboratory tests with the dark-warm-soft series, and e (English a in
‘date’), i (English e in ‘be’) with the bright-cold-sharp set.
Consonants also are associated about as one might expect from ordinary
naïve feeling in the matter. What happens is that, when a word has an
acoustic similarity to its own meaning, we can notice it, as in English
‘soft’ and German sanft. But, when the opposite occurs, nobody notices
it. Thus German zart (tsart) ‘tender’ has such a “sharp” sound, in spite
of its a, that to a person who does not know German it calls up the
bright-sharp meanings, but to a German it “sounds” SOFT—and probably
warm, dark, etc., also. An even better case is DEEP. Its acoustic
association should be like that of PEEP or of such nonsense words as
VEEP, TREEP, QUEEP, etc., i.e., as bright, sharp, quick. But its
linguistic meaning in the English language happens to refer to the wrong
sort of experience for such an association. This fact completely
overrides its objective sound, causing it to “sound” subjectively quite
as dark, warm, heavy, soft, etc., as though its sounds really were of
that type. It takes illusion-freeing, if unpoetic, linguistic analysis
to discover this clash between two “musics,” one more mental and one
more psychic, in the word. Manas is able to disregard properties of the
psychic plane, just as it can disregard whether an equational x refers
to automobiles or sheep. It can project parts of its own patterns upon
experience in such a way that they distort, and promote illusion, or
again in such a way that they illuminate, and build up scientific
theories and tools of research.

 

Yoga is defined by Patanjali as the complete cessation of the activity
of the versatile psychic nature.⁶ We have seen that this activity
consists largely of personal-social reactions along unperceived tracks
of pattern laid down from the Ar[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa
level functioning above or behind the focus of personal consciousness.
The reason why the Ar[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH MACRON]pa level is
beyond the ken of the consciousness is not because it is essentially
different (as if it were, e.g., a passive network) but because the
personality does focus, from evolution and habit, upon the aforesaid
versatile activity. The stilling of this activity and the coming to rest
of this focus, though difficult and requiring prolonged training, is by
reliable accounts from widely diverse sources, both Eastern and Western,
a tremendous expansion, brightening and clarifying of consciousness, in
which the intellect functions with undreamed-of rapidity and sureness.
The scientific study of languages and linguistic principles is at least
a partial raising of the intellect toward this level. In the
understanding of a large linguistic pattern there is involved a partial
shift of focus away from the versatile psychic activity. Such
understandings have even a therapeutic value. Many neuroses are simply
the compulsive working over and over of word systems, from which the
patient can be freed by showing him the process and pattern.

All this leads back to the idea touched upon in part I of this essay,
that the types of patterned relationship found in language may be but
the wavering and distorted, pale, substanceless reflection of a CAUSAL
WORLD. Just as language consists of discrete lexation-segmentation
(N[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]ma-R[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH
MACRON]pa) and ordered patternment, of which the latter has the more
background character, less obvious but more infrangible and universal,
so the physical world may be an aggregate of quasidiscrete entities
(atoms, crystals, living organisms, planets, stars, etc.) not fully
understandable as such, but rather emergent from a field of causes that
is itself a manifold of pattern and order. It is upon the bars of the
fence, beyond which it would meet these CHARACTERS OF THE FIELD, that
science is now poised. As physics explores into the intra-atomic
phenomena, the discrete physical forms and forces are more and more
dissolved into relations of pure patternment. The PLACE of an apparent
entity, an electron for example, becomes indefinite, interrupted; the
entity appears and disappears from one structural position to another
structural position, like a phoneme or any other patterned linguistic
entity, and may be said to be NOWHERE in between the positions. Its
locus, first thought of and analyzed as a continuous variable, becomes
on closer scrutiny a mere alternation; situations “actualize” it,
structure beyond the probe of the measuring rod governs it;
three-dimensional shape there is none, instead—“Ar[LATIN SMALL LETTER U
WITH MACRON]pa.”

 

Science cannot yet understand the transcendental logic of such a state
of affairs, for it has not yet freed itself from the illusory
necessities of common logic which are only at bottom necessities of
grammatical pattern in Western Aryan grammar; necessities for substances
which are only necessities for substantives in certain sentence
positions, necessities for forces, attractions, etc. which are only
necessities for verbs in certain other positions, and so on. Science, if
it survives the impending darkness, will next take up the consideration
of linguistic principles and divest itself of these illusory linguistic
necessities, too long held to be the substance of Reason itself.

 

Reprinted by permission of the Theosophical Society from Theosophist
(Madras, India), January and April issues, 1942.

1. To anticipate the text, “thinking in a language” does not necessarily
have to use WORDS. An uncultivated Choctaw can as easily as the most
skilled litterateur contrast the tenses or the genders of two
experiences, though he has never heard of any words like “tense” or
“gender” for such contrasts. Much thinking never brings in words at all,
but manipulates whole paradigms, word-classes, and such grammatical
orders “behind” or “above” the focus of personal consciousness.

2. The full formula from which this is abbreviated is printed and
explained in my paper “Linguistics as an exact science” in Technol.
Rev., December 1940, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Mass. (p. 285 in this volume).

3. This word and sentence contains only one N[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH
MACRON]ma or lexation, mamahl or ‘white-race person.’ The rest is all
grammatical pattern which can refer to anything. The Nootka stem or
N[LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH MACRON]ma for ‘doll’ with the same
operations done upon it would mean ‘they each did so because of their
doll-like-ness.’

4. Compare ‘kith’ and ‘throe,’ which give no meaning, and a bewildering
effect, without the patterns ‘kith and kin’ and ‘in throes of.’

5. “Are” is in parentheses because “be many” is expressed by a single
verblike word. The Japanese ordinarily does not use a plural.

6. Bragdon’s paraphrase of the Yoga S[LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH
MACRON]tras, An Introduction to Yoga, Claude Bragdon, New York, 1933.

Appendix:

The “Yale Report”:
Report on Linguistic Research in the Department of Anthropology of Yale
University for the Term September 1937–June 1938

By B. L. Whorf and G. L. Trager¹

Part 1  The Synchronic or Non-historical Aspect

________________________

Schematic Outline of Part 1

Division A  Configurative Linguistics

By B. L. Whorf and G. L. Trager

1. Preliminary linguistic outline

2. Phonemics

3. Morphophonemics

4. Configurations of grammar including grammatical classes

5. Configurations of grammar as compared with experience interpreted
non-linguistically

Division B  Configurative Linguistics and Cultural World-Outlook—
“Ethnolinguistics”

By B. L. Whorf

1. The configuration of experience as seen in language

I. Segmentation of experience

a. Segmentation in terms of grammatical classes

b. Segmentation in terms of one language compared with another

II. Implicit metaphysics of a language, and, more or less, of a culture

III. So-called primitive mentality—the concept of cultural mentalities

2. Interpretation of coordination and parallelism between language and
culture (the non-historical aspect, historical aspect to be treated in
Part II² of Report)

a. General considerations

b. Illustrative detail

c. Simple versus complex terms

d. Cultural attitudes and backgrounds

e. Comparison of negativisms

3. Behavior-patterns as correlated with language

4. Study of the supra-linguistic and quasi-linguistic mentality³
(collective or social) through the linguistic approach

a. In general—spiritual emphases of a culture

b. Kinds of translations—official, literal, and interpretative

c. Understanding of symbolism

d. Ideas not independently lexated

The concepts of lexation and independent lexation

Application to the grasping of subtle turns of meaning in the language
of exotic cultures

e. Correct recognition of the immaterial values of a culture

____________________⁴

Trager’s share in the present report is unavoidably very much curtailed
by his absence in the European linguistic field. The compilation of the
report was conceived and undertaken by the author, Whorf, not until the
end of the second semester, long after Trager had sailed, and the author
feels that it has not been possible for him to do justice by proxy to
the large contributions made by his colleague. The important work in the
subjects A2 and A3, the corner-stone of linguistics, is chiefly due to
Trager. A1 and A5 represents mostly the work of Whorf; A4 represents
mostly joint effort and collaboration. Division B represents the
viewpoint of Whorf, who wishes to take full responsibility, but not full
credit, for what is there expressed, for he acknowledges the
contributions resulting from many discussions and consultations with
Trager, particularly as relating to Trager’s work with the Taos Indians.
A number of suggestions and ideas have been contributed by Charles C.
Hockett and Norman A. McQuown,⁵ students at the Yale Graduate School in
the classes of the authors, others have resulted from correspondence
with Doctors⁶ Morris Swadesh, Mary Haas, and C. F. Voegelin. Five
meetings for the reading of papers and discussion of linguistic work
have been held jointly with Prof. Franz Boas and the group of linguistic
workers associated with him at Columbia University, and we owe much to
the stimulating points raised and ideas contributed by Prof. Boas and
his co-workers, even where the fruits of those ideas may appear
unrecognizable to them. We both acknowledge our great indebtedness to
Prof. Sapir, especially for⁷ encouragement and for the stimulation given
by his broad and penetrative outlook, at once scientific and sensitive,
all of which he has given freely to us even while weighed down by
illness. We unite in heartily wishing him a speedy return to health.

An expanded outline form has been used for the report, which follows.
The nature of the research has been that of a work of systematization
and of recognition of significances, and its conclusions are largely
expressed in the arrangement and statements of the whole body of the
report.

______________________⁸

Division A  Configurative Linguistics

By B. L. Whorf and G. L. Trager

(Abbreviations: lge—language, lgs—languages, Eng—English)

1. Preliminary linguistic outline

As supplement to the extensive ethnographic outline prepared and
published by the Dept. of Anthropology in 1937–1938, a tentative outline
of the field of configurative linguistics as applied to any one language
was made early in the term, and was entitled Language—Plan and
Conception of Arrangement—as the name implies, a first and exploratory
plan for the arrangement of linguistic information. It was not published
in the ethnographic outline, but 5 or 6 typed carbon copies were
distributed to persons interested, and a very condensed synopsis
published in the ethnographic outline. It served somewhat as a basis for
the further research, and work during the year has suggested much
enlargement, some revision. The idea of such an outline is an important
one for linguistic taxonomy, or the systematic view and classification
of all known “linguistic species”, i.e. individual lgs, in order that
science may obtain a comprehensive view of the human linguistic faculty
as one large whole, much as zoology classifies and studies all animal
species, not merely a few preferred ones. Long in advance of the
ultimate possibility of such a linguistic world-picture it is desirable
to compare many adequately comprehensive outlines and “trait-lists” of
individual lgs to “see what we have got” world-wide and so make valid
generalizations about the totality Language.

2. Phonemics

a. Distinction of phoneme vs. allophone (positional variant). The
allophonic constellations, or groups of sounds which actualize or
represent each phoneme or sound-type under definite sets of conditions
stateable as formulae, have been worked out for Taos, Picurís, Hopi,
modern Aztec (2 dialects), 2 or 3 dialects of American Eng. A certain
basic system of allophonic constellations, as well as of phonemes, is
characteristic of each language, and certain variations upon this basic
system characterize each dialect of a language.

b. Correlative phonemes, or correlative phonemic sets, e.g. (p, t, k,),
(p^(c), t^(c) , k^(c),), (b, d, g). Features of correlation, e.g.
voicing, aspiration, desonancy (the opposite of voicing, e.g. M, N, N),
off-glides,⁹ on-glides, nasalization, etc. have been studied. It is
important, and often difficult, in a newly studied lge, to distinguish
between a correlative feature, e.g. aspiration, i-glide, and a phoneme,
e.g. h, y. A certain correlative feature and a certain phoneme may have
exactly the same sound and be the same thing on the physical or
mechanistic level. They are different purely and simply as elements of
Gestalt-wholes; this makes them immensely different perceptively to the
native hearer but indistinguishable to the ear of the student until he
has become adjusted to the phonemic system of the language. They can be
distinguished only by configurative phonemic analysis, which is¹⁰
obligatory and cannot be replaced by nicety of ear or acoustic
instruments (not a new conclusion but worth reemphasizing). The denoting
of affricates by such symbols as¹¹ ts, ta, t∫ offends against this
principle because it denotes a feature of correlation by the symbol for
a phoneme (t), and this soon leads to practical difficulties.
Correlative features between allophonic constellations also exist (e.g.
one particular positional variant of l may have a phonetic feature
correlative with the corresponding or “homopositional” variant of m,
although l and m as phonemes do not correlate). Of this type are
cluster-glides, which sound like vowels, and are often lumped with
certain vowels under the loose term “shwa”. Such glides appear in e.g.
pris^(o)m, rhyth^(o)m, litt^(o)le, and are more widely distributed in
colloquial dialects, e.g. ath^(o)letic, el^(o)m; their irregularity of
distribution in “standard’ Eng may enable them to be considered as
vowels (?), but Hopi -k^(o)n-, -k^(o)l-, -t^(o)n-, etc. are definitely
allophonic correlatives (cluster-glides).

c. Distinction of segmental phonemes (consonants, vowels) and prosodic
phonemes, i.e. units of length, stress, accent (pitch-stress, pitch),
clipping. Clipping or prosodic staccato (Trubetzkoy’s “Silbenschnitt”)
was discovered in and worked out for Hopi; it occurs in Eng and German.

3. Morphophonemics

Morphophonemics is a configurative analysis which distinguishes phonetic
configurative elements (called usually morphophonemes) characterized by
homologous position in linguistic elements of constant meaning—a type of
configuration not used in pure phonemics. Thus if threads connected all
the c’s, l’s, i’s, f’s, in cliff, cliffs, cliffy, the same morphophoneme
would be found repeated along each thread. The same would be true of
leaf, leaves, leafy, for this type of analysis considers the v in one
word morphophonemically equivalent to the f’s in the other two, because
it lies on the same thread with them. Morphophonemics relates to the
underlying model of a set of forms—when lexical this model is that
linguistic entity which has traditionally received the name of “root”.
We recommend that this very convenient term be retained, but also that
the understanding of it be less loose, and clarified by the
morphophonemic concept. The symbol √ is suggested not only for roots but
to indicate morpho-phonemic symbolism in general. The roots of the
“cliff” and “leaf” forms above might be denoted √klìf₁, √lif₂. All
phonologic variation in a given lge may be divided into allophonic
(coming under phonemics) and morphophonemic. The latter includes ablaut,
sandhi, lenition, hardening, zeroing, e.g. Eng moisten (moisn) : √moist,
Latin nox : √noct, cf. noctis, and various other types of phonologic
phenomena. It is very important not to confuse morphophonemics with
historical reconstruction. The (morphophonemic) root √klìf is purely a
formula that correlates synchronic linguistic facts, and has nothing to
do with the historical prototype (for which we use the customary
marking * instead of √) of the set of forms in question. Trager has
worked out the complicated and unusual consonantal changes (consonantal
ablaut) in Taos verbs, Whorf the “vocal segments” of Hopi vowels treated
as morphophonemes.

4. Configurations of grammar including grammatical classes

a. Overt and covert classes. Grammatical categories are¹² distinguished
by grammatical markers, which may or may not appear with the form
categorized. The test unit is the sentence, or sometimes small group of
sentences (immediate field of discourse), not the word. For the marker
to appear “with” the form means to appear in the same sentence (or
sometimes, in the immediate field of discourse); e.g. in ‘he saw a small
fish’, ‘a’ marks “fish” as of the category or class ‘singular number’,
and appears “with” it. Grammatical classes which appear ordinarily
“without” markers do have markers appearing with them under certain
particular circumstances—such a class is “covert”, and its marker a
“reactance”. Its grammatical meaning, if distinguishable, is a
“cryptotype”. Grammatical classes are not to be set up in the absence of
any markers at all; from a grammatical configurative standpoint an
entirely unmarked class would be a fiction. Such fictitious categories
have frequently been foisted upon exotic languages and modeled upon
meanings of marked categories in the investigator’s or grammarian’s
native European language. At the same time genuine categories of the
exotic language have been ignored because they were marked only
covertly. Covert marking is very definitely marking, and cannot be
ignored. Markers include of course features of position and order in the
sentence, and negative features—the significant absences of forms or
patterns otherwise to be expected. Overt categories are accompanied by
markers in all or nearly all sentences—e.g. verbs and nouns in Eng and
French, gender in French. Their grammatical meanings are “phenotypes”.
Covert categories have markers that ordinarily do not appear—they appear
only in certain “test” types of sentence; e.g. Eng genders, where the
markers (reactances) are the personal pronouns, but appear only when the
sentence calls for such a pronoun. The pronouns mark linguistic classes,
not “natural” orders of experience that could be discriminated by
non-linguistic tests—this, in spite of the considerable degree of
alignment with a sex distinction is true of Eng as well as French,
Latin, Hebrew or Taos gender. Eng verbs belong to different covert
classes of “resolution” marked by absence of nouns or pronouns after the
verb and other patterns (‘I heard it’) but not (‘I listened it’) and
(‘it was heard’) but not (‘it was listened’) etc., but in many types of
sentence (‘I will hear’, ‘I will listen’, etc.) no markers appear.
Covert classes have failed of sufficient recognition both in European
and in American Indian lgs; they are often of the greatest importance,
and failure to recognize them may baffle or delude the investigator of a
lge. The covert classes may have a far-reaching connection with the type
of thinking, the “philosophy” or “implicit metaphysics” of a lge (cf.
the important “round”, “long”, etc. covert classes of objects, i.e. of
nouns, in Navaho, reactance in form of certain verbs) and go to make up
the number of those things that are responsible for the impression of a
“primitive mentality” different from “civilized mentality” (see B1,
III). The manifestations of these class-distinctions in thinking and the
character of the sometimes rather deeply-hidden and seldom-appearing
reactances suggest the phenomena associated with the unconscious,
subconscious, or foreconscious in psychology, though on a more
socialized and less purely personal plane, and may connect in a
significant manner therewith.

b. Selective and modulus classes. Observing now a different order of
configuration, classes may be divided into two types through the type of
applicability of their markers, according as they apply only to a
selected group of the vocabulary (selective class) or to the¹³ whole
vocabulary or the whole of a certain larger class, which may be
selective (modulus class). Typical of selective classes are the “parts
of speech”, nouns, verbs, etc., of modulus classes or moduli are case,
number (applicable e.g. to all nouns), voice, aspect, tense (applicable
e.g. to all verbs). In some lgs and lge families, e.g. Semitic,
Wakashan, moduli take the place of “parts of speech”; this has not been
sufficiently recognized. Eng is moving in the same direction, has indeed
gone a long way towards such a condition. Esperanto has moved in the
opposite direction; it was designed to have only modulus classes and
roots, but selective classes of roots have appeared in actual usage, as
Mr. McQuown has shown, modeled on similar classes in European lgs.
Moduli are overt, selective classes either overt or covert. The markers
of moduli are called by us “signatures”. One modulus (e.g. Eng
noun-plural) may have more than one signature, e.g. for Eng noun-plural,
-s, vowel change, -en, absence of articles, plural verb, suppletion
(e.g. chicken : poultry signatures may be “bound” (a part of the word,
including internally) or “free” (appearing separately in same sentence
(including features of order and negativisms). “Inflection” is a term
covering all bound markers, both signatures and selective markers.
“Attached” is suggested as a broader variety of the type of “bound”,
including markers attached to any word and not necessarily to the word
categorized—e.g. in S. Paiute there are such markers that may be
attached simply to any word that begins the sentence—these are usually
not called “inflections” but “enclitics”.

5. Configurations of grammar as compared with experience interpreted
non-linguistically

The task of formal grammar ends when the analysis of all linguistic
configurations is completed, but the characteristics of a language are
by no means fully accounted for then. It still remains to indicate the
type of experience and kinds of referents referred to by different
grammatical classes, for lgs may here differ widely. Our ordinary ways
of classifying referents, as being “things”, “objects”, “actions”,
“states”, etc. are quite unsuitable for this work, as they are
themselves names for partitionings of experience resulting after it has
been grammatically classed, and circular definitions or mere confusion
will result from applying them as if they referred to the conformation
of reality itself. Terms like “subject”, “predicate”, “actor”, “agent”,
“function”, “cause”, “result”, are equally misleading or useless in any
other than a strictly grammatical sense, defined for and by each
particular lge and referring only to the patterns therein and not to
external reality. It is, e.g. quite legitimate to talk about “the agent”
in a given lge where the term has been defined or illustrated, but it is
not to say that two different lgs of widely different type are alike in
their treatment of the “agent”. In such a use it is not clear what
“agent” means. It is impossible to break up the flow of events in a
non-arbitrary manner into “subject”, “actor”, “predicate”, etc. as if
there existed external realities of this sort. We, to be sure, may
analyze a phenomenon as ‘boy runs’, but another lge is capable of
analyzing it ‘run manifests as boy’. In describing differences between
lgs in such respects we must have a way of describing phenomena by
non-linguistic standards, and by terms that refer to experience as it
must be to all human beings, irrespective of their languages or
philosophies.¹⁴ This is possible, the way having been shown by Gestalt
psychology. Visual perception is the standard, norm, and framework of
all experience. The forms and laws of visual perceptions are the same
for all individuals—even the most glaring abnormalities, like
color-blindness, are relatively minor, and do not disturb the universal
configurative principles of visual perception. We need not cite these
laws here—see, e.g. Kurt Koffka, “Gestalt Psychology”. The basic
principle is the contrast of figure and ground, involving the differing
degrees of organization, stability, and fixity in figures or outlines of
all sorts. A non-linguistic canon of describing the referents of
linguistic forms, a canon which is understood in the same way by the
speakers of any and all tongues, is provided by considering whether the
referent has an outline or has not, and next, how much of an outline, a
definite or a vague outline, a fluctuating or a stable outline, a
quality of ground or field as more important than outline, and similar
criteria which can and should be worked out and expressed in suitable
terminology. The difference between the referents of the words (a) dog,
chair, house, tree, and (b) run, stand, fall, smooth, stiff, etc. is not
to be phrased as that (a) are things, and (b) actions or states; but as
(a) with marked outlines, or outline as of primary importance, and (b)
with outline-quality subordinate or lacking. Going further, and
comparing (c) stand, sit, lie, fall, with each other and with (d) white,
smooth, large, useful, we see that the (c) words also refer to
experience with a degree of outline, though a very low degree, while the
(d) words refer to experiences in which the quality of outline is
lacking. Certain covert shape-classes of nouns in Navaho and other lgs
seem to have a class meaning referring to generalized outlines like the
(c) words. The lge which says ‘run manifests as boy’ has the
characteristic of commonly expressing “first degree outlines” (e.g. boy)
as “verbations”. In Eng, an experience of “liquid H₂O” must have a
certain minimum degree of outline-quality before it is in common
parlance referred to by the noun ‘water’—lacking this it is treated as
ground or field, and referred to by adjectives—‘wet’, ‘damp’, ‘moist’.
Hopi treats “liquid H₂O” rather differently—see B IIb below. Some lgs
have highly figural (i.e. “outlinish”) verbs, e.g. ‘to be a hole in the
ice’ (Potawotami), ‘to manifest as a fascicled bunch’ (an outline like a
bouquet of flowers) (Hopi). Hopi is indeed rich in highly figural verbs,
with no counterpart in Eng. If the experience is also momentary or
fluctuating it must be a verb reference, no matter how outlinish, unlike
Eng; hence our nouns ‘wave’, ‘flash’, ‘blow’ (striking), ‘splash’,
‘lightning’, ‘meteor’ cannot be translated by nouns in Hopi, but the
same experiences are there denoted by verbs. This pattern even prohibits
the reifying or “nounizing” of such momentarily outlined experiences by
roundabout linguistic devices such as participles: ‘shooting star’ is
ruled out in favor of ‘star moves’, ‘sunset’ in favor of ‘sun sets’
(literally, ‘sun interiorizes’), ‘running dog’¹⁵ is permissible only
when used like a dependent relative clause, and ‘it is a running dog’ is
ruled out in favor of ‘a dog runs’.

Division B  Configurative Linguistics and Cultural World-Outlook

By B. L. Whorf

The term “Ethnolinguistics” is suggested for this type of study.

1. The configuration of experience as seen in language

I  Segmentation of Experience  The flux of experience may be classified
and “chopped up” differently by different languages; this is most
readily seen by going outside of Indo-European, American Indian lgs
providing some of the greatest contrasts. These differences in
“segmentation”—in what is treated as “one” aspect, phenomenon,
substance, or quasi-whole, isolated out of the mass of presentation and
fitted together with other such segmentation to make the mosaic
representation of life which the language and culture takes for
granted—these differences may apply not only in the large outlines of
the cosmic picture (BI, II), where they are at their most subtle and
hard to appreciate, but also in countless small matters of detail, where
they are much more easily seen.

   We say “a box of cigars”, Hopi says “cigars plurally put inside”,
where ‘plurally put inside’ is a unitary term, unanalyzeable [sic]
except for inflectional endings. The two expressions refer to the same
bit of experience but segment it into different constituents. Eng
presents an outlined bit of the world, a ‘box’—it carries the
implication of contents, which the relater ‘of’ discloses to be cigars.
In Hopi the cigars are the main idea, to which is referred a generalized
configuration of interiorized multiplicity, but whether the enclosure
that preserves this configuration be a box, barrel, bag, package, etc.
does not require mention. We “unbutton” a coat, Hopi “causes
inner-plural separation” of it (unit term ‘separate’ with inner-plural
and causative inflections) without any allusion to such bits of
experience as buttons. Where we have one term ‘snow’, another language
has different words for snow everywhere on the ground, snow in patches,
falling snow, etc. Words translated ‘war’, ‘clan’ etc. may carry a
complex institutional meaning like our ‘the Church’, ‘the theater’, ‘the
stage’, or again they may be rather on the plane of our ‘a church
service’, ‘a play’, ‘a fight’.

a. Segmentation in terms of grammatical classes Study in this field
springs naturally out of A4 and A5. For what sort of segmentations of
experience does the lge use its various parts of speech, its cases,
numbers, aspects, voices, etc.? See A5 for ways of allocating types of
experience to verbs or to nouns, contrasting Eng and Hopi. Eng uses
nouns for ‘summer’, ‘winter’, ‘morning’ etc.; in Hopi these
segmentations of experience are neither nouns nor verbs, according to
the formal configuration of the Hopi noun and verb classes, but a class
by themselves, a type of adverb (= when it is summer, when it is
morning). The ideas of ‘waiting’, ‘remembering’, ‘inferring’ may be
expressed in Hopi by adverbs; in Eng they require verbs. In Hopi
“referential motion” or motion described simply by reference points and
directions is not denoted by formal verbs—i.e. there are no verbs ‘go’
and ‘come’. It is expressed by formally verbless sentences containing
the necessary directional data as cases, postpositions, or adverbs.
Then, in¹⁶ the absence of formal verbs, a special inflection at the end
of the last word in the sentence adds “verbation”, or the characteristic
of verbs which is necessary to complete sentences. Thus ‘he goes to the
tree’ is ‘he to the tree (with verbation)’ or ‘to the tree he (with
verbation)’. But ‘he runs¹⁷ to the tree’ requires a formal verb to
express running. The adverb pay ‘now, then’ properly ‘in process of
manifesting for the moment’, or ‘transition through a small segment of
existence’¹⁸ when thus used with verbless verbation means ‘go’ in the
sense ‘leave, depart’, i.e. not go anywhere or in any direction in
particular but simply go out of the immediate scene. The province of a
certain grammatical class in one language may be a mere unexpressed
nuance in another, in a third it may be a nuance expressed entirely by
prosodic features, stress, loudness-emphasis, intonation, etc. In Hopi
definite words express what special stresses and intonations express in
Eng, e.g. [Whorf_p358a] ‘if they are not quieted’, [Whorf_p358b] ‘if
they are not quieted’, where the adverb pas corresponds to the Eng
nuance given by special stress on ‘not’. Some languages have no special
type of intonations for questions, interrogation being expressed only by
a morpheme, sometimes an independent word.

b. Segmentation in terms of one language compared with another Most
generally the two lgs so compared will be an exotic lge being
investigated and the investigator’s native tongue, e.g. Eng, French,
German, Spanish, etc. Modern European lgs are enough alike to constitute
a “standard average European” (SAE) for comparison with e.g. an Am. Ind.
lge. A very simple case of segmenting experience differently is
treatment of the human body and its division into named parts. Even
within SAE are distinct differences: ‘finger’ and ‘toe’ have the same
name in most Romance lgs, Eng uses ‘toe’ for both ‘foot-digit’ and
‘point of foot’, Polish has one word for ‘hand-arm region’ and similarly
‘foot-leg’. Hopi differs somewhat from SAE—a general hand-arm region,
but foot and leg distinguished, no simple terms for hand, nipple,
nostril, anus, vagina, buttock, cheek, which are expressed synthetically
as the heads, holes, or mounds of certain regions,¹⁹ on the other hand
simple terms for fold of groin, top of head, and lower back over
buttocks, our ‘back’ being segmented as two regions instead of one.
Verbs and words for general ideas may be related to the body-part
analysis and vary accordingly. The Hopi verb [Whorf_p359a] refers to
motion of entire hand-arm region with an external object included, hence
is the translation to lift, pass, hand over an object already in the
hand, but is not used when the action must begin with a grasping or
picking up of the object.

   The world of natural phenomena and substance may be variously
segmented—see instances above of ‘snow’ and Eng (and SAE) ‘water’. Hopi
segments liquid aqueous manifestation into [Whorf_p359b] ‘wild water’
and [Whorf_p359c] ‘fixed water’ (water within a small fairly stable
outline, as that of a container); it is the first that runs from taps
and faucets and is in springs and rivers, the second which is in a glass
or vessel or spilled therefrom on floor, etc. The second is the most
general response to being asked the word for ‘water’, while the other is
apt to be the reaction to ‘pond’ and is always so to ‘spring’. There is
nothing quite corresponding to Eng ‘wet’—while ‘be dry’ is a formal²⁰
verb (not a formal adjective as is e.g. ‘white’, ‘big’). There is
neither adjective nor stative verb for wetness but only ‘to wet it’, a
formal transitive verb, and ‘wet’ must be expressed as ‘wetted’ i.e.
‘having had water applied’ or by a compound or phrase involving
[Whorf_p359d].²¹ or [Whorf_p359e], whichever is the proper segmentation.
This is no doubt in harmony with Hopi climatic conditions and cultural
attitudes towards water.²² The phenomenon of light is segmented into
ta·la ‘light diffused through space’ (also the word for ‘day’) and qö·hi
‘luminous essence within an outline’ (also the word for ‘fire’). The
light within a neon tube is qö·hi but the illumination spread of it is
ta·la and the tube is said to be [Whorf_p360e] ‘be carrying or conveying
ta·la’. [The]²³ Hopi term ‘rain’ [Whorf_p360g] is a much broader
segmentation than Eng or SAE ‘rain’ and might be called ‘the
rain-complex’ or even ‘the rain aspect of nature’; it includes all the
powers and properties manifested in the rainstorm. In Hopi it is ‘the
rain’ that ‘strikes’ (lit. ‘shoots’) the house or tree that with us is
‘struck’ by ‘lightning’. ‘Lightning’ and ‘thunder’ are not the entities
that they are in SAE but mere epiphenomena attending the power of rain,
and in accordance with the principle mentioned in A5 are fleeting events
to be referred to by verbs but not by nouns. Not only natural phenomena
and body-parts but ordinary behavior and the most familiar human acts
may be variously segmented for linguistic naming.²⁴ Segmentation of
behavior in such a way that acts by individuals or dual pairs are given
a different name from the performance of what is to us the same act by a
group is common in the Great Basin and adjoining Mexico and is
pronounced in Hopi; e.g. wari ‘run (sing.)’, [Whorf_p360a] ‘run (pl.)’,
[Whorf_p360b] ‘stand (sing.)’, [Whorf_p360f] ‘stand (pl.)’,
[Whorf_p360d] ‘sleep (sing.)’, to·ka ‘sleep (pl.)’. This is akin to the
fact of highly figural verbs, for the experiences are different in
outline; e.g. [Whorf_p360c] indicates a configuration l, [Whorf_p360f] a
configuration like ll ll ll.

II  Implicit Metaphysics  Every complex of a culture and a lge (or every
‘culture’ in the broadest sense, as including lge) carries with it an
implicit metaphysics; a model of the universe, composed of notions and
assumptions organized into a harmonious system which is valid for
framing statements about what goes on in the world as the carriers of
the culture see it. There are certain words for large segmentations that
sum up a great deal to the cultural metaphysics, e.g. in modern SAE
‘time’, ‘space’, ‘cause’, ‘effect’, ‘progress’, ‘the past’, ‘the
future’, ‘substance’, ‘matter’, but the total picture is never given
explicitly, not even in grammar, but is a complex semi-conscious
thought-form which is taken for granted, and acted upon without being
brought into the front of consciousness for scrutiny. The grammar is
harmonious with it and reflects it somewhat, but only in scattering way.
Thus the implicit metaphysics of SAE culture presupposes a uniformly
flowing 1-dimensional time-order, a 3-dimensional space-order distinct
from it, a universe consisting of a void or ‘holes’ b substance or
matter which has ‘properties’ and forms island-like ‘bodies’,²⁵ an
absolute unbridgeable difference between the matter and the ‘holes’,
events ‘caused’ by ‘preceding’ events, things happening to matter,
nothing happening in the void. Many experiences do not quite fit the
picture; it is inevitable that they will be overlooked or find but
faltering expression, because of the nature of the grammar and
terminology available. The somewhat different cosmic model of modern
physics involving relativity and microcosmic (quantum) analysis has been
forced upon physics by research but no language, except mathematics, has
been developed in its terms. But further, American Indian and other
culture-language complexes have implicit metaphysical systems of their
own, differing both from SAE and from “science”. The SAE view is not
naive nor grounded in universal experience, (nor is any other) except as
it corresponds with the universal figural properties of visual
perception—SAE “time” and “space” e.g. are not intuitions. The implicit
metaphysical systems of exotic culture-languages can be worked out and
understood to some degree, by following same methods by which cultural
anthropologist obtains an integrated description of a whole culture (in
its broad outlines at least)—necessary however to take thoroughly
analyzed configurative descriptions of grammar into consideration along
with what natives say about their attitudes and outlook; and at last,
possibly after many years’ work, an integrated picture emerges, perhaps
startling in its differences from what was first imagined. Many things
in lge and grammar receive full explanation only in terms of the
metaphysics. The Hopian metaphysics has no time and space orders like
ours has a contrast of two realms; a the causal, or unmanifested which
includes the future and the mentalpsychic and is dynamic and in a
process the end of which is manifestation, and b the manifested, which
includes the present, past, and physical or apparent, and does not act
causally per se, but contributes to causality by helping as it were to
maintain a general well-being that aids the cycle of events. Within
realm b there is a contrast of two modes of existence and/or extension;
punctual (outlined around a point-center) and tensive (extending more or
less indefinitely), which contrast takes over much of the work of the
SAE matter-void contrast and is worked out throughout grammar and
vocabulary in literally thousands of ways; it is seen e.g. in the
contrasts between [Whorf_p359e], and [Whorf_p359d], qö·hi and ta·la,
[Whorf_p360c] and [Whorf_p360f], and in the use of different
postpositions and demonstratives according as a location is specified
punctually or tensively.

III  So-called Primitive Mentality  The concept of a primitive
mentality, originated by Lévy-Bruhl, is a far-reaching generalization in
a very important field of inquiry, otherwise little touched by either
anthropologists, linguists, or psychologists, though seemingly of
fundamental importance for all three. To believe that Lévy-Bruhl’s
concept must be either uncritically embraced or flatly denied seems
equally unjustified. To deny it and throw the burden of all the apparent
divergences on the back of the obvious cultural and linguistic
distinctions is to gloss over the facts. The decided impressions of a
different way of thinking among “primitives” obtained by L-B and others
are based upon something, but something as yet insufficiently analyzed.
In the light of our research, esp. A4a, B1I, B1II above, it would seem
that much of the difference in²⁶ mentality may be understood through the
differences of the kind there indicated—differences in grammatical
categorization, especially of covert categories, in segmentation of
experience and in the implicit metaphysics of the culture-language
complex. To all these must be added a still more subtle mental
atmosphere derived from a myriad inobvious but deep-rooted aspects and
values of the culture outside the linguistic realm. All these factors,
build up into a vast summation for which there seems to be no term as
well suited as “mentality”. It is on one hand fused with each individual
personality, and hence an individual factor, but also of a certain
common type for all individuals, through its embodiment of a common
basis in the culture, language, and metaphysics. Hence, for the concept
of a “primitive mentality” we should substitute that of “cultural
mentalities”. What has been mostly meant by the term “primitive
mentality” is “any cultural mentality other than SAE cultural
mentality”. The road to the understanding of any cultural mentality lies
first through a good ethnographic understanding of the culture and
thence proceeds through linguistic territory, and at length returns to
the broad-cultural taking the following course from the grosser to the
subtler: configurative linguistics in general—overt categories—covert
categories—interpreted in non-linguistic Gestalt terms—segmentation of
experience—implicit metaphysics—cultural mentality.

2. Interpretation of Coordination and Parallelism between Language and
(Non-Linguistic) Culture. (The non-historical aspect).

a. General considerations  [The]²⁷ way in which lge interlocks with the
culture is a fit subject for linguistics in its broader sense, although
it may be held by some to fall outside of “straight” linguistics
(configurational linguistics). Hitherto neglected, except by Sapir,
partly because “straight” linguists have not been interested in cultural
anthropology and cultural anthropologists have been the same with
respect to linguistics. Moreover, field admittedly holds a certain
fascination for the more fantastic and romantic theorizers, with
“Volksgeist” ideas, notions of inherent superiority of certain lgs, of a
lge molding the culture, of stages of cultural “evolution” and what not.
This feature should no longer repel properly qualified investigators.
The very persistence of such notions as Volksgeist may indicate certain
bases of reality, or certain partial glimpses of truth never properly
worked out or thought through. It is necessary, then, first to sound
Sapir’s note of caution: “We shall do well to hold the drifts of lge and
culture to be non-comparable and unrelated processes - - - - Attempts to
connect linguistic morphology with certain states of cultural
development are vain. Rightly understood, such correlations are
rubbish.” There is no causal connection, in either direction, between
language and (non-linguistic) cultural features. The plea for more
correlated study of a given language and study of the culture of its
community does not rest on any such consideration, but on the fact that
lge itself is culture, and that lge and the rest of culture (with
language extracted from it) belong together as really inseparable parts
of great whole—the culture in a broad sense.²⁸

b. Illustrative detail  Kinship systems obvious instance—kinship terms
must be understood in terms of the kinship system as it configurates by
itself, and also in terms of the language and its linguistic
configurations. Moreover, the pattern of the kinship relation may serve
as a model for conceiving other sorts of relations, and hence may be a
factor in the “cultural mentality”, (q.v. B1, III) and may be reflected
in linguistic forms. Kinship terms in Hopi form a covert grammatical
class, lacking certain grammatical forms shown by all other nouns. This
grammatical class includes only two non-kinship terms: ‘(one’s) hand-arm
region’ and ‘(one’s) appointed helper or co-worker’, a term of great
importance in the social culture; on the²⁹ other hand ‘husband’ and
‘wife’ do not belong to this kin-term grammatical class. In Eng kin
terms do not form any grammatical class either overt or covert—and yet
the names of various kinds of animals, objects, and substances do form
covert grammatical classes in Eng. Strong social or economic sub-groups
within the whole community warp the lines of the language by the special
jargons, “lingoes”, technicalities, passwords etc. they build up among
themselves; these warpings may be taken up by entire community and may
even reach status of grammatical classes especially covert ones. In Eng
the traditional “racy” talk of fishermen is doubtless source of division
of fish-name nouns into 2 covert classes with markers (reactances) in
the plural formation: 1. ‘economic fish’ (fish sought by fishermen),
plural without -s (trout, bass, cod, mackerel etc.), 2. ‘low-grade
fish’, plural with -s (sharks, skates, rays, bullheads, shiners etc.)
including “queer” fish, (may be fished for but are not typical prized
fish e.g. eels, flounders). Origin doubtless reference to fish of the
catch in large quantities:³⁰ with technical or jargon use of the
quantized or mass-noun pattern³¹ instead of plural (like ‘grain’, ‘bush’
vs. ‘grains’, bushes’), while low-graders intrusive in the catch are
spoken of as individuals, not en mass). Incidentally, Hopi has no
mass-noun patterns; the punctual-tensive metaphysics does the equivalent
work. Names ending in -fish (goldfish, butterfish) are class 1 for a
different reason. “Straight” configurative linguistics³² does not
attempt these cultural interpretations, but simply maps the classes and
their markers—e.g. -s, which “inflection” is a “reactance” as regards
the (covert, selective) fish-class 2, and a “signature” as regards the
(overt, modulus) class of noun-plural.³³ The native speaker of Eng will
pluralize names of fish new to him in accordance with his sense of the
cultural placement of the fish. Here appears the connection with the
psychic unconscious mentioned in A1 4. The speaker is not aware that in
his unthinking talk he classifies fish, still less that he does so on a
cultural basis. Nevertheless he does so classify them!

c. Simple vs. complex terms  Once the ability to analyze the language
has been attained via configurative linguistics, it is possible to³⁴
observe whether a cultural pattern or feature is denoted by a simple, or
primary term (e.g. plough, church, money) or a complex analyzable or
secondary one (e.g. typewriter, post office, be engaged). In the
historical aspect this may correlate with time-perspective (    q.v.);³⁵
from non-historical standpoint it may correlate with observable degree
of integration, pervasiveness, or deep-rootedness of the cultural
feature—due usually to historical age, although it is the integration
that is first directly observed and the historical age may not be
clearly indicated without further research directed to this point. In
most European lgs war is denoted by a simple term (war, guerre, Krieg,
bellum), and the warfare-pattern shows the signs of being deeply
ingrained—large armies, elaborate equipment, high efficiency,
professionalism, military prestige,³⁶ war psychology, belief that war is
an inborn human or masculine trait, etc., all of which might be observed
without knowing the long history of warfare in Europe. A companion
linguistic trait is the host of warlike and military words, even in
ordinary civilian life.³⁷ In Aztec, however, the word for war, yaoyotl,
is analyzeable [sic], = ‘enmity, hostility’ from the simple term yaotl
‘enemy’; Aztec culture showed indeed strong warlike traits, yet probably
by no means so strong or deep-rooted as in Europe (Aztec warlike prowess
would appear from historical indications to be a relatively late
development). In Hopi the nearest thing to a term for ‘war’ is
na·´qöYta, analyzeable, = ‘be plurally and reciprocally killing’ from
simple term qöya ‘kill plurally’, with reflexive and durative
signatures. This correlates with the relative unimportance of war in
Hopi culture. In Navaho the term for war is simple. Of course there may
be lack of correlation; there may be a simple term for some culture
element which is not deep-rooted, though it probably once was, unless
term has been borrowed, or is itself obsolescent. Vogue and slang terms
like dude are often coined simple terms for cultural emphases that are
not deep-rooted, and with alteration of the emphases the term³⁸ becomes
obsolescent, or it may survive only in special uses (‘dude-ranch’).

d. Cultural attitudes and backgrounds—e.g. The Hopi linguistic
segmentations of experience with respect to the phenomena of water and
rain pointed out in B1 Ib., (distinction between and usages of ‘wild
water’ and ‘fixed water’, lack of our segmentation ‘wet’, importance of
the segmentation ‘rain’ or ‘rain-aspect of nature’) are in harmony with
Hopi climatic conditions, economic importance of and cultural attitudes
towards water and rain. Plant-names in Hopi form a covert grammatical
class, a “botanical gender”, with reactance a distinct way of forming
plural; this correlates with deep-rooted agricultural and
plant-utilizing nature of Hopi culture. Or we may observe negative
correlation, or discrepancy with culture; e.g. SAE terminology and
linguistic patterns, except for terminology in technological spheres,
does not correlate well with the great importance of machinery and
mechanical-electrical systems in modern life. Names refer too much to
simple block-like outlines, machine-referents are segmented too much
like “objects”, terms do not refer enough to ramified, cobwebby
configurations,³⁹ designations of functions are too narrow, meanings too
limited,⁴⁰ misleading analogies too current.

e. Comparison of negativisms  Where a lge is relatively negative to
another, say to SAE, i.e. it appears to lack both term and concept for a
certain SAE word, the concept may be a cultural one peculiar to one lge
(e.g. to SAE). This pointed out before, and in terms of very obvious
cultural reference occasions no difficulty, but we continually lose
sight of the cultural basis of common familiar words and ideas. Hopi has
a linguistic pattern for indicating age in years or other units, of a
person or anything else, but it has no word for ‘birthday’. Of course
‘birthday’ is a cultural concept of SAE. The Hopi do not celebrate
anniversaries of birth or attach special significance to one’s natal
day. It might be too hastily deduced that lack of a word ‘birthday’
indicated a lack of interest in age or as = haziness as to people’s
ages, but this does not follow, for the question of reckoning age is a
separate one from that of the cultural importance of birthday
anniversaries.

3. Behavior-Patterns as Correlated with Language

Not only collective, group behavior, but personal behavior of
individuals is largely conditioned and channeled by the ‘official’
cultural meanings of the outlines (i.e. ‘objects’) in the environment
wherein the behavior takes place. The ‘official’ cultural meanings are
often deposited in language, sometimes in a simple term like ‘altar’,
‘lamp’, ‘bridge’, sometimes in grammatical forms which express the
‘official’ meaning or function, as in instrumentive terms, e.g.
‘heater’, ‘conveyor’, ‘accelerator’,⁴¹ ‘sprinkler’, ‘defroster’. The
coinage of terms by means of grammatical⁴² operations (moduli), e.g. the
category of meanings indicated by the signature, suffixed -er, -or,
actually determines much individual behavior by giving an ostensible cue
to the meanings of situations and environments. Not only do such cues
operate positively, but also negatively for often important properties
of the environment are obscured by the usual way of speaking about it,
and behavior which is deficient or misdirected as regards the actual
needs of the situation results—including what is called “carelessness”,
or “oversight”. Suppose the motive toward certain behavior is an
interest in fire-prevention in a factory; then the usual linguistic
forms will distribute this behavior in certain ways—the ‘heaters’ will
all be safeguarded but the ‘conveyors’ will probably be overlooked,
though they may convey hot cinders, start fires in bearings, etc. Whorf
has drawn on his experience in fire underwriting for many instances of
this kind. The same thinking occurs with individual “random” behavior
(as well as patterned or group behavior) in exotic cultures, emphasizing
the importance of understanding the culture-languages for insight into
the forms of behavior. Grammatical configuration of terms or linguistic
patterns referring to given situations may give information that could
not be obtained from simple observation nor from questioning answered
only in terms of the questioner’s language (this ties in with B4).
Information of the latter sort may tell investigator that a certain Hopi
object is a ‘prayer-pipe’, that it is smoked during a prayer-ritual,
especially when praying for a good harvest, etc. This information is
important, but it should be coupled with the Hopi linguistic situation.
Whereas a pipe, as such, is called a [Whorf_p368a] this object is a
na´twaNpi, lit. ‘fixed outline for mutual trying, endeavoring’ (on the
pattern of e.g. [Whorf_p369a] ‘fixed outline for sleeping, bed’,
[Whorf_p369b] ‘fixed outline for closing, door’ etc., [Whorf_p369c]
‘try, endeavor, practise’). The informant’s explanation obtained in the
context of these linguistic patterns brings out that smoking the pipe is
treated as an adjunct and aid to ‘concentrating’ in the mind or ‘heart’,
on a desired result, usually the harvest—‘concentrating being a focusing
of the causal power of the Hopian (metaphysical) causal realm and the
basic germinal form of ‘trying’,—‘mutual’ (na-) refers to the mutual or
reflexive interaction between the tryer and the not-yet-manifested
result being tried for, while na´twana ‘mutual trying and being tried
for’, ‘precipitation out of endeavor-power into actuality’, means at the
same time ‘harvest, crops’, as the goal and result par excellence of the
collective Hopi will and endeavor.

4. Study of the Supra-Linguistic and Semi-Linguistic⁴³ Mentality
(Collective or Social) through the Linguistic Approach

a. In general:  This aspect may also be described as the necessity for
linguistic approaches to culture to concern themselves at some time in
their career with avoiding the pitfalls of a trite superficiality. One
of the neglected phases of (linguistic) cultural anthropology is study
of the finer shades of meaning, the deeper intellectual and spiritual
life, the values which are recognized as ideals—often too readily
assumed to be lacking (see Radin in this connection, Primitive Man as
Philosopher). Whorf’s conclusion from linguistics and cultural
anthropology is that just as the traditional view that supposedly
intuitively given intellectual concepts (of the type of space, time,
causality etc.) are really cultural forms of SAE and some other cultures
affiliated, in regard to spiritual values the traditional view is also
reversed; it has proceeded as if spiritual values were a cultural
product of SAE or “civilization”, whereas they are common, in different
forms, to all men, and may represent a real intuitive level of
experience. This level is admittedly very hard to⁴⁴ get at, for it is
not only linguistic (and therefore one step ahead of the non-linguistic
anthropologist) but supra-linguistic (and therefore one step ahead of
even the linguistic anthropologist). It is, in a sense, the most subtle
aspect of the cultural mentality (q.v., supra) and the last realm
reached by boring through the entire linguistic-cultural world outlook.
Religion in its inward aspect, not simply its forms and ceremonies but
what it deeply means, both to the individual and in the collective life,
comes in here, also the ethical and esthetic values of the culture. A
culture, deeply understood, presents emphases on certain large
totalities or integrations of very manifold experiences, which may be
called the spiritual emphases of the culture. These emphases may be very
little talked about, even in the native language, yet they may be the
field of much unuttered brooding, wondering, and formulating which is
not merely individual, for it comes out on rare occasions, or in
esoteric initiations and kiva ceremonies, and there achieves a certain
collective basis. Hence it is not non-linguistic, and the language is
shot through with cues and hints toward it, though in too direct
questioning on these points the informant, especially if he is a Pueblo
Indian, may “shut up like a clam”. Cultures may differ widely on what is
felt to be “private”, or “sacred”, or merely “nobody’s business”. One
Hopi informant fuses the Eng. words “secret” and “sacred”, and there is
perhaps no difference in Hopi thought. Any student would get the
impression that Pueblo culture is intensely introspective for all its
insistence on outward ceremonial. Hopi even has a pronoun⁴⁵ which is
supposed to be merely thought, not spoken, except when quoting⁴⁶
thoughts. This is han ‘I as thinker’ with certain differences in
accompanying verb form (cf. Eng. ‘thinks I’, ‘says I to myself’, 1st
person used as 3rd person with 3rd pers. verb). The Eng. form is however
often said, not the Hopi. The Hopi thinks to himself⁴⁷ han 
[Whorf_p360d] ‘I’ll sleep’, but if he intends to communicate this
thought he says aloud [Whorf_p370a] ‘I’ll sleep’, while if he is talking
of another’s thoughts, then⁴⁸ he will pronounce the word han, and say
“that fellow is thinking [Whorf_p371a]”. If asked the meaning of han he
says “I” and may add “the same as [Whorf_p371b]” and on questioning
explains that it is used only in thinking or “talking to yourself”.
There are very many ideas which (unlike han) are nowhere summed up in
definite words (e.g. the ideas underlying Eng. gender or to take a
simpler case of “cultural fish classes” are not), yet they exist as
large wholes or massive configurations of linguistic-cultural
organization. Here again, the road lies through the more overt patterns
of language, thence through the more covert, but it need not stop there,
it leads on to the deeper shades of meaning and the spiritual
orientations of the culture and of personalities.

b. Kinds of translations. In connection with the above, important to
distinguish 3 kinds of translations of cultural terms and references;
viz. “official” “literal” and “interpretative”. The first is what its
name implies and is usually first given by the informant, the second is
systematic and in terms of a knowledge of grammar and the analysis of
the form, the third is psychological and cultural, and takes in the
informant’s detailed explanations and the interpreter’s knowledge and
insight into “ethnolinguistics”—native segmentations of experience,
metaphysics, cultural mentality. For example Hopi paho off.
‘prayer-stick’, lit. ‘wild-water arrow’, interp. cannot here be given as
it would involve too much discussion of religious ideas, of the symbolic
meaning of [Whorf_p359d] ‘wild water’ or ‘aqueous element’⁴⁹ subtle or
fluid essence contrasted with⁵⁰ solid form, and of the “subtle arrow”
which goes into the super-terrestrial world. For [Whorf_p371c] informant
gives off. tr. ‘north-wind great spirit’ and⁵¹ less spontaneously
‘north-wind chief’ (which he may realize is too literal, [Whorf_p371d];
is lit. ‘chief’). Grammatical analysis gives us lit. tr. ‘from-the-north
chief’ which in this case tells us very little. There is no explicit
reference to ‘wind’ (no wind or stem for wind) in the form, yet the form
conveys a certain idea which the native renders (officially) as ‘wind’.
The interp. tr. then is obtained from informant’s explanation, which
brings out that the idea is not “a wind that blows” but the influence of
a certain one of the (cosmic) 6 directions (these “directional
influences” have the subtle nature⁵² of winds, but need not be
manifested as objective winds). A sentence with literal grammatically
analyzed translation is e.g. na·v (by-himself) haqa´wat (any-obj.) sinot
(person-obj.) [Whorf_p372a] (good-intentions-who-has-obj.) [Whorf_p372d]
(by-him) [as personal agent]⁵³  [Whorf_p372e] (these) [Whorf_p372f]
(all-directions-from) [Whorf_p372b] (chiefs, rulers) pεw (to-here)
[Whorf_p372c] (to-us) yo´k^(w)nayani (they-will-cause-rain). A somewhat
interp. tr. is ‘the collective directional spirits may bring us rain
through the agency of any person who has sincere (na·v) good intentions
in the matter’.

c. Understanding of symbolism.⁵⁴  Symbolism, being a form of reference
that plays upon subtle and supra-linguistic meanings, often eludes
direct questioning. Yet it is so far linguistic that it influences
profoundly the use of language and hence it may be studied through the
language patterns it produces. In Aztec of the Conquest period there is
very much symbolic allusion to flowers; study of the language patterns
shows that the flower-symbolism is not that of SAE. Flowers do not
symbolize delicacy and femininity so much as⁵⁵ all that is proud, fiery,
aristocratic, and somewhat like flags, crests, or spearheads. The
characterizing of flowers as sweet or fragrant need not alter this
masculine symbology, and hence such ideas as fragrance and sweetness
differ in connotation from with us. The idea of sweet flowerlike
fragrance applied symbolically in the human sphere might suggest to us a
gentle maiden, but to the Aztec a haughty cacique.⁵⁶ If this symbolism
is not understood the frequent references to “beautiful, sweet flowers”
in Aztec songs will have to us a delicate feminine ring which is foreign
to the spirit of the original. So also with the symbolism of jewels or
of birds among the Aztec or of corn and rain with the Hopi—it is never
quite the same symbolism as with us, and to appreciate it we must not
only know the culture but perform two operations of a linguistic nature:
(1) disabuse ourselves of the effect of our own literary language in its
allusions to e.g. corn and rain, (2) assimilate the native linguistic
patterns, segmentations, and meanings that are tied in with the native
employment of the symbolism.

d.⁵⁷ Ideas not independently lexated.  “Lexation” and “lexated” (terms
applying to the research in config. linguistics, grammar, A4 of report,
not discussed therein) are terms used by the author for the status of a
meaning or idea when it is connected with a lexeme (i.e. a word as item
in the lexicon, not a word as element in a sentence). Thus the meaning
of the words ‘feminine’ and ‘blueprint’ are lexations, the meaning of
the Eng. feminine gender category is not a lexation but is linguistic,
the meaning of a blueprint is neither a lexation nor linguistic. Many
ideas, even though linguistic are never lexated, e.g. the meanings of
grammatical categories are not (the idea lexated as “noun” is not the
idea of the Eng. noun category itself, but rather a surrogate for it).
Many ideas which are akin to lexations are never lexated independently,
i.e. have no lexemic sign which is not, in the very nature of the case,
also a sign for some other and perhaps much more obvious idea, so that
the former idea may easily elude observation. A stranger to our culture
would not at first find in the word radio any meaning but that of the
common household article ‘box containing receiving set’. Such ideas as
‘science of ether-wave transmission’ and ‘collectivity of performers in
the public notice who broadcast’ (cf. similar meanings attached to
stage, pulpit, prize-ring, turf) would not appear to him until he had
steeped himself in the language. Or consider the noun press and the
different meanings which are not lexated independently therefrom!
Moreover non-lexated linguistic ideas may be attached not to single
words but to phrases, to word groups or classes, patterns, “turns of
phrase”, symbolisms and what not. Further, concepts which are basically
not linguistic at all but derived from contemplation of visual symbols,
(like a concept formed by pondering over a blueprint) may be secondarily
attached to linguistic references.⁵⁸ Non-lexated meanings bulk
especially large on the spiritual levels of a culture. They can be best
approached by working through the more explicit linguistic element [sic]
until the researcher not only knows⁵⁹ words but when the occasion calls
for it can see through the disguise of words to meanings of a more
subtle order. In Hopi kik^(w)së is the word for ‘breath’, but in certain
contexts a fairly sophisticated informant feels it should be rendered
‘spirit of the breath’; moÑ^(w)i ‘chief’ when denoting the being of a
cosmic direction he renders ‘spirit’ or ‘great spirit’; these are cases
somewhat like that of radio.⁶⁰ It follows that the lack of a certain
type of idea cannot be argued from an apparent lack of a term for the
idea. In Hopi the absence of a lexation corresponding either to our
‘God’ or ‘(a) god’, does not mean that the Hopi do not have as part of
their own culture the idea of a cosmic or universal being which is
deeply and as it were religiously felt. Such an idea is definitely
present; there is merely no lexation or no one lexation for it. It may
be behind many different lexical allusions and circumlocutions, such as
‘chief’, ‘person’, ‘persons’, (cf. the effect in Eng. of writing these
words with a capital letter), ‘breath’, ‘from all the directions’, the
phrase [Whorf_p375a] ‘Great Something’ or ‘Great What’, etc. So too the
absence of any one lexation for that erstwhile favorite of ethnologists,
‘mana’ does not mean that ideas of a subtle, indwelling, impersonal
power are not present.

e. Correct recognition of the immaterial values of a culture.  For
example⁶¹ a non-linguistic approach to Hopi culture, or even a
superficial type of linguistic approach could perhaps give the idea that
the religion consists largely of external ceremonial and that inner
realizations and inner states are not important. But Hopi religion
learned about through the Hopi language gives a different picture.⁶² (It
is believed that the testimony of Kennard on this point will be the same
as Whorf’s). Like the whole Hopi view of life, it is seen to stress
inner mental activity to a high degree, outward ceremonies being almost
in the status of “symptoms” of inner states, though symptoms regarded as
important assurances that the inner work of the religious community is
being properly done, and as essential to effective mobilization of
individuals⁶³ into a powerful, co-operating mental group. The language
is rich in terms for ‘concentrating’ the mind, for various modes of
mental action and existence etc., these terms and ideas appearing
frequently in ritual and in public speeches of chiefs, etc. The
terminology and phraseology also indicate that the emphasis is not on
inner experiences of a receptive and passive type (inner perceptions,
feelings, religious emotion, visions, messages, revelations) although
there are some words having such reference, but on those of a projective
and dynamic type (directing of will, good intent, wielding of “power”,
concentrated thought as sufficient cause, thinking activity harnessed to
the religious purpose, etc.). Through its emphasis on will and thought
rather than receptivity, feeling, or sensation, the religion and in fact
the whole immaterial culture might be called “thelistic” and
intellectual—of course in its own intellectual terms, not ours. But this
might be easily missed in a non-linguistic approach, and the abundance
of ritual then contrasted with other religious cultures of a
“vision-quest” character in such a way as to give the idea of a mere
empty formalism. The “inner work” is not much talked about; it is
thought in linguistic and quasi-linguistic thought forms, which come up
readily in the innocent discussion of Hopi linguistic meanings when too
pointed questions about what one thinks during ceremonies get nowhere.
The investigator who uses only English often cannot get at what the
native thinks without direct quizzing, and under quizzing the Hopi
will-power can easily manifest in a form that about such things has been
styled “won’t-power”.

End—Reference to Part II The Historical Aspect⁶⁴

This document was first published in Penny Lee’s The Whorf Theory
Complex: A Critical Reconstruction (Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1996),
where it was referred to as “The Yale Report” and discussed in detail in
chapter 3. The editors thank Edith Sjoerdsma for her help with minor
corrections in preparation for this republication. The original
seventeen-page handwritten draft document, together with nine finalized
typed pages which comprise a little more than the first seven of the
draft, is in the Yale University Library Manuscripts and Archives, and
is available on microfilm as part of Benjamin Lee Whorf Papers (1979).
It is published here with the permission of Yale University Library
Manuscripts and Archives. The footnotes that follow are Lee’s
annotations.

1. The “Yale Report” is probably as important in theoretical and
historical terms as the papers included in Carroll’s 1956 collection of
Whorf’s writings entitled Language, Thought, and Reality. In reproducing
the report I have used the more final, typed version as far as it goes
and, with the exception of a few of the more interesting variations from
the handwritten draft to which I have drawn attention in footnotes, have
not attempted to make a detailed comparison of the two versions. From
page eight I have worked from the handwritten copy, keeping to the
format established in the typed part. In order to remain true to the
style of the original I have not added omitted articles or altered other
features characteristic of a draft. Where arrows into the place of
insertion in the text indicate Whorf’s intentions regarding marginal or
other additional comments I have included these as directed, noting the
fact in footnotes where the passage consists of more than a word or
phrase. These changes include transposing the penultimate and final
sections of the report as directed by a marginal note. I have also noted
the more interesting deletions where legible, ignoring smaller ones
which consist of repeated words, etc.

2. This part seems not to have been attempted, even in draft form, but
see note 4 below.

3. End of original typed page 1.

4. In the handwritten draft there is a line across the page at this
point and several additional sections are listed (see below) opposite
the marginal note: “Part II The Historical Aspect”:

“5. Time-Perspective as seen in one language (including both vocabulary
and grammatical patterning) in correlation with culture.

6. Adaptation of a language to New Conditions especially Cultural
Influences

a. Inventive adaptation

b. Loan influences—loan words, loan translations, borrowed patterns

C The Concept of Linguistic Taxonomy (This heading is circled and an
arrow indicates that Whorf would have placed it after D).

D Historical Comparative Linguistics

1. Reconstructive Linguistics

Azteco (spelled Azeteo?)-Tanoan

2. Linguistic Map of North America

3. Notes on theories of belts, areas, and substrata”

Although materials relating to some of these sections may be found in
the Whorf and Trager archival collections, the sections seem not to have
been written, probably, I would hazard a guess, because of Trager’s lack
of involvement in what report writing was done and also the apparent
abandonment of the report itself as an activity which might be
fruitfully completed.

5. Names reversed in handwritten version.

6. “Doctors” added to typed version.

7. “his constant” omitted in typed version.

8. End of original typed page 2.

9. “(e.g. off-glide i in ai, ei, oi as diphthongal unit phonemes),” in
original omitted.

10. End of original typed page 3.

11. With respect to Whorf’s rendering of Hopi words I have tried to
reproduce the originals as closely as possible.

12. End of original typed page 4.

13. End of original typed page 5.

14. End of original typed page 6.

15. “(where ‘running’ is not long durative)” in margin of draft. P7 ends
at end of this sentence.

16. End of original typed page 8.

17. “runs” underlined in draft.

18. These two longer glosses of ‘pay’ are transposed in the draft. A
marginal note not included in the typed version adds: “or in still
different words ‘suddenly now and all over’ or ‘in process of being for
the moment’”.

19. In the draft this reads: “as the head (qötö), hole (höci), or mound
(como) of a region.”

20. End of original typed page 9. Whorf included a slash mark and noted
“10” in the draft at this point which is several lines into handwritten
page 8.

21. Whorf differentiated between examples and the rest of his text by
printing them rather than writing them in cursive script. I will
continue to underline these words as he did in the typed part of the
report.

22. This sentence is encircled in the original.

23. Written then deleted in original. An arrow through the text
indicated that Whorf wanted to bring this sentence and the next three up
to this point in the text from further down.

24. An arrow moves this sentence below the previous section.

25. End of original handwritten page 8.

26. End of original handwritten page 9.

27. Article written then deleted in original. A marginal note at this
point reads “above the term “ethnolinguistics” is suggested for this
type of study.”

28. End of handwritten page 10.

29. Marginal note: “refer to in d” at this point.

30. “and” deleted.

31. “for” deleted.

32. “need not” deleted.

33. The remainder of this section is written as a marginal note with an
arrow to indicate point of insertion in the text.

34. “tell” deleted.

35. Space left in original.

36. End of original handwritten page 11.

37. This sentence was written as a marginal note.

38. “[indecipherable word] vogue” deleted. This sentence was added
later.

39. “and organizations [indecipherable word]” deleted.

40. “internal processes with machines too much scamped (?) over”
deleted.

41. “or ‘exhilarator’” deleted.

42. End of original handwritten page 12.

43. “Quasi-” inserted above “Semi-”.

44. End of original handwritten page 13.

45. Underlining of “pronoun” deleted.

46. “another’s apparent” deleted.

47. “only perhaps” deleted.

48. “and only then” deleted.

49. End of handwritten page 14.

50. “distinguished” deleted.

51. “somewhat” deleted.

52. “or inner form” deleted.

53. Whorf’s square brackets.

54. Marginal notes at this point:

“c. understanding of symbolism

d. correct recognition of immaterial values of a culture

e. ideas never independently lexified”

55. The original sentence includes a number of deletions (underlined) as
follows: “[ . . . ] as they [indecipherable] all that is proud, fiery,
and warlike (“aristocratic” inserted above), they are thought of
somewhat as like battle flags, martial crests or spearheads
[indecipherable].”

56. Marginal sentence with arrow showing point of insertion in text.

57. Following the marginal note: “interchange d. and e.” at this point I
have transposed the content of the original sections d. and e. The
original unnumbered page between 14 and 15 ends seven lines from this
point with the words “inner realizations and inner” from what is now
section e. below. The original page 15 starts with the words “states are
not important” and ends with the words “never lexated independently”
from original section e. which is now section d. The final page
(numbered 16 although it is the 17th page) begins with “i.e. have no
lexemic sign” and finishes with a place for the authors’ signatures.

58. This sentence inserted later.

59. “all the” deleted.

60. “with Hopian metaphysics also involved” deleted.

61. “it might perhaps be supposed from” deleted.

62. “[indecipherable] extensively studied the language knows it
[indecipherable] is almost the reverse that is true” deleted.

63. “minds” deleted.

64. Following a space, provision was made for signatures as follows:

“Date              Signatures”
