              7
A SI LLUST!
  A ND THE        NN ERS”
          JOHN      LUBBOCK




PRE-HISTORIC                        TIMES
           AS   ILLUSTRATED   BY


     ANCIENT           REMAINS
                 AND   THE


MANNERS   AND     CUSTOMS      OF   MODERN
                 SAVAGES




            Elibron Classics
           www.elibron.com
Elibron Classics series.


© 2005 Adamant Media Corporation.


ISBN 1-4212-7039-0 (paperback)
ISBN 1-4212-7038-2 (hardcover)



This Elibron Classics Replica Edition is an unabridged facsimile
of the edition published in 1872 by Williams and Norgate, London
and Edinburgh.



Elibron and Elibron Classics are trademarks of
Adamant Media Corporation. All rights reserved.
This book is an accurate reproduction of the original. Any marks,
names, colophons, imprints, logos or other symbols or identifiers
that appear on or in this book, except for those of Adamant Media
Corporation and BookSurge, LLC, are used only for historical
reference and accuracy and are not meant to designate origin or
imply any sponsorship by or license from any third party.
          a                   twa!
         ie                    *
               i               ;            :
                                            ad
          ee                                     7


es
     ~         oral      /




                        °“y        ‘
                   *,                   ~


                                       om
                                        ~~
PREHISTORIC   TIMES.
            LONDON
GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, PRINTERS,
       ST. JOHN’S SQUARL.
  PRE-HISTORIC                                                                            TIMES,
                                             AS   ILLUSTRATED         BY




                    ANCIENT                              REMAINS,
                                                   AND       THE




MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF MODERN SAVAGES,

                                                        BY


                  SIR        JOHN            LUBBOCK,                       Baru, M P.
    VICE-PRESIDENT      OF   THE   ROYAL   SOCIETY;    VICE-PRESIDINT           OF    THE       BRITISM   ASSOCIATION;
 PRESIDENT   OT   THE   ANTHROPOLOGICAL      INSTITUTE;        AND     FELLOW        OT   THE     LINNZAN,    GEOLOGICAL,
                                     AND   OTHER      LEARNED        SOCIETIES.




                                     THIRD               HDITION.




                WILLIAMS AND NORGATE,
     14, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON;
                               AND
            20, SOUTH FREDERICK STREET, EDINBURGH.

                                                      187 2.
                               (Lhe right of Translation is reserved. |
         Digitized by the Internet Archive
             in 2023 with funding from
              Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/prehistorictimesOOOOsirj
         PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

      N this work I present to the public some essays
         on Pre-historic Archeology, part of which have
appeared          in the Natural History Review, viz. that
on—
      The Danish Shell-mounds, in October, 1861.
      The Swiss Lake-dwellings, in January, 1862.
      The Flint Implements of the Drift, in July, 1862.
   North American Archsology, in January, 1863.
   Caye-men, in July, 1864.
   Messrs. Williams and Norgate suggested to me to
republish these articles in a separate form: and I was
further encouraged to do so by the fact that most of
them had re-appeared, either in France or America.
The conductors             of the Annales des Sciences Natu-
relles    did me the honour to translate those on the
Danish Shell-mounds             and the Swiss Lake-dwellings.
The      latter     algo    appeared   in Siliman’s   Journal ;
and      the article on American        Archeology, with the
vl                              PREFACH.


exception of the last paragraph, was reprinted in the
Smithsonian Report, for 1862 *.
     At first I only contemplated reprinting the papers
as they stood;          but having,        at the request of the
managers, delivered at the Royal Institution a short
course of lectures on the Antiquity of Man,                         it was
thought desirable to introduce the substance of these,
so as to give the work a more complete character.
     My object has been to elucidate, as far as possible,
the principles of pre-historic archeology; laying spe-
cial stress upon the indications which it affords of the
condition of man in primeval times.                    The tumuli, or
burial-mounds, the peat-bogs of this and other coun-
tries, the Kjékkenméddings or shell-mounds of Den-
mark, the Lake-habitations of Switzerland, the bone-
caves and the river-drift gravels, are here our principal
sources of information.
     In order to qualify myself, as far as possible, for
the task which I have undertaken, I have visited not
only our three great museums                    in London,        Dublin,
and Edinburgh, but also many on the Continent;                           as,
for instance, those at Copenhagen, Stockholm, Lund,
Flensburg, Aarhuus, Lausanne, Basle, Berne, Zurich,

   * The article on Cave-men was also translated in the Annales des Sciences
Naturelles, fifth ser. vol. ii., and that on North American Archoology in the
Revuo Archéologique for 1865.
                            PREFACE.                          vii

Yverdon, Paris, Abbeville, etc., besides many private
collections of great interest, of which I may particu-
larly specify those of M. Boucher de Perthes, Messrs.
Christy,     Evans,     Bateman,   Forel,   Schwab,      Troyon,
Gilli¢ron, Uhlmann, Desor, and lastly, the one recently
made by MM. Christy and Lartet in the bone-caves of
the Dordogne.
   Sometimes     alone, and sometimes in company with
Messrs. Prestwich        and Evans, I have made numerous
visits to the valley of the Somme, and have examined
almost every gravel-pit and section from Amiens down
to the sea.      In 1861, with Mr: Busk, and again in
1863, I went     to Denmark, in order to have the ad-
vantage of sceing the Kjikkenméddings             themselves.
Under the guidance of Professor Steenstrup, I visited
several of the most celebrated shell-mounds, particu-
larly those at Havelse, Bilidt, Meilgaard, and Fanne-
rup.     I also made myself familiar with so much of the
Danish language as was necessary to enable me to read
the various reports drawn up by the Kjokkenmédding
committee,     consisting of Professors     Steenstrup, Wor-
saae,   and Forchhammer.           Last year I went to the
north    of Scotland,     to examine    some   similar    shell-
mounds     discovered by Dr. Gordon,        of Birnie, on the
shores of the Moray Firth, which            appear, however,
Vill                      PREFACE.

to     belong to a much      later period     than    those    of
Denmark.
     In 1862 M. Morlot very kindly devoted himself to
me for nearly a month, during which time we not only
visited the principal museums of Switzerland, but also
several of the Lake-habitations        themselves, and par-
ticularly those at Morges, Thonon, Wauwyl, Moossece-
dorf, and the Pont de Thiele.           In addition to many
minor     excursions,   I had, finally, last       spring,    the
advantage of spending some           time with Mr. Christy
among the celebrated       bone-caves      of the Dordogne.
Thus, by carefully examining the objects themselves
and the localities in which they have been found, I
have endeavoured to obtain a more vivid and correct
impression of the facts than books, or even museums,
alone could have given.
   To the more strictly archeological part of the
work I have added some chapters on the Manners and
Customs      of Modern     Savages,     confinmg     myself    to
those tribes which are still, or were, when first visited
by travellers, ignorant of the use of metal, and which
have been described by competent            and _trustworthy
observers.     This account, incomplete as it is, will be
found, I think, to throw some         light on the remains of
savage life in ages long gone by.
                              PREFACE.                                 ix

   Fully satisfied that religion and science cannot in
reality be at variance, I have striven in the present
publication to follow out the rule laid down by the
Bishop of London, in his excellent lecture delivered
last year at Edinburgh.           The man of science, says Dr.
Tait, ought to go on, ‘honestly, patiently, diffidently,
observing and storing up his observations, and carry-
ing lis reasonings          unflinchingly to their legitimate
conclusions,      convinced that       it would     be treason        to
the majesty at once of science and of religion if he
sought to help either by swerving ever so little from
the straight rule of truth *.”
   Ethnology, in fact, is passing at present through a
phase from which other Sciences have safely emerged;
and the new views with reference to the Antiquity of
Man,     though     still looked      upon with       distrust      and
apprehension,       will, I doubt not, in a few years, be
regarded with as little disquietude as are now those
discoveries    in astronomy and geology, which                  at one
time excited even greater opposition.
   I have great pleasure in expressing my gratitude
to many archeological friends for the liberal manner
in which their museums have been thrown open to me,

  * Lecture on Science and Revelation delivered at Edinburgh.    See the
Times, November 7th, 1864.
x                                  PREFACE,


and     for much            valuable   assistance      in other ways.
My thanks            are     due    to Professor        Steenstrup        for
many      of the figures            by which       the work       is illus-
trated.      Others, through           the kindness      of Sir W. R.
Wilde,      Mr. Franks,            and Dr.      Thurnam,        haye   been
placed at my disposal by the Society of Antiquarics,
and the Royal Irish Academy.                      To Professor Steen-
strup, Dr. Keller,             M. Morlot,        and   Professor       Riiti-
meyer,      I am indebted for much information on the
subject of their             respective       investigations.      Finally,
Mr. Busk, Mr. Evans, and Professor Tyndall have
had the great kindness to read many of my proots,
and I am             indebted      to them       for various      valuable
suggestions.

      CHISELHURST,
          February, 1865.
        PREFACE        TO THE SECOND EDITION.

    N     preparing      a New   Edition    of Prua-x1storic
         Times,    I have endeavoured,     as far as possible,
to avoid unduly increasing the size of the book; and
although the present work will be found to contain a
great number of new facts, some of the chapters being
indeed almost re-written, still it is only increased in
size to the extent of one hundred pages.          Nearly half
of these are occupied by the addition of more than
seventy     new    figures, which   will tend to diminish,
rather than increase, the time occupied by its perusal.
   This course has compelled me to omit all reference
to many researches of much merit and interest, while
in other cases I have been obliged to treat the labour
of years in a few short sentences.         The true force of
the evidence in support of archeological conclusions
is thus materially weakened, by being deprived of its
cumulative character, but I have endeavoured m many
cases    to meet      the objection by the introduction of
statistical tables.
Xil                             PREFACE.

      Since the first edition was published, I have visited
the principal German and Italian museums, and have
been in correspondence with the most active archo-
logists both in Europe and also across the Atlantic.
      I cannot attempt here to express in any suitable
manner my gratitude for the assistance which I have
received.       Every museum         which I have visited       has
been thrown open to me with the greatest liberality ;
and every archeologist whom                I have consulted has
given me the readiest and fullest information.
      No one can be more sensible              than I am of the
many shortcomings           of this work.       Those,     however,
who perceive them most clearly, will,              I am    sure, be
disposed to judge them             leniently, because      they will
best be able to appreciate the difficulty of keeping
pace with a Science which              has so many        and such
enthusiastic        votaries;    the results    of whose     carnest
labour are to be found scattered through a numbcr
of periodicals, published in many different countrics
and in various tongues.

       Hies Exus, Down, Kent,
             March, 1869.
                           CONTENTS.


                               CHAPTER           I.
                             INTRODUCTION.
                                                                                 PAGE
Division of Pre-historie    archwology   into   four periods—First      disco-
  very of metal—Allusions to bronze in ancient writers—Lucretius—
  Ticfenau—Find of iron objects at Nydam, in Slesviek—Owner’s marks
  —Inscriptions at Nydam—Nature of archaological evidence—Sta-
  tistics—Pottery of the different ages—Bronze weapons not of Roman
  origin—Geographical distribution of bronze weapons—Summary of
  argument—Bronze weapons not Saxon—Hallstadt



                            CHAPTER II.
                 ON THE USE OF BRONZE IN ANCIENT TIMES.
Bronze   eelts—Bronze   swords—Bronze     spears—Bronze    fish-hooks     and
  sickles—Bronze knives—Bronze ornaments—The metallurgy of the
  Bronze Age—Gold ornaments—List of bronze objects—Dress during
  the Bronze Age—Burial during the Bronze Age—Hut-urns—Pen-pits
  —Picts’ Houses—Beehive houses—The Burgh of Moussa—Staigue fort,
  Kerry .     0    “   0   .    .    °    :   °   .



                             CHAPTER III.
                           THE BRONZE AGE,
Similarity of bronze implements in different countries—The Bronze Age
  and the Phoenicians—Ancient voyages. Himileo—Pytheas—Phee-
  nician colonies and commerce—Copper—Tin—Traces of Baal worship
  in Northern Europe—Objections to the Pheenician theory .
xiv                              CONTENTS.

                              CHAPTER        IV.
                    THE USE OF STONE IN ANCIENT TIMES.
                                                                               PAGE
The great abundance of stone implements—Grimes’ Graves—Pressigny
  —Mode of obtaining flakes—Modern flakes—Mannufacture of flakes in
  Mexico, and among the Hsquimaux—Ancient manufactories—The use
  of ancient stone axes—Scrapers—Shell-mound          axes—Chisels—Awls
  —Spears—Daggers—Slingstones—Arrowheads—Bone implements—
  Harpoons—Flint finds . :   -   0   ;   :   .   °   oe   ey                     YAS

                             CHAPTER V.
                    MEGALITHIC MONUMENTS AND TUMULI.
Tumuli—Menhirs—Stone circles—Mention of stone circles and tumuli in
  ancient history—Megalithic monuments not Druidical—Abury—Sil-
  bury Hill more ancient than the Roman road—Stonehenge—Carnac—
  Modern use of stone circles—Megalithic monuments in India—Modern
  Indian dolmens—Stone circles, etc.,in Palestine and other countries—
  Resemblance between the chambered tumuli and the dwellings of some
  Arctic nations—Hut-burial among modern savages—Long barrows—
  Picts’ houses—Objects buried with the dead not always intended for
  actual use—Lists of interments—Models of implements sometimes
  buried—Barrows belong to very different periods—Difficulty of deter-
  mining the period to which a tumulus belongs—Tabulated interments—
  Statistics—Danish tumulus in the Island of Méen—Description of a
  barrow at West Kennet—Pottery from the West Kennet tumulus—
  Breton tumuli—Sepulchral pottery—Rock Sculptures—Bones of ani-
  mals in tumuli—Sepulchral feasts—Sacrifices—Pre-historic races of
  men—Desirability of preserving tumuli       :   2    :    :   ;      7109

                              CHAPTER        VI.
              THE   ANCIENT   LAKE-HABITATIONS   OF   SWITZERLAND.

Lake-dwellings mentioned by Herodotus—Irish crannoges—Pile dwell-
  ings in other parts of Europe—Modern lake-dwellings—Lake-dwellings
  found in most of the Swiss lakes—Lake-dwellings—Attempt to make
  a census—Construction of the platforms—Comparison of dwellings in
  large and small lakes—Comparison        of lake-dwellings     of different
  periods—Preparation of the piles—Number of piles used—Description              |
  of the remains at Wauwyl—Weapons and implements of the lakemen
  —Axes—Knives —Saws—Spindle        Whorls—Flakes — Arrowheads—
  Implements of bone and wood—Pottery—Dress—The                fauna of the
  lake-dwellings—Moosseedorf—The       fauna—Birds—Mouse—Cat—Ass
  —Horse—Boar—Sus Palustris—Comparison of the bones belonging to
  wild and domesticated races—Oxen—Absence of extinct species—
  Aurochs—Elk—Ibex—General character of the fauna—Comparison of
  the different lake-villages—The flora of the Pfahlbauten—Cultivated
  plants—Scarcity of human remains—Objects of bronze—The worship
                                  CONTENTS.                                XV

                                                                          PAGE
  of Lakes—The Pottery of the Bronze Age—Inhabitants of the lake.
  villages—Character of the objects found in different lake-villages—
  Antiquity of lake-villages .    4    i   60    :    5    °    so Ab

                               CHAPTER. VII.
              THE DANISH KJOKKENMODDINGS,        OR SHELL-MOUNDS,
Danish tumuli—Kjékkenméddings, or shell-mounds—Description of the
  shell-mounds—Distribution of the shell-mounds—Shell-mounds in
  Scotland—Shell-mounds in other countries—Flora of the Danish shell-
  mounds—Fauna of the shell-mounds—Fish—Birds—Mammals—Con-
  dition of the bones—Prevalence of certain bones—Habits of the mound-
  builders—Flint implements      from the shell-mounds—Absence       of
  polished   flint implements—Food      of the shell-mound builders—The
  relation of the shell-mounds to the tumuli—The opinions of Messrs.
  Steenstrup and Worsaae—Antiquity of the shell-mounds    .    .     . 223


                           CHAPTER             VIII
                       NORTH    AMERICAN    ARCH ZOLOGY,

Bibliography—Classification of antiquities—implements—The use of
  copper—Ancient copper-mines—Pottery—Ornaments—Harthworks—
  Enclosures—Sacred enclosures—Harthworks of the Scioto valley—
  Aztalan—Vitrified walls—Modern earthworks—Chunk yards—Ancient
  modes of burial—So-called sacrificial mounds—Grave Creek mound—
  Temple Mounds—Animal mounds—Rock carvings—Wampum—The
  mound-builders—Gigantic earthworks—Traces of ancient agriculture
  —Antiquity of the remains—Condition of the bones—American forests
  —Indications of four periods—Man and the mastodon—Antiquity of
  man in America                                                        . 250


                           CHAPTER             IX.
                          QUATERNARY       MAMMALIA.

Succession of species—Tho cave-bear—The cave-hyzena—The caye-lion
  —The mammoth—Hxistence        of the African elephant in Hurope—The
 quaternary species of rhinoceros—Rhinoceros Tichorhinus—The musk
 ox—The hippopotamus—tThe Irish elk—Wild horses—The reindeer
 —The Aurochs—The uras—Elk—Lemming—Snowy owl—Mollusca
 —Links between existing species—Climate of the quaternary period
 —Probable fluctuations of climate             .    .    :   :    5 eee)

                           CHAPTER             X.
                                 CAVE   MEN.

Caves in the South of France—Belgian caves—Kent’s Hole—Brixham
  cave—Sicilian   caves—Gibraltar caves—Aurignac—Wokey    hole—
xV1                             CONTENTS.

                                                                            PAGE

  Caves   in the Dordogne—@eology        of the Dordogne—Fauna     of the
  Dordogne cayes—Absence     of domestic    animals—Flint implements—
  Flakes—Scrapers—Awls, etc.—Hammers—Lanceheads—Relative an-
  tiquity of the remains—Absence of polished implements—Bone im-
  plements—Representations of animals—Drawing of reindeer and
  mammoth—Sculpture—Habits of the cave-dywellers—Human remains
  —The Engis skull—The Neanderthal skull—Caye men      .    A    . 312


                           CHAPTER            XI.
                         RIVER-DRIFT    GRAVEL-BEDS.

M. Boucher de Perthes—Mr. Prestwich and Mr. Hyans—Mr. Frere’s
  discovery in 1800—Similar discoveries elsewhere—Similar discoveries
  in other countries—Spain—Assyria—India—Antiquity as shown by
  physical geography—The questions at issue—Hvidence derivable from
  the flints themselves—The forgeries—Character of the true drift im-
  plements—Forms of drift implements—Drift implements never ground
  —Scarcity of human bones—Scarcity of men in ancient times—Pro-
  portion of men to other animals in the Hudson’s Bay Territory—Tho
   elephant and rhinoceros—Characteristics of the drift-beds—Physical
  geography of the Somme valley—St. Acheul—Organic remains—
  Mineralogical constituents of the river-drift gravels—Objections to the
  proposed theory—Ice action—Fresh-water origin of the grayels—
  Inapplicability of cataclysms—Alteration of the river level—Gradual
  excavation of the valley—The lower level gravel-beds—Their Fauna—
  The peat—Objects found in the peat—Relation of the: loiss to tho
  gravel—Continual changes of river courses—LHleyation of the land—
  Recapitulation   .   6    °     .    :    ‘    :    :   “    5    . 342


                            CHAPTER           XII.
                         ON THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN.
Historical evidence—Hthnological       evidence—Hvidence   derivable from
  physical geography—The vegetation of Denmark—The cone of the
  Tiniére—The valley of the Thitle—The formation of Egypt—The
  gradual elevation of the country, owing to the annual deposit of Nile
  mud—Mr. Horner’s Egyptian researches—Age of the Mississippi delta
  —Lapse of time, as indicated by the change of climate—Sir J. W.
  Lubbock on the earth’s axis—Hffect of a change in the gulf-stream—
  Astronomical causes—Precession of the equinoxes—M. Adhémar’s
  argument—The cupola of ice at the South Pole—Objections to M.
  Adhémar’s Theory—Probable effect of precession—The excentricity of
  the earth’s orbit—Date suggested for the glacial epoch—Hffect of
  rivers on the level of continents—M. Adhémar on changes in tho sea-
  level—Geological changes in the Quaternary period—Geological time
  —Reported evidence of man in the Pliocene period—Miocene man        385
                                     CONTENTS.                                  xvii
                                                                                PAGE
                                CHAPTER         XIII.
                               MODERN       SAVAGES.

The untrustworthiness of tradition—Tendency to the marvellous—No evi-
  dence of degradation—Progress among savages—Hottentots: dress;
  food ; weapons ; metallurgy ; customs ; character—Veddahs—Andaman
  Islanders—Australians : houses; food; rock-engravings ; canoes; im-
  plements; clubs; spears; throwing-sticks; the boomerang; fire;
  clothes; ornaments ; tattooing ; initiation ceremonies; games; super-
  stition; modes of burial; language ;marriage—Tasmanians—Feegee
  Islamders: food; weapons; houses; temples; religion; canoes;
  pottery; games; agriculture; women; dress; tattooing; burial;
  customs ; parricide; horrible rites; cannibalism; character of the
  Feegeeans—Maories: food; dress; ornaments; tattooing; houses;
  fortifications ;weapons; canoes; burial; music; character; religion;
  cannibalism—Tahiti: implements; fish-hooks ; nets; baskets; mats;
  bark-cloth ; dress; canoes; music ; furniture; weapons; food; fire;
  cookery ; ava; a chief’s dinner; solitary meals; surgery; modes of
  burial; Oberea’s morae; government ; ideas of right and wrong; the
  Arreoy society ; general character—The Tongans      9    é    .   » 424



                               CHAPTER         XIV.
                         MODERN     SAVAGES.—continued.

Esquimaue: tents; houses; interior of an Esquimaux house; lamps;
  absence of cleanliness ; stores of food; cookery ; food ; difficulty of ob-
  taining water; fire; implements and weapons; hunting; modes of
  hunting and fishing; sledges; boats; scrapers; clothes, ornaments,
  cheek-studs; music; drawings; religious modes of burial; things
  buried with the dead; character—North American Indians: dress;
  ornaments; labrets; the practice of head-moulding ; religion ; social
  position of women; character; cruelty; infanticide; implements;
  weapons ;bows; knives ; spears; boats; fire ; dwellings ;agriculture;
  maize; rice; animal food; burial; art—Paraguay Indians—Patago-
  nians:    stature;   huts;    dress;   weapons;   food;   burial—Fuegians:
  huts; implements; weapons; food; habits; mode              of fishing; can-
  nibalism; absence of religion; canoes; dress; fre           .    .    °     . 491



                               (CISDAIE TORR    OWN
                         MODERN    sAvVAGES—concluded.

Skilfulness of savages—Varieties of implements—Neatness in sewing—
  Art of drilling—Important works erected by savages—Differences in
  the Stone Age—Different lines of civilization—Differences of weapons
                                                                     a
XVLi                                CONTENTS.

                                                                         PAGE
 —Isolation of savages—Geographical distribution of weapons, etc.—
 Differences between savages—Different uses for the dog—Different
 modes of obtaining fire—Different modes of burial—Descent of pro-
 perty—Differences in prevalent sounds—Differences in signs—Ideas of
 decency—Ideas of virtue—Deification of white men—Curious customs
 —Social position of women—Savages and children—Moral inferiority
 of savages—Intellectual inferiority—Poverty of savage languages—
 Deficiences in numeration—Absence of religion among various savage
 races—Rudiments of religion—Low ideas of the deity—Witchcraft—
 General wretchedness of savages       :   5    .         :    °    . 544


                              CHAPTER           XVI.
                     CONCLUDING             REMARKS

The higher animals—The primitive condition of man—Diffusion of man
  —Harly races of man—Natural selection applied to man—The
  influence of mind—Increase of happiness—Sufferings of savages—
   Anxieties of savages—Superstitious terrors of savages—Self-inflicted
   sufferings—The blessings of civilization—The diminution of suffering—
   The diminution of sin—The advantages of science—The future .          . 584


APPENDIX        :    4    5
 INDEX     4    q    °    5     :
            DESCRIPTION OF THE FIGURES,
                                      —_>—___.




 1. Ancient Danish arrow-head with owner’s mark.
           Engelhardt.  Denmark in the early Iron Age, p. xiii, fig. 35.
 2. Modern Esquimaux arrow-head with owner’s mark.
           In my collection, one-half natural size.
 3. Owner’s marks from various ancient Danish arrows.
           Denmark in the early Iron Age, p. i-xiii.
 4. Copper? celt from Waterford. It is 6 inches long, 33 wide at the broader
        end, and 17 at the smaller, which is about 1-16th thick.
             Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 363.
 5. Winged celt, or Paalstave, from Ireland.
          Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 378.
 6. Socketed celt from Ireland, one-third of the actual size.
            Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 385.
 7-9. The three principal types of celts, and the manner in which they are
       supposed to have been handled.
            Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 367.
10. Kalmuck Axe. Iron. In the collection of the late Dr. Klemm.
11. Copper ? celt from Ireland, one-half of the actual size.
            Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 363.
12. Half of a celt mould from Ireland. It is of mica slate, 6} inches long,
       4 wide, and presents upon the surface the apertures by means of
       which it was adjusted by the other half.
            Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 91.
13, Decorated celt from Ireland. It is 8} inches long, 4 wide at the blade
       end, and half-an-inch thick.
           Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 365.
14. Simple celt from Denmark, one-third of the actual size.
            Nordiske Oldsager idet Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhavn, No. 178.
15. Ornamented celt from Denmark, one-third of the actual size.
           Nordiske Oldsager i det Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhavn, No. 179.
16. Socketed celt from Donmarl, one-third of the actual size.
           Nordiske Oldsager idet Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhayn, No. 195.
17. Bronze celt, Naples. In my collection, one-half nat. size.
nS    nay    a   ue ays       ry)      a         two-thirds nat. size.
19. Stone axe, Denmark.   In my collection,   ei    >    op
20. African axe. The blade is ofiron. In my collection, one-sixth nat. size.
                                       a 2
xx                        DESCRIPTION     OF   THE   FIGURES.

21. Iron sword from a cemetery at Brighthampton in Oxfordshire, one-eighth
       of the actual size.
               Archzologia, vol. xxxviii., pl. 2, fig. 1.
22. Sword from Ireland. It is 234 inches long, 13 wide in the centre of the
      blade, which is margined by a grooved feather edge.
           Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 444.
23. Sword from Sweden, one-fourth of the actual size.
               Nilsson’s Skandinaviska Nordens Ur-invanare, pl. 1, fig. 7.
24. Sword from Switzerland, one-fifth of the actual size.
          In the museum of Col. Schwab. Mitt. Ant. Ges. in Zurich, Bd. xii.,
                 {el Bh
25. Sword from Concise on the Lake of Neufchatel, one-fourth of tho actual
       size.
               In the museum of Col. Schwab.      Mitt. Ant. Ges. in Zurich, Bd. xiii.,
            H. 3.
26. Sword from Scandinavia.
          Atlas for Nordisk Oldkyndighed, pl. iv. fig. 42.
27. Sword from Denmark, found in the Treenhoi tumulus.
          Afb. af. Danske Oldsager og Mindesmeeker, H. 5.
28. Sword from Denmark, one-sixth of the actual size.
          Nordiske Oldsager i det. Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhayn, No. 121.
29. Sword from Denmark, one-sixth of the actual size.
          Nordiske Oldsager i det. Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhavn, No. 123.
 80. Hilt of sword from Denmark, one-fourth of actual size.
               Nordiske Oldsager i det. Kong. Mus. i Kjibenhavn, No. 128.
 81. Hilt of sword from Denmark, one-fourth of actual size.
              Nordiske Oldsager i det. Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhavn, No. 127.
 32. Bronze dagger blade from Ireland. It is 103 inches long, by 23 wide.
        The four rivets by which it was fastened to the handle are still in
        situ.
              Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 448.
 83. Bronze dagger from Ireland, two-thirds of the actual. size.
              Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 458.
 34. Bronze dagger blade from Ireland, one-third of the actual size.
              Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 463.
 35. Bronze spear-head from Ireland.      It is 11} inches long, by 14 broad.
              Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 499.
 36, Bronze spear-head from Ireland.      It is 18} inches long, by 2} broad.
              Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 496.
 87. Bronze knife from Denmark, one-half of the actual size.
                Nordiske Oldsager i det Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhavn, No. 167.
 38. Bronze knife from Denmark, one-third of the actual size.
                Nordiske Oldsager i det Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhayn, No. 169.
 39. Bronze knife from Denmark, one-third of the actual size.
            Nordiske Oldsager i det Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhayn, No. 166.
 40, Bronze knife from the lake-village of Estavayer, on the lake of Neuf-
        chatel, one-half of the actual size.
                Keller. Mit. der Antiq. Ges. in Zurich, Bd. xiii, Abth. 2, H. 3,
                   pl. v. fig. 19,
                      DESCRIPTION     OF   THE    FIGURES.                   xxl

 41. Bronze knife from the lake-village of Estavayer, on the lake of Neuf-
        chatel, one-half of the actual size.
             Keller. Mit. der Antiq. Ges. in Zurich, Bb. xiii, Abth. 2, H. 3,
              pl. v. fig. 20.
 42. Razor-knife from Denmark, one-half of the actual size.
            Nordiske Oldsager i det Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhavn, No. 178.
 43. Razor-knife from Denmark, one-half of the actual size.
            Nordiske Oldsager i det Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhayn, No. 172.
 44, Razor-knife from Denmark, one-half of the actual size.
            Nordiske Oldsager i det Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhayn, No. 171.
 45. Razor-knife from Denmark, one-half of the actual size.
            Nordiske Oldsager i det Kong. Mus. i KjSbenhavn, No. 175.
 46. Small bronze knife in a leather case, from Denmark, two-thirds       of the
        actual size.
            Nordiske Oldsager i det Kong. Mus. i Kjibenhavn, No. 164.
47. Bronze knife, actual size, Denmark.
            Nordiske Oldsager i det Kong. Mus. i Kjibenhavn, No. 170.
48. Bronze knife found by Sir Gardner Wilkinson, at Thebes.
            Lee’s Keller, p. 276.
49. Bronze bracelet from Cortaillod, on the lake of Neufchatel, one-third of
       the actual size.
            Troyon’s Habitations Lacustres, pl. xi., fig. 28.
50. Bronze bracelet from Cortaillod, on the lake of Neufchatel, one-third of
       the actual size.
            Troyon, l.c. pl. xi., fig. 18.
51-54. Bronze hair-pins from the Swiss lakes, one half of the actual size.
            Keller, l. c. Zweiter Bericht, pl. 3.
55. Bronze awl from the Swiss lakes, actual size.
           Keller, l.c. Zweiter Bericht, pl. 3.
56-60. Various small objects of bronze from the Swiss lakes.
           Keller, l.c. Zweiter Bericht, pl. 3.
61. Bronze celt, one-half nat. size. Showing the line of junction of the two
       halves of the mould in which it was cast.
            Found at Aylesford, Kent; and presented to me byG.W. Dasent, Esq.
62. Bronze brooch, Mecklenburgh, three-tenths nat. size.       Showing the
       manner in which it has been mended.
            Lisch. Alterthiimer, H. vii. pl. 4, fig. 2.
68. Bronze celt. Showing the air-vents bent over.
64. Gold torque, consisting of a simple flat strip or band of gold, loosely
      twisted, and having expanded extremities which loop into one another.
      It measures 54 inches across, and was found near Clonmacnoise, in
      Ireland.
           Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 74.
65. Gold fibula, one-half of the actual size.     The hoop is very slender, the
      cups deep and conical.
           Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 56.
66. Smooth massive cylindrical gold ring, with ornamented ends, one-half of
      the actual size.
           Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 52.
Xxil                  DESCRIPTION       OF THE FIGURES.

67. Gold fibula, one-third of t\ e actual size.     The external surfaces of the
       cups are   decorated   with circular indentations surrounding a central
      indented spost. There is also an elegant pattern where the handle
      joins the cups. It is 8$ inches long, and weighs 33 ounces, being the
      heaviest now known to exist.
           Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 60.
67*. Iron ornament, Africa.
68. Inscribed celt.   Museum Kircherianum, Rome. One-half of the actual size.
             Rap. Sugli. Stud. e Sulle Scop. Paleo, nel bacino delle Campagna
               Romana. Rossi.
69. Woollen cap, one-third of the actual size. Found with the bronze sword
       (fig. 27) in a Danish tumulus.
             Afb. af. Danske Oldsager og Mindesmeeker.       Madsen, H. 5.
70. Another woollen cap, one-third of the actual size. Found with the
       preceding.
71. A small comb, one-third of the actual size. Found with the preceding.
72. A woollen cape, one-third of the actual size.        Found with the preceding.
73. A woollen shirt, one-third of the actual size.       Found with the preceding.
74. A woolled shawl, one-third of the actual size.       Found with the preceding.
 75. A pair of leggings, one-third of the actual size.    Found with the preceding.
 76. Hut urn. Albano.
 77. Urn apparently representing a lake-dwelling.          Inthe Munich collection.
             Lisch.   Die Alterthiimer Unserer Heid. Vorzeit, H. x. T. 3.
 78. Group of beehive houses, Scotland.
            Proc. Soc. antiq. Scot., vol. i. part xii.
 79. The Bargh of Moussa. Shetlands.
 80. Staigue Fort, in the county of Kerry.
            From a model in the collection of the Royal Irish Academy.
 81. Flint core or nucleus, from which       flakes haye     been   struck,   Jutland.
        One-half of the actual size.
             In my own collection.
 82-84, Three views of a flint flake from the Kjékkenmédding at Fannerup,
        in Jutland, one-half of the actual size. a represents the bulb of
        percussion, which is also shown by the shading in fig. 84.
             In my own collection.
 85. Arrow-shaped flake from Ireland. It is worked up at tho butt end, as
        if intended for a handle.
             Catalogue of Royal Irish Academy, p. 72.
 86-88. Flakes from a Danish shell-mound, actual size.
            Tn my own collection.
 89. Minute flint flake from Denmark, actual size.
            In my own collection.
 90. Sections of flakes.   a Is that of a simple triangular flake; } is that of a
        large flat flake split off the angle from which the smaller flake a had
        been previously taken.     Consequently the section is four-sided.
91. North American two-bladed knife, made of two flakes.
           Reliquize Aquitanice, p. 43, fig. 16.
92. Australians making flakes.
             Geol. and Nat. His. Repertory.      May, 1866.
                         DESCRIPTION       OF THE FIGURES.                       XX
93. Australian flake, one-half actual size.
            In my own collection.
94. Flake from the Cape of Good Hope, actual size.
           In my own collection.
95. Head of New Caledonian Javelin, one-half actual size.
           In my own collection.
96. New Caledonian Javelin, one-sixth actual size.
           In my own collection.
97. Stone celt or hatchet.        It is formed of felstone, is 52 inches long and 2
       broad.
               Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 41.
98. Stone celt or hatchet, actual size. Found in the river Shannon.             One of
       the smallest yet found in Ireland.
               Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 45.
99. Stone celt with a wooden handle, Monaghan, Ireland.
           Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 46.
100.   Stone celt with wooden handle, one-third actual size.         Concise.    From
               Desor.
101, 102. Danish axe, re-ground.  One-half actual size.
           From my own collection.
103. Skin-scraper from Bourdeilles in the south of France, actual size.
           Found by me.
104. Ditto under side.
105-107. Skin-scraper used by the modern Esquimaux of the Polar basin,
       within Behring’s Straits, actual size. It was fastened into a handle
       of fossilivory.   In the Christy Museum.
108. Flint axe from the shell-mound at Meilgaard, in Jutland, actual size
        Upper surface.
109. Ditto, under surface.
110. Ditto, side view.
            In my own collection.
111. Modern New Zealand adze, actual size. Upper surface.
            In the British Museum.
112. Ditto, under surface.
118. Ditto, side view.
            The New Zealand adze is partially polished; this is not the case
                 with the Danish adze, because flint naturally breaks with a
                 smooth surface.  The projection a, in fig. 110, is accidental,
                 and owing to some flaw in the flint. They generally have the
              under side as flat as in fig. 113.
114. Hollow chisel from Denmark.
            In my own collection.
115. Danish dagger.
            In my own collection.
116. Flint dagger, one-half of the actual size. This beautiful specimen was
       found in a large tumulus with a second imperfect dagger, a rude flint
       core,    an   imperfect   crescent-shaped   knife,   one   or two   flakes, two
       amber beads, and some         bits of pottery.   Denmark.
               In my own collection.
XXiV                DESCRIPTION     OF    THE   FIGURES.

117. Another form of flint dagger. Also from Denmark.
           In my own collection.
118. Oval tool-stone.
           Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 94.
119. Triangular flint arrow-head, actual size.
           Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 19.
120. Indented flint arrow-head, actual size.
             Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 20.
121. Barbed flint arrow-head, actual size.
             Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 22.
122. Leaf-shaped flint arrow-head, actual size. Showing the gradual passage
        into the spear-head.
             Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 22.
128. French arrow-head, actual size.
             In my own collection.
124. North American arrow-head, actual size.
             In my own collection.
 125. Fnegian arrow-head, actual size.
              From Nilsson’s Stone Age.
 126. Stone saw in wooden handle,      Switzerland, one-half actual size.
              After Keller.
 127. Bone pin or awl from Scotland, actual size.
  128. Bone chisel, actual size. From Wangen on the lake of Constance.
            In my own collection.
 129. Bone harpoon, actual size.
             Afb. af. Danske Old og Minnesmaerker, 5 Heft.
 130. Ancient bone harpoon, actual size. Dordogne.
             After Christy and Lartet.
 131. Bone scraper. North America.
             Reliquizs Aquitanice, part 5, p. 48, fig. 26.
 182. A tumulus of the Stone Age, at Réddinge in Denmark. It contains two
        chambers.
             Nordiske Oldsager i det Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhayn, pl. 4.
 133. Ground plan of ditto.
 134, Stone circle, Denmark.
            Nordiske Oldsager i det Knog. Mus. i Kjébenhayn, pl. 1.
 135. Dolmen, Denmark.
 136. Stone circle.
            Nordiske Oldsager i det Kong. Mus. i Kjébenhavn, pl. 2.
 137. Kit’s Coty House, near Maidstone.
           After Col. Forbes Leslie. Early Races of Scotland.
138. Carnac, Brittany.
           From a drawing by Dr. Hooker, F.R.S.
139. Indian Dolmen.
           After Capt. Meadows Taylor.
140. Indian Dolmen. Ditio.
141. Summer and winter dwellings in Kamsgchatka.
           Atlas to Cook’s Voyage, pl. 77.
141*. Laplander’s Gamme or hut,
                          DESCRIPTION      OF   THE   FIGURES.              xXXV

142. Kumbecephalic skull from Derbyshire.
             After Bateman.    Ten Years’ Diggings, p. 146.
143, Ground plan of a sepulchral chamber in a large tumulus on the island
       of Méen.
             Ann. for Nordiske Old Kyndighed, 1858, p. 204,
144. Brachycephalic skull from the above tumulus, one-quarter of the natural
       size.
145. Ditto, side view.
             I am indebted for, these two drawings to the kindness of my
             friend Mr. Busk.
146. Interior of the sepulchral chamber in the long barrow near West Kennet,
       in Wiltshire.                                                      ;
             Archzologia, vol. xxxvili. p. 405.
147. Flint scraper from the above tumulus, two-thirds of the actual size.
                Archesologia, vol. xxxviil. p. 405.
148. Flint scraper from the above tumulus, two-thirds of the actual size.
           Archeologia, vol. xxxviii. p. 405.
149. Flint flake from the above tumulus, two-thirds of the actual size.
             Archeclogia, vol. xxxviii. p. 405.
150. Flint implement from the above tumulus, two-thirds of the actual
       size.
             Archeologia, vol. xxxviii. p. 4065.
151. Fragment of pottery from the above tumulus, two-thirds of the actual
       s§1ze.

             Archeeologia, vol. xxxviil. p. 405.
152. Fragment of pottery from the above tumulus, actual size.
             Archzologia, vol. xxxviii. p. 405.
153-5. Fragments of pottery from the above tumulus, two-thirds of the actual
       size.
             Archeologia, vol. xxxviii. p. 405.
156. Fragment of pottery, actual size.
             Archezologia, vol. xxxviii. p. 405.
157. Urn from Flaxdale barrow. The original is 14 inches in height.
             Bateman’s Ten Years’ Diggings in Celtic and Saxon Gravehills,
                p. 280.
158, 159. Two vases from Arbor Low, in Derbyshire.
                Bateman’s Ten Years’ Diggings in Celtic and Saxon Gravehills,
                p. 283.
 160. Drinking cup from Green Low.
            Bateman’s Ten Years’ Diggings in Celtic and Saxon Gravehills,
            p. 286.
161. Sculptures on the Lower Rock at Auchnabreach, Argyllshire.
           After Sir J. ¥. Simpson.  Proc. Soc. Ant. Sc., vol. vi. p. 28,
162. Crannoge in Ardakillin Lough, near Stokestown, county of Roscommon.
      It is constructed of stones and oak piling. The top line shows the
      former highest water level, the second that of the ordinary winter
      flood, the third the summer level.
163. Section of the lake-dwelling at Niederwyl.
            From Lee’s Keller, pl. xvi. fig. 2.
XXV1                  DESCRIPTION         OF    THE   FIGURES.

164, Swiss axe of serpentine, actual size.            From Wangen   on the Lake of
       Constance.
            In my own collection.
165. Spindle whorl, actual size. From Wangen on the Lake of Constance.
           In my own collection.
166. Piece of pottery, showing the impressions of the finger-tip, and the
        marks of the nail, actual size.        Lake of Zurich.
168. Piece of tissue, actual size. From Robenhausen.
            In my own collection.
169. Portion of the vertebra of a cow.
170. Corresponding ditto of a bison.
L771. Bronze pin, actual size.
            Found in a shell-mound near Elgin, and now in the museum            at
              that place.
172. Flint awl from Denmark, actual size.
           After Worsaae.
178. Lance-head ? from Denmark, actual size.
            After Worsaae.
    . Lance-head? from Denmark, actual size.
             After Worsaae.
    . Lance-head?    from Denmark, actual size.
             After Worsaae.
    . Rude flint axe from Denmark, actual size.
             After Worsaae.
    . Copper arrow or spear head, Cincinnati, one-third actual size.
             Whittlesey.   Boston Soc. of Nat. His., vol. i. pl. 16, fig. 6.
    . Copper lance-head, Ontarragon, one-third actual size.
            Whittlesey. Boston Soc. of Nat. His., vol. i. pl. 16, fig. 4.
    . Molar tooth of H. antiqwus, one-third actual size.
            After Lyell.
    . Molar tooth of the mammoth, one-third actual size.
            After Lyell.
    . Flat stone implement of uncertain uso, actual size.
             From the cave at La Madelaine.
    . Stone implement, resembling in some respects those characteristic of
        the drift gravels, actual size. From Moustier. In my own collec-
        tion.
      Ditto, seen from the side.
    . Ditto, seen from the other side.
       A cylindrical piece of reindeer horn, on which are engraved two out-
        lines of fishes, one on each side. La Madelaino, Dordogne.
             After Lartet and Christy.
     . Piece of the palm of a reindeer’s antler, on which is engraved the head
         and neck of an ibex. Laugerie Basse, Dordogne.
             After Lartet and Christy.
 187. Group of figures. Dordogne.
             After Lartet and Christy.
 188. Group of reindeer.
             From a photograph presented to me by the Marquis de Vibraye.
                     DESCRIPTION             OF THE FIGURES.               XXV1

189. Poniard of reindeer horn.
           From the cave at Laugeric Basse.
190. The Engis skull, seen from above.
191. Ditto, seen from the front.
            Huzxley’s Man’s Place in Nature, p. 126.
192. The Neanderthal skull, seen from the side, one-half natural size.
193. Ditto, seen from the front, one-half natural size.
194, Ditto, seen from above, one-half natural size.
           Huxley’s Man’s Place in Nature, p. 139.
         The outlines from camera lucida drawings by Mr. Busk; the details
           from a cast and from Dr. Fublrott’s photographs. «a glabella;
           b occipital protuberance;         d lambdoidal   suture.
195. Rude flint implement from the drift gravel at Hoxne, one-halfactual size
            After Frere. Archeeologia, 1800, pl. xv.
196. Dittc, side view.
Ue Another specimen.
           After Frere.        Archzcologia, 1800, p. xy.
198. Ditto, side view.
199. Stone implement, Madras.
            From a specimen found and presented to me by Mr. Bruce Foot.
200. Another stone implement, Madras.
            From a specimen found and presented to me by Mr. Bruce Foot.
201. Section across the valley of the Somme at Abbeville, after Prestwich ;
            the proportion of the length is reduced to one-third.
202. Section at St. Acheul, near Amiens.
       a. Brick earth with a few angular flints.
       b. Red angular gravel.
       c. Marly sand, with land and freshwater shells.
       d. Grey subangular gravel, in which the flint implements are found.
       e. Coffin,
      f. Tomb.
203. Section taken in a pit close to the Joinville station.
       b. Red angular gravel, containing a very large sandstone block.
       d. Grey subangular gravel.
204. Diagram to illustrate deposit of loéss and gravel.
       a! Loéss corresponding to and contemporaneous with the gravel a.
      b! Loéss            ”             »”            ”               ”    b.
      c' Loéss            a)            ”
                                                      ms              59    QO:
       1. Level of valley at period a.
       2. Level of valley at period b.
       8. Level of valley at present.
205. Australian knife.
            From a specimen presented to me by A. W. Franks, Esq.
206. Australian club, one-fifth of the actual size.
207. Australian spear and spear caster.
            After Hyre.
208. Australian boomerang, one-sixth of the actual size.
209. Tasmanian fire-sticks, one-third actual size.
            From specimens presented to me by Mr. Robinson.
XXVill              DESCRIPTION     OF THE     FIGURES.

210. New Zealand patoo patoo, one-fourth of the actual size.
           In my own collection.
211. Stone axe with wooden handle, one-fourth of the actual size.
           In my own collection.
212. South Sea axe of ceremony.
           In my own collection.
218. South Sea fish-hook, one-half of the actual size.
           In my own collection.
214, Esquimaux knife.
           In my own collection, from a specimen          presented   to me   by
             Mr. Flower.
215, 216. Esquimaux knife.
           In my own collection.
217. HEsquimaux arrow-head, actual size.
           In my own collection.
218, Esquimaux spear-head, actual size.
           In my own collection.
219. Hsquimaux bone-harpoon, one-third of the actual size.
          In my own collection.
220. Esquimaux cheek-stud of stone.
           In my own collection, presented by Dr. Rae.
221-3. Drawings on Esquimaux bone implements.
            Presented to the Ashmolean Museum, by Captain Beechey, 1832.
224. Dacotah fire-drill-bow.   —
            From Schoolcraft’s Indian Tribes.
225. Iroquois fire-pump-drill.
           From Schooleraft’s Indian Tribes.
226. Fuegian harpoon, one-half of the actual size.
           In my own collection.
227. Ogham stone. Found in Kerry.
          Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 185.
228. Ogham stone. Found in Kerry.
          Cat. of Royal Irish Academy, p. 185.
           DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.

The three great tumuli at Upsala, popularly supposed to be those of Odin,
       Thor, and Freya. (Frontispiece.)
Diagram of Abury.    (To face page 119.)

                          Prate I.    (To face page 75.)
Fig. 1. A flint axe from a tumulus, one-third of the actual size.
     2. Another form of stone axe, with a hole for a handle, one-third of the
         actual size.
     3. A flint saw, one-half of the actual size.
     4. A flint dagger, one-sixth of the actual size.
     5. A flint chisel, one-half of the actual size.
     6. One of the “cores” from which the flint flakes are splintered, one-
          half of the actual size.
     7. One of the flakes, one-half of the actual size.
     8, 9. Rude axes from the Kjékenmédding at Havelse, one-half of the
         actual size.
   10, Flint axe from drift at Moulin Quignon, near Abbeville, one-half of
         the actunl size.
   11. Flint axe from Abbeville, showing that the part stained white ig
         parallel to the present surfaces, and that the weathering has taken
         place since the flint was worked into its present shape; one-half of
         the actual size.
    12. Slingstone from the Kjikkenmédding at Havelse, one-half of the
         actual size,

                        Prate II,    (Lo face page 334.)
Sketch of mammoth,      on a piece of ivory found at La Madelaine      in the
        Dordogne.
                        Prats III.    (Lo face page 342.)
A flint implement found near Abbeville, slightly reduced.
              In my own collection.
            The artist has been so careful to present a faithful image of this
              specimen, that he has even copied exactly my rough
              memorandum as to the place and date of its discovery.
       PRE-HISTORIC                         TIMES.


                         CHAPTER       I.

                       INTRODUCTION.


     HE first appearance of Man in Europe dates from a
        period so remote, that ncither history, nor even tra-
dition, can throw any light on his origin, or mode of life.
Under these circumstances, some have supposed that the
past is hidden from the present bya veil, which time will
probably thicken, but never can remove.         Thus our pre-
historic antiquities have been valued as monuments of ancient
skill and perseverance, not regarded as pages of ancient
history ; recognized as interesting vignettes, not as historical
pictures. Some writers have assured us that, in the words
of Palgrave, “ We must give it up, that speechless past;
whether fact or chronology, doctrine or mythology ; whether
in Europe, Asia, Africa, or America; at Thebes or Palenque,
on Lycian shore or Salisbury Plain: lost is lost; gone is
gone for ever.” Others have taken a more hopeful view,
but in attempting to reconstruct the story of the past, they
have too often allowed imagination to usurp the place of
research, and have written in the spirit of the novelist, rather
than in that of the philosopher.
   Of late years, however, a new branch of knowledge has
                                                     B
2                 DIVISION   OF   PRE-HISTORIC

arisen; a new Science has, so to say, been born among us,
which deals with times and events far more ancient than any
which have yet fallen within the province of the archeologist.
The geologist reckons not by days or by years; the whole six
thousand years, which were until lately looked on as the sum
of the world’s existence, are to him but one unit of measure-
ment in the long succession of past ages. Our knowledge
of geology is, of course, very incomplete; on some questions
we shall no doubt see reason to change our opinion, but on the
whole, the conclusions to which it points are as definite as
those of zoology, chemistry, or any of the kindred sciences.
Nor does there appear to be any reason why those methods of
examination which have proved so successful in geology,
should not also be used to throw light on the history of man
in pre-historic times. Archeology forms, in fact, the link
between geology and history. It is true that in the case of
other animals we can, from their bones and teeth, form a
definite idea of their habits and mode of life, while in the
present state of our knowledge the skeleton of a savage could
not always be distinguished from that of a philosopher.   But
on the other hand, while other animals leave only teeth and
bones behind them, the men of past ages are to be studicd
principally by their works; houses for the living, tombs for
the dead, fortifications for defence, temples for worship,
implements for use, and ornaments for decoration.
  From the careful study of the remains which have come
down to us, it would appear that Pre-historic Archeology
may be divided into four great epochs.
  I. That of the Drift; when man shared the possession
of Europe with the Mammoth, the Cave bear, the Woolly-
haired rhinoceros, and other extinct animals.    This we may
call the “ Paleolithic” period.
   II. The later or polished Stone Age; a period cha-
racterized by beautiful weapons and instruments made of
               ARCHEOLOGY      INTO    FOUR      PERIODS.          3

flmt and other kinds of stone; in which, however, we find
no trace of the knowledge of any metal, excepting gold,
which seems to have been sometimes used for ornaments.
This we may call the “ Neolithic” period.
   Ill. The Bronze Age, in which bronze was used for arms
and cutting instruments of all kinds.
   IV. The Iron Age, in which that metal had superseded
bronze   for arms,   axes, knives, etc.; bronze, however, still
being in common use for ornaments, and frequently also
for the handles of swords and other arms, though never for
the blades.
   Stone weapons, however, of many kinds were still in use
during the Age of Bronze, and even during that of Iron,
so that the mere presence of a few stone implements is not
in itself sufficient evidence that any given “find” belongs
to the Stone Age. In order to prevent misapprehension, it
may also be well to state, at once, that, for the present, I only
apply this classification to Europe, though, in all probability,
it might be extended also to the neighbouring regions of Asia
and Africa. As regards other civilized countrics, China and
Japan for instance, we, as yet, know nothing of their pre-
historic archeology.  It is evident, also, that some nations,
such as the Fuegians,     Andamaners,         etc., are even now, or
were very lately, in an Age of Stone.
   It is probable that gold was the metal which first attracted
the attention of man; it is found in many rivers, and by
its bright colour would certainly attract even the rudest
savages, who are known to be very fond of personal deco-
ration.    Silver does not appear to have been discovered
until long after gold, and was apparently preceded by both
copper and tin, as it is rarely, if ever *, found in tumuli of
the Bronze Age; but, however this may be, copper seems to
have been the metal which first became of real importance to
                       * Horze ferales, p. 60.
                                B 2
A                FIRST DISCOVERY      OF METAL.

man: no doubt owing to the fact that its ores are abundant
in many countries, and can be smelted without difficulty;
and that, while iron is hardly ever found except in the form
of ore, copper often occurs in a native condition, and can
be beaten at once into shape.      Thus, for instance, the North
American Indians obtained pure copper from the mines near
Lake Superior and elsewhere, and hammered it at once into
axes, bracelets, and other objects.
  Tin also early attracted notice, probably on account of the
great heaviness of its ores. When metals were very scarce, it
would naturally sometimes happen that, in order to make up
the necessary quantity, some tin would be added to copper,
or vice versd. It would then be found that the properties of
the alloy were quite different from those of either metal, and
a very few experiments would determine the most advan-
tageous proportion, which for axes and other cutting instru-
ments is about nine parts of copper to one of tin.          No
implements or weapons of tin have yet been found, and
those of copper are extremely rare, whence it has been in-
ferred that the art of making bronze was known elsewhere,
before the use of either was introduced into Europe. Many
of the so-called “copper”     axes,    etc., contain a small pro-
portion of tin; and the few exceptions indicate probably a
mere temporary want, rather than a total ignoranco, of this
metal.
    The ores of iron, though more       abundant, are much less
striking in appearance than those of copper.       Moreover,
though they are perhaps more easily reduced, the metal, when
obtaimed, is much less tractable than bronze.       This valuable
alloy can very easily be cast, and, in fact, all the weapons and
implements made of it in olden times were cast in moulds of
sand or stone. The art of casting iron, on the other hand,
was unknown until a comparatively late period.
  In the writings of the early poets, iron is frequently charac-
           ALLUSIONS   TO   BRONZE   IN ANCIENT   WRITERS.             5

terized by the epithet roAv«unros, and its adjective, ovd:jpeos,
is used metaphorically to imply the greatest stubbornness.
  While, however, these facts tend very much to remove the
& prior’ improbability that a compound and comparatively
expensive material like bronze should have been in general
use before such a common metal as iron, we must, of course,
seek elsewhere for evidence of the fact.
   Hesiod, who is supposed to have written about 900 B.0.,
and who is the earliest European author whose works have
come down to us, appears to have lived during the transition
between the Bronze and Iron Ages. He distinctly states
that iron was discovered after copper and tin. Speaking of
those who were ancient, even in his day, he says that they
used bronze, and not iron.
       Tois Ory yarKea wey Tevyed. YarKeor Oé TE OlKOL,
       yarke S elpydfovto wédas 8 ove Erxe oldnpos.
His poems, as well as those of Homer, show that nearly three
thousand years ago, the value of iron was known and appre-
ciated. It is true that, as we read in Dr. Smith’s Dictionary
of Greek and Roman Antiquities, bronze “‘is represented in
the Iliad and Odyssey as the common material of arms, in-
struments, and vessels of various sorts; the latter (iron) is
mentioned much     more rarely.”     While, however, the above
statement is strictly correct, we must remember that among
the Greeks the word iron (ciénpos) was used, even in the
time of Homer, as synonymous with a sword, and that steel
also appears to have been known to them under the name of
aSduas, and perhaps also of xvavos, as early as the time of
Hesiod. We may, therefore, consider that the Trojan war
took place during the period of transition from the Bronze
to the Iron Age.
  In the Pentateuch, excluding Deuteronomy, bronze, or as
it is unfortunately translated, brass, is mentioned          thirty-
eight times, and iron only four times.
6                                LUCRETIUS.

     Lucretius distinctly mentions the three ages.             He says,—
          Arma antiqua, manus, ungues, dentesque fuerunt
          Et lapides, et item sylvarum fragmina rami,
          Posterius ferri vis est, zrisque reperta,
           Sed prior zris erat, quam ferri cognitus usus*.
      Coming    down to more       modern     times, Eccard} in 1750,
and Goguet in 1758}, mention the three latter ages in plain
terms §; the same idea runs through Borlase’s History of
Cornwall, and Sir Richard Colt Hoare also expresses the
opinion      that   mstruments      of iron    “denote     a much      later
period” than those of bronze.
  To the Northern archeologists, howéver—especially to Mr.
Thomsen, the founder of the Museum at Copenhagen, and to
Professor Nilsson—must be ascribed the merit of having raised
these suggestions to the rank of a scientific classification.
   The date of the introduction of iron into the North of
Europe cannot at present be satisfactorily ascertained ;
nevertheless it is most likely that the use of this metal
spread rapidly.     Not only does it seem a@ priord probable
that such an important discovery would have done so, but
it is evident that the same commercial organization which
had already carried the tin of Cornwall all over our con-
tment, would equally facilitate the transmission of iron, as
soon as that even more useful metal was discovered and
rendered. available. However this may be, the soldiers of
Brennus were provided with iron swords, and when the
armies of Rome brought the civilization of the South into
contact with that of the North, they found the value of iron
already well known to, and in general use among, their new
enemies. Nor is there any reason to suppose that arms of
    bronze were also at that time still in use in the North, for, had
      * Vi, 1282.                        des Arts et des Sciences. Sco Ch. iv,
      + Eecard. De Origine et Moribus    and the preface.
    Germanorum,                             § See Rhind in Arch. Ins. Jour. V.
      £ Goguet. De l’Origine des Lois,   xiii.
                                TIEFENAU.                                 7

this been so, they would certainly have been mentioned by the
Roman writers ; whereas the description given by Tacitus of
the Caledonian weapons shows that in his time the swords used
in Scotland were made of iron. Moreover there are several
cases in which large quantities of arms belonging to the Roman
period have been found together, and in which the arms and
implements are allof iron. This argument is in its very nature
cumulative, and cannot therefore be fully developed here,
but out of many, I will mention a few cases in illustration.
   Some years ago, an old battle-field was discovered at
Tiefenau, near Berne, and described by M. Jahn.          On it
were found a great number of objects made of iron; such
as fragments     of chariots, bits for horses, wheels, pieces of
coats of mail, and arms of various sorts, including no less
than a hundred two-handed swords.        All of these were
made of iron, but with them were several fibule of bronze,
and some coins, of which about thirty were of bronze, struck
at Marseilles, and presenting a head of Apollo on one side
and a bull on the other, both good specimens of Greek art.
The rest were silver pieces, also struck at Marseilles. These
coins, and the absence of any trace of Roman influence, suffi-
ciently indicate the antiquity of these interesting remains.
   A very similar collection of antiquities has been obtained
from the ancient lake-village near La Tene, on the Lake of
Neufchatel.     This interesting locality will be referred to
again in the chapter on Swiss lake-villages, and I will here
only observe that 50 swords, 5 axes, 4 knives, and 23 lances
have been discovered, but not a single weapon of bronze.
Nine coins have been also found here, while not a single one
has been met with in any of the Stone Age or Bronze Age
villages. Yet the Gauls had a coinage of their own 300 years
before Christ, and in our own country, as Mr. Evans* has
well shown, about 150 years later.
  * The Coins of the Ancient Britons, 1864, by John Evans, Esq., F.R.S.
8                    FIND   OF   TRON   OBJECTS    AT


   Some very interesting “finds” of articles belonging to
the Iron Age have been made in the peat bogs of Nlesvick,
and described by M. Engelhardt, Curator of the Museum at
Flensborg. One of these, in the Moss of Nydam, comprises
clothes, sandals, brooches, tweezers, beads, helmets, shields,
shield bosses, breastplates, coats of mail, buckles, swordbelts,
sword sheaths, 100 swords, 500 spears, 30 axcs, 40 awls, 160
arrows, 80 knives, various articles of horse gear, wooden
rakes, mallets, vessels, wheels, pottery, coins, etc. Without
a single exception, all the weapons and cutting implements
are made of iron, though bronze was freely used for brooches
and other similar articles*.
   In the summer of 1862, M. Engelhardt found in the same
field a ship, or rather a large flat-bottomed boat, seventy
feet in length, three feet deep in the middle, and cight or
nine feet wide. The sides are of oak boards, overlapping
one another, and fastened together by iron bolts.                    On the
inner side of each board are several projections, which                    are
not made from separate pieces, but were left when the boards
were cut out of the solid timber. Each of these projections
has two small holes, through which ropes, made of the inner
bark of trees, were passed, in order to fasten the sides of the
boat to the ribs.      The rowlocks are formed by a projecting
horn   of wood, under which is an orifice, so that a rope,
fastened to the horn and passing through the orifice, leaves
a space through which the oar played.      There appear to
have been about fifty pairs of oars, of which sixtecn have
already been discovered.    The bottom of the boat was
covered by matting. I visited the spot about a week after
the boat had been discovered, but was unable to sce much
of it, as it had been taken to pieces, and the boards, etc.,
   * See Lubbock in Nat. Hist. Rev.     the pleasure of visitine this interost-
Oct. 1868, and Stephens in Gent.        ing spot with M. Engelhardt in 1862.
Mag. Dec. 1863. Ononeofthearrows        See algo “ Denmark in the Early Iron
were some Runic characters.   Ihad      Age,” by C. Engelhardt.
                       NYDAM   IN SLESVICK.                         9

were covered over with straw and peat, that they might dry
slowly.   In this manner, M. Engelhardt hoped that they
would perhaps, at least in part, retain their original shape.
The freight of the boat consisted of iron axes, including a
socketed celt with its handle, swords, lances, knives,brooches,
whetstones, wooden vessels, and, oddly enough, two birch
brooms, with many smaller articles.      Only those, however,
have yet been found which remained actually in the boat;
and, as in sinking it turned partly over on its side, no doubt
many more articles will reward the further explorations
which M. Engelhardt proposes to make.       It is evident that
this ancient boat was sunk on purpose, because there is a
square hole about six inches in diamcter hewn out of the
bottom; and it is possible that these objects were sunk as
offerings to the Lake, but, on the whole, it seems to me
more probable, that im some time of panic or danger the
objects contained in it were thus hidden by their owner,
who was never able to recover them.      Even in recent times
of disturbance, as, for instance, in the beginning of this
century,   and   in 1848,   many   arms,   ornaments,   household
utensils, etc., were so effectually hidden in the Jakes and
peat mosses, that they could never be found again. Much
interest is added to this vessel and its contents, by the fact
that we can fix almost their exact date.      The boat lies, as I
have already mentioned, within a few yards of the spot where
the previous discoveries at Nydam were made, and as all the
arms and ornaments exactly correspond, there can be little
doubt that they belong to the same period. Now the pre-
vious collection included nearly fifty Roman      coins, ranging
in date from A.v. 67 to 4.p. 217, and we cannot therefore be
far wrong in referring these remains to the third century.
   A very similar discovery has been made at Thorsbjerg in
the same neighbourhood, but in this case, owing to some
chemical difference in the peat, the iron has been almost
10                      OWNER’S   MARKS.

entirely removed. It may naturally be asked why then this
should be quoted as an instance of the Iron Age? And the
answer seems quite satisfactory.    All the swords, lance-
heads and axe-blades have disappeared, while the handles of
bronze or wood are perfectly preserved, and as the orna-
ments and other objects of bronze are well preserved, it is
evident that the swords, etc., were not of that metal; and it
is therefore reasonable to conclude that they were of iron,
more especially as the whole character of the objects resem-
bles that of those found at Nydam, and the coins, which are
about as numerous as those from the latte: place, range from
60 a.D. to a.p. 197; so that these two great “finds ” may be
regarded as almost contemporancous.
         ErGo4..        Fie. 2.             Fre. 3.




                              S



                           (
     Not only are the weapons in these finds all of iron, but
                      INSCRIPTIONS   AT   NYDAM.                     i

their forms and the character of the ornamentation are very
different from those of the Bronze Age; resembling in some
respects Roman arms, in others they are quite peculiar, and
evidently representative of northern art.
   Many of the arrows had owner’s marks on them (figs. 1 and
3) resembling those on the modern Esquimaux arrows (fig. 2).
The Nydam swords also bear seven inscriptions; three of
them are illegible, the others are “ricus, riccim, cocillus, and
umored.”   On the umbo of one of the shields is inscribed, in
dotted Roman letters, AEL. AELIANUS; while another one
has a short Runic* inscription, which Mr. Haigh reads as
Aise Ah (Aise owns) +; two figures resembling Runic letters
are also inlaid with golden wire on one of the sword blades.
One of the Thorsbjerg scabbards also has a Runic inscription
of two lines, each containing ten letters.
   I particularly dwell on these cases, because no inscriptions
or coins have yet been found in any antiquities which can be
referred to the Bronze Age.
   For the same reason the abundance of silver is very signi-
ficant; out of two hundred buckles and square silver girdle
ornaments, the greater number are of bronze plated with
silver, and silver was also used to ornament shield rims,
sandals, brooches, breast-plates, sword-hilts, sword-sheaths,
girdles, harness, etc., as well as for clasps, pendants, boxes,
and tweezers, while one helmet was formed entirely of this
comparatively rare metal.
  The ornamentation also of the shields, etc., is of a character
altogether unlike any that occurs in the Bronze Age.
   An assemblage of objects very similar to those of Nydam and
Thorsbjerg has also been found in the “ Vimose” or “ Moss of
the Temple.”     It comprises no less than 1500 lance-heads,
40 axes, and 80 swords, all of iron; abundance of silver; one
Roman and three Runic inscriptions; and a coin of Faustina
   * See Appendix No. 1.              Archeological Journal, 1863.
ve                        NATURE   OF

Junior.    Here, again, bronze weapons are entirely absent,
though bronze was used for ornaments, etc.
     From these and similar discoveries, it appears evident
that the use of bronze weapons had been discontinucd
in the North before, probably long before, the commence-
ment of our era. From the ease with which bronze could be
worked, this metal was still used for brooches and orna-
ments; but in the manufacture of swords, axes, and similar
implements, it had been entirely superseded by iron. There
are many cases on record of iron swords with bronze handlcs
or scabbards, but scarcely an instance of the reverse.
   Conversely, as bronze weapons are entirely absent from the
great “ finds ” of the Iron Age, so are iron weapons altogether
wanting in those instances where, as for instance at Nidan,
 on the Lake of Bienne, and Estavayer, on that of Neufchatel,
large quantities of bronze tools and weapons have been found
together.                 |
   To sum up this areument, though the discoveries of bronze
and of iron weapons have been very numerous, yet there is
hardly a single case in which swords, axes, daggers, or other
weapons of these two different metals have been found
together ;nor are bronze weapons found associated with in-
scriptions, or with coins, pottery, or other relics of Roman
origin.
   So, also, though no doubt stone weapons were used during
the Bronze Age, there are many cases in which large numbers
of stone implements and weapons have been found without
any of metal.
   In illustration of this argument, I must call attention to
the following table. Objects found singly teach us compara-
tively little, but when numbers occur together they become
much more instructive.      The first ten localities are some of
 the Swiss lake-villages, which will be described in Chapter
 VI.; the eleventh is the Nydam find just alluded to.
                      ARCHEOLOGICAL    EVIDENCE.                  13

  Now from the ancient lake-village in the peat moss of
Moosseedorf we have a list comprising 75 flint nuclei, 25
arrow-heads, 12 spear-heads, 90 scrapers, 80 saws, 96 axes,
310 long flakes, and about 2000 small ones, 25 hammers,
45 grindstones, etc., 71 awls of bone, 12 pointed ribs, 160
bone chisels, 18 sharpened boar’s teeth, 8 perforated boar’s
teeth, 2 perforated bear’s teeth, 5 harpoons of horn, 8 chisels
and 4 awls of horn, besides 30 axe-handles or sockets, with-
out a trace of metal.   The result, so far as six stations are
concerned, is shown in the following table (p. 15).
   If, for instance, we commence with the remains discovered
at Wangen, on the Lake of Constance, we have an even more
remarkable case. M. Léhle has found there more than 1500
axes, 100 whetstones, 150 corn-crushers, and 2500 arrow-
heads, flint flakes, chips, etc.; altogether more than 4450
instruments   of stone, besides about 350 of bone,         making,
with 100 carthenware spinning-weights, a grand total of
nearly 5000 objects, and yet not a trace of metal. The
number of corn-crushers and spindle-whorls is interesting,
when we remember that Wangen alone, among these four
localities, has supplied us with specimens of carbonized grain,
and flax fabrics.
   Now let me ask the reader to compare with the four cases
given in the table on page 15 the list of remains from the
Bronze Age settlements       of Morges, Nidau, Hstavayer, Cor-
taillod, and Corcelettes.    The manner in which the collec-
tions were made accounts, probably, for the absence of
whetstones, and, perhaps, to a great extent, for that of the
flint flakes, etc. On these points, therefore, I lay little stress ;
but the total:absence of stone axes at Morges, and their
rarity at Nidan and Estayayer, is very remarkable.          At the
former M. Forel, after the most careful scarch, has found but
one object of iron.   The large number of corn-crushers and
the presence of spinning-weights are also significant.
14           NATURE   OF ARCHEOLOGICAL    EVIDENCE.

  Col. Schwab’s splendid collection from Nidau tells the
same tale.  He has only 33 stone axes, and yet as many as
335 corn-crushers,     The other articles of stone he has not
apparently collected. He has nearly 200 spindle-whorls, and
many earthenware rings, specimens of which have also been
found at Morges, but which are entirely wanting at the Pont
de Thiele, at Wauwyl, at Moosseedorf, and at Wangen.
   It is, of course, possible that very different states of civi-
lization may co-exist in different parts of the same country ;
but in this case we must remember that the settlement at
Nidau is only about fifteen miles from Moosseedorf.      Nor can
 we suppose that the differences were merely a question of
 wealth; the bronze fish-hooks, axes, small rings, pins, etc.,
 which are found in such large numbers, show that bronze
 was used not for the articles of luxury only, but also for the
 ordinary implements of daily life.
   Nor is it only in the presence or absence of bronze that
 the Pfablbauten differ from one another; there are many
 other indications of progress. We cannot expect to find
 much evidence of this in the implements of bone or stone ;
 but, as has already been mentioned, the better forms of stone
 axe, and those which are perforated, are very rare, if not
 altogether absent in the Stone Age, none having been found
 at the Pont de Thiele, at Moosseedorf, or at Wauwyl, and
 only two at Wangen.
     Again, it is not only by the mere presence of bronze, but
 by the beauty and variety of the articles made out of it, that
 we are so much struck.      In a collection of objects made at
 any of the Stone Age settlements, no one can fail to remark
 he uniformity which prevails.     The   wants of the artificers
 seem to have been few and simple.       In the Bronze Age all
 this is altered. We find not only, as before, axes, arrows,
 and knives, but, in addition, swords, lances, sickles, ear-rings,
 bracelets, pins, rings, and a variety of other articles.
                                                      ANOLS
                                                                                                                                                 AZNOUG                                                                                    ‘NOUT
                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                     }                      |                                  Cae
                                                                        8
                                              ies                       Spe=                                                         can         a                                                                                                 zg
                                :
                                                                                                                 a                   ea                         Se                                                   R                            8 |2                             Bn
                                              4            8            :                                 et ee)         oat         fo          me             Ze                                       bachee
                                iepn
                                Ge            S
                                              (ee)         x            3                 a               <              Cal         nf          5     a.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gerecot                          Se
                                                                        oe                .                                                                eS                                            ¢            fay                                     alp                Qs
                                                                                 a                              ale
                                                                                                                                                 SiFl
                                                                                                                                                   | 2figi el
                                                                                                                                                           2]                                                                                                               slsi   eleiBla
                                                                                                                                                 Ofer PoP)
                                                                                                                                                     ta                                                                                                ees BS                aes
            TUAZLIU
                 “INV
                    WS
gy          Todmett                  GOST |                     O0SS}
                                                                   |        OF            >                      es          as iS           4                  Fi                              Ag              os                                            ses ae               0
py                 JAopsss
                      |'" soo
                           OOL                      &% |        00%         LLG           .                     hie                                             ar           .              $                       hake        ae         a),            ae                 ant   0
            JLOpssny
              *   teey               OO0T           OO          OOT         og            tae                    aoe     eee     .               vee            wee              oe                      ee         wae         .                see       eee               vee   0
            BTA,[PROS                ie             98 |        003         LI            OB      Sail.                                                         oe                                       [Pee       non                                    fas         wo)         0
    payne              eee Ce                 6            é                gee           ez              zor]| 4a| gt               GOT!|            OSFT|         $08|              006
                                                                                                                                                                                       1                 “|                                       ees                  ho          y
                                                                            -ulog
                                                                               sLoysnio
                PoT[eE0g eae é                             d            é                 het             ee         Pl | e                                                                                                                                                             STATISTICS.
                                                                                                                                     TL)|             STS } 80G 1                     $68                fers       Pee             tise         ee al           ah                Ce
                loLvATISy Cap                 é            d            é                 9               wT}                        Lenk] -60R                     Ost               yao Ae)                   tee                                        eels 0
          9[0010F)
               $9}, “*         c              d            é            é                 T               GI         G   2                            COP           9L                OLS                tee    :               tee              tee               .               0
          sad10        take
                         esUe                 eS           ¢ |              Aurw          og              oe! IL}        IL]         OF}|
      =
                                                                             ~UIOD
                                                                                                                                                      80T       é                     NOG =o                    @                                ies      gi 1 hie                 OM
                                                                               SIaysara                                                                                                                                                            alo
IY        ULV          |iesosoarer
                               .                                amog    Zl                I                                          oe               I                                                                                            ueyy
                                                                                                                                                                    ae                fer       oe | |e         F                    S21          }O0L) 19                   70SZ| 6
                                                                            stieg               paoiatg
          PNaie“MAVINN
                ee     GG      Ey                          ae               SE                            Bing           ;                       °°                      |ssuotvaxo
é                 ie                                                        “RUA
                                                                                                                                                                               “°° } COI]| O08| 98                                   O09}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |¢                  00€] 0001;FE
                                                                                                                                                            a         ten                                                       qe                        3            qe]
                                                                            Sauo}s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       seal                       aq|}seati
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
16                POTTERY     OF THE    DIFFERENT   AGES.

     The pottery tells the same tale.        The potter’s wheel indecd
seems to have been unknown during both the Bronze and
Stone Ages, but the material of which the Stone-age pottery
is composed is rough*, containing large grains of quartz,
while that used during the Bronze Age is more carefully pre-
pared. The ornaments of the two periods show also a great
contrast. Inthe Stone Age they consist of impressions made
by the nail or the finger, and sometimes by a cord twisted
round the soft clay. The lines are all straight, or if curved
are very irregular and badly drawn. In the Bronze Age all
the patterns present in the Stone Age are continued, but in
addition we find circles and spirals; while imitations of
animals and plants are characteristic of the Iron Age.
   So again the distinction between the Bronze and Iron Ages
does by no means rest merely on the presence of iron. The
pottery is different, the forms of the implements and weapons
are different, the ornamentation is different, the knowledge
of metallurgy was more advanced, silver and lead were in
use, letters had been invented, coms had been struck.      The
entire absence of silver, of coins, and of inscriptions, in the
bronze finds, is very remarkable.
   The value of this evidence will be better appreciated after
reading the following extract from Mr. Wright’s Essays on
Archeology +:
     “ All the sites of ruined Roman towns with which I am
acquainted present to the excavator a numerous collection of
objects, ranging through a period which ends abruptly with
what we call the close of the Roman period, and attcended
with circumstances          which   cannot leave any doubt that this
was the period of destruction.            Otherwise, surely we should
find some      objects which would remind us of the subsequent
  * The extreme coarseness of the        found in tumuli of tho Stone Age,
Swiss Lake pottery is, perhaps,partly    the material was often moro care-
owing to its haying beenintended for     fully prepared.
kitchen   purposes;   for the vessels       + Essays on Archaology, p. 105.
           BRONZE   WEAPONS    NOT   OF   ROMAN   ORIGIN.      17

periods. I will only mention one class of articles which are
generally found in considerable numbers, the coins. We in-
variably find these presenting a more or less complete series
of Roman coins, ending at latest with the Emperors who
reigned in the first half of the fifth century. This is not
the case with Roman towns which have continued to exist
after that period, for then, on the contrary, we find relics
which speak of the subsequent inhabitants, early Saxon and
Medieval. I will only, for want of space, give one example,
that of Richborough, in Kent. The town of Rutupiz seems
to have capitulated with the Saxon invaders, and to have
continued until its inhabitants, in consequence of the retreat
of the sea, gradually abandoned it to establish themselves at
Sandwich. Now the coins found at Richborough do not end
with those of the Roman emperors, but we find, first, a great
quantity of those singular little coins which are generally
known by the name of minimi, and which, presenting very
bad imitations of the Roman coinage, are considered as be-
longing to the age immediately following the Roman period,
and preceding that of the Saxon coinage.”
  We may assume, then, on the authority of Mr. Wright
himself, that if all the bronze arms which are so abundant in
our museums were really of Roman origin, many of them
would have been found from time to time in conjunction
with other Roman remains; whereas bronze weapons are
never found in association with coins, pottery, or other relics
of Roman origin.
  Mr.   Wright,   indeed,   has called    this fact in question,
but m spite of his profound acquaintance with archeological
literature, he has only been able to bring forward three cases
in support of his argument, not one of which appears to me
to be satisfactory.
   For a full statement of his views I must refer to his
Memoir on Bronze Weapons, in the Transactions of the Hth-
                                                   0
1g           BRONZE    WEAPONS      NOT   OF ROMAN      ORIGIN.

nological Society *, which, in conjunction with my brother
Frederic,    I have      endeavoured to answer before the same
learned body +. I will, however, refer to the only three cases
which Mr. Wright has been able to discover.
  The first is that of the bronze sword figured in Stuart’s
Caledonia Romana, Pl. v.            “ This sword,” says Mr. Wright,
“ig stated to have been             found at the Roman station of
Ardoch, in Scotland, on the wall of Antoninus,                    and there
appears no reason to doubt the statement.”                  In, truth, how-~
ever,   there is no such         statement;       Mr. Wright has been
misled by the fact that the sword is figured on the same
plate with some Roman remains from Ardoch.
   The second case quoted by Mr. Wright is that of a sword
described by Mongez before the French Institute, on the
 16th Prairial, An. 9,” i.e. 5th June, 1801.                  It is stated to
have been found in a peatmoss at Heilly, near Abbeville,
with the skeletons of a man and a horse, and four coins of
the Emperor Caracalla.    ‘‘This sword, therefore,” says Mr.
Wright, “ was that of a Roman cavalry soldier, not older, and
perhaps a little later, than this reign, who had sunk in the
bog to which this turbary had succeeded.”
     Mongez, on the contrary, concluded that the skeleton could
not have been that of a cavalry soldier at all, because a
cavalry soldier would not have been armed with a short
sword; and so far from regarding the sword as Roman, “on ne
pourroit,” he says, “ également pas ’attribuer aux Romains,
si Pon ne raisonnoit que d’aprés la matiére dont elle est
faite {.’ And in the next page he adds, “ Wo are therefore
certain, that after the second Punic war, the Roman swords
were made of iron §.”
   It is true that five months later he altered his opinion, and
   * Transactions of the Ethnological        § “Nous voil) done certains quo
Soc., N.S. vol. iv. p. 176.               lépée des Romains, depuis la seconde
   + Ditto, N.S. vol. vy. p. 105.         guerre Punique, fut fabriquée on fer,”
   a, Abfofe), teilithn os ASB),          p. 194.
               BRONZE     WEAPONS   NOT   OF   ROMAN   ORIGIN.       19

 eame to the conclusion that, after all, the bronze swords were
Roman, but we cannot consider that much weight should be
attached to this opinion, which was in direct opposition to
that entertained by the same learned antiquary a few months
previously.
   Finally, Mr. Wright cites an instance of a bronze sword
found with some Roman coins of Maxentius, who reigned
from 306 to 312 4.0, This sword was discovered in a turbary
at Piquigny, near Abbeville, in a large boat, which it would
seem    had been        sunk, and in which      were several skeletons.
The reason for referring this bronze sword to the Roman
epoch, was the presence in this case, as in the last, of Roman
coins. But it is somewhat remarkable, that in both instances
the antiquarics who recorded the discovery attributed so little
importance to the presence of these coins, that they did not
take the trouble to specify the exact position which they
occupied with reference to the bronze weapons; in fact they
only mention them casually, and as it were by an after-
thought, in a foot-note.        We may be pardoned, then, if we
do not ourselves look upon these coins as being certainly of
the same date as the weapons near which thcy are said to
have been discovered. Others may be of a different opinion,
but even if it be admitted that in these two cases bronze
weapons were actually discovered in association with Roman
coins, and in such a position that the weapons and the coins
must certainly have been embedded together, still, when wo
consider the great abundance of Roman coins on the one
hand, and of bronze weapons on the other, we cannot be
surprised that there should be one or two cases in which they
haye been found associated together.
  Mr. Wright indeed states that, “instead of our not finding
the bronze swords in juxta-position with Roman remains, in
every case where they have becn found in Britain or Gaul,
where    the    details    of the discovery have been carefully
                                    Cra
20        GEOGRAPHICAL     DISTRIBUTION   OF   BRONZE    WEAPONS.

observed, it has occurred under circumstances which Icad to
the strongest presumption of their being Roman.” Yet we
have seen that, in spite of his great acquaintance with archie-
ological hterature, he has only been able to bring forward
three cases, one of which is founded on an error, while the
other two seem hardly more satisfactorily established.
   Again, the geographical distribution of bronze weapons and
implements does not favour such atheory. The Romans never
entered Denmark ; it is doubtful whether they ever landed in
Treland, no Roman         road, masonry,       or earthwork,       has cver
been found there. Yet while more than 350 bronze swords
have been found in Denmark, anda very large number in
Treland *, I have only been able to hear of six bronze swords
in Italy. The rich museums at Florence, Rome, and Naples
do not appear to contain a single specimen of those typical,
leaf-shaped bronze swords, which are, comparatively spcak-
ing, so common in the North.        That the bronzo swords
should have been introduced into Denmark by a people who
 never occupied that country, and froma part of Europe in
which they are very rare, is, I think, a most untenable
hypothesis.
   I may add that no swords or celts of bronze have been
found in the excavations at Pompeii.
  Moreover, the use of the word “ ferrum” (iron), as synony-
mous with a sword, clearly proves that the Roman swords
were made of that metal.
   I have already mentioned that silver and lead do not
oéeur in Bronze Age finds, that coins and letters are
equally absent, and that the ornamentation of tho Bronze
Age, though. sometimes very beautiful, is not of a Roman
character.
   Lastly, the bronze which was so largely used by the
     * The Museum at Dublin contains   the number    of swords   is not stated
282 swords and daggers: unluckily,     separately.
                   SUMMARY     OF ARGUMENT                        all

Romans for ornaments, etc., was composed partly of lead,
whereas that of the Bronze Age consists of copper and tin
only.   Other metals,     indeed,   such   as iron, silver, nickel,
and lead itself, are present; but in small quantities, never
having been purposely introduced, but only occurring as
impurities.
  The reasons, then, which satisfy me that our bronze weapons
cannot be referred to Roman times, may be summed up as
follows :—
   Firstly. They have never been found in company with
Roman pottery, or other remains of the Roman period.
   Secondly. They are very abundant in some countries, as
for instance in Denmark       and   Ireland,   which    were   never
invaded by Roman armies.
  Thirdly. The bronze swords do not resemble in form those
used by Roman soldiers.
   Fourthly. The Latin word “ ferrum” was used as synony-
mous with a sword, showing that the Romans always used
iron.
   Fifthly. The ornamentation is not Roman in its character.
  Sixthly. The   bronze     used by the Romans           contained,
generally, a large proportion of lead, which           is never the
case in that of the Bronze Age.
  Nor is there any subsequent period to which we can refer
the weapons and implements of bronze.           Great numbers of
Saxon interments have been examined both in this country
and on the Continent, and we know that the swords, lances,
knives, and other weapons of that time, were all of iron.
Besides this, if the bronze implements          and weapons had
belonged to post-Roman times, we should certainly, I think,
have found some of them in the ruined towns, and with the
pottery and coins, of that period. Moreover, the similarity
to each other of the weapons found in very distant parts of
Jurope, implies more extended intercourse between different
2               BRONZE   WEAPONS   NOT   SAXON.

countries than any which existed in those centuries. On the
whole, then, the evidence appears to show that the use of
bronze weapons is characteristic of a particular phase in the
history of European civilization, and one which was anterior
to the discovery of iron, or, at any rate, to the general use
of that metal for cutting purposes.
   It is, moreover, I think, clearly established that the use of
iron was general throughout Northern Europe for a con-
siderable time before the invasion of Ceesar.
   Hyidently, however, the transition from the use of bronze
weapons, to those of iron must have been gradual, and there
 must have been a time when the two were in use together.
   M. Ramsauer, for many years director of the salt-mines at
Hallstadt, near Salzburg, in Austria, has discovered an ex-
tensive cemetery belonging to this transitional period. He
has opened no less than 980 graves, evidently of those who
even at that early period worked the salt-mines which are
still so celebrated. The objects discovered are described
and figured in an album, which has unfortunately never
been published, but of which Mr. Evans and I secured a
copy. The following table will sufficiently prove the im-
portance of the discovery.
    That the period to which these graves belonged was that
of the transition between the Bronze and Iron Ages, is
evident ; both because we find cutting instruments of iron
as well as of bronze, and also because both are of somewhat
unusual, and we may almost say of intermediate, types. The ©
same remark applies to the ornamentation.  Animals are fie-
quently represented, but are very poorly executed, while the
geometrical patterns are well drawn.      Coins are entirely
absent.   That the transition was from bronze to iron, and
not from iron to bronze, is clear; because here, as elsewhere,
while iron instruments with bronze handles are common,
there is not a single case of a bronze blade with an iron
                                                                                                                               TT
                                                                                                                                ‘0

                                                                                  SdAVUDHIT               SHIGOG               GIA
                                                                                                                                 NI           THD                 AUVNIGUO “UANNVIN

                                                                                                                                            “SHILIQDILNV



                                     y           pata                                  ‘azUoIg                                              “UOIT                          *1aquey         “sse[y         "£1990.      ‘904g

                *SOAVID) 9} JO “ON
                                                              |squaureurg‘S[assa,\               ‘salipang
                                                                                                     ay        suodva
                                                                                                                 |’                  *suodeaay        ee                             *s}USWILVULG
     A


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
     eS                                   9               TLFT          g                 ge              SI                   I9T
ie
                                                                                                                                                ee               COT                 ge                  pee         1g
     mn
                                                                                                                                                                                -                                     i
     >
                                                                                                         STAVUDHLIA                     INUNA              ‘SUSdHOO
     >                   3
     =                   z                                                                                                      es                                     =                                                             HALLSTADT.
                        os)                                                                                                          STLILINGILNY
                                                                                                                   :   F              .
                        Q                                                                                                  =                                x
                        @                     PIOD                                                                                                                                                                         |
                                                 SPUSWUBUIG                            *azuorg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                2a                                                                                                                      "UOIT                      “squy                  *“SSE[D         *AI0}}0g
                         °
                         A,                                                                                                                                                                                               }losayrg
                                                     UO       sjuamre       -sjassa,
                                                                               |                                                                                                                                       “syoalqo
                                                                                               ‘saupung
                                                                                                |              “suodeasy
                                                                                                                 |                      |
                                                                                                                                     ‘Suodva,y JayjQ                             *s]USUEUO
                                                                                                                                                     ‘sjoo{qao

                                          $¢              FEAL              64            ES             16                    6FS              Iv               LOL                 ce                 806          OOT
                                     za                             =              =                           =                       Sh                                                           =         ~t            2
          “STRqO,                         19              SIGE              esT           68             601                   Ors              FL               OL6                €L                  GFéL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     23
24                      HALLSTADT.

handle.   This shows that, when both metals were in use, the
iron was preferred for blades. Another interesting point in
the Hallstadt bronze, as in that of the true Bronze Age, is
the absence of silver, lead, and zinc (excepting, of course, as
mere impurities in the bronze). This is the more significant,
inasmuch as the presence, not only of the tin itself, but also
of glass, amber, and ivory, indicates the existence of an
extensive commerce.
  Moreover, as Morlot well pointed out, the absence of silver
cannot be accidental, because the bronze of Hallstadt contains
no lead, and the absence of lead entails that of silver, since
the latter could not, at least in Hurope, be obtained without
the former,
                                                    i)Ct




                                     CHAPTER                     II.

              ON         THE   USE   OF    BRONZE               IN ANCIENT   TIMES.


THE commonest and, perhaps, the most characteristic
objects belonging to the Bronze Age, are the so-called
“celts” (figs. 4-16) which were probably used for chiscls,
             Fic.   4.                              Fre.   5.




                                                                                    rovcoratennnnar sane

   Copper Celt from Waterford.        Winged Celt from Ireland.         Socketed Celt from Ireland.

          Fie. 7.                         Fie, 8.                                Fc. 9,




 The three different types of Celts, and the manner in which they are supposed to have been
                                            handled,
26                                                           BRONZE CELTS.

hoes, war -axes -) and a variety of other purposes.                                                Implements
                   Fre. 10
                                                             EF ig, it,




                                                        Copper (?) Celt fre 6%    Celt-mould fro m Ireland.
                                                             I reland,
       K a ihnuck AX e

                                                                  F 1g, 14,      Fie, 15.            Fie. 16.




           PLE




                                         ANN

                         Sn NIT
                                            go



         RN NATE                              MT




                    SP      tendo
                       rmenrememenoereee.Hey AS
         oa,                                      ALT




     Decorated Celt from Ireland,                                                Danish Celts,
                             BRONZE     CELTS.                        7


similar, though not identical, and made of iron instead of
bronze, are even now employed iu Siberia (fig. 10) and
some parts of Africa*. More than two thousand are known
to exist in the different Irish collections, of which the
great Museum belonging to the Royal Irish Academy at
Dublin contained in the year 1860 no less than six hundred
and eighty-eight+, no two of which were cast in the same
mould.    They vary in size from an inch to a foot in length,
and may be divided into three principal classes (figs. 7-9)
according to the manuer in which they were handled; though


                                                         Fie. 19.




                           Bronze Axe, Le Puy.

                                                       Stone Axe.



   Bronze Axe.   Naples.



   * Klemm’s Culturgeschichte der       + In the Museum at Edinburgh are
Menschen, vol. iii, p. 160.  Hora     more than 100, at Copenhagen 350.
ferales, p. 77.
28                       BRONZE         CELTS.

we must remember that there were many intermediate forms.
The first class (figs. 4, 7,11, 13, 14, and 15) 1s the simplest in
form, and is considered by some antiquaries (as, for instance,
by Sir W. R. Wilde*) to be the oldest, partly because they are
“ evidently formed on the type of the old stone celts,” (conf.
figs. 11 and 18 with figs. 19 and 160) partly because some of
them (nearly thirty for instance in the Dublin Museum) are of
red, almost unalloyed, copper, and are “almost the only
antique implements of any kind formed out of” this metal,
and partly because the copper ones at least are always
unornamented. On the other hand, the simplicity of form
exhibited by the copper axes, which may be observed in
those from other countries as well as from Ireland, is perhaps
to be accounted for by the great difficulty of casting copper,
so that the founders, when dealing with that metal, would
naturally confine themselves to the simpler forms. There
can be little doubt that these simple celts were handled in
the manner indicated (fig. 7). Fig. 20 represents a modern
African axe in my collection.  Here, however, the blade is
of iron.

                             Fig, 20,




                             African Axe,

   Evidently, however, in such an axe the blade would tend
to split the handle in which it was placed. To remedy this
                      * Cat. Ir. Acad., p. 361.
                               BRONZE   sworps.                           29

defect, a stop, or ridge, was raised across the ccelt, and the
metal and wood were made to fit into one another (figs. 5
and 8). This second form of celt is known as a Paalstab, or
Paalstave, and has often a small loop on one side (the sup-
posed use of which is indicated in the figure), as well as a
wing on each side. A still further improvement consisted
(figs. 6, 9, 16) in reversing the position of the metal and
the handle, making the axe hollow at one end, and so passing
the handle into it.
   Bronze celts are generally plain, but sometimes ornamented
with ridges,          dots, or lines, as in figs. 6,9, 13, 15, and 16.
That they were made in the countries where they are found,
is proved by the presence of moulds (fig. 12).               It is difficult
to understand why the cclt-makers never cast their axcs as
we do ours, with a transverse hole, through which the handle
might pass.    No bronze implements of this description has,
however, so far as I know, been yet found in Great Britain,
though afew have occurred in Denmark, where they are of
great beauty and highly decorated.
   The swords of the Bronze Age (figs. 22-29 *), are always
more or less leaf-like in shape, double-edged, sharp-pointed,
and intended for stabbing and thrusting, rather than for
cutting. This is evident, not ouly from the general shape,
but also from the condition of the edges.     They never have
any bandguards: the handles are sometimes solid (figs.
25-31); this is generally the case with those found in Den-
mark: sometimes (figs. 22-24) flat, thin, and evidently in-
tended to be plated with wood or bone: while sometimes the
sword expands at its base, and is fastened to a handle by
from two to four rivets.    Swords of this class are gencrally
shorter than the others, and indeed we find every intermediate
form petween the true sword and the dagger (figs. 32, 33, 34) :
  * In Fig. 21 an ancient iron sword    is ropresented, in order to show the
difference in form.
                              BRONZE        SWORDS.



                        Fig. 23.                             95
                                                      Fre.


Ere. 21,


                                                                    Fye. 26.




           Trelar nd,

 Ancient
   Tron
  Sword
  from a                                                            Seandinavia,
  Saxon                               Switzerland,
   tomb,
England

                                                        Lake of
                                                      Neutchatel.

                         Sweden,

                                   Bronze   Swonps.
                               BRONZE       SPEARS.                             Sl

of the two classes together, the Dublin Museum contains nearly
300. The handles of the bronze swords are very short, and
could not have been held comfortably by hands as large as
ours, a characteristic much relied on by those who attribute

    Pra, 27.        Fie. 28,     Fie, 29.        Fie. 20.          Ere, 3,




                                                  Sword-handles from Denmark,


                                             the introduction of bronze
                                             into Europe to a people of
                                             Asiatic origin. The Danish
                                        Musewm contains more than
                                        390 bronze swords.
                                           The next classes of bronze
                                        objects are the heads of
                                        spears (figs. 385, 36), jave-
                                        lins, and arrows; two hun-
                                        dred and seventy-six of
                                        which are in the Dublin
                                        Muscum;      in length they
                               vary from two feet and a half to an
                               inch, and their shapes are also very
                               various: but it is unnecessary to
                               describe them in detail, because they
     Swords from Denmark.
                               are repeated in similar weapons of
all ages, countries, and materials.             Bronze arrows, however,
are not very common in Northern                Europe, probably because
flint was so much cheaper, and almost as effective.
32            BRONZE   FISH-HOOKS         AND   SICKLES.


   More than a hundred bronze fish-hooks have been found at
Nidau in the Lake of Bienne, but elsewhere they appear to be
rare; the Museum at Dublin contains only one. Sickles are
more   numerous;   at Copenhagen           there are twenty-five,     at
Dublin eleven; in the Lake-village at Morges eleven have

                               Fie. 33.




                                                           Fic. 34.




                                 * ot


                        Irish Bronze Daggers.


been found, at Nidan eighteen; they are generally about
six inches in length, flat on one side, and raised on the
other; they were always intended to be held in the right
hand.
                              BRONZE    KNIVES.                                ey)

    Bronze knives (figs. 87-41) are frequently found in the
 Danish tumuli, and among the remains of the Swiss lake
 habitations ;twenty, for instance, at Morges, twenty-six at
 Estavayer, and about a hundred at Nidau: in Ireland they
 appear to be very rare; the DublinMuseum                  = press.     Exe. 36,
 does not contain one.         They were generally                         a
fitted into handles of bone, horn, or wood,
and the blade was almost always more or
less curved, those of iron knives, on the
 contrary, being generally straight.
    Fig. 48 represents a bronze knife found
 at Thebes by Sir Gardner Wilkinson, and
figured in Lee’s translation of Keller, p.
 276 *,
    The small bronze razor-knives (figs. 42-
45), indeed, have straight edges, but they
are quite of a different character from the
iron knives: from the ornaments engraved         Pea eel
on them, I am disposed to regard them as            Ireland,
belonging to a late period in the Age of Bronze, if not
in some cases to the beginning of that of Iron. Indeed, the
Flensborg Museum contains a razor-knife, said to have been
found together with objects of the latter metal.
   Ornaments of bronze do not, like the weapons of that
metal, characterize a definite period, but may belong to any
age. Therefore, before we refer any particular ornament to
this period, we must know the circumstances under which it
was found.    The following illustrations are principally from
the Swiss lake villages.
   The personal ornaments which may, I think, safely be
referred to the Bronze Age, consist principally of bracelets

   * See also for Egyptian Bronze       4 ]’Hist. Prim.   de l’Homme,    1869,
implements    and weapons Mr. A.        p. 376.
Arcelin’s paper in the Mater. p. Ser.
34.                          BRONZE     KNIVES.

(figs. 49, 50), pins (figs. 51-53), and rings. The bracelets
are either simple spirals, or rings open at one side, and deco-
rated by those combinations of straight and curved lines so
characteristic of the Bronze Age.             like the weapons, they
generally indicate small hands, but, like the bronze ornaments
of various existing savages—for instance, of many Negro
tribes, of the Khonds in Orissa, &«,—they are often ex-
tremely heavy.
                                                   Fro. 40.          Fie. 41.




             <              V
              Bronze Knives from Denmark,




                                                              Bronze Knives from
                                                                 Switzeriand,




      Bronze pins are very abundant:              for instance, 57 have
been obtained from Morges, 289 from Estavayer, and 600
                          BRONZE      KNIVES,                         85

from Nidau. They are also very frequently found in graves,
where they were used, as pointed out by Sir R. C. Hoare, to
secure the linen cloth which enveloped the bones. Although

            Fig. 42,           Fre, 43.         Fic, 44,   Fic. 45.




                       Razor-knives from Denmark,

                                 Fig, 46,




                                Fre, 47,




                       Small Knives from Denmark.

brooches of bronze are very common, they have generally
been found in conjunction with iron, and ‘during the Bronze
                            pD 2
36
(ny
                           BRONZE        ORNAMENTS.

Age their place seems to have been generally filled by mere
pins. Many of the latter articles found in the Swiss lakes
appear, however, to have been hair-pins. Some of them are


                                     Bie, 48.




                                 Egyptian Knife.

                      oe                                     Fic. 50,




                              Bracelets. — Switzerland.
           Pre. 51.           Fre. 52,           Fre. 53,         Fre, 54.




                            Bronze Mais pins.—Switzerland,




nearly a foot in length, and two found near Berne even as
much as 2ft. 9in. Many of the pins have large hollow
                                          BRONZE                    ORNAMENTS.                                                                                On

 spherical heads, as in figs. 51, 52; the others vary so much
that it is impossible to give any general description of them.
There can be little doubt that these Fre-55. Fss.56. Pia. 57, Fia.s8.
pins really belong to the Bronze Age ;                                                                                                                    i
but the fact, that                        similar ones                               con-
tinued in use long after the introduc-
tion of iron, is equally well established.
One of these later bronze pins is repre-
sented in fig.171.      Some other small                                                                                                                  /
objects of bronze, including      two
needles, from the Lake of Neufchatcl,
are represented     in   figs. 55-60.                                                                                                                     a


Bronze       hammers are very rare; it is
probable that stones were used for this                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                                      Era, 89,
purpose. Gouges are more common.
Small saws have been discovered in
Germany and Denmark, but not, as

                                                                    Fic, 60.




      Been      ctemnnanncelcitintrteteiettttetttiacitttett 7 rte     a,
                                                                            Pear resstareergrenenent
                                                                                                even wannervevennemnenroonateenannetentttioceeeen
     Fst       cp         cu            SUL                          ASU          SSNS                         Ses ene                              ase

                                 Small objects in Bronze,—Switzerland,


yet, in Great Britain.                                Studs or buttons, though not very
abundant, are found both in Switzerland and Scandinavia *.
Silver, lead, and zinc appear to have been unknown during
the Bronze Age.                   Glass beads were in use, but no vessels of
glass have yet been discovered; in the same manner there
are barbarous tribes now which are well supplied with Euro-
pean beads, but which possess no glass vesscls.
   The weapons and ornaments of the Bronze Age aie all

   * Further information as to the                                         will be found in the chapter on the
objects of bronze from Switzerland                                         Swiss lake habitations.
38                               THE METALLURGY

cast, and show very considerable skill in metallurgy *. Three
modes of casting were employed.     One was that in a mould,
either of stone or metal. Of course in this case the mould
was necessarily in two halves, and the line of junction was
generally visible, as in fig. 61, representing a celt, which has
evidently been cast in this manner.         This specimen was
found in Kent, and presented to me by Dr. Dasent.                       It is
               Pre. 6.                    clear, however, that such an
                                           object as the knife in fig. 40
                                           could not have been cast in
                                           this manner. Neither wero
                                           the pins, figs. 51-54, for if
                                           they had been, the line of
                                           junction between the two
                                           halves of the mould must
                                           have been traceable.
                                              Indeed this mode of cast-
                                           ing was evidently unusual.
                                           This is proved by the con-
                                           dition of the objects, by
                                           the scarcity of moulds, and
                                           also by the fact that we
                                           seldom find any two bronze
                                           objects exactly similar to
                                           one another.       Thus, out of
                                 the six hundred and eighty-
                 Kentish Celt,
                                 eight specimens in the Dub-
 lin Museum, no two were cast in the same mould, cleatly
 showing that the moulds were not permanent.
    The second mode of casting was by making a model of
 the object in wood or some other hard substance, and press-

     * See Morlot’sinteresting memoir:    employés   dans   l’Age du Bronze.”
 “ Sur le passage de ’dge de la pierre    Copenhague, 1866.
 4 lage du Breuze et sur les métaux
                       OF THE    BRONZE   AGE.                    o9

ing it on fine sand, so as to obtain a corresponding hollow.
The sand must of course have been contained in two boxes or
frames, fitting like the solid moulds one on the other.         Ob-
jects cast in this manner would therefore also show the line
of junction. The advantage of this method is that sand can
easily be worked into the required form, and wooden models
were much more easily made than hollow moulds, either of
stone or metal.     Like the former, however, this method was
applicable to very simple castings only. Specimens in which
the line of junction is not exactly central, or symmetrical,
were probably cast in this manner, the model having been
pressed into the one mould rather more deeply than into
the other.
   The third method of casting was with wax.     In this case,
as in the former,    a model    was   made   and enclosed   in pre-
pared earth, made of some clayey soil mixed probably with
cowdung, or some other inflammable substance, in order that
when subjected to heat, it might become porous. The frame
was then warmed so that the wax melted and ran out of the
hole through which the metal was to be poured in. This
was the commonest mode of casting during the Bronze Age.
It required fewer instruments, and did not, like the other
two methods, involve a line of junction, which was a great
advantage, because in the absence of steel the projecting
ridge thus produced was very difficult to remove, especially
when the objects were ornamented. In one case M. Morlot
observed on an object of bronze the mark of a finger,
evidently resulting from an impression on the soft wax.
Occasionally, again, when       the wax was heated carelessly, it
burned and left a carbonized film, which of course produced
a corresponding mark on the object cast.
   In some few cases the interiors of bronze vesscls show the
marks of the spatula with which the wax was worked.
   The evidences of imperfect metallurgical knowledge and
40                       THE METALLURGY

appliances are also very interesting. M. Morlot has called
attention to a striking instance of this presented by one of
the large Schwerin brooches (fig. 62). This was evidently
                                 Fis. 62,




                      Mended Brooch.—-Mecklenburgh.

a chef d’ceuvre, but the intermediate bow connecting the two
great discs had been accidentally broken. In order to mend
it again, the two pieces were put into their proper relative
position, and the broken bow was covered with a layer of
     Fic.o3. Wax. The whole was then surrounded with the
              usual preparation of clay, etc., the wax was melted
              out and replaced with bronze.
                  Again, besides the orifice through which the
            ; bronze was poured into the mould, it was neces-
              sary to leave one or more holes through which the
              air might escape. The first, being funnel-shaped,
              was easily removed, but the latter were frequently
              beaten over, as is seen at the top of fig. 63, for
              without steel it was almost impossible to cut them
              off. Indeed the smiths of the Bronze Age seem
              to have been unable to pierce bronze, and the
             anoles for rivets, as in the swords, etc., are cast and
             not pierced.
     Even the ornamentation       in circles, spirals, etc., on the
                       OF THE         BRONZE   AGE.                    4]

bronze objects is all cast, and though beautifully drawn,
was evidently done with the free hand; compasses seem
therefore to have been unknown.       Moreover it is evident
that these decorated objects must have been cast with wax,
for though on a flat surface the line of junction might have
been smoothed down, it could not have been obliterated on
the ornamented objects.
  On some of the bronze vessels, indeed, the ornamentation
has been produced by hammering.       This, however, indicates
a considerable progress in metallurgy.
   Soldering seems to have been eutirely unknown during
the Bronze Age, and even during the earlier times of the
Tron Age. Thus the Hallstadt bronze vessels, when broken,
were always riveted together.
                                  Fic, 64.




              Gold Torque.—Iveland.    Found near Clonmacnoise


I have also figured a group              (figs, 64-67) of Irish gold
42                 GOLD     ORNAMENTS.


                                                            Fie, 66,


     Fie, 65.




                     Gold Ornaments.—Treland,

                                  Fig. 67.




                      Gold Ornament.—Treland,

                                  Fig. 67*,




                                               A    m0 te     BO




        A ¢elion
                            Ww’
                          Iron Ornament.— Africa,
                                   LIST      OF         BRONZE    OBJECTS.                                    43




                                                                                                         Total.



                                                                  |
                                              aed
                                              a            Meerigen.
                                                                  Estavayer,
                                                                          Cortaillod.
                                                                                        |  Auvernier,
                                                                                   Corcelettes.


Celts and Fragments ...... 1                      3                   lop)   Hw             cop)


POMONA Raceseacsiack
               ec nnee:                                                                            |
                                                                                                   S15]
                                                                                                    places.
                                                                                                    Other

Ela     Mere aes
               cere scrtens:                        4

Knives and Fragments                          102

(er er         ee     ne eee                  611 |
ponds UUE 2Gbeted=P een     sanR ae Ae nce    4.96

HAVOTIAS) i napa ceo              asas cee    238

Bracelets and Fragments                           55

UIST
  ANOOICS:          tn orescnegevareces       189

AN ARE aRerar a: Rerignceet
                      ttt Racner                  95

SIAN       VViRVOSes meme        aeiet ae

Hamce-neadspesc.cqeae                          27           ~“T                     oH
                                                                                    no


PASTOR SHGACS a ramege
                  ccseats?

IBUEEONS amiasciemiadleeteeclee                                   28         10    10

INIAUN IEC aes ey.corinconedanennaes           20

Various Ornaments....... Balt a bs)                                          18

SEinEiualmocosacoatsnacdsecdo0sos

Daggers

Sickles Sion        De ites shy. att           18

Double-pointed Pins ......                     75

Small Bracelets           ...... Pedton        20

SUMCMES        he    see oseensnsctsce         96


           MO ta      Secccseare ccc:        2004         208 | 618               539    73        69
44,                       GOLD   ORNAMENTS.

ornaments. We have, however, as yet no evidence as to their
origin, and very probably they belong to a much later period.
The fact is interesting that very similar ornaments, made
however not       of gold, but    of iron, are now     worn   by the
natives of Africa.     One of these is represented in fig. 67%.
      The ornamentation on the objects of bronze is of a peculiar,
and at the      same   time   uniform,    character;   it consists   of
simple geometrical patterns, and is formed by combinations
of spirals, circles, and zigzag lines; representations of animals
and plants being very rarely attempted.        Even the few ex-
ceptions to this rule are perhaps more apparent than real.
Thus, two such only are figured in the Catalogue of the
Copenhagen Museum; one is a rude figure of a swan (fig.
37), the other of a man (fig. 39). The second of these
forms the handle of a knife, which appears to be straight
in the blade, a type characteristic of the Iron Age, but
rarely found in that of Bronze. As regards one of them,
therefore, there is an independent reason for referring it
to the period of transition, or at least to the close of the
Bronze Age. There is, indeed, one type of pattern, usually
 found on the razor-knives, but sometimes also on others,
 intended probably for a rude representation of a ship (figs.
 42-45).   Even, however, if we admit that this is the case,
 and if we accept these objects as belonging to the Bronze
 Age, they will only show how little advance had yet been
 made in the art of representing natural objects.
    The foregoing table, which I owe to the kindness of Dr.
 Keller, will give an idea of the relative numbers of the
 different objects.
      There is, I believe, only one      case in which any bronze
 weapon or implement bears an inscription; a fact which is
 the more significant when we remember how often letters
 are met with on those of iron. Fig. 68 represents this inte-
 resting specimen, which is a winged celt, and is in the
                 DRESS    DURING   THE   BRONZE   AGE,                      45

Museum Kircherianum of the Jesuits’ College at Rome. No
explanation of the inscription has yet been given, nor do we
even know to what alphabet the letters belong.         It was
found in the Campagna, but there is unfortunately no record
of the circumstances under which it was discovered.
  Tke skill displayed in the manufacture
of the objects described in this chapter,
as well as the beauty of their form and
ornamentation,    shows    a   considerable
development of art. The discovery of
a bar of tin at Estavayer, and of a
mould for casting celts at Morges, has
proved that some at least of these ob-
jects were made in Switzerland, just
as evidence of a similar nature shows               i                      ye
that other countries in Europe, as, for
                                                         Inscribed Celt,
instance, Denmark, England, Scotland,
and Ireland, had also their own foundries.          The similarity of
form and ornamentation appears also to indicate some com-
munication between different parts of Hurope; but as Corn-
wall, Saxony, and Spain are the only known European sources
from which tin can be obtained in any quantity, the mere
presence of bronze is in itself a sufficient evidence not only
of metallurgical skill, but also of commercial intercourse.
   We should hardly, perhaps, have hoped to ascertain much
of the manner in which the people of the Bronze Age were
dressed. Considering how perishable are the materials out
of which clothes are necessarily formed, it is wonderful
that any fragments of them should have remained to the
present day. There can be little doubt that the skins of
animals were extensively used for this purpose, as indeed
they have been in all ages of man’s history; many traces of
linen tissue also have been found in English tumuli of the
Bronze Age, and in the Swiss Lakes. Fig. 168 represents a
46                                   DRESS      DURING

piece of fabric from Robenhausen in Switzerland; it be-
longs, however, in all probability, to the Stone Age. Hven
a single fragment such as this, throws much light on the
manufactures, if we may call them so, of the period to which
it belongs; but fortunately we need not content ourselves
with any such partial knowledge as this, as we possess the
whole dress of a chief belonging to the Bronze Age.
     On a farm occupied by M. Dabls, near Ribe in Jutland,
are four tumuli, known as Great Kongehoi, Little Kongehoi,
Guldhoi, and Treenho.                   This last was       examined    in 1861
by MM. Worsaae and Herbst.       It is about fifty ells in
diameter and six in height, being composed of a loose
 sandy earth.         In it, near             the centre,   were    found   thlrce
                                             Fre, 78,

         Firs, 69,




                                                                    Comb,


                     Woollen Caps,


 wooden coffins, two of full size, and one evidently intended
 for a child. The coffin with which we are now particularly
 concerned, was about 9ft. 8in: long and 2ft. 2in. broad on the
 outside ; its internal measurementswere 7$ft.long and 1ft. 8in.
 broad. It was covered by a movable hd of corresponding
 size.   The contents were peculiar, and very interesting.
 While, as might naturally be expected, we                         find, in most
 ancient graves, only the bones and teeth, all the soft parts
 having long ago decayed away, in some cases—and this was
 one of them—almost exactly the reverse has happened.
 Through the action of water, owing perhaps to the fact
 that it was strongly impregnated with iron, the soft parts of
                 THE     BRONZE         AGE.                      47




                                    ts
                                   ona
                                   he
                                    ae
                                      0




                       Woollen Cloak.


  Fic. 73.                                            Pic. 74




                                               Mrs,




Woollen Shirt,                                   Woollen Shawl.
48                       BURIAL   DURING

the body had been turned into a dark, greasy substance;
and the bones, with the exception of a few fragments, were
changed into a kind of blue powder.
   Singularly enough, the brain seems to have been the part
which had undergone least change. On opening the coffin,
it was found lying at one end, where no doubt the head had
originally been placed, covered by a thick hemispherical
woollen cap, about six inches in height (fig. 69). The outer
side of the cap was thickly covered by short loose threads,
every one of them ending in a small knot, which gave the
cap a very singular appearance.     The body of the corpse had
been wrapped in a coarse woollen cloak (fig. 72), which was
almost semicircular, and hollowed out round the neck.     Ii
was about 3ft. 8in. long, and broad in proportion. On its
inner side were left hanging a great number of short
woollen threads, which gave it somewhat the appearance of
plush.                   .
   On the right side of the body was a box, closed by a
lid of the same diameter.    It was V3in. in diametcr, 6hin.
high, and was fastened together by pieces of osicr or bark.
In this box was a similar smaller one, without a lid, and
in this, again, were three articles, namely, a cap 7in. high,
of simply woven woollen stuff (fig. 70); a small comb 3in.
long, 24in. high (fig. 71); and a small simple razor-knife.
   After the cloak and the bark-box had been taken away, two
woollen shawls came to view, one of them covering the fect,
the other lying nearer to the head. They were of a square
shape, rather less than 5dft. long, 3ft. 9in. broad, and with a
long fringe (fig. 74).   At the place where the body had lain,
was a shirt (fie. 73) also of woollen material, cut out a little
for the neck, and with a long projecting tongue at one of
the upper angles. It was fastened at the waist by a long
woollen band, which went twice round the body, and hung
down in front, On the left side of the corpse was a bronze
                             THE    BRONZE     AGE.              49

sword (fig. 27), in a wooden sheath. It is 2ft. 3in. in length,
and has a solid simple handle.
   At     the    feet were    two     pieces     of   Fre. 75.
woollen stuff, about 14}in. long and
  gin. wide (fig. 75), the use of which
does not seem quite clear, though
they may be supposed to have been
leggings.        At the end of the coffin
were found traces of leather, doubtless
the remains of boots. In the cap, where
the     head    had   been, was     some     black
hair, and the form of the brain was still
recognizable. Finally, this ancient war-
rior had been wrapped round in an 0x’s                Gnas.
hide, and so committed to the grave.
   The other two coffins were not examined by competent
persons, and the valuable information which they might have
afforded was thus lost to us.    The more indestructible
things were, however, preserved; consisting of a sword, a
brooch, a knife, a double-pointed awl, a pair of tweezers,
a large double button or stud, all of bronze; a small double
button of tin, and a javelin-head of flint.
   The baby’s coffin produced only an amber bead, anda small
bronze bracelet, consisting of a simple ring of metal.
  The “ Kongshoi” contained four wooden coffins, in which
were bodies clothed in woollen garments, a bronze sword in
a wooden sheath ornamented with carvings, two bronze
daggers, a wooden bowl ornamented by a large number of
tin nails, a vase of wood, and a small box of bark.
   There can, therefore, be no doubt that these very interest-
ing tumuli date from the Bronze Age, and 1 am inclined to
place them somewhat late in that period, partly on account
of the knife and razor-knife, both of which belong to forms
which there are, as already mentioned, other reasons for
                                                 E
50                                    HUT-URNS.

referring to the close of the Bronze Age, and to the beginning
of that of Iron.         Bronze brooches are also very rarely found
in the Bronze Age, and are common in that of Iron.                       The
sword, again, belongs to a form which is regarded by Pro-
fessor Nilsson as being of late introduction.
   Finally, the mode of sepulture, though other similar cases
are on record, is, to say the least, very unusual;               in the age
of Iron, indeed, the corpse was generally extended, but in that
of Bronze the dead were, with few exceptions, burned, or
buried  in a contracted attitude. In Denmark, cremation
appears to have been almost universal; in England I have
taken out the statistics of 100 cases of tombs containing
objects of bronze, 37 recorded by Mr. Bateman and 63 by
 Sir R. C. Hoare; and the following table shows the manner
in which the corpse had been treated.
                        Contracted.       Burnt.    Extended.   Uncertain.
         Bateman..          15             10          5            7
         EeGametniere        4            49           2            8


                           19             59          os            5

   In 100 cases recorded by Mr. Greenwell all were con-
tracted and burnt.
   We may consider, therefore, that during this period the
corpse was sometimes, though very rarely, extended on its
back, and more frequently it was buried ina sitting or crouch-
ing position, and in a small chamber formed by large stones,
but that the most usual practice was to burn the dead, and
collect the ashes and fragments of bones in or under an urn.
     The ancient funeral customs, however, will be more fully
considered in a subsequent chapter.
   We know as yet very little about the architecture of
the Bronze Age. Rougemont* considers that the Round
                          * L’Age du Bronze, p. 12, 380.
                                   HUT-URNS.                                      SL

 towers belong to that period, but I know no sufficient reason
 for this opinion. In the next chapter I shall give my reasons
 for referring some at least of our so-called Druidical re-
 mains to that period, and many of the Swiss Lake-villages
 certainly belong to it. These remains, indeed, give us little
 information as to* the kind of houses then in use. Certain
 “‘hut-urns,” however, or urns in the form of huts, which
 have been discovered in Italy and Germany, appear to be-
 long to the close of the Bronze Age. The Italian “ hut-
 urns”    were discovered in 1817* at Albano,                      near Rome,
 under    an undisturbed layer of peperino or                      consolidated
volcanic ash, and belong, therefore, to a time when the
voleanoes near Rome were still in a state of activity. The
volume of the Archeologia for 1869 contains a full ac-
count by Prof. Pigorini and myself of the numerous vases
and other objects found with these hut-urns.      The pottery
is peculiarly dark and compact, and with it were found several
bronze knives. The presence of some fragments of iron,
however, appears to show that the huts belong quite to the
close of the Bronze Age, or rather to the commencement of
that of Iron.     The following figure will give an idca of
the urns themselves, as well as of                            Fro, 76.
the houses they were intended to
represent.
   These cases are not isolated. In
the year 1837 Dr. Beyer found
near Parchim a somewhat similar
hut-urn in a tumulus, which, both
from its form and as containing
bronze, is considered by Dr. Lisch
as certainly      belonging       to      the
Bronze    Age “lic                                        Hut-urn,—Albano.

   # See Lettera del Signor D. A.             Alba-Longa.  Roma, 1867.
Visconti sopra aleuni vasi sepolchralt          + Ueber die Hausurnen.       Schwe-
rinyenuti nelle vicinanze della antica    _—rin, 1856.
                                         B2
De                             PEN-PITS.

     In 1849 an urn evidently intended to represent a house
with a tall straw roof, was     found in a tumulus       at Aschers-
leben.   From its colour and material Dr. Lisch refers this
urn also to the Bronze Age.
                 Bei                 The Museum at Munich
                                           contains a very interest-
                                           ing piece of pottery (fig.
                                           77), apparently intended
                                           to represent a Lake-
                                           hamlet comprising seven
                                           small round huts. The
                                           huts are arranged in
                                           three rows of three each,
                                                thus forming three sides
    Um apparently representing a Lake-dwelling,
                                                ofa square. The fourth
side is closed by a wall, in the centre of which is an opening
leading into a porch, which is represented as being thatched.
The platform on which the huts stand, is supported by four
columns represented as consisting of logs, lying one upon the
other. The roof is unfortunately wanting.                  The sides are
ornamented with the double spiral so characteristic of the
Bronze Age.
  In North Germany and Denmark also urns have been
discovered somewhat resembling that in fig. 76. In these
cases the “door” is in the roof. Dr. Lisch considers that
these last urns are the earliest, and represent a form of
dwelling even more ancient than those in which the door
is in the side. To me, I confess, it seems more probable
that these urns belong to a later period, when the repre-
sentation of the dwelling was more conventional, and the
resemblance consequently less.
   Many of the dwellings in use during the Bronze Age were
no doubt subterranean or semi-subterranean.    On almost all
large tracts of uncultivated land, ancient villages of this
                                PICTS’ HOUSES.                                 53
 character may still be traced. A pit was dug, and the earth
 which was thrown out formed a circular wall, the whole being
 then probably covered over with boughs. The “ Penpits,”
 near      Gillingham,    in Wiltshire,     are of this character,            and
 indicate a populous settlement.  In Anglesea, similar hut-
 circles have been well described by the Honourable Owen
 Stanley *, On Dartmoor and elseychere, where large blocks
 of stone abounded, the natives saved themselves the trouble
 of excavating, and simply built up circular walls of stone.
 In other cases, probably when concealment was an object, the
 dwellings were entirely subterranean.    Such ancient dwell-
 ings are in Scotland known as “weems,” from “ Uamha,”
 a cave.  In one of these at Monzie, in Perthshire, a bronze
 sword was discovered+.      Such underground chambers,
 however, appear to have been used in Scotland as dwellings,
 or at least as places of concealment, down to the time of the
 Romans; for a weem described by Lord Rosehillt was con-
 structed partly of stones “ showing the diagonal and diamond
markings peculiar to Roman workmanship.”                      The so-called
Picts’ houses, which are so common in the north of Scotland,
are but slightly, and often not at all, sunk beneath the sur-
face, though, being covered with earth, they are scarcely
distinguishable externally from the larger tumuli: but on
digging into the green mound, it is found to cover a series of
large chambers, built generally with stones of considerable
size, and converging towards the centre, where an opening
appears to have been left for light and ventilation. These
differ little from many of the subterranean weems, excepting
that they are erected on the natural surface of the soil, and
have been buried by means               of an artificial mound heaped

   * On     Remains of the Ancient         + Wilson, Pre-Historic   Annals     of
Circular    Habitations in Holyhead      Scotland, vol.i. p. 104.
Island.    By the Hon. W. O. Stanley,      t Lord Rosehill, Proc. of the Soc.
M.P.                                     of Ant. of Scotland, 1869, p. 109.
54,                          BEEHIVE       HOUSES.

over them. It may seem improbable that a people living in
such rude dwellings should possess a knowledge of metal-
lurgy, but the Kaffirs and other existing African tribes
present us with a simular case.
                                      Ere. 78.:




                        Group ef Beehive Houses.—Scotiand.

   From these we pass naturally to the beehive houses, which
are constructed of dry, thick walls in the form indicated
by the name*. No doubt many of these are very ancient,
and some probably date from the Age of Stone; but on
the other hand they also come down to the present day,
and fie. 78 represents a group m Long Island, on the shore
of Loch Resort, which was inhabited down to the year 1823.
Even now some fey. beehive houses are still occupied in the
Island of Uig.
                                     Fic, 79.




                              The Burgh of Moussa.

   * See Capt. Thomas on Beehive            also Petrie, Proc. Soc. Antiq. Scot-
Houses, Proc. Soe. Antiq. Scotland,         land, vol. vii. p. 201.
vol, ii. p. 133; vol. vii. p. 153. See
                    THE   BURGH   OF MOUSSA.                   BD

   The celebrated “ brochs” or “ burghs” which abound in
the north of Scotland, as well as in the Orkneys and Shet-
lands, are of a very peculiar character. They have been sup-
posed by some to be Scandinavian, but no similar buildings
occur in Norway, Sweden, or Denmark, so that this style of
architecture is no doubt anterior to the arrival of the North-
men.                    :
   Fig. 79 is copied from a photograph of the celebrated
Burgh of Moussa, in the Shetlands, the best preserved speci-
men of this curious style of architecture.       I visited this
most interesting building in 1867. It stands close to tho
sea on the little island of Moussa.     It is circular   in form,
41 feet in height, and open at the top; the central space
is about 20 feet in diameter, and the walls are about 14 feet
thick at the base and 8 at the top. They contain a stair-
case, which leads to the top of the building, several horizontal
galleries, and some small conical chambers, all opening on
the inside; the only external orifice being the door, which is
about 7 feet high.
   The absence of trees and abundance of stone probably led
to this curious style of architecture. Although, moreover, so
archaic in character, these burghs continued in use down to
historical times, in fact until the introduction of lime, and
the knowledge of the true principle of the arch, enabled the
natives to construct buildings of a more modern character ;
these burghs are extremely numerous in Caithness, in the
Orkneys and the Shetlands, but this Moussa Burgh is one
of the few that are mentioned in history. Torfceus tells us
that about the year 1150 Erling carried off the beautiful
Margaret, mother of Harold, the then Earl of Orkney, and
was besieged in Moussa by Harold, who, however, being
unable to take the place, at length thought it politic to
consent to the marriage.    By far the greater number of tho
burghs are  mere  ruins, and the so-called Dun of Dornadilla,
56                 STAIGUE FORT, KERRY.

supposed to have been erectedby the ancient Scotch King
of that name, is the only one which is at all as complete as
that of Moussa. Whether any of the burghs go back to
the Bronze Age it is impossible to say. It is remarkable,
however, that in the Island of Sardinia there are archaic
buildings known as “ nurhags,” which very closely resemble
the British burghs.
                             Fre. 80,




                       Staigue Fort.—Kerry.

  In a future chapter I shall endeavour to show that Stone-
henge and Abury belong to the Bronze Age. Some of
the ancient fortifications also probably are of this period,
but a large proportion, as for instance the Staigue Fort, in
the county of Kerry, fig. 80, belong in all probability to a
much later period.
                                      57




                            CHAPTER          III.

                         THE     BRONZE       AGE.

     HERE are four principal theories as to the Bronze Age.
        According to some archeologists, the discovery, or
 introduction, of bronze was unattended by any other great
 or sudden change in the condition of the people; but was
the result, and is the evidence, of a gradual and peaceable
 development.       Some attribute the bronze arms and imple-
ments, foundin Northern Europe, to the Roman armies, some
to the Pheenician merchants; while others, again, consider
that the men of the Stone Age were replaced by a new and
more civilized people of Indo-European race, coming from
the East ; who, bringing with them a knowledge of bronze,
overran Europe, and dispossessed—in some places entirely
destroying—the original, or rather the earlier inhabitants.
   M. Wibel* believes that the civilization of the Bronze Age
originated in the South of England, from whence it spread over
other parts of Europe. He is also of opinion that the ancient
bronze was obtained, not by the fusion of copper and of tin,
but directly from ore containing the two metals.                     ‘This, I
confess, seems to me extremely improbable +, and I cannot
but agree with those who          maintain that the knowledge              of
bronze must necessarily have been preceded by the separate
use of copper and of tin. Yet no single implement of the
latter metal has been hitherto found in Europe, while those
 * Die Cultur der Bronze-zeit Nord- und Mittel-Huxopas.   Dr. I. Wibel, Kiel,
 + See Appendix.
58              SIMILARITY    OF    BRONZE   IMPLEMENTS

of copper are extremely rare ; Hungary and Ireland, indeed,
have been supposed to form partial exceptions to this rule.
The geographical position of the former country is probably
a sufficient explanation; and as far as Ireland is concerned,
it may perhaps be worth while to examine how far that
country really forms an exception. In the great Museum at
Dublin there are 725 celts and celt-like chisels, 282 swords
and daggers, and 276 lances, javelins, and arrow-heads; yet
out of these 1283 weapons only 30 celts and one sword-blade
are said to be of pure copper*. I say “are said to be,”
because they have not been analyzed, but are supposed to
be copper only from the “ physical properties and ostensible
colour of the metal :” indeed one of these very celts, which
was analyzed by Mr. Mallet, was found to contain a small
percentage of tin. It is possible that for some of the pur-
poses to which celts were applied, copper may have been
nearly as useful as bronze, and at any rate it might some-
times have happened that, from a deficiency of tin, some
implements would be made of copper only.
   Taking these facts into consideration, Ireland certainly
does not appear to present any strong evidence of an age
of copper, while no one has ever pretended to find either
there, or any where else in Europe, a trace of any separate
use of tin +.
   Sir W. R. Wilde admits it to be “remarkable that so few
antique copper implements have been found, although a
knowledge of that metal must have been the preliminary
stage in the manufacture           of bronze.”    Ho thinks, however,
that “the circumstance may be accounted for, either by sup-
posing that but a short time elapsed between the knowledge
of smelting and casting copper ore, and the introduction of
   * One even of these is with good     poses of ornamentation, but that of
reason considered by Dr. Wilde to be    course does not affect tho present
an American specimen.                   argument.
   t+ It was sometimes used for pur-
                   IN   DIFFERENT    COUNTRIES.                    £9

tin, and subsequent manufacture and use of bronze; or from
the probability of nearly all such articles having been re-
cast and converted into bronze, subsequent to the introduc-
tion of tin, which renders them harder, sharper, and more
       *.”
valuable
  Any argument     used.by Sir W.               R. Wilde is of course
entitled to respectful attention, but on the whole, the absence
of implements made either of copper or tin seems to me to
indicate that the art of making bronze was introduced into,
not invented in, Europe.
   Another circumstance which strongly militates against the
theory of a gradual and independent development of metal-
lurgical knowledge in different countries, is the fact which
has been broadly stated by Mr. Wright, that whenever we
find the bronze swords or celts, ‘‘ whether in Ireland in the
far west, in Scotland, in distant        Scandinavia, in Germany,
or still farther east in the Sclavonic countries, they are the
same—not similar in character, but identical.” The great
resemblance of stone implements found in different parts of
the world may be satisfactorily accounted for by the simi-
larity of the material, and the simplicity of the forms. But
this argument cannot be applied to the bronze arms and
implements.     Not only are several varietics of celts found
throughout Europe, but some of the swords, knives, daggers,
etc., are so similar, that they seem as if they must have been
cast by the same maker.  Compare, for mstance, figs. 4, 6,
and 13, which represent Irish celts, with, 14, 15, and 16,
which are copied from Danish specimens; the three swords,
fies. 22, 23, and 24, which come respectively from Ireland,
Sweden, and Switzerland, and the two, figs. 25 and 26, of
which the first is Swiss, the second Scandinavian. It would
have been easy to multiply examples of this similarity, and
it is not going too far to say that these resemblances cannot
                        * Wilde, l.c. p. 357.
60            SIMILARITY   OF BRONZE     IMPLEMENTS.

be the result of accident. On the other hand, it must be
admitted that each country has certain minor peculiarities.
Neither the forms nor the ornaments are exactly similar.
In Denmark and Mecklenburgh, spiral ornaments are most
common; farther south, these are replaced by ring orna-
ments and lines.    The Danish swords generally have solid,
and richly decorated handles, as in figs. 25-31, while those
found in Great Britain (fig. 22) termmate              in a plate which
was riveted to pieces of wood or bone.            Again, the British
lance-heads frequently have loops at the side of the shaft-
hole, as in fig. 35, which is never the case with Danish
specimens.
    The impurities in the bronze indicate, as was shown in the
last chapter, that the copper ore was not all derived from
 one locality, and, lastly, the discovery of moulds in Ireland,
 Scotland,   England,   Switzerland,     Denmark,        and elsewhere,
proves that the art of casting in bronze was known and prac-
tised in many countries.       Under these circumstances it
appears most probable that the knowledge of metal is one of
those great discoveries which Europe owes to the Hast, and
that the use of copper was not introduced into our Continent
until it had been observed that by the addition of a small
quantity of tin it was rendered harder and more valuable.
   I have already, in the first chapter, given the reasons
which have convinced me that the bronze weapons are not
of Roman origin. M. Wiberg* has recently attempted to
show that bronze was introduced into the north by Htrurian
merchants, but we have not, I think, any evidence that
Etruria ever enjoyed so extensive a commerce as that indi-
cated by the great number of bronze objects which have
been found in northern and western Europe.
   We may, therefore, pass on to the views of those who
attribute the Bronze Age civilization           to the influence of
                    * Arch. f. Anthrop. 1870, p. 10.
                THE   BRONZE    AGE     AND       THE    PH@NICIANS.          61

Phcenician commerce, a theory which has recently been main-
tained, with great ability, by Professor Nilsson *. Sir George
 Cornewall Lewis +, on the other hand, while admitting that
Cornwall was the great source of tin in ancient times, has
endeavoured to prove that this metal found its way “to the
nations in the east of the Mediterranean by the overland
route across Gaul, and that the Pheenician ships brought it
from the month of the Rhone, without sailing as far as
Britain.”
   He regards, therefore, the accounts of ancient voyages as
being in many cases either mythical, or at least exaggerated,
but he does not make sufficient allowance for the fact that
our knowledge of them is often derived from unfriendly
critics or poetical allusions; nor need we go farther than Sir
Cornewall Lewis’ own work to show how authors may suffer
by this mode of treatment f.
   Take, for instance,         the      case      of Himilco, who      was   sent
 during the prosperous times of Carthage to examine the
 north-western coasts of Europe. His writings have unfor-
 tunately perished, and our knowledge of them derived from
 the “ Ora maritima,” a geographical poem by Avienus, is
thus summed up by Sir Cornewall Lewis: “The report of
Himilco, that the voyage from Gades to the Tin Islands
 (i.e. to Cornwall) occupied at least four months; and that
navigation in these remote waters was impeded by the
motionless air, by the abundance of seaweed, and by the
monsters of the deep—fables which the ancient mariners
recounted of unexplored seas—would not be very attractive
for the traders of the Carthaginian colonies.’    This argu-

  * Skandinaviska Nordens Ur-inva-               t In the long chapter which he
nare. Af. S. Nilsson, Stockholm,1862.          devoted to the Egyptian Chrono-
   + An Historical Survey of the As-           logy and Hieroglyphics, the name
tronomy of the Ancients.       By the          of Dr. Young is not once men-
Right Hon.     Sir George   Cornewall          tioned.
Lewis, 1862.
con)2                ANCIENT    VOYAGES.     HIMILCO.

ment is surely very weak, because, if Himilco really did
make this voyage, then such voyages were possible; and,
on the other hand, if he did not do so, and if his statements
were such mere fables, we may safely assume that the shrewd
merchants of Carthage would detect the imposition, and
would extract the truth, if not from Himilco himself, at any
rate from some of those by whom he was accompanied.
   But let that pass; we will examine the four “fables”
specially referred to by Sir G. C. Lewis. It is unnecessary
to say any thing about the “ motionless air ;” it would be
doing an injustice to Sir Cornewall Lewis to suppose that
he regarded this as a serious objection.      It may be an
invention, but it is not an improbability. Neither is the
 time occupied by an exploring expedition any test of that
 which would be required for a commercial voyage.         Nor
 can I lay any stress on the statement that Himilco’s vessels
 were “impeded” by the monsters of the deep.             What
 Avienus really said was, as Sir Cornewall Lewis admits in
 another passage, that while becalmed and lying in a helpless
 state, the ships were “ surrounded by marine monsters *.”
 It might fairly be argued that whales were in all probability
 more numerous on our coasts in ancient times than they are
  now; the great mammalia of the sea, as well as those of the
  land, have given way before the overwhelming power of man.
  But it is unnecessary to urge this hypothesis; the great
  monsters of the deep have in all ages appealed strongly to
  the mmagination of mankind, and no poct would fail to allude
  to them in describing the dangers which besct those “ who
  go down to the sea in ships, and occupy thcir business in
  great waters.”
        The third point alluded to by Sir Cornewall Lewis, so far
  from throwing any doubt on the veracity of Himilco, appears
  rather to be an argument in his favour. His ships, he says,
                               * See Appendix.
                                 PYTHEAS,                                 63

or at least Avienus says for him, were “surrounded by sea-
weed.” Where was he when this took place? All that
we can say in answer to this question is, that he sailed
through the Pillars of Hercules into the Atlantic Ocean,
and we know that a few days’ sail in this direction would
have brought him to the “ Mare di Sargasso,” a sea which
has actually taken its name from the quantity of seaweed
(Sargasso) growing in it. Sir C. Lewis says, “The notion
of remote seas being impassable by ships, either from their
shoals, or from the obstacles to navigation produced by the
semi-fluid and muddy properties of the water, frequently
recurs among the ancients ;” and it is true, no doubt, that
statements of this kind are made by many ancient writers,
as, for instance, by Herodotus, Plato, Scylax, and even Aris-
totle; but not one of these writers alludes to “ seaweed” as
an impediment to navigation, and it can hardly be acci-
dental, that the only voyager by whom this is referred to,
was one who sailed on a course which, if persevered in for a
few days, would have brought him to that which is even now
known as the Sea of Seaweed *.
   Pytheas is another ancient writer, whose character has
suffered very much in the hands of Sir C. Lewis, who, rely-
ing on the authority of Polybius and Strabo, does not hesi-
tate to stigmatize him as a mendacious impostor. Polybius
doubts the journeys of Pytheas, because Pytheas was a
poor man; but the great travellers and explorers of the
present day do not generally belong to our wealthy fami-
lies.   Strabo seems to have been prejudiced against Pytheas,
because he professed to have visited countries which ought,
according to Strabo’s theory, to have been uninhabitable.
Moreover, we should remember that the first travellers in the

   * May not the belief in the “At-   rally suggest the idea of sunken land,
lantis’ be as probably owing tothe    as to any of the other causes which
“ oulf-weed,” which would sonatu-     are usually assigned for it?
64                                PYTHEAS.

North      must have seen, and on their return would describe,
many things which would appear impossible or incomprehen-
sible to dwellers on the sunny shores of the Mediterranean.
Sir C. Lewis refers specially to four incredible assertions
made by Pytheas, First, he is said to have related that
“if any person placed iron in a rude state at the mouth of
the voleano in the island of Lipari, together with some
money, he found on the morrow a sword or any other article
which he wanted, in its place.’ This, however, merely
 shows     that the myth         of Valand, Wielant,           Weland,       or in
 our popular dialect, Wayland Smith, was current in the
 Lipari islands at the time of Pytheas*. This myth, more-
 over, is but a very slightly modified account of what actually
 has taken place more than once when an ignorant people,
 living by the side of a more civilized race, and attributing
 their superiority to magical arts, has been anxious to benefit
 by their necromancy, and yet afraid to come in contact with
 the magicians themselves.     Thus “the Veddahs of Ceylon,
 when they wanted arrows, used to bring some flesh in the
 night, and hang it up in a smith’s shop, also a leaf cut in
 the form they will have their arrows made, and hang by it;
 which if the smith do make according to their pattern, they
 will acquite and bring him more flesht.”’ If our knowledge
 of this peculiar mode of barter had been derived from the
 Veddahs, it would undoubtedly have taken the form of the

     * On this interesting subject, see      says: “Ces ouvertures sont connues
 Wright. Archeeol. vol. xxxil. p. 315.       des habitans de ’endroit sous le nom
    + Knox’s Historical Relation of the      de Trous des Soitais. Ils prétendent
 Island Ceylon. London, 1681. Quoted         que jadis ces grottes servaient d’habi-
 in the Hthnological Society’s Trans.       tation & une esptce humaine d’une
 vol. ii. p. 285, N.S. See also Sir J.      trés petite taille, Sottais, nains, pyg-
 E. Tennent’s Ceylon, vol. i. p. 593.       mées, quiy vivaient de leur industrie,
 The Belgian form of the myth as re-        et restauraient tout ce qu’on déposait
 lated by Schmerling (Ossements fos-        prés des ouvertures, 4 condition que
 siles, vol. i. p. 43) still more closely   Von y ajoutét des vivres. En trés peu
 resembles the account given by Knox.       de tempsces effets étaient réparés, et
 Speaking of the caves near Liege, he        remis 4 la méme place.”
                            PYTHEAS.                          65

old European myth. The metallurgists of old, to preserve
their monopoly, evidently had a great interest in keeping up
this superstition.
   Sir Cornewall Lewis, in the second place, accuses Pytheas
of having described the sea round the Lipari islands as being
in a boiling state. But we do not know what his exact words
were, and cannot fairly judge him, for it makes a great
difference whether he was repeating a statement made to
him, or making one on his own authority. Moreover, we
must remember that there have been submarine eruptions
in the Mediterranean, and that the Lipari islands lie be-
tween Mount Etna and Vesuvius, in the very centre of an
active volcanic area.    These two mountains, which for the
last two thousand years have been more or less frequently
in eruption, seem to have enjoyed a long period of rest,
during which the Lipari islands served as a vent. It seems
to me therefore highly probable that this statement made
by Pytheas was a perfectly truthful record of an actual
occurrence.
   The third difficulty is the assertion, that round the island
of Thule, Pytheas saw a substance which was neither earth,
air, nor water, but a substance resembling medusz or jelly-
fishes (mvevpove Oaracclw €ords), which could neither be
passed on foot nor in ships. This passage, which has com-
pletely puzzled southern commentators, is regarded by Pro-
fessor Nilsson as a striking evidence of Pytheas’ veracity.
For when the northern ocean freezes, this does not happen
as in our ponds or lakes, but small, separate plates of ice are
formed, and as soon as this process commences, the fisher-
men hurry to the shore, lest they should be caught in the
ice, which for some time is too thick to permit the passage
of a boat, yet too weak to support the weight ofa man.    A
very similar description is given by Captain Lyon. “We
came,” he says, “amongst young ice, in that state called
                                                F
66                              PYTHEAS.

sludge, which resembles in appearance and consistency a far
better thing—lemon ice. From this we came to small round
plates, of about a foot in diameter, which have the appear-
ance of the scales of gigantic fishes *.” Richardson also
particularly mentions the “circular plates of ice, six or
eight inches in diameter}.” These discs of ice tossed about
by the waves suggested to Professor Nilsson himself, when
he first saw them, the idea of a crowd of medusee, and if we
imagine a southerner who had never before witnessed such a
phenomenon, and who on his return home wished to describe
it to his fellow-countrymen, it would have been difficult to
find an apter or more ingenious simile.             It is, at any rate,
not more far-fetched or less appropriate than that used by
Herodotus, when, in order to describe a heavy snow-storm,
he compared it to a fall of feathers.
  “Fourthly,” says Sir C. Lewis, “ Pytheas affirmed that in
returning from his great northern voyage, in which he first
obtained accounts of the remote island of Thule, he had sailed
along the entire coast of the ocean between Gadeira and the
Tanais; that is from Cadiz round Spain, Gaul, Germany, and
Scythia, to the river Don, which was considered by the
ancients as the boundary of Europe and Asia. This state-
ment furnishes an additional proof of the mendacity of
Pytheas, because it is founded on the belief, received in his
time, that Hurope did not project far to the North, and that
the Ocean swept along its shores to the north of Scythia-and
India.” Pytheas, however, did not, in reality, lay himself
open to any such accusation; the passage on which Sir C.
Lewis relies only affirms that after his return from the north
(érraveABa@v évOévde) he travelled along the whole coast of
Hurope from Cadiz to the Don.                 This, which       evidently
refers to a second journey, is a very different statement, and
one which I see no reason to doubt.
     * Lyon’s Journal, p. 84.       + Arctic Expedition, vol. ii. p. 97.
              PHENICIAN    COLONIES    AND   COMMERCE.         67

   According to Geminus, Pytheas in his northern journey
reached a place where the nights were only two or three hours
long, and he adds that the Barbarians took him to see the place
where the sun slept. These two statements seem to point to
Donnas as the northernmost point of his voyage. Here the
shortest night is two hours long, but behind the town isa
mountain, the top of which is the southernmost point from
which the midnight sun can be seen. The inhabitants took
Professor Nilsson here in the year 1816, to show him the place
where the sun rested, just as their predecessors may have con-
ducted Pytheas to the same spot, for the same purpose, more
than 2000 years before. On this subject I will only add that
Pytheas was no mere wanderer, but a distinguished astro-
nomer, who, with the help of the gnomon only, estimated the
latitude of Marseilles at 43° 17’ 8”, a calculation which differs
merely by a few seconds from the result given by modern
astronomers—namely, 43° 17’ 52”,
    I have dwelt at some length on this part of my subject, for
while we are all anxious to pay due honour to our modern
travellers, to Livingstone and Galton, to Speke and Grant,
we ought not to forget those who led the way. The memory
of great men is a precious legacy, which we cannot afford
lightly to surrender, and not the least valuable part of Pro-
fessor Nilsson’s work on the Bronze Age is the chapter in
which he has rescued the memory of Pytheas from the cloud
by which it has been so long and so unjustly obscured.
    But even if Sir Cornewall Lewis could have established his
case, and destroyed our faith in these particular expeditions,
still there remain overwhelming proofs of an important and
extended commerce in even more ancient times than those of
Pytheas or Himilco.     The evidence of this has been well put
together by Dr. Smith*, of Camborne, to whose work I
would refer those who may wish for more detailed informa-
             * The Cassiterides, by George Smith, LL.D.
                                FQ
68          PH@NICIAN   COLONIES   AND   COMMERCE.

tion ; for the present I must content myself with referring
to a few well-known facts, which, however, will be sufficient
for my present purpose.
  We know, then, that Marseilles was founded by the Pho-
cean Greeks 8.c. 600; Carthage is supposed to have been
built by the Phoenicians about 800 8.c.; and Utica, according
to Strabo and Pliny, about 300 years earlier still; while,
according to Velleius Paterculus and Pomponius Mela, the
city of Gades (Cadiz) was founded by the Tyrians not long
after the fall of Troy. Before such facts as these, the sup-
posed improbability of Pytheas’ voyage to Norway falls to
the ground. The distance between Cadiz and Phcenicia is
 more than 2000 miles, and it is greater than that between
 Cadiz and Norway. Even, therefore, if Pytheas effected all
 that has been claimed for him, he will not have made a longer
 voyage than hundreds of his countrymen had done, a thousand
 years before.
    The above-given dates must not, of course, be considered
 as exact, but there is no reason to doubt their general accu-
 racy. Not only do the writings of Hesiod and Homer, which
 are probably not of a later date than 800 B.c., and probably
 somewhat earlier, show that the nations on the eastern shores
of the Mediterranean were at that time highly civilized, and
had a considerable commerce, but we have very valuable
evidence of the same fact in the Biblical narrative. Indeed,
brass, i.e. bronze, is mentioned in the fourth chapter of
 Genesis, which would be, according to the chronology of the
 established version, 3875 3B.c.; but there is so much doubt
 about these dates, that I do not feel disposed to rely on this
 isolated passage. The high civilization of Egypt in the time
 of Joseph is, however, apparent to every reader of the book
 of Exodus. Again, when Solomon prepared to build the
 temple in Jerusalem, he sent unto the king of Tyre for cedar-
 trees out of Lebanon, “for thou knowest,” he said, “ that
                                  COPPER.                                    69
there is not among us any that can skill to hew timber like
unto the Sidonians” (1 Kings v. 6); and again we read,
 (2. c. vil. 13, 14) that “King Solomon sent and fetched Hiram
out of Tyre. He was a widow’s son of the tribe of Naphtali,
and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass: and he
was filled with wisdom, and understanding, and cunning to
work all works in brass.” It is admitted that the word which
here, and in so many other passages, is translated ‘ brass,”
should rather be “bronze.”    This latter, which was the com-
mon metal of antiquity, is never mentioned in our version,
while on the other hand, the alloy which we now term brass,
and which is composed of copper and zinc, was not known in
ancient times.
   Now this bronze, which from the wholly independent
statements of Homer and in the Book of Kings, we find to
have been so abundant in the Hast three thousand years
ago, was composed of copper and tin, in the proportions
of about nine parts of the former to one of the latter;
and the question therefore arises, whence were these metals
obtained ?
   Copper is found in so many countries, that we cannot, as
yet, form any definite opinion as to the source, or sources,
from which it was derived by the Pheenicians. Nevertheless,
we have some reason to hope and expect that we shall even-
tually be able to do so, because the slight impurities by which
it is accompanied afford a clue to the country from which it
was     obtained.     As regards tin, the case is very different;
although ores of this metal are found im other countries, as
for instance in France, in Portugal, in Saxony, in Spain,
and     in Siberia, still almost       all the    tin now       used    is de-
rived either from         Cornwall,    or from        the island of Banca,
which lies between Sumatra and Borneo.   Jn ancient times
a certain amount of tin was no doubt obtained in Spain *,
      * See Howarth, Trans. Ethn. Soc. 1867, p. 80.     See also Appendix.
70                      SOURCES    OF TIN.

but, as Dr. Smith observes *, “ the most remarkable feature
in tin mining seems to be the enduring character of the
mines. Wherever tin has been produced in any considerable
quantities, within the range of authentic history, there it is
still abundantly found. In Banca, we are told, the supply
is inexhaustible; and Cornwall can now supply as large a
quantity annually as it ever could.”   The result of inquiries
made of the Government Engineers, at the College of Mines
in Madrid, is as follows: “I cannot learn that Spain ever
produced any quantity of this metal. The Government do
not work any mines of tin. The quantity being produeed
at present is very small, chiefly by streamers; or rather
labourers, while out of their regular employment, search
some of the rivers near the granite hills im Galicia and in
Zamora.    I cannot learn that there is any tin mining in the
country.”
     Unless, then, the ancients had some           source   of tin with
which we are unacquainted, it seems to be well established,
and is indeed admitted even by Sir Cornewall Lewis, that the
Pheenician tin was mainly derived from Cornwall, and, con-
sequently, that even at this early period a considerable com-
merce had been organized, and very distant countries brought
ito connexion with one another.       Sir C. Lewis, however,
considers that the tin was “ carried across Gaul to Massilia,
and imported thence into Greece and Italy.””                 Doubtless,
much of it did in late times come by this route, but the
Phoenicians were in the plenitude of their power 1200
years B.c., while Massilia was not built until 600 3.c.          More-
over, Strabo expressly says that in early times the Phoenicians
carried on the tin trade from Cadiz, which we must remember
was nearer to Cornwall than to Tyre or Sidon.
  We are, therefore, surely quite justified in concluding that
between B.C, 1500 and B.c. 1200, the Phoenicians were already
                      * The Cassiterides, p. 45.
          SUPPOSED   TRACES   OF   PH@NICIAN   COMMERCE.     ra

acquainted with the mineral fields of Spain and Britain; and,
under these circumstances, it is, I think, more than probable
that they pushed their explorations still farther, in search of
other shores as rich in mineral wealth as ours. Indeed, we
must remember that amber, so much valued in ancient times,
could not have been obtained from any nearer source than
the coast of the German Ocean.
   M. Morlot thinks that he has found traces of the Phoeni-
cians even in America, while Professor Nilsson has attempted,
as already mentioned, to show that they had settlements far
up on the northern shores of Norway.    M. Morlot relies on
some antiquities, and particularly on certain glass beads,
found in American tumuli; these, however, in the opinion of
Mr. Franks, may be medizval, and of Venetian origin.       Pro-
fessor Nilsson’s arguments may be reduced to seven, namely,
the small size of the sword-handles, bracelets, etc.; the
character of the ornaments on the bronze implements; the
engravings in Bronze Age tumuli; the worship of Baal;
certain peculiar methods of reaping and fishing; and the
use of war-chariots.
   The implements and ornaments of bronze certainly appcar
to have belonged to a race with smaller hands than those of
the present European nations; the ornaments on them are
also peculiar, and have, in Professor Nilsson’s opinion, a sym-
bolic meaning. Although the great stones in tumuli attributed
to the Bronze Age are very seldom ornamented, or even hewn
into shape, still there are some few exceptions ; one of these
being the remarkable monument near Kivik in Christianstad.
From the general character of the engravings Professor
Nilsson has no hesitation in referring this tumulus to the
Bronze Age, and on two of the stones are representations of
human figures, which may fairly be said to have a Phoenician,
or Egyptian appearance.
   On another of the stones an obelisk is represented, which
v2       TRACES   OF   BAAL   WORSHIP   IN   NORTHERN     EUROPE.

Professor Nilsson regards as symbolical of the Sun-God; and
it is certainly remarkable that, in an ancient ruin in Malta *,
characterized by other decorations of the Bronze Age types,
a somewhat similar obelisk was discovered; we know also,
that in many countries Baal, the God of the Phcenicians, was
worshipped under the form of a conical stone.
   Nor is this, by any means, the only case in which Professor
Nilsson finds traces of Baal worship in Scandinavia. Indeed,
the festival of Baal, or Balder, was, he tells us, celebrated on
Midsummer’s       night in Scania,       and far up mto           Norway,
almost to the Loffoden          Islands, until within       the last fifty
years. A wood fire was made upon a hill or mountain, and
the people of the neighbourhood gathered together in order,
like Baal’s prophets of old, to dance round it, shouting and
 singing. This Midsummer’s-night fire has even retained in
 some parts the ancient name of “ Baldersbal,”’ or Balders-
fire. Leopold von Buch long ago suggested, that this custom
 could not have originated in a country where at Midsummer
the sun is never lost sight of, and where, consequently, the
smoke     only, not the fire, is visible.        A similar custom also
prevailed until lately in some parts of our islands.              Baal has
given his name to many Scandinavian localities, as, for in-
stance, the Baltic, the Great and Little Belt, Belteberga,
Baleshaugen, Balestranden, etc.
     The ornamentation characteristic of the Bronze Age, is, in
the opinion of Professor Nilsson, decidedly Semitic rather than
Indo-European.      He lays considerable stress on two curious
vase-carriages, one found in Sweden and the other in Meck-
Ienburg, which certainly appear to have been very like the
“vases”? made for Solomon’s temple, and described in the
first Book of Kings. Finally, he believes that the use of war
  * For an account of the ruins of      p. 407, or Dr. Adams’ Archzeol. and
Hagiar Kem, see Furse. Trans. Int.      Nat. Hist. of the Nile Valloy, and the
Congress of Pre-hist. Archzeol. 1868,   Maltese Islands.
              OBJECTIONS   TO   THE   PHENICIAN   THEORY.         73

 chariots, the practice of reaping close to the car, and a
certain method of fishing, are all evidences of Phenician
intercourse.
    Professor Nilsson is so great an authority, as an archeo-
logist his labours have contributed so much to place the
science on a sound basis, that his opinions are deserving of
the most careful consideration. Nor can they fairly be judged
by the very short abstract which has been given above, as
many of his arguments must be followed in detail before
they can be properly appreciated.         That the Phoenicians
have left their traces in Norway is, however, in my opinion,
all that can fairly be deduced from the facts on which he
relies, even if we attribute to them all the significance claimed
for them by him. Further evidence is required before it
would be safe to connect them with the Bronze Age. As
regards the smallness of the hands, we must remember that
Hindoos share this peculiarity with Egyptians ; this character
is therefore not less reconcilable with an Indo-European than
with a Phoenician origin of the Bronze Age civilization.
   There are three strong objections to the theory so ably
advocated by Professor Nilsson.         The first is the character of
the ornamentation on the bronze weapons and implements.
This almost always consists of geometrical figures, and we
rarely, if ever, find upon them representations of animals or
plants ; while on the ornamented shields, etc., described by
Homer, as well as in the decoration of Solomon’s temple,
animals and plants were abundantly represented.      Secondly,
the burial customs of the Phoenicians differed altogether from
those of the Bronze Age, and although it may be said that those
who attribute the presence of bronze in Northern and Western
Europe to Phoenician commerce, do not necessarily, on that
account, assume that the population of those countries became
Pheenician,   still in this case      the hypothesis    explains the
presence of bronze but not the Bronze Age, of which the use
74         OBJECTIONS   TO   THE   PH@NICIAN   THEORY.

of bronze, though the most striking, is by no means the only
characteristic.  Thirdly, the Phcenicians, so far as we know
them, were well acquainted with the use of iron; in Homer
we find the warriors already armed with iron weapons, and
the tools used in preparing the materials for Solomon’s temple
were of this metal.    It is very remarkable that scarcely any
traces of ancient commerce have been found in Cornwall, and
itis much to be regretted that our museums possess so few
specimens of Phcenician art. When these wants shall have
been supplied, as we may hope that ere long they will be,
there is no doubt that much lhght will be thrown on the
subject.
   The form of the head also would be very instructive ;
but owing to the habit of burning the dead which pre-
vailed at that period, we have, as yet, very few skulls
 which can safely be referred to the Bronze Age. On the
whole, then, though there is, I think, ample evidence to
prove that the general use of bronze weapons and imple-
ments characterizes a well-marked epoch in history, it must
also be admitted that we have still very much to learn in
regard to this interesting phase in the development of
European civilization, and the race by whom the knowledge
of metals was introduced into our Continent.
        |


s
4                                    Se ,

            y    '       a
            >                =



        ‘




        ee
    \       \.       i

            \                    i
                           MI.
                             Heese tgpnantsnanco
                                             ae




(0 face page   y,   pepe


75.
                                        ] or




                           CHAPTER                  IV.

              THE USE OF STONE IN ANCIENT TIMES.

    HE preceding chapters have been devoted to the Age
     of Bronze. We must now pass on to still earlier times
and ruder races      of men;      to a period which,                       for obvious
reasons, is called by archeologists the Stone Age.
   The Stone Age, however, falls naturally, as has been
already stated, into two great divisions.
   First. That of the Drift, which I have proposed to call the
Paleeolithic or Archzeolithic period.
   Secondly. The later Stone Age, for which I have sug-
gested the term Neolithic, and in which the stone implements
are more    skilfully made, more varied                         in form, and often
polished. We will now consider this later period, reserving
the earlier for a subsequent chapter.
   The immense number of stone implements which occur, in
all parts of the world, is sufficient evidence of the important
part they played in ancient times, M. Herbst has favoured
me with the following list of the numbers contained in the
Copenhagen Museum :—
        Flint axes and wedges.       . . . . . 1070
       LOA     enIsels”.   we     pe           te          Pe         ae   285
       ollowaditiome       tect                an                at        270
       NArrOWwreniceloe)    2     tun          oe   Mart   A          es   O65
       Hollow ditto        ees                      ees                     33
       Ponce                i                          e                   OO)
      Mancesicsdew         eee          eee                a.              606
78     MATERIALS      PREFERRED     FOR   STONE   IMPLEMENTS.

selves,” but also that the antiquary has found clear “evidence
of sucha period.” Part, at least, of this evidence will be
found in the following pages; and though it is true that
much of it has been obtained since our accomplished coun-
tryman published the work from which I have just quoted,
yet he has repeated his previous statements in a lecture
subsequently delivered at Leeds.
   Our knowledge of this ancient perioa 1s derived principally
from four sources, to the consideration of which I propose to
devote four separate chapters: namely, the tumuli, or ancient
burial-mounds; the Lake habitations of Switzerland; the
Kjokkenméddings, or shell-mounds, of Denmark; and the
Bone-caves.     There are, indeed, many other remains of great
interest, such, for example, as the ancient fortifications, the
“castles” and “ camps”? which crown so many of our hill-
tops, and the great lines of embankment, such as Offa’s
dyke and the Wans-dyke, which cross so many of our
uplands; there are the so-called Druidical circles and the
vestiges of ancient habitations; the “ Hut-circles,” “ Clog-
hauns,” “ Weems,” “ Penpits,” “ Picts’ houses,” etc. The
majority of these belong, however, in all probability, to a later
period; and at any rate, in the present state of our know-
ledge, we cannot say which, or how many of them, are
referable to the Stone Age.
   As far as the material is concerned, every kind of stone,
which was hard and tough enough for the purpose, was used
during the Stone Age in the manufacture of implements.
The magnificent collection of celts at Dublin has been specially
studied, from a mineralogical point of view, by the Rev. 8.
Haughton, and the results are thus recorded by Wilde * :—
   “Of the better qualities of rock suited for celt-making,
the type of the felspathic extreme of the series of trap rocks
is the pure felstone, or petrosilex, . . . . ofa pale blueish
              * Catalogue of the Royal Irish Academy, p. 72.
                                       JADE.                                   79

 or grayish green, except where the surface has been acted
upon, and the average composition of which is 25 parts
quartz and 75 felspar. Its physical characters are absence
of toughness, and the existence of a splintery conchoidal
fracture almost as sharp as that of flint....... At the
hornblendic extreme of: the trap rocks we find the basalt, of
which also celts were made; tough and heavy, the siliceous
varieties having a splintery fracture, but never affording so
cutting an edge as the former....... Intermediate in
character between these two rocks, we find all the varieties of
felstone, slate, and porphyry streaked with hornblende, from
which the great majority of the foregoing implements have
been made.”
   It is very remarkable how carefully the best kinds of stone
were selected even when very rare. Of this the most interest-
ing example is afforded by the axes, etc., of Jade.     These,
though far from common, are not very rare, having been
found in many of the Swiss lake-villages, in various parts of
Italy, France, Germany, and England, although Jade itself is
not known to occur in any part of Europe. It was supposed
by some archxologists that it might have been obtained
from the conglomerate known in Switzerland as the “ Nagel-
flue,” but the most careful investigations have not confirmed
this view*. I do not think it would yet be safe to conclude
that these Jade axes were introduced from the East; but no
European locality for Jade has yet been discovered, and it is
perfectly possible that they may have passed from hand to
hand, and from tribe to tribe, by a sort of barter. Other
facts of a similar nature are on record. Thus Messrs. Squier
and Davis tell us that in the tumuli of the Mississippi valley
we find “side by side, in the same mounds, native copper

  * See Damour, Comptes Rendues,          Fischer,   Archiv.   f. Anthropologie,
1865, p. 359.   Fellenberg. Soc. des      1867, p. 337.
Sciences Naturelles de Berne, 1865.
80                            FLINT.

from Lake Superior, mica from the Alleghanies, shells from
the Gulf, and obsidian (perhaps porphyry) from Mexico.”
Good representations of the sea-cow or manatee are found a
thousand miles from the shores inhabited by that animal, and
shells of the large tropical Pyrula perverse are found in the
tumuli round the great lakes, two thousand miles from home.
     On the whole, however, flint appears to have been the
stone most frequently used in Europe, andit has had a much
more important influence on our civilization than is generally
supposed. Savages value it on account of its hardness and
mode of fracture, which is such that, with practice, a good
sound block can be chipped into almost any form that may
be required.
   In many cases blocks and pebbles of flint, picked up on
the surface of the ground, were used in the manufacture of
implements ; but in other cases much labour was spent to
obtain flint of good quality.       A good illustration of this is
afforded by the so-called       Grime’s    Graves, near   Brandon,
one of which has recently, by the kind permission of Mr.
Angerstein, been explored by Mr. Greenwell*. Much dif-
ference of opinion has existed among archeologists as to the
true nature of the graves, but the question has now been set
at rest by Mr. Greenwell, who has shown that they were
excavations made in the chalk for the purpose of obtaining
flint.   They are shallow pits, 254 in number, varying in
diameter from 20 to 60 feet, placed irregularly, generally
about 25 feet apart, and occupying rather more than. 20
acres. Although now comparatively shallow, Mr. Greenwell
has proved that the pits originally went down to a depth of
39 feet, when they branch out into passages, often commu-
nicating with one another. On the east side of the pits isa
mound, apparently consisting of the chalk taken from the
first pit; after which it appears that when a new pit was dug,
                  * Trans, Hthn. Soc, 1870, p. 419.
                 ANCIENT    WORKINGS     FOR FLINT.           81

most of the material was thrown down the old shafts, which
were thus filled in to within a few feet of the surface. As
usual in the Upper Chalk, the flint is disposed in layers,
which differ in quality, while maintaining the same character
over considerable areas. It may be remarked that, as Mr.
Flower has well pointed.out*, Brandon, “though situated in
a bleak and barren district, has evidently been a place of
considerable resort from a very remote period—a circum-
stance which can only be attributed to the abundance and
good quality of the flint found there.” Paleolithic imple-
ments abound in the drift gravels, the surface is strewn with
flint flakes and fragments of flint implements, and at the
present time it is the only place in England where gun-flints
are still made. For this purpose one particular layer of flint is
found to be peculiarly well adapted, on account of its hard-
ness and fineness of grain, while another layer, which is less
suitable for gun-flints, is known as “ wall stone,”’ being much
used for buildmg purposes. Now it is interesting to find
that, even in very early times, the merits of the gun-flint
layer were well known and appreciated; for although there
is abundance   of flint on the surface, the ancient flint-men
sank their shafts down past the layer of “wall stone,” which
occurs at a depth of 194 feet, to the gun-flint layer, which at
the spot in question is 39 feet deep, although about a mile to
the S.W., where it is now worked, it is much nearer the
surface.
   At present the workmen excavate the chalk both above
and below the layer of flint ;but in the old galleries, perhaps
from the greater difficulty of raising the material, the chalk
below the flint bed was in no case removed. The implements
used in making these excavations were deer’s horns, the brow
tine being used as a pick, and the others removed.         Thus
treated, a deer’s horn closely resembles in form a modern
                   * Trans. Ethn. Soc. 1870, p. 437.
                                                       G
82                      GRIMES’ GRAVES         SPIENNES.

pick, but of course it is subject to rapid wear by use, which
accounts for the large numbers of worn-out implements found
by Mr. Greenwell among the rubbish.
   In one case the roof of a passage had given way. On
removing the chalk which had fallen in, the end of the gallery
came in view. The flint had been hollowed out in three places,
and in front of two of these recesses, pointing towards the
half-excavated stone, were two deer-horn picks, lying just
as they had been left, still coated with chalk dust, on which
was in one place plainly visible the print of the workman’s
hand. They had evidently been left at the close of a day’s
work; during the night the gallery had fallen in, and they
had never been recovered.
   “Tt was a most impressive sight,” says Mr. Greenwell,
“and one never to be forgotten, to look, after a lapse, it may
be, of 3000 years, upon.a piece of work unfinished, with the
tools of the workmen still lying where they had been placed
so many centuries ago.”
   Similar deer-horn picks have been found in other localities
where chalk has been worked for flint, and also in the Cornish
Tin Stream Works*. Near Spiennes also, in Belgium, there
are extensive workings for flint, consisting of a system of
shafts and galleries, very like those of Grimes’ Graves, which
have been described by MM. Briart, Cornet, and Houzeau
de Lehaie+, many tools of deer’s horns have been obtained,
but they are of a very different character, having been appa-
rently used as hammers, the horn being cut off just above
the brow tine, which served as a handle.
     In addition      to the       deer-horn    picks, a few adze-shaped
tools of flint have been discovered in Grimes’ Graves, and a
basalt hatchet, in form resembling that represented in fig. 97,
but with an oblique cutting edge, the marks of which were
     * See, for instance,   Rep.   of the      + Mem.   de la Soc.   des Sciences,
Roy. Inst. of Cornwall, 1871, p. xxii.      des Arts, & du Hainaut, 1866-7.
                                PRESSIGNY.                       83

distinctly seen upon the sides of the gallery, showing that it
had been used in excavating the chalk.
   As already mentioned, it was very desirable in the manu-
facture of flint implements, to have the flint of a good
quality, free from cracks and flaws, and easily accessible.
Hence, places which fulfilled these conditions were specially
frequented in ancient times, and whole districts were sup-
plied from these favoured localities. One of the most re-
markable of these manufactories is that discovered by Dr.
Leveillé       at Pressigny-le-Grand,    in France, about half-way
between Tours and Poitiers. Here there is an abundance
of good flint of a honey colour, and even, though coarse,
texture. This flint was largely used in ancient times: the
fields   are    covered   with nuclei, flakes, etc., and implements
made here, and easily recognizable by the peculiar colour,
have been found in various parts of France, and even,
it would seem, in Belgium. I have in my collection a
block of Pressigny flint, from which a flake more than
twelve inches in length has been struck. The large nuclei
of this form, which from their shape are known as “livres
de beurre,” have excited a good deal of discussion. They
are generally from eight to thirteen inches in length, shaped
more or less like a boat, with a broad butt at one end,
tapering gradually to the other.       The form has been at-
tained by a succession of lateral chips, at right angles to the
longer axis, while generally one or more longitudinal flakes
have also been removed.
   At first sight they certainly suggest the idea that they are
early stages in the manufacture of large axes, or some similar
instruments, and from their form it has even been suggested
that they may have been intended to serve as ploughshares.
On the comparison of a large number, however—and I have
had the opportunity of examining many hundreds—it will be
observed that we never meet with specimens in a more
                            a 2
84.                   TOE   FRACTURE   OF FLINT.

advanced state of manufacture, as would certainly have been
the case if this hypothesis were correct. Again, some of them
have an original depression in the flint, very much reducing
the thickness.      This would weaken them so greatly as to
render such specimens useless for implements ; flints of such
a form would certainly, therefore, not have been selected, if
strength had been any object. On the other hand, such
irregularities would have been no disadvantage, if the “ livres
de beurre” were nuclei prepared with some degree of care,
in order to give long and regular flakes. Long flint flakes
were much in demand during the Stone Age for the manu-
facture of spear heads, etc., and these “livres de beurre ”’
appear to have been the blocks or nuclei from which they
were obtained.
  Many of the flakes were certainly never intended to serve
as knives, but were worked up into saws,             awls, or arrow
heads. Many savages use flint or chert, in this manner,
even at the present day; and the Mexicans in the time of
Cortez used precisely similar fragments of obsidian.
   The operations of modern gun-flint makers give us a very
clear insight into the mode of manufacture of the ancient
flint implements, and the process is one of considerable in-
terest.
   If we take a rounded hammer, and strike with it on a flat
surface of flint, a conoidal fracture is produced; the size of
which depends, in a great measure, on the form of the ham-
mer.    ‘The surface of fracture is propagated downwards
through the flint, ina diverging direction, and thus embraces
a cone, whose apex is at the point struck by the hammer,
and which can afterwards be chipped out of the mass. Flint
cones, formed in this way, may sometimes           be found among
heaps of stones broken up to mend the roads, and have doubt-
less often been mistaken for casts of fossil shells.
      If a blow is given, not on a flat surface, but at the angle
                                FLINT FLAKES.                     85
of a more or less square flint, the fracture is at first semi-
conoidal or nearly so, but after expanding for a short distance,
it becomes flat, and may be propagated through a length of
as much as thirteen inches, thus forming a blade-like flake
(figs. 82-89), with a triangular cross section (fig. 90). The
consequence is, that a .      Fic. 82.    Fre. 83.  Fre. 84.
perfect flint flake will
always have a small
bulb, or projection
(fig. 83 2) at the butt
end, on the flat side;
this has been called the
            Pie. Sl.




      Flint core or nnrcleus.           Flint Flakes.—Denmiark.


bulb, or cone, of percussion. After the four original angles
of a square block have been thus flaked off, the eight new
angles may be treated in a similar manner, and so on. Fig.
81, and pl. 1, fig. 6, represent blocks, or cores, from which
86                          FLINT FLAKES.

flakes have been struck off.          <A flake itself is represented in
pl. 1, fig. 7, anda very long one from Fannerup in Jutland
is figured, one-half of the natural size, in figs. 82, 84. The
                                     Fie, 85,




                       Atrow-shaped Flint Flake,—Ireland.

bulb is shown in figs. 83 a and 84, and the flake has been
worked into a point at the end. The largest flake I am
           Fira. 86.     Fig. 8&7,              Fie. §8.        Fie. 89.




                         Flint Flakes,—Denmark.
acquainted with is described by M. de Caneto, in the Revue
de Gascoyne, for 1865.          It was found in the commune                   of
Pauilhaic, and is 184 inches in length.                    Fig. 85 is an arrow-
              DIFFICULTY     OF   MAKING   FLINT     FLAKES.            87

shaped flake chipped away at the base, apparently to adapt
it to a handle or shaft.
   Figs. 86-89 are small Danish flakes: forms exactly simi-
lar may be found in any country where the ancient inhabi-
tants could obtain flint or obsidian. In fig. 86 we see that
another flake had been previously taken from the same block.
Figs. 86, 88, represent flakes of which the points have been
broken off, but we see along their whole length the depres-
sion caused by the previous removal of other flakes. The
section of such a flake is, therefore, not triangular, as in fig.
98 a, but four-sided, as in fig. 90 b.      Sometimes,          though not
often, a wide flake is taken off in such a way as to overlap
two previous flakes, as in the case of the one represented in
fig. 89. In this instance, the section is pentagonal ; the flat
under-surface remaining always the same, but the upper side
showing four facets.
   Easy as it may seem to make such flakes as these, a little
practice will convince any one who attempts to do so, that a
certain knack is required, and a gun-flint maker at Brandon
told me that it took him two years to acquire the art. It is
also necessary to be careful in the selection of the flint. It
is therefore evident that these flint flakes, simple as they may
appear, are always the work of man. ‘To make one, the flint
                  Fre. 90.                    must      be held firmly,
             Pas                              and then a consider-
                                              able      force    must   be
                                        applied, either by pres-
                                    6 sure or by blows, re-
                                        peated three or four
              Seen oF Euakes            times, but at least
three, and given in certain slightly different directions, with
a certain definite force ; these conditions could scarcely
occur by accident, so that, simple as it may seem to the un-
trained eye, a flint flake is to the antiquary as sure a trace
88                       MODERN         FLAKES.

of man, as the footprint in the sand was to Robinson
Crusoe.
  It is hardly necessary to say, that the flakes have a sharp
cutting edge on each side, and might therefore be at once
used as knives, as in fig. 91, which represents a North
American two-bladed knife: they are indeed so named by
                                  Fic. 91,




                           North American Knife,
                                  Fie   92,




                         Australians making flakes.

some archeologists; but it seems to me more convenient
to call them simply flakes, and to confine the name of knife
to implements more especially intended and adapted for
cutting purposes. Fig. 92, from a drawing by Mr. Baines *,
        * See Geol. and Nat. Hist. Repertory, No. 13, May, 1866.
               MANUFACTURE    OF FLAKES      IN MEXICO.                                             89

 represents an Australian       making rude flakes.                                            Fig. 93
 represents an Australian flake, and fig. 94, one from the
 Cape of Good Hope.     Figs. 95, 96, represent a new Cale-
 donian javelin, with an obsidian flake (fig. 96) for a head.
                 Fig. 93.




                                                       Fic. 94.




                                             thesis eeseestsispdtitate AteneAeOUON EHS   AEE

          Australian Flake.          Flake from the Cape of Good Hope.


  Some    of the old Spanish writers in Mexico give us a
description of the manner in which the Aztecs obtained their
obsidian flakes. Torquemada*, who is confirmed by Her-
nandez, tells us—I quote from Mr. Taylor’s Anahuac—“ they
had, and still have, workmen who make knives of a certain
block stone or flint (obsidian), which it is a most wonderful
          * Torquemada, Monarquia Indiana.       Seville, 1616.
90                MANUFACTURE      OF FLAKES   IN MEXICO

                          and admirable thing to see them make ont
                          of the stone; and the ingenuity which in-
                          vented this artis much to bepraised. They
                          are made and got out of the stone (if one
                          can explain it) in this manner : one of these
                          Indian workmen sits down upon the
                          ground, and takes a piece of this black
                          stone, which is like jet, and as hard as flint
                          —and is a stone which might be called
                          precious, more beautiful and brilliant than
                          alabaster or jasper, so much so, that of it
                          are made tablets and mirrors. The piece
                          they take is about eight inches long, or
                          rather more, and as thick as one’s leg, or
                          rather less, and cylindrical;    they have a
                          stick as large as the shaft of a lance, and
                          three. cubits or rather more in length, and
                          at the end of it they fasten firmly another
                          piece of wood, eight inches long, to give
                          more weight to this part; then pressing
                          their naked feet together, they hold the
                          stone as with a pair of pincers, or the vice
                          of a carpenter’s bench.      They take the
                          stick (which is cut off smooth at the end)
                          with both hands, and set it well home
                          against the edge of the front of the stone
                           (y ponenlo avesar   con el canto de la frente
                          de la piedra), which also is cut smooth in
                          that part; and then they press it against
                      |   their breast, and with the force of the pres-
     Nev Caledonian
                  sure there flies off a knife, with its point
                  and edge on one side, as neatly as if one
 were to make them of a turnip with a sharp knife, or of
 iron in the fire. Then they sharpen it on a stone, using a
 hone to give it a very fine edge; and in a very short time
                     AND   AMONG        THE      ESQUIMAUX.                      91

these workmen will make more                      than twenty knives in the
aforesaid manner.    They come out in the same shape as our
barbers’ lancets, except that they have a rib up the middle
and have a slight graceful curve towards the point.”
  Thus it appears that the obsidian flakes were made, not by
blows, but by strong pressure; and the same is the case
with the chert implements of the Hsquimaux, according to
the description given by Sir E. Belcher*. “ Selecting,” he
says, “a log of wood in which a spoon-shaped cavity was cut,
they placed the splinter to be worked over it, and by pressing
gently along the margin vertically, first on one side, then the
other, as one would set a saw, they splintered off alternate
fragments, until the object, thus properly outlined, presented
the spear or arrow-head form, with two cutting serrated
sides.” A very similar account is also given by Lieutenant
Beckwith     of the method              used by the North American
Indians +.
  Next to flint flakes, the axes, wedges, or celts, are, perhaps,
of most importance.  The largest and finest specimens are
found in Denmark; one in my possession, of beautiful white
flint, is 13in. long, 14in. thick, and 3}in. in breadth.                       The
Seeland axes have very often, indeed generally, perpendicular
sides; in Jutland a large proportion have sloping sides ; this
is also generally the case in other parts of North-Western
Europe. In Switzerland, however, the axes, which are much
smaller than those from Denmark, have perpendicular sides
(fig. 164). The common Danish axe or wedge is figured in
pl. 1, fig. 1. Figs. 97 and 98 represent forms which, though
rare in Seeland, are common in other parts of Europe. Those
found in Denmark are sometimes polished, but almost, if not
quite, as often left rough.         On the contrary, in other parts
of North-Western Europe, the axes are usually ground to a
  * Trans. of the Ethnological   Soc.         Surveys of the Pacific Railroad, 1855,
New Series, vol. i. p. 138.                   vol. ii. p. 43.
  + Report of the Explorations   and
92                           STONE     AXES.

more or less smooth surface.               That some were held in the
hand is evident, but that others were fixed inwooden handles
is equally clear, in many specimens, from peculiar polished
spaces, which have been produced by the friction of the
wood.    In almost all cases, the wooden handle has long
perished, but there are one or two instances on record, in
which it has been preserved.                Fig. 99 represents a stone
hatchet, found, some years ago, in the County of Monaghan ;
the handle was of pine, and was 13tin. long.
        en                   Fig. 100 represents another stone
                          axe in its handle; this specimen was
                          found      at Concise,      on      the     Lake         of
                          Neufchatel, and closely resembles the
                          modern African axe (fig. 20). In the
                          latter case, however,        the blade               is of
                          iron. It will be observed that the
                          Swiss specimen differs from the other
                                                                    Fic, 99.

                                           Fre. 98,




                  Stone   Axes —Ireland,                   Stone Celt in handle.


two in haying an intermediate piece of horn. These horn
sockets are very numerous in some of the Swiss lake villages,
as for instance at Concise, while in others, as at Wangen,
though axes are abundant, none have yet been discovered.
                      THE   USE   OF STONE        AXES.              93

   To us, accustomed as we are to the use of metals, it seems
difficult to believe that such things were ever made use of;
we know, however, that many savages of the present day
have no better tools. Yet, with axes such as these, and
generally with the assistance of fire, they will cut down large
trees, and hollow them out into canoes.       The piles used in
the Swiss Stone Age lake habitations were evidently, from the
marks of the cuts on them, prepared with the help of stone axes;
and in the Danish peat bogs, several trees have been found
with the marks of stone axes, and of fire, upon them, and in one
or two cases stone celts have even been found lying at the
side. In the excavations known as Grimes’ Graves again, as
already mentioned (ante, p. 82), a basalt hatchet was found,
which had evidently been used for excavating the gallery, as
the marks were       still distinctly visible on the walls.
                                  Fic. 100.




                              Swiss Stone Axe.

  One use    of the North American               tomahawk was to crush
bones for the sake of the marrow *, and it is most probable
that the ancient stone axes also served the same purpose.
   In many cases the axes themselves bear ample marks of
long continued use. For instance, the specimen represented
in figs. 101, 102 has no doubt once been much longer, and
with surfaces consisting of one continuous sweep, as in pl. 1,
fis. 1. The edge, however, having been destroyed by use,
it was again chipped sharp and repolished, the new surface
      * James’ Expedition to the Rocky Mountains, rol. i. p. 193.
94,           THE        USE   OF ANCIENT       STONE   AXES.

meeting the old one at a A second time the edge has
become destroyed, and the owner, as may be seen in fig. 102,
has commenced the formation of a new one.

             Fie. 101.                                  Fie. 102.




                                           WW

                                 Danish Axe.


   That they were also weapons of war is probable, not only
on & priori grounds, but also because they have frequently
been found in the graves of chiefs, associated with bronze
daggers. About the year 1809, a large cairn in Kircud-
brightshire, popularly supposed to be the tomb of a King
Aldus M‘Galdus, was removed by a farmer.        ‘“ When the
cairn had been removed, the workmen                 came to a stone coffin
 of very rude workmanship, and on removing the lid, they
 found the skeleton of a man of uncommon size.     The bones
 were in such a state of decdmposition, that the ribs and
 vertebree crumbled into dust on attempting to lift them.
 The remaining bones, being more compact, were taken out,
 when it was discovered that one of the arms had been almost
 separated from     the shoulder        by the stroke           of a stone axe,
                               PIERCED     HATOHETS.                              95

 and that a fragment of the axe still remained in the bone.
 The axe had been of greenstone, a material which does not
 occur in this part of Scotland. There were also found with
 this skeleton a ball of flint, about three inches in diameter,
 which was perfectly round and highly polished, and the head
 of an arrow, also flint, but not a particle of any metallic
 substance *.”            ;
   We know also the North American stone axe or tomahawk
 served not merely as an implement, but also as a weapon,
being used both in the hand and also as a missilet.
  Another class of stone hatchets are those which are pierced
for the handle, as in pl. 1, fig. 2.             From the nature of flint,
these were scarcely ever made of that material.     There are,
however, in Copenhagen, two such hatchets, in which advan-
tage has been ingeniously taken of a natural hole in the flint.
In many kinds of hard stone, however, it is quite possible to
drill a hole .by means of a cylinder of bone or horn, with a
little sand and water; yet it is very doubtful whether this
class of implements truly belong to the Stone Age. The
pierced axes are generally found in graves of the Bronze
period, and it is most probable that this mode of attaching
the handle was used very rarely, if at all, until the discovery
of metal had rendered the process far more easy than could
have been the case previously.
   The so-called “scrapers” (figs. 103, 104), are oblong stones,
rounded at one end, which is brought to a bevelled edge by
a series of small blows.             One side is flat, the other, or outer,
one is more or less convex; sometimes they have a short
handle, which gives them very much the appearance of a
spoon. They have been found in England, France, Den-
mark, Ireland, Switzerland, and other countries. They vary

  * New Statist. Acc. Kirkeudbright-       2nd edit. vol. i. p. 187.
shire, vol.   iv. p. 332.   Quoted    by      + Colden’s    History    of the   Five
Wilson,   Pre-his,   Ann, of Scotland,     Nations, vol. i. p. 10.
96                        SCRAPERS.

from one to four inches in length, and from half an inch to
two inches in breadth. A modern HEsquimaux scraper is
represented in figs. 105-107. These modern specimens are
in form identical with the old ones.
          Fie. 103,                           Fre. 104.




                             Scraper.


   To the small, triangular “axes” (figs. 108-110), which are
very characteristic of the Kjékkenméddings, as well as of
the Coastfinds, I have applied the name by which they are
usually known, but without wishing to prejudge the question
as to the purpose. They are flat on one side, and more or
less convex on the other; rudely triangular or quadrangular
in shape, with the cutting edge at the broader end; and from
2tin. to 54in. in length, with a breadth of lhin. to 2hin.
They are never ground, and the cutting edge, though not
sharp, is very strong, as it is formed by a plane, meeting the
                        SHELL-MOUND        AXES.                         97

flat side ata very obtuse angle.        Professor Steenstrup doubts
whether these curious and peculiar implements were                 ever
intended for axes, and regards them as having been, in all
probability, mere      weights for fishing lines, in support of
which view he figures some not, perhaps, very dissimilar stone
objects, used for that purpose by the Esquimaux. The so-
called edge, in his opinion, neither has nor could have been
used for cutting, but is merely the result of that form which
was found by the fishermen to be most convenient.          He
also calls attention to the polished facets on their surfaces,

           Fre. 105,                       Fig. 106,         Fic. 167,
          —_—_                                     Feeder   ceca




                           Esquimaux Scraper.



which he regards as affording strong support to his opinion.
   It must be at once admitted that there are many of these
“axes” which could never have been used for cutting, but
these may be regarded as imperfect, and are certainly not to be
taken as normal specimens. It is true that the two surfaces,
constituting the edge, form a very obtuse angle with one
another, but we must remember that if this detracts from the
sharpness, it adds greatly to the strength.            Moreover, the
angle is almost exactly the same as that which we find in the
adze of the New Zealanders, and other South Sea Islanders.
                                                  B
98                             CHISELS.

Figs. 111-118 represent a recent adze, brought by the Rev.
R. Taylor from New Zealand, and now in the British Museum,
which very closely resembles the typical axes of the Kjékken-
méddings.        The edge, indeed, is polished, but is after all not
smoother than the natural fracture of the flint. The projection
on the underside of the Danish specimen (fig. 110 a.) is acci-
dental, and due to some peculiarity in the flint. This surface
is usually as flat in the Danish specimens as in those from
New Zealand.
           Fie. 108.                      Fria. 109.        Fis. 110.




                                Danish Axe,


     The chisels (pl. 1, fig. 5) resemble the Danish axes, in having
perpendicular sides, but they are narrower, and are almost
always ground to a smooth surface.       Many of them are
slightly hollowed on one side, as in fig. 114.
   The flat, semi-circular, flint instruments represented in pl. 1,
fig. 3 are common in Denmark, but very rarely, if ever, found
in Great Britain, France, or Italy. The convex edge was
evidently fastened into a handle of wood, the marks of which
                        SEMILUNAR    IMPLEMENTS.         AWLS.               99

are still, in many cases, plainly visible. The other edge,
which is either straight or concave, is generally provided with
a number of teeth, giving it more or less resemblance to a
saw.    Insome cases itis so much worn away by use, that the
implement takes the form of a new moon or of a boomerang.
The edge is in many cases quite polished, evidently by con-
tinuous friction against 4 soft substance. I say a soft sub-
stance, because the polished part overlaps on both sides, and

            Fie. ill.                               Fie, 112.    Fre, 113.
                                                                         ~




                               New   Zealand Adze



passes in between the teeth of the saw, which would not have
been otherwise the case. It is probable that the semi-lunar
instruments were fixed in wooden handles, and then used in
cleaning skins. Similarly-shaped instruments are even now
used as knives by the Esquimaux women, under the name of
Ooloos.     It might be convenient to apply this term to the
ancient Danish specimens.
  The     so-called      “awls”      are rude pieces of flint, or flakes
worked up at one place by a number of small chips to a
                                          H 2
100                   SPEARS.     DAGGERS.     SLINGSTONES.

point (fig. 172).               Though not very sharp, they are pretty
strong.
          Fic. 114.
                                    The spear-heads (fig. 115) are very
                                  variable   in size    and   form;   some   of
                                  them are scarcely distinguishable from
                                  large arrow-heads; others are much
                                  larger.    Some      are so rude that it
                                  is questionable       whether   they were
                                  finished, while      others are marvellous
                                  specimens of ancient art.       One in my
                                  possession is 12in. in length, 14 in. in
                                  breadth, and of wonderfully beautiful
                       workmanship.       It is one of six, found
                       together inside a large tumulus in the
                       island of Moen.
                          The daggers (pl. 1, fig. 4, and fig.
                       116) are often marvels of skillin flint-
                       chipping.     Their form so closely re-
                       sembles that of metallic daggers, that
      Hollow Chisel.
                       some antiquaries are inclined to regard
them as copies of bronze daggers, and therefore as not be-
longing to the Stone Age. The localities in which they have
been found do not, however, offer any support to this hy-
pothesis. Another form of flint weapon (fig. 117), which
is common in Denmark, has a handle like that of the last
form, but instead of a blade, it ends in a point, and suggests
the idea, that if the tip of the dagger had been accidentally
broken off, or the blade rendered narrow by wear and tear,
the rest of the weapon might have been worked up into a
poniard, and thus utilized.       In both these classes the
crimping along the edges of the handle is very curious.
   The shngstones are of two kinds. The first are merely
rough pieces of flint (pl. 1, fig. 12), reduced by a few blows
of a hammer to a convenient size and form. But for the
                          SLINGSTONES.                            101

situations in which they are found, these might almost be
regarded as natural fragments. Professor Steenstrup is now
disposed to think that many of them were used as sink-

                         Fie, 116.                  Fre, 117,



   Fic, 115,




                          Dagger.               Dagger (broken at
                                                    the point).



stones for nets, but that some have really served as sling-
stones seems to be indicated by their presence in the Peat-
mosses, which it is difficult to account for in any other way.
102              SLINGSTONES.    ARROWHEADS.

The other kind of slingstones are round, flattish flint disks,
some of which are beautifully made.
   The ovul tool-stones (fig. 118), or “ Tilhuggersteens ”of the
northern antiquaries, are oval or egg-shaped stones, more
or less indented on one or both surfaces. Their use is not at
present thoroughly understood.         Some antiquaries suppose
that they were held between the finger and thumb, and used
as hammers or chippers.         If, however, a large series is
obtained, it will be found that the depression varies greatly
       Be           in depth, and that sometimes the stone is
                    completely perforated, which favours the view
                  / of those who regard these implements as
            :       ringstones for nets, or small hammer heads.
    Oval   stone.   Jt is very doubtful whether these imple-
 ments really belong to the Stone Age.
    Other stones, in which the longer axis is encircled by a
 groove, appear to have been evidently intended as sink-
 stones for nets.
    The arrow-heads are divided by Sir W. R. Wilde into five
varieties. Firstly, the triangular (fig. 119), which frequently
had a notch on each side to receive the string which attached
it to the shaft; secondly, that which is hollowed out or
indented at the base, as in fig. 120; thirdly, the stemmed
arrow, which has a tang or projection for sinking into the
shaft ; fourthly, when the wings are prolonged on each side,
this passes into the Larbed arrow (fig. 121); finally, we have
the leaf-shaped form, a beautiful example of which is repre-
sented in fig. 122. The true arrow-heads are generally
about an inch in length, but they pass gradually into the
javelin, and from that into the spear-head.       The great
similarity of arrow-heads, even from the most distant locali-
 ties, may be seen in figs. 123, 124, and 125, which represent
specimens from France, North America,           and Tierra    del
Fuego, respectively,
                                     ARROWHEADS.                                         103


   The different forms were perhaps in use in different tribes,
but more probably they are due to the variety of purposes
for which they were intended ; thus in North
America the war arrows taper to the end, so                                    Pa.
that when the shaft is drawn out, the head
        Fie. 119.

                                Fig, 120.


                                                       Fie, 121.




                                       Arrow~neads,—Ireland,


                                               Fie. 124,




                    Fie, 123,




                                                                         Fic, 125.




                      France,                                        Tierra del Fuego.




                                                  $


                                             North America.




remains in the wound; while hunting arrows. are expanded
at the end, so that the head is drawn                              out with the shaft.
104,          SAWS.     BONE    IMPLEMENTS.       AWLS.

Among other tribes, the lance-shaped arrows are used in
hunting, barbed arrow-heads in war*.
           Fic. 126.
                              There are various other kinds
                           of flint implements, such as ham-
                                mers, saws (fig. 126), harpoons,
                                etc., but—omitting for the pre-
                oe)             sent the earlier, or drift types—
           Stone Saw.      the above are the principal forms
of stone weapons and implements.
   Besides being employed for handling the stone axes, the
bones and horns of animals were much used as the material
                                 Fie. 127.




                           Bone Awl.—Scotland.

of various simple implements, and those of the stag appear to
have been preferred, as being the hardest.    The commonest
bone implement is the pin or awl (fig.             eae
127) : not much less numerous are certain
oblong chisel-like implements (fig. 128), the
use of which it is not easy to determine.
Ribs split open, and pointed at one end, are
sometimes found, and have been supposed
by some archeologists to have served in
preparing flax; by others to have been used
in the maaufacture of pottery.       Arrow-
heads, spear-heads,    chisels, and bone har-
poons (figs. 129, 130) also occur. Fig. 130
represents a bone harpoon belonging to
the Reindeer period, which will be described
in the chapter on Caves. Fig. 131 repre-                  Bone Tapio
sents a North American bone chisel used in dressing deer-
           * Murray,   Travels in N. America, vol. i, p. 385.
                                               HARPOONS.                         105

 skins for taking off the hair.                       Pierced teeth also were not
 unfrequently worn as amulets.
     Fie. 129,   Fic, 150.         Fre. 131.        Stone implements are fre-
                                                 quently found on the surface of
                                                 the ground, or are dug up in agri-
                                                 cultural or other operations. But
                                                 those found singly in this manner
                                                 have comparatively little scientific
                                                 value: itis only when they occur in
                                                 considerable numbers, and espe-
                                                 cially when associated with other
                                                 remains, that they serve to throw
                                    Mocem
                                      Bone
                                             much light on the manners and
                                  Implement. customs of ancient times.
                                                                       As al-
                                   America,
                             +                  ready mentioned, the tumuli, the
                                 lake habitations,          and the    shell-mounds
                                  are specially valuable in this respect, but
                                  I must also say a few words about the
                                  “ Coastfinds”” of the Danish antiquaries.
                                 “ Coastfinds” are discoveries of rude flint
                                 implements, which are found lying in
                                 large numbers on certain spots along the
                                 whole line of coast. Owing probably to
                                 the elevation of the land which has taken
                                 place in Jutland since the Stone Age,
                                 some of them are now a considerable dis-
                                 tance from the present water-line. Some,
                                 on the other hand, are at low levels; one,
             Ancient Bone for instance, close to the Railway station
                France..  at; Korsér, is exposed only at low tide, and
             others are always covered.                    The “ Coastfinds,” how-
Ancient
             ever, belong, probably, to different classes.                    Thus,
   Bone . one at Anholt was evidently a workshop of flint im-
Harpoon.—
Denmark,     plements, as is shown by the character of the chips,
106                        FLINT FINDS.

and by the discovery of more than sixty flint cores.     Those,
on the contrary, which even at the present day are under
water, were probably so in old times, and as there are no
traces of lake habitations   in Denmark,    it seems   the most
natural supposition that they were the places where the
fishermen used to drag their nets. It is still usual to choose
particular spots for this purpose, and it is evident that many
of the rude objects used in fishing, especially of the stones
employed as net-weights, would there be lost. The objects
discovered are just what might have been expected under
these circumstances. They consist of irregular flint chippings,
net-weights or sling-stones, flakes, scrapers, awls, and axes.
      These six different classes of objects have been found in
most, if not all, of the coastfinds, though in different pro-
portions. To give an idea of the numbers in which they
occur, I may mention that Professor Steenstrup and I
gathered in about an hour at Froélund near Korsér, 141
flakes, 84 weights, 5 axes, 1 scraper, and about       150 flint
chips; while at a similar spot, near Aarhuus in Jutland, I
myself picked up, in two hours and a half, 76 weights, 40
flakes, 39 scrapers, 17 awls, and a considerable number of
flint chips.
      In the sheltered and shallow fjords of Denmark    the sea
is generally calm, and, in many instances,a layer of sand has
accumulated over and thus protected the flint fragments.
This was the case vith both the above mentioned coastfinds,
one of which was exposed in draining the land, the other in
a railway cutting.   Sometimes a change of currents will
remove the light sand, and leave the heavier stones, which
again in other cases have lain apparently undisturbed and
exposed from the first; and in such instances, the spots arc
sometimes so thickly strewn with white flints that they may
be distinguished by their colour, even at a considerable
distance.
                               FLINT FINDS.                                107

    Of course, in a sea like that which surrounds our coast,
 such remains would soon be reduced to mere gravel; besides
 which, we must remember that on our Southern and Eastern
 shores, even in historical           times,   the   sea   has   encroached
 greatly. “Flintfinds,” however, resembling in many respects
 these Danish “ coastfinds,” are not altogether unknown in
 this country. A great number of flint flakes, with a few
 arrows and cores, were found some years ago by Mr. Shelley
 in a field near Reigate, but, so far as I am aware, no other
 forms have yet been observed at this place.
   In the Aberdeen Journal (October, 1863), Mr. T. F.
 Jamieson mentions a spot on the banks of the Ythan, below
 Ellon, where, in a few minutes, he filled his “ pockets with
 flint flakes, abortive arrow-heads, flint blocks, from which
 the flakes have been struck off, and other such nondescript
 articles of ancient cutlery.”          There are many other places,
 as, for instance, Bridlington, Pontlevoy, Spiennes, near Mons,
several localities near Macon, which have been explored by
MM. H. de Ferry and A. Arcelin, and above all the great
workshops at Pressigny-le-Grand, discoveredby Dr. Leveillé*,
where immense numbers of rude hatchets, cores, flakes, spear-
heads, etc., have been found. Now that our attention has
been called to these flintfinds, no doubt many similar dis-
coveries will be made elsewhere.
   Nor are these discoveries confined to Europe.                  Mr. Busk
and Mr. Langham Dale have met with a very similar assem-
blage of flakes, etc., on the Cape Flats, at the Cape of Good
Hopet+.   Throughout the whole of America, Australia, and
Polynesia indeed, stone implements were in use down toa
comparatively modern period, and in many parts are so still.
In Asia and Africa, on the contrary, as in Europe, stone
implements have, for the most part, been long abandoned.
   * See Evans’ “Archzologia”, vol.      actions Ethn. Soc. N. S. vol. v.
40. Steenstrup and Lubbock, Trans-          + Trans. Ethn. Soc, 1869, p. 51.
J08                     FLINT   FINDS.

Still there, as, for imstance, in Algeria and at the Cape, in
Palestine and Assyria, in India and Japan, stone umplements
have been discovered, showing that these countries also, like
Europe, have, in all probability, passed through an age of
Stone.
                                         109




                                 CHAPTER           V.

                    MEGALITHIC    MONUMENTS        AND      TUMULI.


      LL over Europe, we might indeed say all over the world,
        wherever they have not been destroyed by the plough
 or the hammer, we find relics of pre-historic times—camps,
 fortifications,     dykes, tumuli,        menhirs       or    standing     stones,




                                 Danish Tumulus,

cromlechs or stone circles, dolmens* or stone chambers, etc.,
many of which astonish us by their magnitude, while all of
  * In this country it has become the       and “‘ Maen,”     astone.   They should
custom to reverse    these two names.       therefore, I consider, be used as in the
Croralech, however, is derived from         text. I may add that “‘Menhir,” a
“Crom,” a circle,and “Lech,” stone,         standing stone, is derived     from
and Dolmen from “Danul,” a table,           “ Maen,” stone, and “hir,” long.
110                           TUMULI.

them excite our interest by the antiquity of their origin, and
the mystery with which they are surrounded.
                             Fig, 133.




                       Plan of the preceding.


   In our own island the smaller tumuli may be seen on
 almost every down; in the Orkneys alone it is estimated that
                              Fie, 184.




                       Sepulchral Stone Circle,

more than two thousand still remain; and in Denmark they
are even more    abundant;      they are found all over Europe,
                                     TUMULI.                                     Ti
 from the shores of the Atlantic to the Oural mountains; in
 Asia they are scattered over the great steppes, from the

                                     Fie. 135,




                                  Danish Dolmen,

 borders of Russia to the Pacific Ocean, and from the plains of
 Siberia to those of Hindostan; the entire plain of Jelalabad,
 says Masson, “is literally covered with tumuli and mounds*.”
                                         Fie. 136,




                               Sepulchral Stone Circle.

In America we are told that they are to be numbered by
thousands and tens of thousands; nor are they wanting in
Africa tf, where the Pyramids themselves                      exhibit the most
magnificent      development         of the          same   idea;    indeed     the
  * Journeys   in Baloochistan,    Af-           + See, for instance, Livingstone’s
ghanistan, etc., vol. i. p. 164. See         Miss. Travels, pp. 219. 304.
also p. 155, amd vol. di. p. 111-118.
TA                              MENHIRS.

whole world is studded with the burial places of the dead.
Many of them, indeed, are small, but some                   are very large ;
Silbury Hill, the highest in Great Britain, has a height of
one hundred and seventy feet; but though evidently artificial,
there is some doubt whether it is sepulchral.
                                  Fis, 137,




                               Kit’s Coty House.


   The standing stones, or “ Menhirs,” also were no doubt
generally erected in memorial of some particular event, the
majority being in fact the tombstones of Archaic times.
   In addition to these memorials of the past, ancient camps
and fortifications crown many of our hills.
   In some parts of Scotland the old Hill fortresses present the
remarkable peculiarity, first noticed by Mr. John Wiliams
in 1777, of having been subjected to considerable heat.
Until 1837 these vitrified forts were supposed to be peculiar
to our island, but in that year Professor Zippe called attén-
 tion to the existence        of similar remains          in Bohemia,       and
 since that time vitrified forts have been discovered in various
 parts of France and Germany *.
   * References to the various me-         _logie, 1870, p. 258. See also papers
moirs in which these are described         by Mr. Stuart and Dr. Fodisch in the
are given by Virchow, Zeit. f. Ethno-      Proc. Soc. Antiq. Scotland, vol. viii.
                              STONE    CIRCLES.                         113

   Lastly, the country is intersected by great dykes, or lines
 of embankment,—such,            for instance, as the Wansdyke, the
Devil’s Dyke at Newmarket, and Offa’s Dyke, which rungs
from the Bristol Channel to the Dee, thus roughly dividing
England from Wales,—which were no doubt partly boundary
lines and partly fortifications, like the Roman Wall or the
still more remarkable Wall of China.
    Stone circles, or cromlechs, consist of rough upright
stones, arranged in a circle. The usual diameter is about
100 feet, but some are much larger, the principal circle at
Abury, for instance, being 1200 feet across.     The stones
are placed at equal distances, and the number of them had
probably some significance. “ The two inner circles at Abury,
the lesser circle at Stennis, and one at Stanton Drew, each
consisted of twelve; the outer circles at Abury, the outer
circles of uprights and transoms at Stonehenge, the large
circle at Stanton Drew, and the circle at Arbor Low, each
of thirty; those of Rollrich and Stennis of sixty; and the
large enclosing circle of Abury of one hundred stones. Four
circles at Boscawen, and adjacent places in Cornwall, have
each been formed of nineteen stones *.” Stonehenge is the
most celebrated example of a stone circle, but it differs from
the usual type in several respects: in having, for instance,
the principal stones roughly hewn, and in the presence of
capstones.
   Stone circles are by no means confined to Europe. Stanley
saw, a few miles to the north of Tyre, a circle of rough
upright stones ;and Kohen, a Jesuit missionary, has recently
discovered in Arabia, near Khabb, in the district of Kasim,
three large stone circles described as being extremely like
Stonehenge, and consisting of very lofty trilithons f.
  Arctic travellers, again, mention stone circles and stone
  * Thurnam.   OCrania   Britannica.      + Bonstetten.   Sur les Dolmens,
Decade iv.                             Deeds
                                                                T
114                   MENTION      OF STONE    CIRCLES

rows among        the Esquimaux.           These are, however, of a
different character, being quite small, and merely the lower
part of the habitations.
  Lafitan figures an Indian (Virginian) temple consisting of
a circle of upright stones, which, however, are carved at the
top into rude representations of human faces*. Mr. Squier
mentions stone circles as occurring in Peru f.
   Even in Australia stone circles are said to occur. Mr.
Ormond, in a letter to Sir J. Y. Simpson ¢, says that he has
seen many, especially near the Mount Elephant Plains in
Victoria. They are “from 10 to 100 feet in diameter, and
sometimes there is an inner circle. The stones composing
these circles, or circular areas, vary in size and shape.
Human bones have been dug out of mounds near these
circles. The aborigines have no traditions respecting them.
When wee about them, they invariably deny knowledge of
their origin.’
    As regards the eee at, or the purpose for, which the
 European stone circles were erected, history gives us no
 information.
      Mr. George Petrie, indeed, has called Dr. Wilson’s attention
to several cases in which the Orkney circles were mentioned
in old deeds, etc.§         Thus, in 13849, William de Saint Michael
was summoned to attend a court held “ apud stantes lapides de
Rane     en le Garniach,” to answer for his forcible detention
of certain ecclesiastical property; and in 1880, Alexander,
Lord of Regality of Badenoch, and son of Robert II., held a
court, “apud le standand stanys de la Rathe de Kyngucy
Estir,” to enquire into the titles by which the Bishop of
Moray held certain of His lands. Even so late as the year
   * Moeurs des Sauv. Amer. vol. ii.      ings. Proc. Soc. Ant. Scot. vol. vi.
p. 135. I have given acopy in the         1867, p. 81.
Origin of Civilization, 2nd ed. p. 179.      § Pre-historic Annals of Scotland,
   + Amer. Nat. vol. iy. p. 12.           2nd edit. vol. i. p. 164.
   ~ Simpson on Ancient Sculptur-
                      IN ANCIENT   HISTORY.                      145

 1438, we find a notice, that “John off Erwyne and Will.
Bernardson swor on the Hirdmane Stein before oure Lorde
ye Erle off Orknay and the gentiless off the cuntre.” This
comparatively recent use of the stone circles does not, how-
ever, enable us to form any opinion as to the purpose for
which they were originally intended.
   It is perhaps more to the purpose to observe that both in
the Iliad (B. xviii.) and Odyssey (B. viii.) assemblies of elders
are mentioned as sitting in solemn conclave on stone
seats arranged in circles, but in the former case the
seats are said to have been polished. Many, however, of the
British stone circles were certainly sepulchral; and it seems
probable that this was their original purpose; but that, like
other shrines, they were subsequently used as temples.
   As regards stone   pillars and tumuli, we are told, in Gen.
xxxi., that “Jacob took a stone and set it up for a pillar
                                                         ;”
and in verse 51, “ Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap,
and behold this pillar, which I have cast between me and
thee. This heap is a witness, and this pillar is a witness,
that I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou
shalt not pass over this pillar to me, to do me harm,” etc.
At Mount Sinai Moses erected twelve pillars *. And so,
again, when the children of Israel had crossed over Jor-
dan, Joshua took twelve stones and pitched them in Gilgal.
“And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When
your children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying,
What means these stones? Then ye shall let your chil-
dren know, saying, Israel came       over this Jordan       on dry
land +477
  Achan and his whole family were stoned with stones and
burned with fire, after which we are told that Israel “ raised
over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So the Lord
turned from the fierceness of his anger.” Again, the king
     * Hx. xxiv. 4.                       + Joshua iv, 21, 22.
                              12
116                      MENTION    OF TUMULI

of Ai was buried under a great heap of stones; and so also
was Absalom, of whom likewise we are told that he “ reared
up for himself a pillar, which is in the King’s Dale; for he
said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance, and he
called the pillar after his own name, and it is called unto this
day Absalom’s Place.”
   According to Diodorus, Semiramis, the widow of Ninus,
buried her husband within the precincts of the palace, and
raised over him a great mound of earth. Pausanias mentions
that stones were collected together, and heaped up over the
tomb of Laius, the father of Gidipus. In the time of the
Trojan war, Tydeus and Lycus are mentioned as haying been
buried under two earthen barrows. “ Hector’s barrow was
 of stone and earth. Achilles erected a tumulus, upwards of
an hundred feet in diameter, over the remains of his friend
Patroclus. The mound supposed by Xenophon to contain
the remains of Alyattes, Father of Croesus, king of Lydia,
was of stone and earth, and more than a quarter of a league
in circumference.        In later times,       Alexander       the      Great
caused a tumulus to be heaped over his friend Hephesstion, at
the cost of 1200 talents, no mean sum, even for a conqueror
like Alexander, it being £232,500 sterling*.” Virgil tells us
that Dercennus, king of Latium, was buried under an earthen
mound; and, according to the earliest historians, whose
statements are confirmed by the researches of archeologists,
mound-burial was practised in ancient times by the Scythians,
Greeks, Htruscans, Germans, and many other nations.
  By far the greater number of the tumuli in Western
Europe are entirely pre-historic, but there are some few, of
which the date and origin are known to us, such as the
tumuli of Queen Thyra and King Gorm, who died about
950, at Jellinge, in Denmark.
  There are, moreover, other cases in which tumuli are men-
      * Ten Years’ Diggings in the Celtic and Saxon Gravehills, p. v.
                          IN ANCIENT    HISTORY.                            7

tioned, though not in a manner which enables us to identify
them with any of those now existing. Thus Gregory of
Tours *has a quaint story to the effect that Macliav, flying
from his brother Chanaon, took refuge with Chonomor, Count
of the Bretons.   Chanaon sent messengers to demand that
Macliay should be given up to him, but Chonomor concealed
him in a tomb, “rearing over hima tumulus in the usual man-
ner, but leaving a small opening for the entrance of air’? (com-
ponens desuper ex more tumulum, parvumque ei spiraculum
reservans, unde halitum resumere posset). He then showed
this tumulus to the messengers, and assured them that Macliav
was buried in it.
   The Codex Diplomaticus contains references to more than
sixty barrows or lows, bearing the names of particular per-
sons;    some   of them, as for instance,          Wéddne’s      Beorgh,      or
Woden’s     Barrow, are probably mythical, but there is no
reason whatever to doubt         that some,       for instance Alfrede’s
Beorh,    Althelwolde’s      Beorh,     Cissan      Beorh,       Cwichelme’s
Hlcew, Oswolde’s Hlcew, etc., retain the name of the person
really buried within+. It appears that im England the habit
of burying under tumuli was finally abandoned during the
10th century.
   The Danish Sagas also tell us that in the middle of the
8th century, Sigurd Ring, having conquered his uncle, King
Harald Hildetand, in the battle of Braavalla, “washed the
corpse, placed it on Harald’s war chariot, and buried it in a
tumulus which he had formed for the purpose.        Harald’s
horse also was slain and buried with him, with the saddle, so
that Tarald might either ride to Valhalla, or go in his chariot,
as he preferred.       Ring then gave a great feast, after which
he recommended the chiefs present to throw their ornaments

  * Historia Francorum, iv. 4.         Codex     Diplomaticus,    see   Kemble,
   + For an interesting memoir on      Arch, Jour, yol. xiv. p. 119.
notices of heathen interment in the
118             ANTIQUITY       OF    MEGALITHIC    MONUMENTS,

and arms into the tumulus in honour of Harald.                         Finally the
tumulus was carefully closed *.”
  Most of these monuments, however, are doubtless far older.
Some, indeed, were ancient and mysterious even in the days of
Homer.    Thus at the burial of Patroclus, when Nestor is
pointing out to his son Antilochus the course for the chariot
race, he says,—

                                     “ Plain is the goal
         That now I tell thee of ; nor canst thou miss it:
              *         &         *         %         %
                              On either side
          Where narrowest is the way, and all the course
          Around is smooth, rise two white stones, set there
          To mark the tomb of some one long since dead,
          Or form a goal for men in ages past .”

   It is very striking to find these Menhirs mentioned in our
earliest writings, as monuments of events even then already
 lost in the obscurity of the past.
      Many of the very largest tumuli in Western Hurope appear.
 from the nature of their contents, to have been constructed
 during the Stone Age.                  At first, indeed, it seems almost
incredible that the immense tumuli of Brittany should have
been erected by a people who possessed no metal. We must
remember,        however, that some of the South Sea monuments
were quite as considerable. Moreover, though hundreds of
beautiful stone axes and ornaments have been found in the
tumuli of Brittany, no weapons of metal have yet occurred in
them. It has been supposed that the carvings on some of
the stones could not have been cut without metal. Actual
  * Engelhardt.     Guide Tlnstré        du     + Tliad, xxiii. 884.   I have quoted
Musee des Antiquités du Nord 0o-              from Mr. Wright’s translation, which
penhague.   1868.    See also Saxo            im this passage, at lcast, is more
 Grammaticus.     His.   Dan.    l. x. ch.    faithful than that of any other with
xii.                                          which I am acquainted,
120               ABURY    AND    SILBURY HILL.

has grown up at the expense, and in the midst, of the ancient
temple, and out of 650 great stones, not above 20 are still
standing.
   In a very interesting memoir* Mr. Fergusson has at-
tempted to prove that both Stonehenge and Abury belong to
post-Roman times. “The Roman road,” he says, “ from
Bath to Marlborough, either passes under Silbury Hill, or
makes a sudden bend to get round it in a manner that no
Roman road, in Britain at least, was ever known to do. .
No ono standing on Oldborough Down, and casting his eye
along its straight unbending line, can avoid seeing that it
runs straight at the centre of Silbury Hill. It is true, it may
 have diverged just before hitting it, but nothmg can be more
 unlikely. It would have been just as easy for the Roman
 engineer to have carried its arrow-like course a hundred
yards to the right.     This, indeed, would have been a pre-
ferable line, looked at. from a Roman point of view,—straight
for Marlborough, to which it was tending, and fitting better
ta a fragment of the road found beyond the village of Kennet.
But all this was disregarded, if the hill existed at that time,
and the road runs straight at its heart, as if on purpose to
make a sharp turn to avoid it,—a thing as abhorrent to a
Roman road-maker, as a vacuum is said to be to nature.
From a careful examination of all the circumstances of the
case, the conclusion seems inevitable, that Silbury Hill
stands on the Roman road, and consequently must have been
erected subsequently to the time of the Romans leaving the
country.”
   Startled by this argument, and yet satisfied that there
must be some error, I turned to the Ordnance map, and
found, to my surprise, that the Roman road was distinctly
laid down as passing, not under, but at the side of, Silbury
Hill,   Not content with this, I persuaded Professor Tyndall
               * Quarterly Review, July, 1860, p. 209,
                               STONEHENGE.                               121

to visit the locality with me, and we convinced ourselves
that upon this point the map was quite correct.       The
impression on our minds was that the Roman engineer,
in constructing the road from Morgan’s                  Hill, had taken
 Silbury Hill as a point to steer for, swerving                  only just
before reaching it. Moreover, the map will show that not
only this Roman road; but some others in the same part of
England, are less straight than is usually the case.
    Since the first edition of this work was published, excava-
tions, at which I was present, have been made at the side of
Silbury Hill, and the ditches running along the Roman road
were clearly traced. Mr. Fergusson himself admits, in the
passage just cited, that the pieces of the road on the two
sides of Subury Hill are not in the same straight line, so
that there must have been a bend somewhere.         On the
whole, therefore, I quite agree with old Stukeley, that the
Roman road curved abruptly southward, to avoid Silbury
Hill, and that “this shows Silbury Hill was ancienter than
the Roman road*.” How much more ancient it is impos-
sible to say.
   As regards Stonehenge, we have, I think, satisfactory
reasons for attributing it to the Bronze Age,
   The historical account, if I may use such an expression, of
Stonehenge is, that it was erected by Aurelius Ambrosius in
memory of the British chieftains, treacherously murdered by
Hengist and the Saxons, about the year 460.           Guraldus
Cambrensis, writing at the close of the 12th century, says,
“That there was in Ireland, in ancient times, a pile of stones
worthy of admiration, called the Giant’s Dance, because
giants, from the remotest part of Africa, brought them into
  * Mr. Blandford, who superin-        inthe same volume, by the Rev. A.
tended the opening of the Hill in      OC. Smith.
1849, came also to the same conclu-       + Stukeley thinks it was founded
sion. Proc. Archzeol. Inst. 1849, p.   in 1859 z.c., the year of the death of
803. See also theinteresting memoir    Sarah, Abraham’s wife.
122          MYTHICAL     ACCOUNT      OF STONEHENGE.

Ireland; and in the plains of Kildare, not far from the
Castle of Naas, as well by force of art as strength, miracu-
lously set them up; and similar stones, erected in a like
manner, are to be seen there at this day. It is wonderful
how so many and such large stones could have been collected
in one place, and by what artifice they could have been
erected; and other stones, not less in size, placed upon
such large and lofty stones, which appear, as it were, to be
so suspended in the air, as if by the design of the workmen,
rather than by the support of the upright stones. These
stones (according to the British history) Aurelius Ambrosius
king of the Britons, procured Merlin, by supernatural means,
to bring from Ireland into Britain.      And that he might,
leave some famous monument of so great a treason to future
ages, in the same order and art as they stood formerly, set
them up where the flower of the British nation fell by the
cut-throat practice of the Saxons, and where, under the
pretence of peace, the ill-secured youth of the kingdom, by
murderous designs, were slain*.”’
   This account is clearly mythical. The larger stones were
evidently obtained in the neighbourhood, and are in fact
“‘ Sarcens,” identical with those which occur in hundreds on
Salisbury Plam.     Moreover, the very name of Stonehenge,
like those of Stanton Drew,          Stennis, etc., seems   to me a
very strong argument against those who attribute these
monuments to so recent an origin. Stonehenge is generally
considered to mean the Hanging-stones, as indeed was long
ago suggested by Wace, an Anglo-Norman poet, who says:
                Stanhengues ont nom en Englois
                Pieres pandues en Francois f,
but it is surely more natural to derive the last syllable from
the Anglo-Saxon word “ing,” a field; as we have Keston,
           * Giraldus.   Topogr. of Ireland.
           + Wright’s Wanderings of an Antiquary, p. 301.
                         ORIGIN    OF THE NAMD.                     123

originally Kyst-staning, the field of stone coffins.              What
more natural than that a new race, finding this magnificent
ruin, standing in solitary grandeur on Salisbury Plain, and
able to learn nothing of its origin, should call it simply the
place of stones? What more unnatural than that they should
do so, if they knew the name of him in whose honour it was
erected?      The plan also of Stonehenge seems to be a suffi-
cient reason for not referring it to post-Roman times. It
has, indeed, been urged that if Stonehenge had existed in
the time of Cesar, we should find it mentioned by ancient
writers.     Hecatzeus, however, does allude to a magnificent
circular temple, in the island of the Hyperboreans, over
against Celtica, and many archeologists have confidently
assumed that this refers to Stonehenge. But why should we
expect to find it described, if it was, as we suppose, even at
that time aruin, more perfect, no doubt, than at this day,
but still a ruin? The Caledonian Wall was a most impor-
tant fortification, constructed by the Romans themselves,
and yet, as Dr. Wilson tells us*, only one of the Roman
historians   makes    the least allusion        to its erection, nor is
Abury itself mentioned by any medieval author.
   It is evident that Stonehenge was at one time a spot of
great sanctity. A glance at the Ordnance map will show
that tumuli cluster in great numbers round, and within
sight of it; within a radius of three miles, there are about
three hundred burial mounds, while the rest of the country
is comparatively free from them. If, then, we could deter-
mine the date of these tumuli, we should be justified, I think,
in referring the Great Temple itself to the same period.
Now, of these barrows, Sir Richard Colt Hoare examined
a great number, 151 of which had not been previously
opened. Of these the great majority contained interments
by cremation, in the manner usual during the Bronze Age.
               * Pre-Historic Ann. of Scot. vol. ii. p. 39.
124,    STONEHENGE   A MONUMENT    OF THE BRONZE   AGE,

Only two contained any iron weapons, and these were both
secondary interments; that is to say, the owners of the iron
weapons were not the original occupiers of the tumuli.    Of
the other burial mounds no less than 39 contained objects of
bronze, and one of them, in which were found a spear-head,
and pin of bronze, was still more connected with the temple
by the presence of fragments, not only of Sarcen stones, but
also of the blue stones which form the inner circle at Stone-
henge; and which, according to Sir R. C. Hoare, do not
naturally occur in Wiltshire. Stonehenge then may, I think,
be regarded as a monument of the Bronze Age, though
apparently it was not all erected at one time, the inner circle
of small, unwrought, blue stones being, probably, older than
the rest; as regards Abury, since the stones are all in their
natural condition, while those of Stonehenge are roughly
hewn, it seems reasonable to conclude that Abury is the
older of the two, and belongs either to the close of the Stone
Age, or to the commencement of that of Bronze.
   Both Abury and Stonehenge were, I believe, used as
temples. Some of the stone circles, however, have been
proved to be burial places. In fact, a complete burial place
may be described as a dolmen, covered by a tumulus, and
surrounded by a stone circle.     Often, however, we have only
the tumulus,    sometimes   only the dolmen,    and sometimes
again only the stone circle.
   The celebrated monument of Carnac (fig. 138), in Brit-
tany, consists of eleven rows of unhewn stones, which differ
greatly both in size and height, the largest being 22 feet
 above ground, while some are quite small. It appears that
 the avenues originally extended for several miles, but at
 present they are very imperfect, the stones having been
 cleared away in places for agricultural improvements.  At
 present, therefore, there are several detached portions, which,
 however, have the same general direction, and appear to
                  MEGALITHIC        MONUMENTS      IN INDIA.                 125

have been connected together. Fig. 138 is from a sketch
made by Dr. Hooker, when we visited Brittany together, in
the spring of 1867.
   Most of the great tumuli in Brittany probably belong to
the Stone Age, and I am therefore disposed to regard Carnac
as having been erected during the same period.




                                     Carnac.

  Megalithic erections, resembling those which are generally,
but without     sufficient   reason        ascribed    to the Druids, are
found in very distant countries. In Moab, De Saulcy ob-
served rude stone avenues, and other monuments, which he
compares    to Celtic dolmens.            Lieut. Oliver, also, mentions
that the Hovas of Madagascar to this day erect monoliths
and stone tombs closely resembling those of Western
Europe*.     Mr. Maurice+ was, I believe, the first to point
out, that in some parts of India, there are various monuments
of stone, which, in the words of Colonel Yule, “recall strongly
those mysterious, solitary, or clustered monuments of un-
known origin, so long the puzzle and delight of antiquaries,
which abound in our native country, and are seen here and
there in all parts of Europe and Western Asiat.” Mr. Fer-

 * Trans. Ethn. Soc. 1870, p. 67.         - t{ Jour. of the Asiat. Soc. of Ben-
 + India Antiqua.                         gal, yol. xiii. p. 617. See also Proc.
126                 MEGALITHIC       MONUMENTS     IN INDIA,

gusson goes farther, and argues with great ingenuity that
the “Buddhist architecture in India, as practised from the
third century B.c. to seventh a.D., is essentially tumular,
circular, and external, thus possessing the three great cha-
racteristics of all the so-called Druidical remains*.” These
resemblances, indeed, are too great to be accidental, and the
differences represent, not so much a difference in style, as in
civilization. Thus, the tumuli of India, though sometimes of
earth, are “generally of rubble masonry internally, and of
hewn stone or brick on the external surface, and originally
were apparently always surrounded by a circular enclosure of
upright stones, though in later times this came to be attached
to the building as an ornamental band, instead of an imde-
pendent feature. In the most celebrated example in India,
that at Sanchee, the circle consists of roughly squared
upright stone posts, joined at the top by an architrave of the
same thickness as the posts, exactly as at Stonehenge; the
only difference being the insertion of three stone rails be-
tween each of the uprights, which is a masonic refinement
hardly to be expected among the Celts.”                       In India, then,
the circles of stones seem generally to have surrounded
tumuli; but this is not always the case, and there are some,
“which apparently enclose nothing.’ Again, they are gene-
rally covered with sculpture;               but to this also there are
exceptions, as, for instance, at Amravati, where there are
numberless little circles of rude unhewn stone, identical
with those in this country, but smaller.”
   In Europe we know that the stones of Megalithic monu-
ments are almost invariably uncarved.
   There is indeed a dolmen, near Confolens in Charente, in
Soc. Antiq. Scotland, vol. i. p.93.       Wise, ditto, p. 154. Hooker’s Hima-
Babington, Trans. Lit. Soc. Bombay,       layan Journals. Taylor, Trans. Roy.
1823.   Congreve,   Madras   Jour.   of   Inrish Acad. vol. xxiv. &e.
Lit. and Science, 1847. Yule, Proc.         *EON, Cy ps ize
Soc. Ant. Scotland, vol. i. p. 93.
                      MODERN     INDIAN    DOLMENS.                       127

 which the upper stone is supported, not on rude stone blocks,
 but on four slender columns*. I agree, however, with M.
 Rochebrune, that the supports were probably carved at a
 period long subsequent to the erection of the monumentt.
 At Stonehenge the stones are roughly hewn, but at this stage
 the Megalithic architecture inWestern Europe seems to have
 been replaced by a totally different style. In Algeriat, on
 the contrary, it advanced        further; we      there find tumuli of
 regular masonry and stone circles, in which the floors are
 paved. On the principal stones in one of the stone circles
 are letters, the meaning of which, however, is unknown,                   In
India it reached a still higher stage of development, so that
it requires an observant eye to detect in the rude cromlechs,
stone circles, and tumuli, the prototypes of the highly deco-
rated architecture of the Buddhists.
   It is a very remarkable fact, that even to the present day,
some of the hill tribes in India continue to erect menhirs,
cromlechs, and other combinations of gigantic stones, some-
times singly, sometimes         in rows,     sometimes      in circles, in
either case very closely resembling those found in Western
Europe. Among the Khasias$, “the funeral ceremonies are
the only ones of any importance, and are often conducted with
barbaric pomp and expense; and rude stones of gigantic
proportions are erected as monuments,               singly or in rows,
circles, or supporting one another like those of Stonehenge,
which they rival in dimensions and appearance.”
   The single pillars are sometimes tombstones, sometimes
memorials of important events. Colonel Yule once asked a
native if there were any tradition about one of these pillars,
   * Statistique Monumentale de la    de la Société Archéologique de la
Charente.                             Province de Constantine.   1863, p.
  + Mém. sur les Restes d’industrie   214.    See also Letournenx.      Ar. f.
appartenant aux temps primordiaux     Anthropologie.    1868, p. 307.
dans le Dép. de la Charente, 1866.       § Dr. Hooker’s Himalayan Jour.
  t Recueil des Notices et Mémoires   vol. ii. p. 276. See also p. 320.
128                    MODERN     INDIAN DOLMENS.

which is known as Mausmai, i.e. “the stone of the oath.”
‘“‘ There was war,” said the man, “ between two villages, and
when they made peace, and swore to it, they erected this stone
for @ witness *,”




                                 Indian Doimens.

    Dr. Hookert has called attention to the fact that the
 Khasian word for a stone, “ Mau,” as commonly occurs in
 the names of their villages and places, as that of Man, Maen,
and Men does in those of Brittany, Wales, Cornwall, etc.,
thus Mausmai signifies in Khasia the Stone of Oath,—
Mamloo, the Stone of Salt,—Mouflong, the grassy Stone,
just as in Wales, Penmaenmawr signifies the hill of the big
stone; while a Menhir is a standing stone, and a Dolmen a
table stone, etc.       Those    who     believe   that the use of metal
was introduced into Europe by a race of Indo-European
origin, will find in these facts an interesting confirmation of
their opinion.
  How closely these Indian dolmens resemble those of
HKurope may be seen by comparing figs. 1389 and 140, with
581 and 137,
    * Proc. Soc. Antiq. Scotland, vol.       t+ Address to the British Associa-
 i. p. 93.                                tion, 1868, p. 7.
                       MODERN    INDIAN             DOLMENS.                   129

   The Indian dolmens, as shown in the valuable memoirs by
Captain Meadows Taylor* (figs. 139, 140), may truly be
said to be identical with those of Western Europe. He exa-
mined a very considerable number, having obtained particu-
lars of no less than 2129 dolmens in the district of Bellary,
in the Dekhan, and it is interesting that, as is sometimes the
case in Europe, more than 1100 had an opening in one of
the side stones, doubtless in order to introduce food for the
dead. Montperieux figures (pl. xxx.) a dolmen with a similar
hole in his work on the Caucasus ; and Schoolcraft mentions
that in the United States the Redskins very frequently left
an opening in the grave cover for the same purpose.
                                       Fre.   140




                                Indian Dolmen,

   We must not, however, attribute too much importance to
the similarity existing between the megalithic erections in
various parts of the world. Give any child a box of bricks,
and it will immediately build dolmens, cromlechs, and “ tri-
lithons,” like those of Stonehenge, so that the construction of
these remarkable monuments may be regarded as another
illustration of the curious similarity existing between the
child and the savage.
  * Trans. BR. Irish Academy, vol.            Races of Scotland.”
xxiv. p. 329.   See also Col. Forbes             + Schooloraft’s Indian Tribes, Pt.
Leslie’s valuable work, “The Early            i, p. 33.
                                                                     K
130               MODES    OF BURIAL    IN TUMULI.

   Tumuli or barrows are much more numerous and more
widely distributed than stone circles. No doubt the great
majority of them are burial mounds, but some also were
erected as memorials, like the “heap of witness’ erected
by Laban and Jacob, or the mound heaped up by the Ten
thousand in their celebrated retreat, when they obtained their
first view of the sea.
   The size of the tumulus may be taken as a rough indication
of the estimation in which the deceased was held, as             James*
also tells us was the case among the North American Indians.
The Scotch Highlanderst have a complimentary proverb,
“ Curri mi clach er du cuirn,” i.e. “I will adda stone to your
cairn,” and Iam informed by Mr. R. Gray that the custom
still exists in the Hebrides, as it does among various savage
and semi-savage races.
   The remark made by Schoolcraft as regards the American
Indians is applicable to many savage tribes. ‘‘ Nothing that
the dead possessed was deemed too valuable to be interred
with the body. The most costly dress, arms, ornaments, and
implements, are deposited in the grave;” which is “placed
in the choicest scenic situations—on some crowning hill or
gentle eminence in a secluded valley.” And the North
American Indians are said, even until within the last few
years, to have cherished a friendly feeling for the French,
because, in the time of their supremacy, they had at least
this one great merit, that they never disturbed the resting-
places of the dead.
   Coffins do not appear to have been used during the Stone
Age, though Mr. Greenwell has sometimes found traces of
decayed wood, and in one case the side of a grave showed the
impression of a rough board. The majority of tumuli are mere
heaps of earth, or of stones, covering the bones or ashes of the
   * Expedition to the Rocky Moun.      _   Wilson, Pre-historic Annals of
tains, vol. li. p 2.                   Scotland, vol. i. p. 86, 2nd ed.
                        CHAMBERED    TUMULI.                     181

dead; in many cases, however, the mound          contains a cist of
stones, evidently intended to protect the remains of the de-
ceased, while in other cases the dead was buried in a dolmen,
more or less resembling those represented in figs. 135-187,
and the whole was then covered over.      Such dolmens, either
covered or uncovered, occur, as already mentioned, in Northern
Africa, and in India. “Some archeologists have considered
that all dolmens were originally covered with earth or stones,
but I think the evidence shows that some at least were
intentionally left exposed.
   Some of the oldest tumuli of Scandinavia are of a different
character. They contain a passage, formed by great blocks
of stone, almost always opening (as do those of Brittany)
towards the south or east—never to the north—and leading
into a large central chamber, round which the dead sit. At
Goldhayn, for instance, in the year 1830, a grave (if so it can
be called) of this kind was opened, and numerous skeletons
were found, sitting on a low seat round the walls, each with
his weapons and ornaments by his side. Now, the dwell-
ings used by Arctic nations—the “winter-houses” of the
Esquimaux and Greenlanders, the “‘Yurts”’ of the Siberians—
correspond closely with these “Ganggraben” or “ Passage
graves.” The Siberian Yurt, for instance, as described by
Erman, consists of a central chamber, sunk a little in’ the
ground,   and, in the absence       of great stones,    formed   of
timber, while earth is heaped up on the roof and against
the sides, reducing it to the form of a mound. The opening
is on the south, and a small hole for a window is sometimes
left on the east side. Instead of glass, a plate of ice is used ;
it is at first a foot thick, and four or five generally last through
the winter.       The fire-place is opposite the entrance ; and
round the sides of the room, against the walls, “the floor is
raised for a width of about six feet, and on this elevated part
the inmates slept at night, and sat at work by day.”
                               K 2
132                THE    USE    OF TUMULI          AS DWELLINGS.

   Captain Cook gives a very similar description of the winter
habitations used by the Tschutski in the extreme north-east
of Asia.      They are, he says*, “exactly like a vault, the floor
of which is sunk a little below the surface of the earth.                       One
of them, which I examined, was of an oval form, about twenty
feet long and twelve or more high. The framing was com-
posed of wood, and the ribs of whales, disposed in a judicious
manner, and bound together with smaller materials of the
same sort. Over this framing is laid a covering of strong
coarse grass, and that, again, is covered with earth; so that,
on the outside, the house looks like a little hillock supported
by a wall of stone three or four feet high, which is built
round the two sides and one end.”
                                         Fie. 141




                       Summer and Winter Dwellings.—Kamskatka

   Fig. 141* represents the plan of a Laplander’s gamme, or
hut, at Komagfiord, as given by Mr. Brooke+. It was built of
sods, supported by a rude framework, and the interstices were
stuffed with moss. The greatest height was 6ft., the breadth
14ft., the whole length 30ft. A is the door; B, the passage,
8ft. high, 6ft. broad, and 12ft. in length; C is the inner door,

  * Voyages to the Pacific Ocean,                   + Brooke’s Travels in Lapland, p.
vol. ii. p. 450. See also yol. iii. p. 374.    318.
                          YURTS     AND    GAMMES.                     eS)

opening into the gamme, D; H, the fire-place, composed of
a few large stones to confine the wood-fire; F, an opening
in the roof to let out the smoke;            G, G are sleeping divisions,
which serve also to support the roof; His a portion fenced
off for the sheep and goats. A comparison of this hut
with the corresponding plan of a tumulus (fig. 148) will
show how closely these dwellings appear to agree with




                           Laplander’s Gamme, or Hut.

the “Ganggraben:”          indeed, it is possible that im some
cases ruined dwellings of this kind have been mistaken
for sepulchral tumuli*; for some mounds have been exa-
mined which contained broken implements, pottery, ashes,
etc., but no human bones; in short, numerous indications
of life, but no trace of death. We know, also, that several
savage tribes have a superstitious reluctance to use any
thing which has belonged to a dead person; in some cases
this applies to his house, which is either deserted or used as
a grave. The-Indians of the Amazons bury their dead under
their houses, which, however, are not therefore abandoned
by the living.
  Among the New Zealanders, on the contrary, according to
     * The so-called ‘“‘Pond-barrows”’ perhaps belong to this class.
134                   HUT-BURIAL   AMONG     MODERN       SAVAGES,

Mr. Taylor, “when the owner died, and was buried in his
house, it was left with all it contained: the door was tied up
and painted with ochre, to show it was made tapu, and then
no one ever entered it again*.’” In many villages, he says,
nearly half the houses belonged to the dead.
   The islanders of Torres Straits also used the ordinary huts
as dead housesf.
  Denhamj also states that in the great central African king-
dom of Bornou “every one is buried under the floor of his
own house, without monument or memorial; and among the
commonalty the house continues occupied as usual, but
among the great there is more refinement, and it is ever
afterwards abandoned.”  ‘The same is the case with the
Dahomans, Yorubans, and other races of the Gold Coast§.
It is still more significant that the Esquimaux themselves
frequently leave the dead in the houses which they occupied
when alive ||. Nor can any one compare the plan of a Scandi-
navian “passage grave,” as, for instance, the one represented
in fig. 148, with any drawing (see fig. 141*) of an Hsquimaux
snow house, without being struck with the great similarity
existing between them.
      Under these circumstances, there seems much probability
in the view advocated by Professor Nilsson, the venerable
archeologist      of Sweden,        that these       “Ganggraben”           are a
copy, a development, or an adaptation, of the dwelling-house ;
that the ancient inhabitants of Scandinavia, unable to imagine
a future altogether different from the present, or a world quite
unlike our own, showed their respect and affection for the
dead, by burying with them those things which in life they
had valued most : with women their ornaments, with warriors
  * New     Zealand    and its Inhabi-     55-130.
tants, p. 101.                               § Burton’s    Mission   to Dahome,
   + M'Gillivray, Voyage of the Rat-       vol. ii. p. 2.
tlesnake, vol. ii. p. 48.                     || Ross’ Arctic Expedition,   1829-
   { Travels in Africa, vol. iv. pp.       1833, p. 290.
                             PIOTS’ HOUSES.                     185
                                                                 Q




their weapons.    They buried the house with its owner, and
the grave was literally the dwelling of the dead.          When a
great man died, he was placed on his favourite seat, food and
drink were arranged before him, his weapons were placed by
his side, his house was closed, and the door covered up;
sometimes, however, to be opened again when his wife or
children joined him in the land of spirits.
   It is just possible that the comparative rarity of chambered
tumuli in England and France may be connected with the
greater mildness cf the climate, which did not necessitate
the use of underground “ winter-houses ;” or it may be an
indication of a difference in race.  Further investigations
will, doubtless, decide this point.        In the meantime we must
remember that the so-called “ Picts’ Houses’ are abundant
in the northern parts of Great Britain.         These curious
dwellings are “scarcely distinguishable from the larger
tumuli; but on digging into the green mound, it is found to
cover a series of large chambers, built generally with stones
of considerable size, and converging towards the centre,
where an opening appears to have been left for light and
ventilation. These differ little from many of the subter-
ranean weems, excepting that they are erected on the
natural surface of the soil, and have been buried by means of
an artificial mound heaped over them *.”
  According to Mr. Bateman, who has recorded the syste-
matic opening of more than four hundred tumuli (a very
large proportion of which were investigated in his presence),
and whose opinion is, therefore, of great value, “ the funda-
mental design of them (i.e. the British tumuli), with the
exception of the very few chambered or galleried mounds
in Berkshire, Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, Ireland, etc., as
New Grange, Wayland Smith’s Cave, Uleybury, and others,
and those of the much later Saxon period, is pretty nearly
                     * Wilson, l. c. vol. i. p. 116.
136                     THE    MOUND    BUILDERS.

the same in most         places; the leading feature of these
sepulchral mounds        is, that they enclose either an artless
stone vault, or chamber, or a stone chest, otherwise called a
Kistvaen, built with more or less care; and, in other cases,
a grave cut out more or less below the natural surface, and
lined, if need be, with stone slabs, in which the body was
placed in a perfect state, or reduced to ashes by fire*.’’
   The “long” tumuli of Great Britam resemble, in some
respects, the Scandinavian “ Ganggraben,” and, like them,
in districts where large blocks of stones occur, contain mega-
lithic chambers,     in which        the dead were        buried    and not
           vices           burnt.      No trace of metal has yet been
      SOROS                found in this class of tumulus;             which
                           therefore probably belongs to the Stone
                           Age. The skulls found in these tumuli
                           are very long and narrow skulls, which
                           have received from Dr. Wilson the
                           name of “Kumbecephalic,” or boat-
                           shaped skulls, resembling the one in
                           fig. 142, which was obtained by Mr.
                          Bateman from the tumulus known                    as
                           “Longlow,”          near   Watton,      in Derby-
   ving Skal—Deryskive, shire. This tumulus contained the re-
mains of thirteen individuals who had been buried in the
usual contracted position. They were contained in a cist
composed of large stones, and were accompanied with several
worked flints, including three carefully made arrow-heads.
Long skulls are comparatively rare in the round tumuli of
England, while on the contrary, no round skulls have yet
been met with in the long tumuli, at any rate in Wiltshire and
Gloucestershire: so that the evidence appears to support Dr.
Thurnam’s aphorism, Long barrows, long skulls, round bar-’
rows, round skulls+.          This conclusion rests on the measure-
   * Bateman, Ten Years’ Diggings,          + Mem, Anthropological Soo. vol.
p. xi.                                 i.    The following facts, however, are
                                LONG BARROWS.                                      137

ments of 137 skulls, 70 from round barrows and 67 from
long ones, and it must be observed that these are not selected
specimens, but so far as the long barrow skulls are concerned,
comprise the whole number which we possess in a sufficiently
perfect condition, while as regards the 70 from round tumuli,
Dr. Thurnam has taken the whole number (41) contained in
the Bateman collection, those described in the Crania Brit-
tannica, and all those in his own collection. It is important to
observe, therefore, that in neither case has any selection been
made which could influence the results. Now if we class
those skulls in which the relation of the breadth to the length
is less than 73 to 100 as long heads or Dolichocephalic, those
in which it is from           74-79     to 100 as medium          heads, and
those in which the proportion is 80 or more than 80 to 100
as short heads, or Brachycephalic, we shall have the following
result :—
         Total number of      Dolichocephalic   Orthocephalic    Brachycephalic
                    skulls.       63-73.           74-79.                 80-89.
one GarrOws se Oli               OD        cer Weigle       is   cn          0
imound barrows,          (U5.         0.    « o>     26.5.            »    oh
   Thus there is not a single long head among the 70
specimens from round barrows, nor a single round head
among the 67 specimens from long barrows.      So remarkable
a distinction certainly appears to imply a difference of race,
and Dr. Thurnam is disposed to refer the Dolichocephalic
people to the Neolithic Age, the Brachycephalic to that of
Bronze.
  As yet, no bone belonging to any of the extinct mammalia
has been found in a tumulus.               Even the reindeer, so far as
our present evidence goes, is entirely wanting. Again, the
stone implements, as already mentioned, are of a character
very different from those used by Palwolithic men.    It is
mainly taken from his second paper         of which Dr. Thurnam has been go
(in the memoirs of the same Society),      kind as to forward me the proofs,
138             OBJECTS    BURIED    WITH     THE DEAD.

therefore not surprising to find that the skulls which have
been obtained from tumuli attributed to the Stone Age indi-
cate that Europe was, even at that period, already inhabited
by more than one race of men.       On the Continent, as in
England, some are brachycephalic, or short-headed, and
so far resemble those of the Lapps, while others are doli-
chocephalic, or long-headed* (fig. 142). Virchow+ has re-
cently published a memoir on the skulls obtained from Danish
tumuli, and contained in the Copenhagen Museum. Omitting
fragmentary specimens, and those belonging to young persons,
he has examined 41 skulls referred to the Stone Age, 3 to the
Bronze Age, and 5 to the Iron Age, and compared them with
the specimens of Lapp (6), Greenland (5), and Finn (8) skulls
contained in the same collection. On the whole, these Stone
Age skulls are orthocephalic, inclining to brachycephalism ;
the Bronze Age and Iron Age specimens are dolichocephalic,
but it must be remarked that 1+ would not be safe to draw
any definite conclusion from so small a number of specimens;
and that even if the Bronze Age indicates the immigration of
a new race into Western Europe, they would probably not
exterminate the earlier inhabitants, but would at any rate
spare the young women, so that, until we have a considerable
body of evidence, it would be very unsafe to speculate on
the character of the population during the Bronze Age.
   The Greenlanders are dolichocephalic, the Lapps and
Finns, on the contrary, brachycephalic; but Virchow ob-
serves that if, in this respect, the skulls of the latter resemble
the type of the Danish Stone Age, they differ greatly in
height and breadth, so that no ethnic affinity can be predi-
cated between them.
   In some cases the skulls obtained from one and the same
tumulus differ from one another very considerably.                  Thus
  * Nilsson’s Stone Age.   English       + Ar. fir Anthropologie.   1870,
ed. p. 121.                           p. 55
                    OBJECTS    BURIED     WITH THE     DEAD.                     139

among those found in the great tumulus                      at Borreby, in
Denmark,       the breadth,      taking     the length at 100, varied
from 71:8 to 85°7, or no less than 14 per cent*.
   The care with which            the    dead   were    interred, and the
custom of burying implements with them, have been regarded
by some archeologists as proving the existence of a belief
in the immortality of the soul, and in a material existence
after death.       ‘That the ancient Briton,” says Dr. Wilson +,
“lived in the belief of a future state, and of some                    doctrine
of probation and of final retribution, is apparent from the
constant deposition beside the dead, not only of weapons,
implements, and personal ornaments, but also of vessels
which may be presumed to have contained food and drink.
That his ideas of a future state were rude and degraded, is
abundantly manifest from the same evidence.”
   But it is very far from being “constantly” the case,
that the dead were so well supplied with what we call the
necessaries of life; indeed, it is quite the exception and not
the rule,—so that if we are to apply the evidence of the
tumuli      in this manner,      we     must, I think, come to a con-
clusion     exactly the reverse of that stated by Dr. Wilson.
Thus, out of more than 250 interments described by Sir R.
Colt Hoare in the first volume of his great work on Ancient
Wiltshire, only 18 had any implements of stone, only 31 of
bone, 67 of bronze, and 11 of iron; and while pottery was
present in 107, more than 60 of these contained only sepul-
chral urns, intended          to receive the ashes of the dead, and
certainly never meant to hold food. So far, however, as
stone implements are concerned, I must confess that Sir R.
C. Hoare appears to have overlooked the ruder instruments
and weapons.    I will, therefore, rely principally on the
evidence afforded by the researches of Mr. Bateman and
Mr. Greenwell.
  * Busk,     Vogt’s Lectures on Man, p. 384.          + 1. c. vol. i. p. 498.
140          THE DEAD   WERE   FREQUENTLY   BURIED

  Although a large number of the interments described by
Mr. Bateman had been already examined, there were 297
which had not been previously disturbed, and though he
carefully mentions even the rudest bit of chipped flint, no
less than 100 of these were without any implement at all,
either of stone or metal, and the drinking-vessels and food-
vases were only about 40 in number. Moreover, lest it
should be supposed that these ill-provided interments were
those of poor persons or enemies, we will leave all these out
of consideration. This we can easily do. We may be sure
that these tumuli, which must have required much labour,
were only raised in honour of the rich and the great; though
they may have served, and, no doubt, often did serve
afterwards, as burial places for the poor. But it is almost
always easy to distinguish the primary interment ; for though
there are some few cases in which the original occupant has
been ignominiously ejected from his grave to make room for
a successor, these instances are rare, and can       generally be
detected, while the secondary interments are usually situated
either above the first, or on the sides of the tumulus.      The
same feeling which made our ancestors prefer to bury their
dead in a pre-existing tumulus, generally prevented them
from desecrating the earlier interments.
  In the following tables, then, I have recorded the primary
interments only; the first colamn contains the name of the
tumulus, the succeeding nine indicate the disposition of the
corpse, and the articles found therewith, while the last is
reserved for any special remarks.    Out of 139 interments
examined by Mr. Bateman, only 105 had any implements or
weapons, and only 85 were accompanied by any pottery that
can have held either food or drink.   Moreover, if we examine
the nature of the implements which were deposited with the
dead, we shall find that they are far from representing com-
plete sets of tools or ornaments. The rarity of bronze in
         WITHOUT   ANY   ORNAMENTS   OR   IMPLEMENTS,     141

tombs is, perhaps, not surprising; but to men so practised as
our predecessors, 1t must have been an easy matter to make
a rude arrow-head, or a flint flake. Yet some of the corpses
are accompanied by but one single arrow-head, others by a
small flint flake; some, again, by a single scraper. It must
also be observed that many of the stone objects found by Mr.
Bateman are much ruder than might be supposed from the
names he has given them.
                                            ‘ported uoxrg-ojsuy oy} 07 peSuojog uo paurezuoo Ors                                                                           NUN, oY} JO [VISAS Fey O[Geqoad st qT *
               “Moung            Jov “Bop adwy
                              woyajayxg)                      pa           4819        wenn           |             cam.          Ah              wes        re               rv          ticn        oon          con            “5        fetrh        aucany     (to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      here          “eee             ue
               “mong      peay|eso ‘Inq   esse]                 syuaueFerg
                                                                      fe   asig                    syne             vy            [orn                        woe             ose            Jove     tee          oe             ch                                                ae               wey
               “mouteg                    [yetug
                                 “MOLE ATIVI BSBA SIU,        See I810fe   asig   oo   aie   +e                                   pve co                      fore            wen oo        foe
                                                                                                                                                                                              ite     onaoe                       Pl  ase                                           ae               wey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           poom Wesseg
                                          *y}99) SasIOH]}         3819                                                               ote            aes                           et          oH         oF             Ree           oe                                                    IME wosseID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘xog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *oq2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘a[paou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               XI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O'T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9pNL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JOOW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SJUIUINIISUL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘spuaq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LaATis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ssepy|fees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     “”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [itnit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     peay-readg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ylayse9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a8t9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cece
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    “ss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Aan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4819
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [1UUeH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    “moureq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [[nug}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    “|S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3s.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     USnUNIySUL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     uxoSOg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OAT,
                                     *somog UeUINY JUIN]          4819                                de               nt          |ELG             seat        Mere              aS                          queuiniysutauQ                                                               “0778                LL
                                                                                                                                                           suid
                                                                                                                                                           ZJo
                                                                                                                                                            syuouARIy
                                                                                                                                                            Pauls[eo
                                                                                                                                                            ‘QUIY
              pus ‘[eoo odpuauiwry Jo syuauieuso omy]              **                                ere               ss            Iq seddeq                  |                             **s7UIMINI}SUL OPN OA                                                                                  AOTION     OL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ohava
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     lore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     aieoe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     perl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ote
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     {Tews
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     “woueq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     £4e,}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4819
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     M07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     QUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     wee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ory
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     vee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ove
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     19930
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       suul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4sio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              quaut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     +a[er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [*"*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       stan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |]
                                                                   eae    win    Teryotndeg                            wre               dees       wee         deer              ere         owe    “        sSuddiyo wis                          We              IE       ined   |asn   ace       uoplays       More
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [vowtoyds
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   roary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Z1 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OMT,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘soyAd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |-najsur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       padeys-Aaupyy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ooatg]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       481M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       urg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       wort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "033
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *saquid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sqUudUInIyS
              JO a0Tq     “BURJUT Ue Jo sUYeWaL ay YITAA]         JeIQ   |* dnd JuTZUUG              |*"*              are                    2            Lur               aay |‘speay-moare g ‘saddeq | ++ | + | ee                                                      |——lere        Mong UaeTD           IL
                                                 “ys
              ‘uy gt ynoqe ATuo snqaumy,        ones fe
INTERMENTS.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *."”oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 one
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 feo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lene
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ae  oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     eee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     eid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oy}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘sauog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     uojxa[aXs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     JUIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     UA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ys19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BS0IQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     UeUMY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MOT
                                                         *PItYO) 4819 |'* dno upquig                 |                     Same ih tee                          ee                oy                     as             s<            seed ||                ened     [aa           “+     + wort sadug 6
                                             "43003 8,as104                                                                                                                                                quiy paddiya
              B pus UaZP[M) OF Jo souog yung WITM]                y8ID | WIM TeLy[Ndag               |                     ahaa          bia        ita!        ie                we}          @ JO pues 3f99 B JO 31g |——| + | + | se [eres mod ssorg g
                                             *sauod                                                                                                                                                  SJUGUINITSUT JaYIO
              UeUNG      FUNG UM “Aayslfod ouoyspues]             ysig   fs                   tt                           Arr od(ita               lata «|as                     |}           aazy) pue peay-souey |——| wre | ve | ove fore ee    Om ATT £
                                                                                                                                                                                                     spUPWINIYSUT Ae[Na
                                                                  ysio   |e      syuaui3erg |                              os            aS         FEE) |eco                     “|           -ry9 03 puke peay-souvy | = | --- |__| +» laoowy uojSursseig 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘aqa ‘SAUX %
TABULATED



                                                                                                                                                                           urloy                ‘speay-aveds % ‘spastyo
                                   “31400   patJO 831q   daIUL]   ys1Q   |"     dno 9susouy                                a             ae                          oO Jamwerry          | ze      ‘spvay-AOLe                 OME}           co                    Co     ood                  <     SUiT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    deve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a|"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    dee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rallies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    gquausEy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     urg
                                                                  qsro   |        oi          eo              ere                         ipeve                                   creel       aes      ee      es     Stel                                                   se     [es mor spURT § +20g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MoT
                                       "SUOJOTIYS OMT)                   {tt                  we     [pBay-MOITY                         |"         a                             oe          yes   QUDUINL}SUL Te[MOMD |——]                                 --              “*     ["100W UO PPLA &
                                                “908,
              -INS OY} Iwau FIN uowy “yur nae
              JO sadaig “YSty “93 RI ‘sntnuing afaeq)                    |        as          a           ae           a al ae                      ae               ay           ss          ("4799 pue peag-Mosty | e+                                    {oe fof          oe     fee    oo              aT ft
                                                                                6 KUALLOI                      ‘ x NOUT                    c AZ NOU                       A INO                               a ANOLS                       aZ| re}    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             eo}5 | 8]
                                                                    a                                                                                                                                                                       Be)                     i]       7
                              ‘SMUVWA                               a                                                                                                                                                                       Beie/215
                                                                    8                                                                                                                                                                       Proje | Pils
                                                                    3                                                                           410 SLOALAO                                                                                 g2\ 9       ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         “aSduOo
                   “TUIHSATHAG                            SHLLINOIINV
                                                             AO                                                                      S\NVWALVS SHOILSAAFHL
                                                                                                                                                  JO
142
                                 “SINHWUALNI                                                                   AXYVWIUd
                                                                                                                                            (apearqaoum )
143
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pray-seads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1as5eq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3


                                       saridula 19A\0] 84} JO ULOD SseIQ JUO                                                               S[aSSAA § JO STIG                                                                                                                                                                    MOT FUIUUIW 9%
                                                                                                                        “UOXES
                                                                                                                                 4810
                                                                                                                                    W810
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                “*       MOTPINA
                                                                                                         JO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OT JOUIIN                       Td
                                                                    *TeUUe         auIos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     uo}LOW ay
                                                                  Japusys
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              $Z
                                    BJO
                                                                                                       & 400}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &%
               adiey
                 8,09                                                            puosas                        "u0xes
                                               ‘sajvulay aloD

                                 ‘“uojalayxs                           “mote          eF1ey                 “UuL0y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7 “ane
                                                                                                 auc YA,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WOU WaourA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‘s}UIY  peay-rieads ou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -MOLIeass oie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U0                 Uayorg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qWaWINI}su]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        “                                     oe 1Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   peay-readg




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                         Acryl                                                                afew *syUaOeMLLO                                                                                                                                                           ie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         apni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         aU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OM}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AOLYy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pray
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      eae




                                                                         0M}    pue
                                                                                                                                                             suryuuqg
                                                                                                                                                             dno

               yo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                uoppeH 19AO                                  61
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MOT 1OYNOT                                   Bt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \ 1s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          s7USUINn




                           *JULJUL UB JO UOITAXS 97 UII ‘ojeutaz
                                                                                                                                                  SaStA OMT,                                    vee                                                                                                                             aes     ¥                                     at Ll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 uapsny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AOT
                                                                “P(Lya B JO UOJaTaAS OY YIM
                                                                                              “u10Y 5,38)
                                                                                 oy) YA                    ‘opemag                           dno Supquug                |"                      as                                                                                                                              “MOT OAV
                        *JURJUL Uv JO UOJTYS
                                                                               “surgjo sdurddiyp 5                                                                                                                                    peay-readg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <8                                                                                  sauojsAouoyy
                                                                                                                                                  ane      ser          foe     se    | rad3eq                                                                                                                                  MOT    pug
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 peay
 INTERMENTS.




                                                                                                                                             dno Surquyg                        tte   foes      5                                                                                                                                          “* Jamod                           If
                                                                                                        “pnys jor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7
                                                 ar                                                   eed se                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve             “                              6
                                                                                                     fie puosag
                    JOPUN 19977¥] OM 9yI foovsAINS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                em0}satHNYS



                                                                                      ous |Axepuosag
                        yeanyeu                  ay             uo     JOULIOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                      [VAQ  doard
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                    “ojo ‘speay-avads aaryy,                                                                        quag MOT g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          aepoaod.



                                                                     “YSLY Joos 8,2 ‘sninuLOT,                                                                                                          S,avys UIOY                                                                                                             * MOT 00g £
                                                                                                                                                                                      1033ep                                             sdurddiy9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sas
                                                                                                                                                  a        cae          ||      mer |pane 418                                                        *   qury aepnosng                                                                                                            9
                                                                                                  *yof Jo prog                                                                                                                                       a     proy-readg                                                                               uoyoq
                            “PLIYO B fo UOJaTOHXs FUINGu 34s WIT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              g
 TABULATED



                                     *punouc ut punos £10330d jo
                        SUSU FVIY “YSLY Joos OM} JNOGS sarMUNY,                                                                                                                                 Ras
                                                                                                                                                  oe    | OSTA                  see   [owe                                                                                                                              cco             wo7y adivgs                           Ot
                               “pILyo B yt ‘apwatay v AUOPIAT
                        ‘gonyyoou 9u0g puke 49¢     *Y100} S,M0D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IOOW UOJT[PPIAL                                 nN
                        ‘dno durquupejosparyg “souog 8,[euluy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oe       Key Alar                                      {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   paddyyosjuty             ear,
                                                                                                                                                                 SONTO OIG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         quoumnsjsut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         pepaa

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      peaq-reads                                                                        WeIOH                                        68
                                                                                                                                                                        |""*   ony    |                                                                                                                                                              yseAUoW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8¢
                                                                               Rau [RUNUe JUINg                                            ve      * TOSSA                                                                           “ay                     pTjoB                                                                                   "
                                                                               “quiy jo sovard Aun                                           un   jeryorndag                                                                                                                                                             ayepxela                                     9¢
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         yyoumg                                       Le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     82 6% oF
                                                                                                                                                                                                     19ddeq
                                                                      *quyy qurng Jo avard [[wurg                                           tum peroradag                                                               -1B[NIAO      pray-reads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           puwoes          one             wee                                       "UOJ               TPPUAL             WUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MOEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OTe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OMT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SIUSUINI}SUL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   quUaTUNIySUy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   apNy




                                                      *su0qo[ays OMT,                                                                                                                                                       quaminsysur                       zUILT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       quawmnujsut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Outaysey
                                               “gTeulay @ A[Qeqoig                                                                                                                                                          SPBoY-MOIIY                      OMT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             “MOTT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MOD    ¢¢
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    “mot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    dng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 @M0M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ZY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MOT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           uojxng
                        *TI09} ,SOSIOH{T “SoUOG WeLUNE WING Yt AL                                                                                                                                                                               ae          oe              oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [ews
                                      *sUOISUDUIP OFIRT JO UOJD[AXS                                                                                                                          Jaddeq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              "OT
                                                                                                                                           dno Suryuig
                                                                                                                                           ee  “WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                 io
                                                                                                                                                                                                  oe          jiIvads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     raulWeH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3|"                                                                                                             “        uONaM LB
                                                                 5                        mene                                                                         SLOarKo
                                                                                                                                                                          AO                                                                         :                                                                        144
                                                                8           y             Bal                                                                                                                                                        8
                                                                PRIS
                                                                wu
                                                                SWUVAAW
                                                                  ks tele Mh PS
                                                                      “ASduoo             cere                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                 3              12)       Sais
                                                                 2              a} | uM   Awl                         "<NOLS                               ‘<Now|           ‘aznoud    *NOUL
                                                                 |e.                  ale 4                                                                                                                                            ‘AUTLLOL
                 2z          Suruurp
                                   MOT [et                       ee       |__|] fe wr |     aULOG POOT SPU     |                                                |quoumardwy ““radseq      hE                        Reo                        ove       see
                 gz          uopIyegx00                            [fs os | ve | ++ | aug 100d quiy Kyo tee         see                                         hes  Coe    ee            fog                       bel                        |"          4sto
                 6z       IH  peoHt*                             foe   vee | ve      -——}T, UTIL        WUAUINAZSUT OO                                                 GESte              Hie                       BS           ste           |"          4st|    ayy         aAeIs          PaUTYUoD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ea1Y}               SUOJIEHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           JO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘wour      saprseqI9YI0           S[eMIUe*souog
                 OF                 JUIULATOU+                                                          poon             Guatnysul
                                                                                                                               Pe'o}a“                                                                              #88                        {°°        4819
               1¢                            ppyysnig
                                               ™                                                 ase                              fee             tae                                                               oo                   |"               4st
                Eg                UIPPeL,“MOIS                                                   cr                               ees 1] Es                                                                         aa           oa      |**
               SESS:                    eeOMCI
                                         a ee fe                                                 ae                                                                                                                                                       4sI9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                ATqeqotg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                v   Oye]               “yUsUTIIzUr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [LEWIS     “MOLL
                                                                                                                                  ne                                                                                       YUU           |"               asto
               bE        QOH            SIN                OSMOHS                                UB           a         ae        es                                                                                             eae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ae                      4ST| 19                 Teryo[udas “Aaqureyfo
               og         OO TTL see                       me                                           apNyy            quaUINAZsUT
                                                                                                                                ae                                                                                  We           ae      ©               one      UT           *[OAvIs
               9g                       HIeuLsi09g
            Le                                     tee        see
            96               iS                    ane       see                                                                                                                                                                                                              sdeyieg “doxes
           65                                      ee        see
           OF                os                              coyote
           TF                      [Lewis
                                        [aoa              as)
                                                                                                        OYLIPUR        ayUH       ox                                                                                                                                          ‘AWM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                yng you        “9Tos         ‘q[eWaT
           aa            “              eee                  se                                           ‘1atdeqeads‘oa                                ouog au        |)   pee                           hee
                                                                                                                                                                                                          oer             uid dun              “dno
                                                                                                                                                         3uy 9Tni                                                                                                                                                                 TABULATED
          SF                         UOWloMaYD
                                         "  “*
          FF                      UOppeHDIPT“*                                                                     ‘peoq-Mouy
                                                                                                                       ‘938                             ysagy opnx
                                                                                                                                                                 |
          SF                           AQ[MOLUL,                                                                                                                            “TAY
O41
                                                                                                             pray-aouy                                                                                  ‘dno Joryquudg
TITH
OF                                                                                                          peatpivadg
atepdaaq
LF                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OM,             *suozopays
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wg Jo           "Atoyjod
                                                                                                        Moly pRay-     oc              se       |                           “"Tagdeq
          BF                 OSNOWAO'T                                                                            peay-Ieadg
                                                                                                                      pue
                                                                                                                        4         SMOLIG ow,    ardenv=                     ae
                                                                                                                                           sjuaur                                                      Suryquug                        dno
                                                 “                                               y       Jeau                GUSULN]SUL
                                                                                                                                  *           |"                            Taddeg
                                                                                                 y      aay   uvau                syuawarduit                                                                                                                          OMT,            ‘suOJaTaYs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wg Jo           “Aioj}40d            INTERMENTS.
         6p 09                    MPUOTL                                                                 peraaag             squomterduu [eIAAgG
                                                                                                                                              -Ul]
                                    “                     “=                                                                                                syuamald
                                    uojueg                                                             omy,        pajutodsyury “"                      apuy -Wt                                                                                                       YITAL JUING "souog
                                                                                                                                                           quauia[d
                                                                                                                  peay-avadg
                                                                                              peddiuyg
                                                                                              guatanaysut
Udpqry
1g
AOT 2g
    Aajmoryy                                                                                                      peay-MoLry
                                  ** “                                                                                 “
                                                                                              Spvay-MOLe
                                                                                              O47,                                                                                                                                                                     TILA      FING      uvUIMY “souog
                                       * *
                                                                                                                  pray-ivadg
                                                                                                                       puv       a1j[esrq
        gg £¢ g¢ 9¢ 1G            MOTTaQuIOT                                                     oxe                                                                              ‘uin
                                                                                                                                                                                  yerqoyndas
                                                                                                                                                         “WIL                                   dno
                                                                                                                                                                                                 “+
                                                                                                                                                                                                asuaouywin
                                                                                                                                                                                                       perqorudag
                                                          so                                                      proy-Mony
                                                                                                                       oe        os                                                                                 qusuda                                             eMLOS        spUAWTAQSU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jo  yULY   PUNO;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UT ayy
                                              KOIMOLUT,                                                                                                     syuauerd                                                                                                     Yea aaognBq}UL
        69                           ULeqaIVD
                                           asOTqniny                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        “4NATULII}
e10[T
Be                                   *"U0}OM                                                           oF yvou          poyutod “MUySUT                                                                                                                            JITJOB          ‘SBA
                                        saysung
                                                                                                 s}uaar                                 Ug arg,          [BIdA—ag
AS                                              oen       en                                         daly,          sjUOUINIISUL                                                                                                                                   OMI,               Jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   suozo[DYS unos ‘udu
Q9 19                                                                                                svadg pray pUue [BAO -UT
                                                 oe                                              quauiniys
         79                        AVO[SIB                                                             wayorg        quamindysar
                                                                                                                          “+                                                                                                                                                     popunoung
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    fq                  “sauojspuvs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OMT        Tl2WS
                         fe dug        oy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sasaid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jo            ‘€raj10d
                                                                                                                                                                |           xoaseq
Apey
AOT
gg
                Gog        WH
                                                  punoy         yur ts
                                                                                                                                             ;                Ppapuno
                                                                                                                                                                   Kq mng
                                                                                                                                                                        xs    1ay}O                 Popevsjtloa
                  u197885                                                                                                                                    ‘Suojajays
                                                                                                                                                                     YON arom                       Aq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 pxueduoaar
                   auo}sxT                         peuaAog         syuoUNa
                                                                       “T jsuT                                                                         aoaty apN “SINT
                                          Wy     May             S}UOUINYSUE
            “                                                                                                                                        JUNG      uBUNY “‘souod
                U0}RD 100                                                                                                                         4st9 you        Afastua             “payBavoxa     Sn[NUnT,
                GojoqHOH
                       *                                                                                                                            <tWo auo yooy ‘WAY
                                          T, OAL               S}GOUIMAasISUL
            prog        UolRT
                           ""                                                                                                                               ‘peay-Moxry
                                                                                                                                                                 d}0 punos
                                                                                                                                                                        UT a3                        “SNM,
                                                                                 OAT,   SQulod                  sytaudury
       AA          Uses                                                                                                                                       qudra-Ajuam
                                                                                                                                                                        xoauoo syoaf{qo
                                                                                                                                                                                    Jo               ‘guoq
                                                                                                                                                   axI]     u0}3nq    “sp[nour
                                                                                                                         sptag
                                                                                                                            “           a0           uoxrg ‘€pep duu pur       HuesJo                “AAtIs
                    Suuayqog                                                                                                                           ao001q
                                                                                                                                                           pur Yau 908)jo      ‘xoquie              ‘uyelaosod
                  WeIUIES                               peay-s
                                                            “' ory Bee                                                                             pus     ‘sse[d AUGaq) yW3099                    *Suluyeuras
                           sdweg
                    wioyymeg                                                                                            9se4 “     ry
                                                        pvay-readg                                                         asuaouy
                                                                                                                                dno*
                                                                                             8g   “aod
                orpury
                     de,                                                                                                                          OAT          *sU0}9[9X8
                                               OAL,
                                                  UT           S}UOMUNAS                                            Al FORT ore
                   Suayorg
                                                  [eIaAag        SMITINIYSUT                                                   [waya(n
                                                                                                                                    HIdag
                                                                                                                            Furr  dno
                                                 [eIaAag           "S}UBL
                                                                       WMLUTLQSUL                                         qin    aipuey
                                                   Juipnjo
                                                      v              Peay-ieads                                          YOULL Tassaa
                                                                                                                                   “              YT aI               UOJaIayXs
                                                                                                                                                                         JO UB         “WUDsUY
                                                              spEaYy
                                                                  PUR-aoUR[
                                                                       OUO OM
                                                            papua-punoy                                                Osu
                                                     peay-irOCedg      ane
                                                        pray-r
                                                            * vadg                                                                               571gJO UB     “UID
                                                                                                                       LON ort
                                                aoaeypus               ““Peo-MoLe                                       [assa,                                                                          TABULATED
                                                      Pray-rwadg
                                                            ae
                                                festygpur           me                                                 asua
                                                            -ivads “pray                                                                                auoqare
                                                                                                                                                           Jov         ‘daays
                                                ‘ooueT         ‘peay-aoue
                                                                   pur
                                                  Av[NoLa      JuaWNIYSUL
                                            omy, pur     Juatay “NQSUL
                                                sjuaur
                                                    ‘pvoy-twadg |‘proy-Kole
                                     |       pue
                                            omy
                                                       Jauumey |                                                                                  peayy
                                                                                                                                                     Jo€       “quod
                                                    sivadspuw    “PUnod                                                                                                                                 INTERMENTS.
                                                  papua          quUaWNASUL
                                                      “pray-ivad
                                                          “072 g aa
                                                      peaty-aouy
                                                           pue   ysnor                                                    asuaouy
                                                                                                                              dno “=
                                                           SPUsWNTsUy                                                         [Rryo(n
                                                                                                                                  wm dag
                                                 suynjyng          ~
                                                                 spuaumysul
                                         y, aay dood uty               (eo                                                                       oa,     [yews stteq
                                                                                                                                                                  JO         *9U0}8
        “                                F, uaa au0-S] duty           S}uatlof                                              agua
        “
        rr                  5               ino0g Nasut Saw
                  UO}SraITyUalIRA\                                    eae
                                           aarg s}yINy oh             <
                  Sup“ayorg                                                                                           aSBA “"
                                             oyu=       eve
            “                                     peay-readg                                                             asuaouy
                                                                                                                               dno
6g                UOWUATTYW2LBA\                                                                                      SBA a
00T     QD        UHH
                                                punoy          Juammiysur
                                                                    “                                                    asuaouy
                                                                                                                               dao “*
10L             Ayueg     a8ueip
                             ™                                                                                    4 Ara       Ayja1asead           punoyy
                                                                                                                                                       jou              AjjeurS1y0
                                                                                                         Lue   sdungy                                                                  “Tedqa[ndas
 Zor                    aUosyNOID                                                                                                                  ‘uoxegneq          AYUo            |
                                                                                                                                                                                     Suturemar Mota;
                                                 LepnIII9       quau w
                                                                    MaysUl
                                                                                                                                                        Suryun
                                                                                                                                                            ‘dnd
                                                                                                                                                               p
                                                                                                                                               WIT         qUING ‘souog              Ajjuaredde Pajstsodap
                                                                                                                                             32 9y}         UTES ‘OWT}
                                                                                                                                                                                                      145
                                                     *aArid
              Oy} UT IeOq ev JO sapr}q     Jap{NoYys OAT,                  “ gavrd doaq                                                                                                                                                  arepropug Aqny sz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘ONICIY LSVL
                                 saovjans [einzeU 9q3 UO                                                    -    mun AreroutD                                           quing uy Jo aatg                                               UWS              #2
                                                                                                                                ca{peus
                                                                                                                                BULA
                                                                                                                JP UTTIEM BuO
                                 “dows TerNyeU oN} UO                                                       uin         Areqaury                                         yung ‘peay uljaier                                                            ‘ITA         s            &%
                                                                          david MOT[EUS
                                                                                                                                                                      ' IY Jo savard m98y
                                                                                                                                                                    JUNG                                                                               TA           S            a4
                                                                          aAvid MOT[LYS                                                                                 puny "GUL JO a9                                                                "A           g            1G
                             *1aaUILIp UT Yaay IMoy fa3po                                                     uin pirys & fq
              UO 49s ‘satloys JO ajou9 B Aq papunowns                                                       peraa0oau0 ‘sumn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                aRUy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                JULY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                wdaery


                                                                                                                        ONY                                             quing ‘yur Jo avarg                                            eo AVE                       H        0z
                                                                                                                                                                                                           7
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Josasardoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                           yung
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ‘uly


              pue ‘aoujins Mivu 043 WO sUIN aL                                                               Arerutd
                                                                                                                                                                                                             St /
                                  “DOBJANS [VINJVU aq} UO
                                                                   oy                                                                                                                                                                 —— EE                         "        6
                                                                                                                                   [[ewg
                                                                                                                                   un
                                                  “MOLIEQ
                                                                                                                                                                                        quinqun
                                                                                                                        [[ewg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       one             ‘Il          ee           gL
              ay) JO aseq oq} punor youcry oivndg                         aaerd MOT[eYS                                                                                                                                                                             hy ZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ly fooprumegay
                                                                                                                                                                             rodeos
                                                                                                                  un
                                                                                                                                                                                                  punoyy
                                                                                                  MOTIEYS
                                                                                                  aAerd

              saonyins [einyzeu ay} UodT sauog Jo pisodaqy
                                                                                        MOT[VYS


                                                                                                                                                                 jury
                                                                                    MOT[EYS
                                                                                      AOL[RUS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       re
                                                                                                                                                                        Jo
                                                                  DAvAT
                                                                sAeid  aaesd
                                                                     aABid        MOTUS


                                                                                                                dno asuaouy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Hie LEAT                                  ¥
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mou
INTERMENTS.




                                                                                                            sdnoasusauy omJ)
                                                                                                            +     dno osuaouy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sipe                                      Oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PEE



                               “aoeyims Temnjeu oy} woody                                                         um Arexourg
                                                                                                                  dna asuaauy                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                       min [[euL                                                                                                       “ltr                         “
                                                           MOTLEYSARIS                                                                                                                                                                                                               oe
              -a0Ry IMs [eINJeU 911} UOdN sau0g Jo y1sodaq MOT[TRUSsaved
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "T ‘preaoy aise           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘Il
              aoryans [eanzeu ayy uodn sag Jo pisodaqy
                                                                               aAvr3 MOTLETS                       assaA poowd                                                                                                                         a iftes      fs           9
                                                                                                                  doo asuaouy                                                                                                                          gal          2            g
TABULATED



                                                                               aARIS MOT[EYS
                                                                               dAvIS MOT[EYS                                                                                                                                                           *] ‘LOO UOJSTALID ¥
                              *g0BJINS [INU         ay) uodQ.                                                     uin Arelauty)                                                                                                        aa              ie        uoja[quiey{ g
                                         ‘9U( INS    [eANjZeU                                                                                                                                                                                          ery               “       Zz
              att} BAOQe 4aay AMOF sauog Jo Rsodsap oy,
                                        ‘aovjins yemmjpeu
              att] 9AOQR aaj BI) SAUOG JO Wsodop OYL                                                               JassaA poor                                                                                                                         “<"T Gaopw 0043q          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘ONIGMY           HLUON
                                                                                                                                               “AZNOUT
                                                                                                                                               "NOUL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   aeelms
                                                                                                                  “AUALLOL                                “TNO                             “INOLS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pe)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i-] Ss n a »a
                              ‘SHUVNA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         “A8duoo

                                                                                                                                           gO SLOaLgZo
                                      TTUMNGTHD                                              “M ATH                      CHL AM CANINVX                  TIOWOL                       FO SLNHLNOO
146
    9g      uojZueqprom                  |}-—lJ|            wT         TeV
                                                                                           ee              a       +e               ne         oo“    “ee       os       wee    os            wee          oe         -                    “    Vv          ‘aru uo        ayy           jernjeu       ‘QORJINS‘pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     os0[o0}     ‘uryev       !uewom ays pey wv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  jaf     ‘peaq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             v     avardJo  s,taap '1300)    ‘passard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                v       vyLAU        Bpaosord viqaqaA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jo@    ‘qsy pure
                                         (eae oy            aaa         cee                we              |          oar      ordun sory,                      Bae      te     aux.          Oe           ||ne    deal,                   |"        aay        ‘saytmoo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ye zoyy
                                                                                                                        ‘syuaUTfauo  STAB                                                                                                                                     "ystem
                                                                                                                   9H BUI MOQ
                                                                                                                  jov     Tip
    lt          *
             qaps3uq does                [_ oe              eee         ae                 ase             deee    vee                                fae       see      dewe
    gz           UOzRISaFT                                                                                                                                                      are           on           dove    soe                     |"            Apog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UO      ayy          [wINyeU     “aoBjANS
                                            +
                                         |—_/""DIOMOy ~                 see                                a                                          roe       coe      fae el oa            a8                           OARID                V          PLIYD
    6z       umaroyg
                   PIomM
                     [I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                JHOQe ad1Y4 SIBaK"PLO
                                                    —-~-|   8           oe                                                                            (ss                              poog         [assoa         age                              UC ON}              [RINIEU       “adUJINS
    0s      ra            ‘II                   eae         one         on                                                                            ave                              poor         Jassad                 doog DART
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |'**          UL     si)              PuNouLSIDA OY)      SUTLULIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JOB   URW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pur@                ‘uewom          v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       duiktwao ysodap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jo
                                                one         ve          -                  “               erry    Coos             dane       wee    se        .        *|            poog         [ossaa
                                                                                                                                                                                                         |"                doag    oar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |t                   yung         ‘souog            e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ayqeqorgfueursty         OFT
                                  >                 ||         upaaep‘pray guimq     [=>                                                              [ate      mses     ie     wee.          a           Pen     eee               |"   pun                       ‘anes
    Ie      “                  as SON               SS      ove    ane    ses   bee                                                                   ery       Cre      [eee   ses           oe          |"                 Morpeysgdae
    a       “                  ie                   ees     obs    oe     we    ie                                                                    Kec                or     meee                                         Moyuysaaerd
    ee       i“                          |—fa
                                            |                  rederog
                                                                   pue ¢       s3urddiyo
                                                                                   | “*                                                               a                                                           pS                   |"           UG ayy              [eNQeU       *aoUsANs
    #
    eg       Pr
          19330                 TA  | «ow
                               uoydworg                     aN     aes    oe    Dawe se                                                               ae                                      sas         |"                 Morley[adeTdUy]              oy}          oAvAT SBM ayy         ApoqJo B           Puyo
          PIOM       Rs              «
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Duryonoy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ayy  Layo “Apod
                                                    |——]              payeioyiag
                                                                           ‘axe yung
                                                                                  {es                              ve               eer    =          the       Habis           Seay          oo          |               daaq    ears
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |"          uy     ayy  aavsF autos   UAYOIQ                       ULUINIT Souog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pue autos       “sproqsjod
    9¢      «         cy               [| ws                a           or                        “                ae               fs         Ae     on                                      ase                            MOTeYsaAwd
    Lg                 se}             |e cen               Rs          wae 8                              fase    ane              ue                “                                             [assaa                doog aavid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | y                    uvuryo           o[pptur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘odeye      ayy jseo ‘pua Due
                                       |— |                     avoury yurodjo                         Guu
                                                                                                        ) “                         ‘2                me                                      ba                  ass                  ft                 ayyae 48am
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  &                Juno’ “ueur
                                                                   peqieq                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TABULATED
L   8¢      mee!          gar:       capeail|       ama     cass        aaa                SS              Re)          MRCS,       RUG etc)                    plaice
    6g
                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                  moyeygjaawid ayy, urn pretwo s9y                        apis    uodnoy)           “souog
                      Pas                       a           sae,                                                   Sy               pe                                                                            aes                  |***               puryog:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ous         peoy sea ou           Apog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jo @        Ara
                               }         fe Boe                                                                    wg               Soe                                                                           sre                  |                  dunok “pigs
    OF
    It                    “TASee     aes                          ms               i                       eee     eee                                                   pes    ss                                           MOTLEYSDALIT
                          ira“ ||) |                        Suoy jurg                  apy
                                                                                         UL                           fauy                     Se      loess             rhs    BD            —           |"              daaqy aAvAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |*** UT               ay)        aAvIT V19AK OY}               PIt0j;7BOS SULEULIL
                                                                   ‘aaerd ynq              Jou             Qua                                                                                                                                      Jo
                                                        IBYQIEayy                                                                                                                                                                                              aariy       ‘sarpoq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pue            [sadas          SjusWBvIy
                                                                                                 WUINQUN
                                                                                                    Ho                                                                                                                                      vo          Juyyucp,,
                                                        quing Apog                                                                                                                                                                                             ,,‘dnopue OM} aay      SAOge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oy}     satpoq 919M 941     satoqJO @      yuing
                                               ates a         nae                                       oa                       “as                                     face   eee                       llhns
    gy     uoquen ‘ploa,
                    "LT                  |_| +      one                                                  te                      us                                                                               pase                       “£p0q                                                                      INTERMENTS.
    £F       a       “II                                                                                                                                                        3                                 o                |*     UC 9IQ      [VIMZLU *doNJINs
                                         | -        =                                                 pe           sy           ee             sit                                wt                                         Molleusfoavsd aarg saipoqora prey asoj9             1943990)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pue
    tF      a                   |
                               11T |—- + |                                                                                                                                                                                                       AQuaprad pating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ye ay} aules “oully
                                                            yeag          Jadezos                     Fe           a                           aa              pas       ba     aaa           oe          glhos   ive              |"     UO OY)
    Sb      bs        f (is              een us             ae                                                                                                                                                                                        [YINyBU “2oVJLNS
                                                                        nee                                 fees tee                           nae   fee       sre       |-*           poog         [assoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                        |"                doag aavsd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |**               aug, Apog pey             usaq prey         uodn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  v             uspoom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ed          “au0y) yotyM paysar uoda                   *Ssaye}s
    OF      “             A’             ETN est            ae          te                 a                                                                             “eh                  ase                            MOLLUSDATIZ
    Lb      ug                 SAL       fe ne              “5          tee                we
    SF                         JIA“
                                 =  |—|                     wag                ‘sadeizosquing                                                                                                                             daaq  aavsd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 +
                                                                                                                                               iss                              <                                           MOTTEUSdAeIF
    6F      at                 Het:
                              lee eee                                   ose                =a                                   “              oe
    O¢ ETAL AqroT “PION [—_}'T
                            os                                          meet                                                                                                                  tee                 eo                            UC        OY}          [eINIeU       ‘OoUJANS
                                                                                                           Came    |                oo                                          Oe            Go                        doog aavs3
    1¢                         IL        |——l + gp}                    ‘soatuyoau
                                                                           py  yung                          [sdryo
                                                                                                                 ve                 ue                                                 poo          [2SSeA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         |"               daaq aausd
    e        5                                ee                        ee    ss                                                               ae                               a             See        |'"              daa aaurd             uy 944             aAvIday}            pa1eqBas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             saulogBJO         “{poq
    es                          AD        fe see                        oe             -                                                                       vee                     poo          [aSsaa
                                                                                                                                                                                                        [ts       +                °            uo       ayy           [LIN}eU       ‘DORJINS
    *¢      %                            [PA
                                           oe                                                                                       te               Pisce     mara                          Supyurg
                                                                                                                                                                                                  [dao                      Moypeysaaeid
    sg       =                 TA        |) ve              ese         ae                 me                                   <                    (ek       Liha             a            ae          |"             daag      aavid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |" V                       “ueWON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FW        aR      19y}0pulaJO      ay}      OATIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sem e      usu pue    oa1yy    ‘uoIpyyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          941
                                 P       t                                                                                                                                                                                                             souoq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jo     Woy pelt usoq      paov[(dsip
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘pue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       preyer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UT v   4108Jo APN ‘IOPIO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      147
                                                    ‘S8aHO9
                                       5                                                                                                 SLOIrao
                                                                                                                                            IO                                                                                           TAVUO                                                                      146
                                       3                                                                                                                                                                                           me                                                   ‘SHUVNGa
                                              lal
                                       F        z                                                                                                                                                                                      “~S19
                                       z        ¢                               ‘ANOS                                "SNOT                           ‘AZNOUT               *NOUL                                ‘SMALE
                                alae            =|                                          —
    9¢               “*
                  UoIspnyy |e               |
                                           eee Se             sae          ne               |"                 qnyy       epeut                                      ny                                    duryug
                                                                                                                                                                                                               |dno              aavay     |"     UT        at       9a212 O79M Ot}              SUTEWAI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BJO -SIp
                                                                                                               wory ati                 d                ta                          a                                                                       paqunt ‘Apoq
                                                                                                                 rape
                                                                                                                   Jo fe
                                                                                                    a0ppar
 2g                  ‘qormyzazyng[——t}-y
                                     |“                         agnecgy oo        ee        fooe         ter          ee|r                       ‘yadgeqsae                         fete     wee           o         oo         daaq       gAntgaa               asiryot     puZ ao           ‘QU0}s      *W0})Nq

 gc          “               far                     —|       ve        ane       oo        [ewe         see                oo                 ee tien we                                              £ceraury
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ur fer          we
 6S AA                 ad
                     1OYJeABa |——-7
                                 “"                           ca     eS           xa                    Beles               Ga 4        inet             Res                                                                                        uO      aq            fermyea    ‘aoupins
                                                                                                                                                                                    |"              poog      assed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |"             aawin
 09          oe               |—l"y)
                                 * |                           adiey ayey         4        ieee         ee                                           :                                       Ae            ee     |'"*           daety     |"   y           Apoqino            yFnoryy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ur           JuLyeur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   oT         *QavAS
19           oe         7                  |—-Fy
                                              |                ayypur           edre{ aE                a                                                                                    33        |"         doag gavr3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         “+
29           g                             enol,
                                              Se              a                                         se                                                                                     Ug Jory feeding see       |   uC oy                                        yeanqeu ‘aoejANs
£9           a              IRAN                     ese Gap                                            ee                         >                              ie:                        3             eg       |"             Mol[eys
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         joaesd           aAogya)    aavid aram aalyy Speay[ -UJIAL
                                                                                                                                        Ss               sd                         Oy,                                                                atto    samoy ‘smul     Atyuyoreo  paysodop
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ay        wosJo "A
#9           ss             ot                  ail 2                   ve                                                                                                                                          |"          doa       ~gaei3s
             2              TTA |——[ |                    (wag               xoleros
                                                                                zo auruy
                                                                                     |r                                      Souvom                                                                                 [fo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     aawng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        =  | emog                                          paninisip
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  seuodJo 8        PUUE ous         TABULATED
                                                                                                               pare         [8299p,,                                            ‘                                                                           “onerd
                                                                                                   “Koque
                                                                                                   yno
99           a              ele emi Pas                    koe          eae      Ga)       en           ore                <                                      se                        UIQ)                    |           AoA        |motieys              aoepyoan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jo  jaf          ‘speeqGIL FLY            AB[NITD
                                                                                                                                       ee        .                          .                                                     aud                       ‘systpur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &                 Ie[ndueLN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [19109            ‘yuppuad
29
89       ‘&                 XI
                            [2:6 oresiecr                  Seeae     cnow        ob                                                    ier              :       Vea ca                                              ie    Bae              |        uO ayy             [eanieu ‘soupINs
                                                                                 gumsisPe                                  |vie                      Gaywry
                                                                                                                                                      |     anBuog, [yO oe                                          fi          aA         |Moreys                  Jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 vovpyoanontq sse[s ‘speaqUIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B                  -3}2
                                                                                                                                                 A                                  SERIE                                         aavrd                Suz          uIa}Ied
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UT           “ayy
                                                                                                                                                              BAL
                                                                                                                                                              {3
                                                                                                                                                              -OLQ                                                                                                                                                  INTERMENTS.
                                                                                                                                                                     wax            azuoiq
69       «                                     LbAS                    .        A“         [ove         ts                                                                                  on  on                  |"          A104                     B                           ‘dNo1d
                                                                                                                           “f Y; WL JOP                          lanae                     alee                                   oars |morleYS‘SON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 69-89G9-99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "UasUt              AY[Tews StaTMUIY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       JO 19-99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OL, ‘uourosn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OPM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘ads} ‘pue ay ayi                     ‘SoevpyoouIe[lutts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                puNoZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Selly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                osoyy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14B
OL       “                                    erry
                                                 ate                   -05       ae        ies          Coe                then    roe               foae        aay                he      neo)           oe      |            Aro,       wopeys
                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                    aavid
a        “                             |r
                                        ve                a            ais       oa       [pre         fn                 [hea     fms               pen         As                 le      A          ect         |            kro        morreys
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OABL
ra       “             b-              nerl               on           ee        oo        fave        ste            .            oy                fees        are                        ee         wen         on            cee              uy     oqy         aaeis attos       FLING      saUdGpus -Un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jung sdu0g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  JoB        ‘priya
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [[e                  ‘pasoqeas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [eaaaas svverd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jo¢ ,,                    Supqurap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      «dno
el       a              AXle           efAbn              hae                    Be                    paras                       eed                           Cah                                   Ren Be                              he       ee“ayjo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Gnaputut &cipee                     Vortman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       asraaar         Sere
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘uorypsod
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BML
                            ]          es hy              oes          ate       one      [ae          sen          fone ove                         dete        ee                        wal ee                  oes            MOLTRYSARIF ULL           seK           UaaMjog“Way
PL       “                             —_Frayx
                                          1               os           we        ave      foe                     sauuepyto                          ove         sen            fase       ase 1                   [eee   vee              |"     UC     oy3          [einqeu saousins
                                                                                                     par       aap        uot
         °                             |}~— |‘?                      pajyeiojiag
                                                                           ‘axe
                                                                             @            {punos“*                        ties     ae                            none                      SMES ee                 |**          daaq 2AvId
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |              Ue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        : UT        ay)       ‘aAvId ows         sauog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JoB      “SIP
SL       82             Bagiec
                          i                                   radvsas
                                                                 jo   ‘jurgpus            IYRYL                                                                                                                                                             paqtty “Ypoy
                            i]         |— tt |            os, qurp                     sgurddryo fe                       | g                        |sBulitwa
                                                                                                                                                          ve                    ies        seerey      Te         |:            daaq      aavs3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                 ‘uvutoay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ayy, oa             saaurF poutof
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fq ue
                            \                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Supuado
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OM] 499)           "apTM
  9f                                   ‘adroyziaavaM
                                                                             wearerpray
  £/                       sy
                         ‘edroqyug[ee “                                                                                                               daaq       “aavid
                             RPG
                              0Gbig)
                                am                                                                                     wig     or                                     UG ay}      [VINJLU                     ‘QIUJINEug   prep    uodn
  at                               SU                                                                                                                                   ot}  *saUog
                                                                                                                       wp      vee                                |*  UO 9}       TRINJBU                     “dORJINGwa   prep    uodn
  64          S                        rE                                                                                                                                         oud    *sauog
                                                                                                                       OMT, SUIN                                                                    peAnjeuoaoqeysne
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘aovjinssury,          qsHuoure
                                                                                                                                                                                  oy}    *saulog
       aR                         mo   A                                                                                                                                           daly,490F       DAOQEOY}       [VINJLU *OIVJINE
      i3                         ely                                                                                                                  dooq          “And
      re
       EB                URBYpAwy)
                           *P tq =“                                                                                                                    aavlyg       is
pean)                                                                                                                         frer9uTg
                                                                                                                                  tin                    MOTTEYS
                                                                                                                                                               PATI
ees#8                                                                                                                                                   NOTLEUSPABIA
      a98 Mee                               mor
                                            read,                                                                                                       MOTTRYUSPARIS
             JSAM
                                                                                                                                                        MOLTEYSARID
                                           “ONICIU
  18                    puqkuiagy
                          as                              five
                                                                                                                              Suryung
                                                                                                                                   dno                oArIn      io
                                           “ONVTUAEWND
                                                                                                                                                                              t
  gg         apysep                    ‘yoosreD
                                          I
  68          v                          A    Pea      duo pue                                                                Suryung
                                                                                                                                    “dno 3S)                  |                    Mopag
                                                                                                                                                                                       ayy          [BINjeU *‘aOBJANS
                                                                  MOLIet ‘ayy,
                                                                                                                                                        MOTIEYUS
                                                                                                                                                               MARIS
                                           ANVTITUOWLSAAL quanqin                                                                                                                                                                        TABULATED
  06         AOOW! YLOAIT
  16          Aqary  ‘uaydayg“ly                                                                                       poog }Ssea                     aAvIN,     |                aUOyg a[a119 PUNOXBY}         BSEqJO JY}        “UMD
  £6              «                                                                                                       asuaouy
                                                                                                                              dno                       MO[[BUGARIT
                                  fay we
  £6              sf                    foe
                                          oe                                                                                                                                 UO 91)            [BIN;eU    “aoBjANs
  £6                          “Coote
                                  71 {fesscrc
  $6         Aqsy             we            [se    Fess
                                                                                                                                                                             UC 91}       [BINZEU ‘OOBJINS
                                                             Ee                                                                                         MOTELSDABIZ            aUu0}g apox19 prinox
                                            UPTANNQHLUON                                                                                                                                          at} aseqJo               “used
                             “ANVT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         INTERMENTS.
  96         ‘prog oT                                       oj}                                                        pooy          [assaa      4810           Re       y          Asiana   Funok “p[Lya aU0}g afatto PUNOL
  AB Me                Tee                  |e ce            Saat                 Jo
                                                                               yuaMSeIT‘GUIP       wuNG                                                                       94}      aseqJO 9}      “MOLLE
  eso)                  SU                         pelle |e                                                                  AlerIULD
                                                                                                                                 win                                            yafnogy-
                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘spweq     Jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                yIsodaq saUOg
                                                                                                                                                                                                          UO                      ‘adBJINS
                                                                                                           yuourse1y
                                                                                                              \yo            Arexeutg
                                                                                                                                 urn                                         UG 911}     [RINIEU *OOBJANS
  66     a             “AI                  [=Oe   ane
                                                                             paqulog
                                                                                  [BAO     7
                                                                                          AFLWY “UN   md                                      lett
                                                                 (eo
                                                                   quiny                                                                      DAVID

   006     4UONRYD dere sae                                            ory        ‘yur0d-a\quinq
   10T plo       fyotMog {_|'y
                             se                                                                                                                       SABID     ate
                                                                                                                       poo       ]esseaA         qstp           ©           Moog ay}       [BINIVU “OBJINS
   rahe                                                                                                                               Ie
                  at                                 ely
                                                      | Bo                                                                                                                   punoxraseqJO     ‘urlva
                                                                                                                                                 we             is          AVO[ag
                                                                                                                                                                                943       [RINALU *dOVJIMS        a[2112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  au03g
   LOT                       UOJL9[[OUD
                                     it                                                                                                                                      puNnosaseqJo     “Wled                 DILII SUL}
                                                                                                                                                 4s19           :        UO ay}        [LINyeU ‘AOBJINS



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         149
150      MODELS   OF   IMPLEMENTS   SOMETIMES   BURIED.

   In the table with which Mr. Greenwell has been so good
as to furnish me, and which shows the primary deposits in 102
tumuli examined by him, it will be observed that only thirty
contained any implement, the other 72 being altogether bare.
There is not a single case in which the corpse was deposited
in that extended position which seems to us so natural.
  Thus, then, there seems to have been no intention of de-
positing with each corpse a complete set of implements.    The
barrow on Cronkstone Hill, for instance, contained the
skeleton of a man, with whom had been buried the burnt
bones of some one, probably a slave, or, perhaps, a wife, who
had been sacrificed at his grave, and yet the only implement
found with him was a “circular instrument,” probably a
flint scraper or a sling-stone. Again, the mound known as
“Cow Low” contained only a bone pin. The affectionate
relatives who heaped up this tumulus would certainly not
have sent their dead sister into the new world with nothing
but a bone pin, if they had thought that the things they
buried with her could be of any use. Even the great tumulus
at Arbor Low contamed only a bone pin, a piece of iron
pyrites, a kidney-shaped instrument of flint, and two vases.
It would be easy to multiply illustrations, and it is, I think,
sufficiently evident that the articles found in the graves can-
not seriously be considered as affording any evidence of a
definite belief in a future state of existence, or as having
been intended for the use of the dead in the new world
to which they were going.         Moreover, there is a well-
marked speciality in each case, which seems to show that
the presence of these rude implements, far from being the
result of a national belief, are simply the touching evidence
of individual affection.
   In some few cases, again, small models of weapons have
been found, in lieu of the weapons themselves. In modern
Esquimaux graves small models of kajaks, spears, etc., are
           BARROWS    BELONG    TO   VERY   DIFFERENT     PERIODS.         151

 sometimes buried, and a similar fact has been observed in
Egyptian tombs.      Mr. Franks informs me that much of
the jewellery found in Etruscan tombs is so thin that it can
scarcely have been intended for wear during life. In Japan
those who are entitled to wear swords during life have
wooden ones placed in their graves, as insignia of rank ; and
it has long been the custom in China to burn paper cut-
tings, or drawings, of horses, money,            etc., under     the belief
that the objects so represented will be actually possessed by
the deceased*.
   We must always bear in mind that the ancient tumuli do
not all belong to one period, nor to one race of men. No
tumuli belonging to the Palaolithic period have yet been
discovered, but this mode of burial appears to have existed
in Northern and Western Europe from the Neolithic, or
second Stone period, down to the introduction of Chris-
tianity. Indeed it was the examination of the tumuli which
first induced Sir R. Colt Hoare, and other archeologists, to
adopt for Northern Europe the division into three great
periods.     In Denmark, especially, there was supposed to be
so sharp and well-marked a distinction between the tumuli
of the Stone Age and those of the Bronze period, that the
use of bronze might be considered as having been introduced
by a new race of men, who rapidly exterminated the previous
inhabitants, had entirely different burial customs, and were
altogether in a much higher state of civilization. It was
stated that the tumuli of the Stone Age were generally sur-
rounded by a circle of great stones, and contained chambers
formed of enormous blocks of stone; and that the dead were
buried in a contracted or sitting posture, with the knees
brought up under the chin, and the arms folded across the
breast. On the contrary, the burial places of the Bronze
Age were described as having “no circles of massive stones,
   * See, for instance, Marco Polo’s Travels.   Edin. 1816, pp. 248-260.
152            DIFFICULTY    OF DETERMINING      THE PERIOD

no stone chambers;           in general, no large stones         on the
bottom, with the exception of stone cists placed together,
which, however, are easily to be distinguished                from the
stone    chambers;      they consist, as a general rule, of mere
earth, with heaps of small stones, and always present them-
selves to the eye as mounds of earth, which, in a few rare
instances, are surrounded    by a small circle of stones, and
certain relics of bodies which have been burnt and placed in
vessels of clay, with objects of metal*.”
  Thus, therefore, the barrows of the Age of Bronze appeared
+o be distinguished from those of the earlier period, not only
by the important fact that, “instead of the simple and uni-
form implements and ornaments of stone, bone, and amber,
we meet, suddenly, with a number and variety of splendid
weapons, implements, and jewels of bronze, and sometimes,
indeed, with jewels of gold+;” but, also, because the con-
struction of the tumuli themselves was different in the two
periods ; and the corpse which, in the Stone Age, was always
buried in a contracted posture, was in the Bronze Age always
burnt.      Subsequent      investigations, however, have furnished
the Danish antiquaries rather with exceptions to, than con-
firmations of, this generalization ; and, on the whole, it must
be admitted that (though the passage-graves and long barrows
seem always to belong to the Stone Age) we are not acquainted
with any external differences by which the tumuli of the
Stone, Bronze, and Iron Ages can, with certainty, be dis-
tinguished from one another.    The contents of the graves
are, however, more instructive.  Eventually, no doubt, the
human remains themselves, and especially the skulls, will
prove our best guides; but, at present, we do not possess a
sufficient number of trustworthy descriptions or measure-
ments, to justify us in drawing any generalization from them,
      * Worsaae’s Primeval Antiquities, p. 93.          + Ibid. p. 24.
                TO WHICH   A TUMULUS    BELONGS.             153

excepting, perhaps, this, that the skulls found with bronze in
some cases closely resemble those discovered in graves con-
taining only stone implements; from which we may infer
that, even if the use of bronze was introduced by a new and
more   civilized race, the ancient inhabitants were not alto-
gether exterminated.      The pottery does not at present help
us much ; that found in company with bronze is often coarse,
il-burnt, hand-made, and, in form, ornamentation, and mate-
rial, closely agrees with that which occurs in graves containing
stone implements only. We too often see that tumuli are
referred to the Stone Age because they contain one or two
implements made of that material. This, however, is a very
unsafe deduction. We know that stone was extensively used
throughout the Bronze Age; and, indeed, out of 37 tumuli
in which Mr. Bateman found objects of bronze, no less than
29 contained also stone implements, many cf which were
extremely rude.
   There are also cases in which it is evident that flint imple-
ments were deposited in graves rather in deference to ancient
customs, than because they were still in every day use. Thus
in the tumulus known as Kouloba, or “ Hill of Cinders,”
near Kertch, a heap of sharp flints was found. This tumulus
was of considerable size, and contained the remains of a chief,
his wife, servant, and horse.    He wore a cap ornamented
with plates of gold, a gold enamelled necklace, and gold
bracelets.   His sword was of iron, the handle covered with
leaves of gold embossed with figures of hares and foxes.    His
shield was also of gold, covered with heads of Medusa, etc.
An electrum plate, which had formed part of a quiver, was
also ornamented with figures of animals, such as a tiger seizing
a goat, and a deer attacked by a griffin. Above the tail of
the tiger was written 7opvayo.    Statuettes, bronze cauldrons,
and many other things were deposited around.
154                         TABULATED            INTERMENTS.

   The queen was also richly ornamented. The tumulus con-
tained also a diadem of gold, a necklace of gold filagree, to
which were suspended small bottles of fine gold ; medallions
of green and blue enamel; a magnificent vase in electrum ;
two gold bracelets ; and six knives with ivory handles, besides
many other gold ornaments.        Many of these objects were
ornamented with beautiful figures of animals. A mitre, for
instance, had a plate of electrum, on which were represented
four women in Greek costume, sitting in the midst of gar-
lands of lotuses, the stalks of which                           served as seats and
backs. The plate was attached to the mitre by four masks
of lions, and the bottom of the mitre was bordered by a
diadem of gold, adorned by small enamelled rosettes. In the
same tumulus, under this tomb, was a second still richer one,
from which no less than 120 pounds weight of gold jewellery
are said to have been taken.
   In such a tumulus as this, flint flakes could evidently have
but a symbolical meaning *.
   Evidently, therefore, the mere presence of a few imple-
ments of stone is in itself no sufficient reason for referring
any given interment to the Stone Age. The following tabu-
lar statement of 297 interments, recorded by Mr. Bateman,
will, however, I think, be found interesting :—

                                                 CORPSE.
      Implements.       aS            a    ae      a       ee      ee        Total,
                        Contracted.       Bumt.        Extended.   hoa


  NON     Geeta             27              63              3            7    100
  ISUONOe .aihee ease       53              48              2           31    1384
                                                            5
                                                            4



  These      interments are all from the counties of Derby,
        * Journal of the British Archeological Association, vol. xiii,
                                           STATISTICS.                                     155

Stafford, and York.                   In his work on ancient Wiltshire, Sir
R. C. Hoare               records        the examination            of 267 interments,
which may be tabulated in a similar manner as follows :—

                                                   CORPSE.

      fmplements.          ioe            min    see hi CL, hale             oS   Total.
                           Contracted?      Burnt.     Extended.     tae


   ONG    ise vase iets          9           160              3         12        184,
   Stone                         2                5           1          1           9
   BrOuzeer ae,                  4.             49            2          8         63
   Prone ances                  —               —             7          4,        see

   PROTA ceceasmactese
                    ore         15          214              ifs}      25         267



   We see that in this latter table nearly all the cases of
bronze were in interments preceded by cremation, but in the
northern interments the reverse is the case; and, as regards
Wiltshire, if we are to regard cremation as a test of the
Bronze Age, we must refer almost the whole of these inter-
ments to that period. I confess that I am somewhat inclined
todoso. No less than 270 tumuli cluster round Stonehenge,
and it seems most probable that the dead were brought from
a distance tc lie near the great temple. In this case the
great majority of the tumuli belong, therefore, to one period,
that, namely, at which the temple was held sacred. Some
few, indeed, may be referable to earlier or later times, but as
out of 152 of these interments which were examined by Sir
R. C. Hoare, no less than 39 contained objects of bronze, I
am disposed to regard the whole group as belonging to the
Bronze period. Now in these 152 cases the corpse was con-
tracted in four only, and extended in three. In 16 the dispo-
sition of the corpse was not ascertained, and in no less than
129 it had been burnt.
   If we combine the observations of Sir R. C. Hoare and
Mr. Bateman, we shall obtain the following table :—
156                  DIFFICULTY          OF DETERMINING          THE   PERIOD
 a                                  a        a                    A           a

                                                 CORPSE.

         Implements.                                                     xy       Total

                               Contracted.   Burnt.   Extended.        Wie


      INONO Ae see waeeeens         36        223           6           19        284
      StON@seccwereseces            55         53           3           32        143
      iBronz@esessrentes            19         59           if          15        100
      1GYoyo osnenodbacensns         2          3          21           11         67/

      Ota lee eteeeees            112        338           87           at        564


   Some of these interments were no doubt Anglo-Saxon;
if these had been eliminated the argument would have
appeared still stronger, but taking them as they are, out of
87 graves containing iron weapons or implements, the corpse
was certainly extended in 21 cases, and, probably so, in
several others; while, out of no less than 527 cases in which
iron was not present, the corpse was extended only in 16,
the proportion being at least ;%,ths im one case, and only
gard in the other. On the whole we may certainly conclude
that this mode of burial was introduced at about the same
period as the use of iron.
   As regards the habit of burning the dead, the evidence is
less conclusive. Out of 100 cases, indeed, of graves charac-
terized by the presence of bronze, the corpse appears to have
been buried, in a contracted posture, 19 times only; in an
extended position, only seven times. It is evident, there-
fore, that during the Bronze Age, the dead were generally
burnt.     It is true that there are many cases in which
interments by cremation, if I may use such an expression,
contain no weapons or objects of bronze. We know, how-
ever, that this metal must always have been expensive, and
 it is not unreasonable to suppose that many, if not most, of
 these interments may belong to the Bronze Age, although
 no objects of metal occurred in them.
    There can be no doubt that in the Neolithic Stone Age
i5 was usual to bury the corpse in a sitting or contracted
                  TO WHICH     A TUMULUS     BELONGS.                157

posture; and, in short, it appears probable, although far
from being satisfactorily established, that in Western Europe
this attitude is characteristic of the Stone Age, cremation of
that of bronze; while those cases in which the skeleton was
extended may be referred, with little hesitation, to the Age
of Iron. At the same time it must be admitted that the
evidence is very far from conclusive ; and we must remember
that in Anglo-Saxon times the dead were burned by some
tribes, and buried by others.
   But although the presence of a few flint flakes, or other stone
implements, is certainly no sufficient reason for referring any
given tumulus to the Stone Age, the case is different where
a large number of objects have been found together; for
instance, I have in my collection a group of stone implements
consisting   of 14   beautifully    made     axes,   wedges,     chisels,
spear-heads, etc., and more than 60 capital flakes, which
were all found together in one of the large Danish sepul-
chral chambers,      on the    island of Méen*,         and have been
described by M. Boye. The tumulus had a circumference of
140 ells, and a height of about eight ells. It is probable that
it had been surrounded by a circle of stones, for M. Jensen,
the owner, remembered that, many years before, the northern
side had been surrounded by a row of stones standing close
together.    None of them, however, at present remain.               Un-
fortunately M. Boye was not present when they began to
remove the tumulus; still he thinks that fhe account given
to him may be relied on with safety. M. Jensen began to
dig on the east side of the Low, and the first thing which he
came to was a jar, which he unfortunately broke.       It con-
tained burnt bones and a bronze pin, the head of which was
ornamented with concentric lines. Towards the $.S.E. was
found a cist, about an ell long, and formed of flat stones.
In it were burnt bones, a bent knife, and a pair of pincers
     * Annaler for Nordisk Oldkyndighed og Historie, 1858, p. 202.
158                            DANISH    TUMULUS

two inchés in length; both these objects were of bronze.
Not far from this cist was another urn, containing burnt
bones, with several objects of bronze, namely, a knife four
inches in length, part of a small symbolical sword, and two
fragments of an awl. It is evident that these three inter-
ments belonged to the Bronze Age, and also that they were
secondary, that is to say, that they belonged to a later
date than the original sepulchral chamber, over which the
tumulus had been made.
                                   Fria, 143,




                     _——
                 Vis +f




                ey                   tere                          (anaes

         ‘WwW             i;                                            E
                           .            \Booas gta            meen a




                Plan of the Chamber in a Danish Tumulus in Méen,


   The sepulchral chamber itself (fig. 143) lay north and
south, was of an oval form, about eight and a half ells in
length, and twenty and a half in circumference, and about
two and a half in height. The walls consisted of twelve
very large, unhewn stones, which, however, did not in most
cases touch one another, but left intervals which were filled
up by smaller stones. The roof was formed by five great
blocks, the spaces between them being filled up by smaller
ones.   The passage, which was on the east side, was five ells
                           IN THE   ISLAND   OF MOEN.                           159

long and one ell broad, and was formed by eleven side stones
and three roof stones. At the place (a) was, on each side, a
smaller stone, which, in conjunction with another on the
floor between them, formed a sort of threshold, probably
indicating the place where the door stood. Similar traces
of a doorway have been found in other Danish tumuli, and
may, perhaps, be taken as evidence that the mounds had
been used previously as houses; at the time of the inter-
ment the construction of a door would have been simply
purposeless, the passage leading to it being filled up with
rubbish. The chamber was filled up with mould to within
               Fre. 144,                                   Fre, 1465,




                    Skull from a Danish Tumulus at Moen,

half an ell of the roof.            About the middle, not far from
the bottom, a skeleton was extended                   (at 6), with the head
towards the north. On the south side (at ¢ and d) occurred
two crania, each of which lay on a quantity of bones, indi-
cating that the corpses had been buried in a sitting posture.
At (e) was a similar ‘skeleton, close to which were three
amber beads, a beautiful flint axe, which did not seem to
have been ever used, a small unfinished chisel, and some frag-
ments of pottery, ornamented with points and lines. At (/)
was another skeleton, in a similar position, with a flint flake,
an amber bead, and some fragments of pottery.                           Figs. 144,
160              DANISH      CHAMBERED         TUMULUS.

145, represent one of the skulls from this stone chamber.
Several other skeletons were found sitting round the side
walls, but they had unluckily been removed and thrown
away before the arrival of M. Boye. With them were at
least 20 different jars or urns, all of them inverted, and
prettily decorated with points and lines.
                                   Fia. 146,




             View in the Chamber looking through the entrance.



  Besides these objects, the earth in the chamber contained
five flint spear-heads, a fragment ofa flint spear which had
been broken and worked up again, two small flint chisels,
53 flint flakes, varying from three to five and a half inches in
length; 19 perfect, and 31 broken, amber beads, of which
         DESCRIPTION      OF A BARROW             AT WEST    KENNET.             161

the greater number were hammer-like, the rest tubular or
ring-shaped.  The passage was filled up by earth, mixed
with fragments of pottery, and small stones. About the
middle was a skeleton, with the head towards the east, at
the side of which were five flakes and anamberbead.                            Close
to the feet was a jar, unornamented,                  and much ruder than
those found in the chamber itself.                Not the smallest fragment
of metal was found either in the chamber or in the passage.
            Fie. J47.                 Fig. 148.                    Fie, 149,




                                    Fia. 150,




               Flint faviewents toca the Tumulus at West Kennet.

   Again, as a second case of the same sort, I may mention
the Long Barrow (fig. 146) near West Kennet, in Wiltshire,
described by Dr. Thurnam*.                The tumulus in this case is
336 feet in length, 40 feet wide at the west end, and 75 feet
at the east, with a height of eight feet.                   The walls of the
                   * Archzxologia, vol. xxxviii. p. 405.
162       POTTERY       FROM     THE WEST       KENNET      TUMULUS.

chamber   are   formed         by six great blocks           of stone,       and it
opens into a passage, so that the ground plan very closely
resembles that of the tamulus just described, and, in fact, of

            Fig. 151,                                            Fre, 152,




          Fre. 153.




                                                             Fig.   154,




                      Pottery from the Tumulus at West Kennet.


the “Passage graves” generally.      The chamber and en-
trance were nearly filled with chalk rubble, containing also
bones of animals, flint implements (figs. 147-150), and
fragments of pottery. In the chamber were four skeletons,
                                  BRETON      TUMULI.                            163

two of which appear to have been buried in a sitting posture.
 In different parts of the chamber were found nearly 800
 flakes, three or four flint cores, a whetstone, a scraper, part
 of a bone pin, a bead of Kimmeridge                          shale, and several
heaps of fragments of pottery (figs. 151-156) belonging
apparently to no less than 50 different vessels, and all made
by hand, with one doubtful exception. No trace of metal
was discovered. The two pieces (figs. 155, 156) were found
apart from the rest, and may, perhaps, be of later origin.

             Fic, 155.                                              Bre. 156,




                         Pottery from the Tumulus at West Kennet.


  The large tumuli of Brittany, most of which have recently
been opened, have afforded several other instances of the
same kind. Thus the great Mont St. Michel, at Carnac,
which is no less than 380 feet in length, and 190 feet broad,
with an average height of 33 feet, was found to contain a
square chamber, in which were eleven beautiful jade celts,
two large rough celts, and twenty-six small fibrolite celts,
besides 110 stone beads and stone fragments of flint*. Again,
the chamber in the tumulus called Manné-er-H’roek contained
a hundred and three stone axes, three flint flakes, and fifty

  * Rapport 4 M. Le Préfet duMor-             Michel.    Par M.Réné Galles.     1862.
bihan sur les fouilles du Mont St.
                                          mM 2
164                            BRETON     TUMULI.

beads of jasper, quartz, and agate, but neither of these great
tumuli contained a trace of metal*.
   Other similar cases might be mentioned+, in which tumuli
of large size, covering a sepulchral chamber, constructed with
great labour, and evidently intended for a person, or persons,
of high rank, have contained numerous objects of stone and
pottery, without a trace of metal.
  It appears reasonable to conclude that these interments
belong to the ante-metallic period; especially when, as in the
first-mentioned case, we find several secondary interments,
plainly belonging to a later age, and although presenting
no such indications of high rank, still accompanied by objects
of bronze.
   It may seem at first sight very improbable that works so
considerable should have been undertaken and carried out
by nations entirely ignorant of metal. The burial mound of
Oberea, in Otaheiti, was nevertheless two hundred and sixty-
seven feet long, eighty-seven wide, and forty-four in height.
And in treating of modern savages, I shall hereafter have
occasion to notice other instances quite as extraordinary.
   The practice of burying in old tumuli, which continued
even down to the times of Charlemagne}, has led to some
confusion, because           objects of very different date are thus
liable to be described as coming from one grave; yet, on the
other hand, it is very instructive, as there are several cases
on record, besides the one above mentioned, of intcrments
characterized by bronze being found above, and being, there-
fore, evidently subsequent to others, accompanied by stone
only §.
   * Manné-er-H’roeck. Rapport 4 la        tianornm Saxonorum ad cemeteria
Société Polymathique.    Par M. Le-        ecclesie deferantur, et non ad tumu-
febyre et M. Réné Galles. 1863.            los paganorum.”
  + See, for instance, Lukis, Archaz-         § See, for instance, Von Sacken
ologia, vol. xxxy. p. 247.                 Leitfaden zur Kunde des heidnischen
  t+ One of his regulations ran as fol.    Alterthumes, p. 15.
lows:—‘‘ Jubemus ut corpora Chris-
                      SEPULCHRAL    POTTERY.                          165

  On the whole, however,       though it is evident              that the
objects most frequently buried with the dead would be those
most generally used by the living, and though the prevalence
of stone implements proves the important part played by
stone in ancient times, and goes far to justify the belief in a
Stone Age; still, the evidence to be brought forward on this
point in the following chapters will, probably, to many minds
seem more satisfactory; and, at any rate, we must admit that,
in the present state of our knowledge, there are comparatively
few interments which we could, with confidence, refer to the
Neolithic Stone Age, however firmly we may believe that a
great many of them must belong to it.
   Mr. Bateman has proposed to range the pottery found in
ancient British tumuli under       four different heads, namely,
1. Urns; 2. Incense Cups;          8. Food Vases; 4. Drinking
Cups.   The urns generally ac-                     ere
company interments by crema-
tion, and have either contained
or been inverted over burnt
human bones. They are gene-
rally of large size, “ from ten
to sixteen inches high, with a
deep border, more or less deco-
rated by impressions of twisted
thongs, and incised patterns in
which the chevron or herring-
bone constantly recurs in va-
rious combinations,    occasion-
ally relieved by circular punc-
                                               Sepulchral Urn.
tures, or assuming a reticulated
appearance.    They are all made by hand, no trace of the
potter’s-wheel being ever found on them. They almost inva-
riably have an overtanging rim. The material of which they
are formed is clay mixed with pebbles, and some of them
166          URNS.     FOOD VASES.             “INCENSE        CUPS.”

have been described as “sun-dried.” This, however, appears
to be altogether a mistake, arising from the imperfect manner
in which they were burnt.   In colour they are generally
brown or burnt umber outside and black inside. Fig. 157
represents a specimen from Flaxdale Barrow, in Derbyshire.
                        Fig. 158




                            Vessels from a Tumulus at Arbor Low.

      Secondly, the “incense cups,” so called by Sir R. Colt
Hoare. They differ very much in shape, and are seldom
more than three inches high. When decorated, the patterns
                            are the same as those on the
          Fic. 160.
                            urns, and are usually on the
                            under surface, but they are often
                            left plam.     They are often
                                           pierced, and it is possible that
                                           some of them were used for
                                           lamps, as was, I believe, first
                                           suggested by Mr. Birch. “The
                                           third division includes vessels of
                                           every style of ornament, from
                                           the rudest to the most elabo-
                                           rate, but nearly alike in size,
                                           and more difficult to assign to
                                           a determinate period than any
               er                          other, from the fact of a coarse
            Drinking Cup.                  and a well-finished one having
several times been found in company.”                       The above woodcuts
                             DRINKING CUPS.                                167

(figs. 158, 159) represent two vessels found in a barrow on
the circle at Arbor Low, in Derbyshire.
   Fourthly, “The drinking-cups (fig. 160) are generally from
six and a half to nine inches high, of a tall shape, contracted
in the middle, globular below, and expanding at the mouth:
they are carefully formed by hand, of fine clay, tempered
with sharp sand, and well-baked; the walls are thin, aver-
aging about three-eighths of an inch, light brown outside
and grey within.” They are generally much ornamented,
and usually accompany well-made flint implements; but in
some cases bronze awls have been found with them. Mr.
Bateman considers that the greater number belong to the
ante-metallic period.
   Numerous as are the varieties of pottery found in ante-
Roman tumuli, they appear (so far, at any rate, as those
discovered by Mr. Bateman are concerned) to have been
all made by hand, without any assistance from the potter’s
wheel; they are formed of clay tempered with sand, and
often with pebbles; they very rarely have handles, and
spouts seem to have been unknown; the ornaments consist
of straight lines, dots, or marks, as if a cord had been im-
pressed on the soft clay; circular or curved lines are rare, nor
is there the slightest attempt to copy any animal or plant.
   Asa general rule the megalithic monuments are constructed
of rough stones neither hewn nor ornamented.                  Lately, how-
ever, many instances of engravings have been observed.                      In
the north of England and in Scotland these generally take
the form of cups, spirals, circles with a dot in the middle, or
incomplete circles with a dot in the middle, or incomplete
circles with a line running from the centre through the
interval, as in fig. 161*. We have as yet no satisfactory

   * See Tate on the sculptured rocks   Cups and Concentric Rings, ete. Proc.
of Northumberland, 1865. Sir J. Y.      S. of Antiquaries of Scotland, vol. vi.
Simpson, on Ancient Sculpturings of     1867. The monuments described by
168                        ROCK     SCULPTURES.

clue to the meaning of these engravings, many of which have
been figured by Mr. Tate and Sir J. Y. Simpson. They occur
in evident association with ancient oppida and fortifications,
as well as on menhirs, and on the stones composing dolmens
and cromlechs.       Fig. 161 represents a characteristic group
on the rocks of Auchnabreach in Argyllshire.                  The surface of
the rock is well adapted to receive such sculpturings, having
been smoothed and prepared by glacial action.
                                       Fic. 161.




                          Rock Seulptures.—Scotland.


   Similar sculpturings have been found in Ireland, where
also the great tumuli on the Boyne afford instances of more
elaborate ornamentation. The great stone at the entrance
of New Grange, for instance, is covered with double spirals,
Mr, Stuart, in his great work on the        work.    For rock carvings in Spain
Sculptured Stones of Scotland,belong       gee Don M. de Géngora y Martinez.
to a much later period, and scarcely         Antigiiedades Prehistdricas de Anda-
fall within the scope of the present       _lucia.
                 BONES   OF ANIMALS   IN TUMULI.                169

 and those forming the central chamber             are also covered
 with circles, spirals, and other patterns,        one of the most
 remarkable being that of a so-called fern leaf, which occurs
 also in Brittany and in the so-called temple of Hagar Kem,
in Malta.
   Mr. Conwell has recently discovered an extensive series of
interesting sepulchral sculptures in the county of Meath.
   With the exception of the “fern leaf,” all these archaic
sculpturings in Great Britain are mere geometrical figures.
The same figures also occur in Brittany, accompanied, how-
ever, by frequent representations of stone axes, both with
and without handles.
   The rock sculptures of Scandinavia present a still further
advance, many of them being rude representations of boats,
much like those on some of the bronze knives (figs. 42-45).
   The most remarkable monument of this kind, however, is
that of Kivik in Scania, close to the shore of the Baltic.
    The remains of other mammals found with ancient human
 relics have acquired increased interest, since the admirable
 researches of the Danish and Swiss zoologico-archeologists,
 and especially of Steenstrup and Riitimeyer, by whose skilful
 cross-examination much valuable and unexpected evidence
has been elicited, from materials of most unpromising
appearance. Unfortunately the non-human remains found in
tumuli are usually in a very fragmentary condition, and have
received little attention from archeologists.   No remains of
any extinct animal have ever been found in the tumuli of
Western Europe. Even the reindeer is altogether absent. The
deer and ox are most frequent. The latter was certainly
domesticated im Switzerland as early as the Neolithic period.
Whether this was the case in Northern Hurope is still uncer-
tain. Some archeologists believe the dog to have been at
that period the only animal domesticated; others, on the con-
trary, consider the cow, sheep, pig, and goat, if not the horse,
to have been at that early period domesticated in the North.
170            SEPULCHRAL   FEASTS.   SACRIFICES.

In the contents of British barrows, bones of these animals
have been frequently observed ; but it is not as yet deter-
mined whether they belong to wild or tame individuals.
  As far, however, as the horse is concerned, we may pro-
bably assume that all the remains belong to a domesticated
race, for there is no reason to suppose that any wild horses
existed in Great Britain at a period so recent. I have
thought, therefore, that it might be of interest to point out
the class of graves in which bones or teeth of horses were
found.    In Mr. Bateman’s valuable works there are, alto-
gether, twenty-eight cases ; but of these, nine were in tumuli
which had been previously opened, and in one case no body
was found. Of the remaining eighteen, five were tumuli
containing iron, and seven were accompanied with bronze.
In one more case, that of the “ Liffs,” it is doubtful whether
the barrow had not been disturbed.      Of the remaining six
tumuli, two contained beautiful drinking vessels, of a very
well marked type, certainly in use during the Bronze Age,
if not peculiar to it; and in both these instances, as well as
in a third, the interment was accompanied by burnt human
bones, suggestive of dreadful rites. Even, however, if these
cases cannot be referred to the Bronze Age, we still see that
out of the two hundred and ninety-seven interments only
sixty-tbree contained metal, or about twenty-one per cent.,
while out of the eighteen cases of horses’ remains twelve, or
about sixty-six per cent., certainly belong to the metallic
period.   This seems   to be prima facie evidence     that the
horse was very rare, if not altogether unknown in England
during the Stone Age. Both the horse and bull appear to
have been sacrificed at graves during later times, and pro-
bably formed part of the funeral feast. The teeth of oxen are so
common in tumuli, that they are even said by Mr. Bateman to
be “uniformly found with the more ancient interments.”
  The very frequent presence of the bones of quadrupeds in
                     PRE-HISTORIC      RACES   OP MEN.                   171

tumuli appears to show that sepulchral feasts were generally
held in honour of the dead, and the numerous cases in which
interments were accompanied by burnt human: bones tend
to prove the prevalence of still more dreadful customs, and
that not only horses* and dogs, but slaves also, were fre-
quently sacrificed at their masters’ graves; it is not impro-
bable that wives often were burnt with their husbands, as
in India, and among           many savage tribes.           For instance,
among the Feegees it is usual on the death of a chief to
sacrifice a certain number of slaves, whose bodies “are called
‘grass’ for bedding ” the grave+.       ‘It is probable,” says
Mr. Bateman, “that the critical examination of all deposits
of burnt bones would lead to much curious information
respecting the statistics of suttee and infanticide, both which
abominations we are unwillingly compelled, by accumulated
evidence, to believe were practised in pagan Britam.” From
the numerous cases in which the bones of an infant and a
woman have been found together in one grave, it seems
probable that if any woman died in childbirth, or while
nursing, the baby was buried alive with her, as is still the
practice among some of the Esquimaux families.
   I would practically urge on those who may in future open
any barrows—
   1. To record the sex of the person buried; this is more
satisfactorily to be determined from the form of the pelvis,
than from the skulJl.       In this manner we may hope to deter-
mine the relative position, and the separate occupations (if
any) of the two sexes.
   2. To observe the state of the teeth, from which we may
derive information as to the nature of the food.
   8. To preserve carefully any bones of quadrupeds that
   * Even so lately as in 1781, Fre-       + Manners and Customs of the
derick Casimir was laid in his grave   Feegees, by T. Williams, 1860, vol. i.
with his slaughtered horse.    Horw     p. 189.
ferales, p. 66.
172   DBSIRABILITY    OF    PRESERVING   MEGALITHIC   MONUMENTS.


may be present, in order to ascertain the species, and, in the
case of the ox and hog, to determine, if possible, whether
they belong to wild or domesticated individuals.
   We may fairly hope that when thoroughly questioned they
will not only answer many of these interesting questions, but
that they will also tell us many things which it would never
occur to us to ask.        It is evident, at least, that when a suf-
ficient number shall have been examined we shall know much
more than we do yet, about the social and domestic life of
those early ages ; we shall know whether during the Stone
Age they had domestic animals in the North as would
appear to have been the case in Switzerland; we shall
know in part what kind of clothes they wore, and by the
remains found with female skeletons we shall even be able
to ascertain, in some measure, the position occupied by
woman with reference to man.
   If, however, we are to acquire all the information that can
be derived from the burial mounds, it must be done quickly.
Livery year many are destroyed, and Abury itself, the grandest
of megalithic monuments, was sacrificed for a paltry profit of
a few pounds.
   Moreover, as population increases, and land grows more
valuable, these ancient monuments           become more and more
liable to mutilation and destruction. We cannot afford them
the protection of our museums, but it is very desirable that
Government should select some competent archeologist to
act as conservator of the national antiquities, whose duty it
would be, as far as possible, to preserve from wanton injury
the graves of our ancestors and other interesting monuments
of the past; to make careful drawings of all those which
have not yet been figured, and to report from time to time
upon their condition,        At a very trifling expense the Danish
government have bought for the nation a large number of
tumuli, and have thus preserved many national monuments
which would otherwise have been destroyed.
                              178




                        CHAPTER      VI.

       THE ANCIENT LAKE-HABITATIONS OF SWITZERLAND.

    N consequence of the extraordinary dryness and cold of
      the weather during the winter months of 1858, the
rivers of Switzerland did not receive their usual supplies, and
the water in the lakes fell much below its ordinary level, so
that, in some places, a broad strand was left uncovered along
the margin, while in others shallow banks were converted
into islands. The water level of this season was, indeed, the
lowest upon record. The lowest level marked on the so-
called stone   of Stafa was   that of 1674; but in 1854 the
water sank a foot lower still.
   In a small bay between Ober Meilen and Dollikon, on the
Lake of Zurich, the inhabitants had taken advantage of the
lowness of the water to increase their gardens, by building a
wall along the new water-line, and slightly raising the level
of the piece thus reclaimed, by mud dredged from the lake.
In the course of this dredging they found great numbers of
piles, of deer-horns, and also some implements. M. Aeppli
of Meilen, on the Lake of Zurich, was the first to observe
these specimens    of human workmanship,      whichhe justly
supposed might throw some light on the history and con-
dition of the early inhabitants of the Swiss valleys. He at
once, therefore, called the attention of Dr. Keller to them,
and that eminent antiquary soon satisfied himself as to their
true nature, and proved that the early inhabitants of Switzer-
174     LAKE-DWELLINGS   MENTIONED      BY    HERODOTUS.

land constructed some, at least, of their dwellings above the
surface of the water, and that they must have lived in a
manner very similar to that of the Paonians, as described
by Herodotus*.
   “Their dwellings,” he says, “are contrived after this
manner: planks fitted on lofty piles are placed in the
middle of the lake, with a narrow       entrance from the main
land by a single bridge. These piles, that support the planks,
all the citizens anciently placed there at the public charge;
but afterwards they established a law to the following effect:
whenever a man marries, for each wife he sinks three piles,
bringing wood from a mountain called Orbelus: but every
man has several wives. They live in the following manner:
every man has a hut on the planks, in which he dwells, with
a trap-door closely fitted in the planks, and leading down to
the lake. They tie the young children with a cord round the
foot, fearing lest they should fall into the lake beneath. To
their horses and beasts of burden they give fish for fodder;
of which there is such an abundance,          that when a man has
opened his trap-door, he lets down an empty basket by a
cord into the lake, and, after waiting a short time, draws it
up full of fish.”
  At the Newcastle meeting of the British Association, in
1863, Lord Lovaine described a Lake-dwelling observed by
him in the South of Scotland; and in the “ Natural History
Review,” for July, 1863, I had already mentioned one in the
North, which, however, had not at that time been thoroughly
examined.    Sir Charles Bunbury has recorded (Quarterly
Journal of the Geological Society, vol. xii. 1856) some similar
remains found near Thetford, which have been. described at
greater length by Mr. Alfred Newton, in an interesting
paper “ On the Zoology of Ancient Europe,” read before the
Cambridge Philosophical Society, in March, 1862. In his
                      * Terpsichore, v. 14.
          PILE   DWELLINGS      IN   OTHER   PARTS    OF   EUROPE.          175

fifth memoir on the Pfahlbauten*, Dr. Keller has described
a Lake-dwelling at Peschiera, on the L. di Garda; and we
are indebted to MM. B. Gastaldit, P. Strobel, and L. Pigorini
for a description of ruins of a similar nature, which have been
found in Northern Italy. Dr. Lisch has described several
Pile-dwellings in Mecklenburg, and M. Boucher de Perthes,
in his celebrated work, “ Antiquités Celtiques et Antédilu-
viennes,” mentions         certain remains found in the peat near
Abbeville, which appear to have been the ruins of Lake-
dwellings; an observation which is of special interest, ag an
additional argument for referring the Swiss Lake-dwellings
to the period of the peat in the Somme valley, and therefore
to an epoch long subsequent to that of the drift-hatchets.
This inference is entirely in accordance with the conclusions
derived from the study of the stone implements themselves.
   But it is not necessary to go back to pre-historic times;
nor need we appeal to doubtful history or ancient remains
for evidence of the curious habit of water-dwelling. Many
savage or semi-Savage tribes live in the same manner, even
at the present day. I have been informed by a friend who
lives at Salonica that the fishermen of Lake Prasias still
inhabit wooden cottages built over the water, as in the time
of Herodotus.   The city of Tcherkask also is built over the
Don. In parts of Sinde the pastoral tribes “ dwell in habi-
tations elevated eight or ten feet from the ground, to avoid
the damp and the insects occasioned by it}.” Similar dwell-
ings are extensively used in the northern parts of South
America; Venezuela, indeed, having been so called because
the houses resemble those of Venice in being constructed

  * Mittheilungen    der Antiquaris-     lacustri nei Laghi di Lombardia. Atti
chen Gesellschaft in Zurich, 1863.       della Soc. Italiani di Scienze   Natu-
  + Nuovi Cenni sugli oggetti di         rali, 1868, vol. v. p. 154.
Alta Antichita trovati nelle Torbiere       t Burnes. Travels into Bokhara,
enelle Marniere dell’ Italia. Seo also   vol. ili. p. 90.
Stoppani, Prima ricerca di Abitazioni
176                   MODERN     LAKE DWELLINGS.

over water. But it is in the Hast Indies that this habit
prevails most extensively. The city of Borneo is altogether
built upon piles, and similar constructions have been de-
scribed by various travellers in New Guinea, Celebes, Solo,
Ceram,    Mindanao,       the   Caroline       Islands,    and    elsewhere.
Dampier long ago mentioned similar dwellings constructed
over the water, and Dumont d’Urville*, quoted by M.
Troyon, tells us that “Jadis toute la ville de Tondano était
construite sur le lac, et lon ne communiquait d’une maison
& une autre qu’en bateau. Forts de cette disposition, en
1810, les habitants eurent de démélés avec les Hollandais, et
voulurent secouer leur joug: ils s’armérent et furent battus.
 Ce ne fut pas sans peine qu’on en vint a bout: il fallut y
porter de lartillerie et construire des bateaux canoniers.
Depuis ce temps, et pour éviter cet mconvénient, on a dé-
fendu aux indigénes de construire leurs habitations sur le
lac.” The Bishop of Labuan thus describes the dwellings
of the Dyaks: “They are built along the river side, on an
elevated platform twenty or thirty feet high, in a long row;
or rather it is a whole village in one row of some hundreds
of feet long. The platforms are first framed with beams, and
then crossed with laths about two inches wide and two inches
apart, and in this way are well ventilated; and nothing
remains on the floors, but all the refuse falls through and
goes belowt.”
  In Ireland a number of more or less artificial islands called
“ Crannoges{” (fig. 162) are known historically to have been
used as strongholds by the petty chiefs. They are composed
of earth and stones, strengthened by piles, and have supplied
the Irish archeologists with numerous weapons, implements,
and bones.      From     the Crannoge          at Dunshauglin,       indeed,

  * Voyage de l’Astrolabe, vol. v. p.   Series, vol. ii. p. 28.
635.                                       t See Wilde’s Catalogue, vol. i. p.
  + Trans. of the Ethnol. Soc. New      220.
                           IRISH     CRANNOGES.                          (erg

more than one hundred and fifty cart-loads of bones were
obtamed and used as manure!     ‘These Lake-dwellings of
Ireland, however, are referable to a much later period than
those of Switzerland, and are frequently mentioned in early
history. Thus, according to Shirley, “One Thomas Phetti-
place, in his answer to an inquiry from the Government, as
to what castles or forts O’Neil hath, and of what strength
they be, states (May 15, 1567): ‘For castles, I think it be
not unknown unto your honors, he trusteth no point there-
unto for his safety, as appeareth by the raising of the strongest
castles of all his countreys, and that fortification which he
only dependeth upon is zn sartin freshwater loghes in his
                                   Fic. 162.




             Section of a Crannoge in Ardakillin Lough, Roscommon.

country, which from the sea there come neither ship nor
boat to approach them: it is thought that there in the said
fortified islands lyeth all his plate, which is much, and
money, prisoners, and gages: which islands hath in wars
to fore been attempted, and now of late again by the Lord
Deputy there, Sir Harry Sydney, which for want of means
for safe conducts upon the water it hath not prevailed.’”
   Again, the map of the escheated territories, made for the
Government, a.p. 1591, by Francis Jobson, or the “ Platt
of the County of Monaghan,” contains rough sketches of the
dwellings of the petty chiefs of Monaghan, which “are in all
cases surrounded by water.”             In the “Annals of the Four
Masters,” and other records of early Irish History, we meet
with numerous instances in which the Crannoges are men-
                                                                     N
178   LAKE   DWELLINGS   FOUND   IN MOST   OF   THE   SWISS   LAKES.

tioned, in some of which their position has not preserved
them from robbery and destruction; and we need not, there-
fore, be surprised to find that many of the Swiss Pfahlbauten
appear to have been destroyed by fire.
   The Swiss “ Pfaklbauten,” or Lake-habitations, have been
described by Dr. Keller, in six memoirs presented to the
Antiquarian    Society of Zurich, in 1854, 1858, 1860, 1863,
and 1866, and subsequently translated into English by Mr.
Lee. M. Troyon, also, in a special work, “ Sur les Habita-
tions Lacustres,” 1860, has given a general account of the
ancient habitations of his native land, accompanied with the
Lake-dwellings of other countries and times. The discoveries
in Lake Moosseedorf have been described by MM. Jahn and
Uhlmann (Die Pfahlbaualterthiimer von Moosseedorf. Bern,
1857); Mr. Desor has published a memoir entitled                   Les
Palafittes ou constructions      lacustres du lac de Neuchatel;
the Lake-habitation at the Pont de Thiéle has also been
described in a separate memoir by M. V. Gilliéron (Actes de
la Société jurassienne d’Emulation, 1860); and we owe to
Dr. Riitimeyer two works on the animal remains from the
Pfahlbauten, the first, “ Untersuchung der Thierreste aus
den Pfahlbauten der Schweiz,” published by the Antiquarian
Society of Zurich, in 1860; and still more recently, a larger
work—* Die Fauna der Pfahlbanten in der Schweiz.” Col-.
lections of objects from these localities have also been made
by many Swiss archeologists. The Flora has been studied
by M. Heer, whose        results are contained        in the memoirs
published by Dr. Keller, and in asnecial vaper “ Die Pflanzen
der Pfahlbauten.”
   Nor must we omit to mention M. Morlot’s excellent paper
in the “ Bulletin de la Société Vaudoise (March, 1860),” and
his no less admirable “ Legon d’Ouverture d’un cours sur la
haute Antiquité fait & Académie de Lausanne (Dec. 1860).”
The Swiss archeologists have indeed made the most of a
golden opportunity. Not only in the lake of Zurich, but
                 NUMBERS   OF LAKE VILLAGES.                179

also in Lakes Constance, Geneva, Neufchatel, Bienne, Morat,
Sempach, in fact in most of the large Swiss lakes, as well
as in several of the smaller ones (Inkwyl, Pfeffikon, Moos-
seedorf, Luissel, etc.), similar Lake-habitations have been
discovered.   In the larger lakes, indeed, not one, but many
of these settlements existed;     thus, there are already on
record, in Lake Bienne, twenty; in the Lake of Geneva,
twenty-four; in Lake Constance, thirty-two; in Lake Neuf-
chatel, as many as forty-nine; on the whole more than two
hundred; and many others, doubtless, remain to be discovered.
Of those already known, some belong to the Iron Age, some
few even to Roman times; but the greater number appear to
be divided in almost equal proportions between the age of
Stone and that of Bronze.
   Though the architecture of this period was probably simple,
still the weight to be sustained on the wooden platforms must
have been considerable ; and many of the piles are either bent
or broken; and to prevent them sinking too deeply into the
soft mud they were sometimes driven through boards which
rested on the bottom.
   The dwellings of the Gauls are described as having been
circular huts, built of wood and lined with mud. The inter-
stices appear to have been filled with moss.     Some of the
huts on the Pileworks were probably of a similar nature.
This supposition is not a mere hypothesis, but many frag-
ments of the clay used for the lining have been discovered.
Their preservation is evidently due to the building having
been destroyed by fire, which has hardened the clay, and
enabled it to resist the action of the water. These fragments
bear, on one side, the marks of interlaced branches, while on
the other, which apparently formed the inner wall of the cabin,
they are quite smooth.    Some of those which have been found
at Wangen are so large and so regular, that M. Troyon felt
justified in concluding that the cabins were circular, and from
ten to fifteen feet in diameter. It would be most interesting
                               N 2
180             ATTEMPT   TO MAKE   A CENSUS.

if we could construct a retrospective census for these early
periods, and M. Troyon has made an attempt to do so. The
settlement at Morges, which is one of the largest in the Lake
of Geneva, is 1,200 feet long and 150 broad, giving a surface
of 180,000 square feet. Allowing the huts to have been fifteen
feet in diameter, and supposing that they occupied half the
surface, leaving the rest for gangways, he estimates the
number of cabins at 311; and supposing again that, on an ave-
rage, each was inhabited by four persons, he obtains for the
whole a population of 1244. Starting from the same data,
he assumes for the Lake of Neufchatel a population of about
5000. Sixty-eight villages belonging to the Bronze Age are
supposed to have contained 42,500 persons; while for the
preceding epoch, by the same process of reasoning, he esti-
mates the population at 31,875.
   So far as these calculations rest on the fragments of the
clay walls, they must be regarded as altogether unsatisfactory,
since Dr. Keller informs me that the largest pieces yet dis-
covered are only a footin their greatest diameter. There is
also good reason to believe that the huts were generally not
circular, but rectangular. Nor am I inclined to attribute
much value to the estimates of population based on the
extent of the platforms. M. Troyon himself admits that his
“chiffres sont peut-étre un peu élevés, eu égard aux habi-
tations sur terre ferme, dont il ne peut étre question dans ce
calcul, et vu qu’on est encore bien loin de connattre tous les
points des lacs qui ont é+é occupés,” and, indeed, in the
three years which have elapsed since his book was written,
the number of Lake villages discovered has been doubled.
Moreover, M. Troyon assumes that the Lake villages of the
Bronze Age were contemporaneous, and that the same was
the case with those belonging to the Stone Age.      This also
I should be disposed to question; both these periods, but
especially the Stone Age, in all probability extended over a
                 CONSTRUCTION   OF THE   PLATFORMS.              181

long series of years, and though in these matters it is of
course necessary to speak with much caution, still if we are
to make any assumption in the case, it would seem safer to
suppose that in each period some of the villages had perished,
or been forsaken, before others were built.
  We might feel surprised that a people so uncivilized should
have constructed their houses with immense labour on the
water, when it would have been so much more easy to have
built them on dryland. But we have already seen how, even
in historical times, such dwellings have served as simple
and yet valuable fortifications. Still, though it is evident
that the security thus given would amply compensate for
much extra labour, it remains difficult to understand in what
manner the piles were driven into the ground,
  In many cases, indeed, settlements of the Stone Age are
characterized by what are called “ steinbergs,” that is to say,
artificial heaps of stones, etc., evidently brought by the
natives to serve as a support to the piles. A boat laden
with stones, apparently for this purpose, was some years ago
discovered in the Lake of Neufchatel. In fact, they found it
easier to raise the bottom round the piles, than to drive the
piles into the bottom. On the other hand, some of these
constructions,   as, for instance, those at Inkwyl and Wauwyl,
described respectively by M. Morlot and Col. Suter, more
closely resemble    the Irish   Crannoge.      We   see, therefore,
that, as Dr. Keller says, the Lake-dwellers followed two
different systems in the construction of their dwellings,
which he distinguishes as “ Pfahlbauten,” or Pilebuildings,
and “ Packwerkbauten,” or Crannoges:           in the first of which
the platforms were simply supported on piles; im the second
of which the support consisted not of piles only, but ofa
solid mass of mud, stones, etc., with layers of horizontal and
perpendicular  stakes, the latter serving less aS a support
than to bind     the mass   firmly together.     Tt is evident that

the “ Packwerkbau ” isa much simpler and ruder affair than
182              COMPARISON   OF LAKE-DWELLINGS

the    “ Pfahlbau,”   in which no small skill must have been
required to connect the perpendicular and horizontal piles
firmly together. Still the “ Packwerkbauten” were not
suitable for the larger lakes, as during storms they would
have been injured by the waves, which must have passed
harmlessly through the open work of the “ Pfahltbauten.”’
We find, therefore, that while the former method         of con-
struction prevailed only in small lakes or morasses, the latter
was adopted in the larger lakes, and even sometimes, possibly,
on dry land; a custom which, however singular, exists at
the present day, as, for instance, in the island of Borneo,
and even in Switzerland itself.
   The antiquities found at Wauwyl, Robenhausen, at the
Pont     de Thiéle, at Moosseedorf,    and elsewhere    in small
lakes and peat-bogs, are more or less covered by a thick
layer of peat, which perhaps at some future date will give us
a clue to their age.  On the contrary, im the large lakes no
peat grows. At the entrance of the rivers, indeed, much
mud and gravel is of course accumulated; the Lake of
Geneva, for mstance,      once   no doubt   extended   for a con-
siderable distance up the Valley of the Rhone. But the
gravel and mud brought down by that river are deposited,
as every one knows, near its entrance into the lake, and the
water of the lake is elsewhere beautifully clear and pure.
   The lake itself is very deep, in parts as much as nine
hundred and eighty feet ; and the banks are generally steep,
but round the margin there is, in most places, a fringe of
shallow water, due, probably, to the erosive action of the
waves, and known to the fishermen as the “ blancfond,”
because the lake is there of a pale greyish hue, when
contrasted with the bright blue of the central deeper water.
It is on this “blancfond,” and at a depth of sometimes as
much as fifteen feet, that the Pfahlbauten were generally
constructed. On calm days, when the surface of the water
                       OF DIFFERENT      PERIODS.               183

is unruffled, the piles are plainly visible. Few of them now
project more than two feet from the bottom; eaten away by
the incessant action of the water, some of them “ n’apparais-
sent plus que comme aiguilles,” which finally also disappear,
and leave only a black disk at the surface of the mud. This,
however, is the case principally in the Lake villages of the
Stone Age.      “Ce qui les distingue surtout,” says Prof.
Desor, “c’est la qualité des pieux, qui sont beaucoup plus
gros que ceux des stations du bronze: ce sont des troncs
entiers, mesurant jusqu’a 28 et 30 centimétres. Au lieu de
faire saillie dans V’eau, ils sont 4 fleur du fond.” On the
other hand, in speaking of the Bronze Age piles, he says:
“Tes pieux sont plus gréles; ce sont fréquemment des
troncs fendus en quatre, n’excédant guére 4, au plus 5 pouces
de diamétre; au lien d’étre 4 fleur du fond, ils s’élévent de
1 @ 2 pieds au-dessus de la vase, ce qui permet de les
reconunaitre facilement, malgré leur plus grand profondeur.”
M. Troyon also tells us that “On peut dire que les pilotis
de la fin du deuxiéme 4ge, anciens de plus de deux mille
ans et saillants d’un 4 trois pieds au-dessus de la vase, pré-
sentent 4 peu prés partout le méme aspect, tandis que ceux
de age de la pierre ont été généralement usés jusqu’a la
surface du limon dont ils sont parfois recouverts *.”
   The more complete destruction of the piles belonging to
the earlier period depends not only on their greater age, but on
their occurrence in shallower water. The action of the waves
being greatest near the surface, and diminishing gradually
downwards, not only are those piles which occupy the deeper
parts least liable to destruction, but in each the erosion takes
place gradually from above, so that the upper end of the
piles is often more regularly pointed even than the lower.
Lying among     them are fragments of bone, horn, pottery,
and sometimes objects of bronze.           Most of these are em-
          * Les Constructions lacustres du lac de Neufchatel.
184          CONDITION   OF THE OBJECTS FOUND.

bedded in the mud or hidden under the stones, but others
lie on the bottom yet uninjured; so that when for the first
time I saw them through the transparent water, a momentary
feeling of doubt as to their age rose in my mind. So fresh
are they and so unaltered,-they look as if they were only
things of yesterday, and it seems hard to believe that they
can have remained there for centuries. The explanation of
the difficulty is, however, to be found in the fact that the
action of the most violent storms is perceptible only to a
small depth.     Except, therefore, near the mouths of rivers,
or where there is much vegetation, which in the large lakes
is rarely the case, the deposition of mud at depths greater
than four feet is an extremely slow process, and objects
which fall to the bottom in such situations will neither
be covered over nor carried away.       “J’ai péché,” says M.
Troyon, “sur emplacement en face du Moulin de Bevaix,
les fragments d’un grand vase qui gisaient & peu de distance
les uns des autres, et que j’ai pu réunir de maniére a les
remontre complétement.       A la Tongue, prés d’Hermance,
j’ai trouvé les deux fragments d’un anneau support, distants
de quelques pieds, qui, en les rapprochant ne laissent aucun
interstice.’ The upper parts of the objects also, which are
bathed by the water, are generally covered by a layer of
carbonate of lime, while the lower part which has sunk into
the mud is quite unaltered. M. Troyon once obtained at
Cortaillod a pair of bracelets in one haul of the dredge—the
first, which had been visible from the boat, was greenish and
covered with incrustation ; the second, which had been ‘in
the mud immediately below, was as fresh as if it had only
just been made.
   As piles of the Bronze Age are sometimes found at a
depth of as much as fifteen feet, and it is manifest that build-
ings cannot have been constructed over water much deeper
than this, it is evident that the Swiss lakes cannot       then
                    LEVEL   OF THE   SWISS   LAKES.           185

have stood at a much -higher level than at present. This
conclusion is confirmed by the position of Roman remains
at Thonon, on the lake of Geneva, and we thus obtain
satisfactory evidence that the height of the Swiss lakes
must have remained almost unaltered for a very long period.
   In the large lakes the passing traveller may readily mark the
number and general distribution of the piles, he may determine
the area which they occupy, and pick up fragments of bone
and pottery; but, on the whole, the peat-mosses are more
instructive. In them we not only obtain evidence as to the
size, form, and construction of the huts, but implements of
wood, specimens of fruit, nuts, grain, and even fragments of
clothing, none of which can be preserved in the open water
of the large lakes.
   After haying chosen a favourable situation, the first step
in the construction of the Lake-habitations was to obtain the
necessary timber.     To cut down a tree with a stone hatchet
must have been no slight undertaking.   It is, indeed, most
probable that use was made of fire, in the same manner as
is done by existing savages in felling trees and making
canoes. Burning the wood and then scraping away the
charred portion renders the task far more easy, and the men
of the Stone period appear to have avoided the use of large
trees, except in making their canoes. Their piles were em-
bedded in the mud       from   one   to five feet, and must also
have projected from four to six feet above the water level,
which cannot have been very different from what it is at
present.   They must, therefore, have had a length of from
fifteen to thirty feet, and they were from three to nine inches
in diameter.   The pointed extremity which entered into the
mud still bears the marks of the fire and the rude cuts made
by the stone hatchets. The piles belonging to the Bronze
period, being prepared with metal axes, were much more
regularly pointed, and the differences between the two have
186                                 NUMBER     OF PILES USED.

been ingeniously compared to those shown by lead pencils
well and badly cut. Moreover, a cut by a stone axe is
necessarily more or less concave, whereas those made with
metal are flat. To drag the piles to the lake, and fix them
firmly, must also have required much labour, especially when
their number is considered.                         At Wangen alone M. Léhle
has calculated               that 50,000 piles were             used; but we   must
remember that these were probably not all planted at one
time, nor by one generation. Wangen, indeed, was certainly
not built in a day, but was, no doubt, gradually enlarged as
the population increased. Herodotus informs us that the
Peeonians made the first platform at the public expense, but
                         that, subsequently, at every mar-
                     :
          Fie. 163,
  oes
       Moule     FL
                  £2
                         riage (and polygamy was permitted),
                         the bridegroom was expected to add
             Lett
               l BF Fb.
                  _acertain number of piles to the com-


  cae
        (    ze Feng   2    WCE

   |   re besls
                   mon support. Fig. 163 represents
                   a section taken at Niederwyl, and
  halted cri    ! shows two series of piles, one over
     | ti    if    the other. The layer of ashes ap-
                   pears to indicate that the settle-
                                             ment   was burnt     down, and subse-
                                             quently rebuilt.     The pile-works of
                          subsequent periods differ little from
            Section at Niederwy].
                          those of the Stone Age, so far at
least as can be judged by the parts remaining, but the piles
are less decayed, and project above the Sar Gatien than 3is
the case with those of the preceding epoch.
        Through the kindness of Col. Suter I had an opportunity
of examining                 the     construction      of the Lake-dwelling       at
‘Wauwyl, near Zofingen, in the Canton of Lucerne.                               This
 apparently belonged to the Stone Age, no trace of metal
 having yet been discovered in it. It is situated in a peat
 moss, which was evidently at one time the bed of a shallow
          DESCRIPTION   OF THE   REMAINS   AT WAUWYL.       187

lake. By the gradual growth of peat, however, the level has
been raised several feet, and. the plain has recently been
drained. We were assisted by six labourers, who dug out
the peat, which we then carefully examined. I mention this,
because the difference in the objects collected from different
Pfahlbauten may probably be, in part at least, accounted for
by the different ways in which the search has been made. The
peat at Wauwyl varies in thickness from three to ten feet,
and rests on a white bed consisting of broken fresh-water
shells. This stratum, though only a few inches thick, is
found in the old beds of many small lakes, and is frequently
mentioned by the Swiss archeologists under the name of
“weissgrund.’”    It must not, however, be confounded with
the “ blancfond”’ of the larger lakes. The piles go through
the peat and the “ weissgrund” into the solid ground below.
It is not easy to obtain them whole, because the lower por-
tions are much altered by time, and so thoroughly saturated by
water, that they are quite soft. Col. Suter, however, extracted
two of them; one was 14ft. 6in. in length, of which 4ft. was
in the peat, and the remaining 10ft. 6in. in the sand beneath,
the other was only 8ft. 6in. long, 4ft. of which was in the
peat, the other 4ft. 6in. in the solid ground. ‘The piles vary
from three to five inches in diameter, and are always round,
never having been squared. The lower part is very badly
cut, so that it is difficult to understand how they can have
been forced to so great a depth into the ground.
   In most of the Pfahlbauten the piles are scattered, more
or less irregularly, over the whole extent of the settlement ;
at Wauwy]l this is not the case, but they enclose, as it were,
four quadrangular areas, the interiors of which are occupied
by several platforms one over the other, the interstices being
filled up by branches, leaves, and peat. The objects of
antiquity are not scattered throughout the peat, but lie
either on the layer of broken shells, which formed the then
188        WEAPONS     AND     IMPLEMENTS         OF THE   LAKEMEN.

bottom of the lake, or in the lower part of the peat.                         It
is, therefore,      evident     that     almost     the whole,    if not     the
whole, of the peat has grown since the time at which this
interesting ruin was inhabited.    The upper part had,
however,     been    removed        before     our    arrival,   so   that   the
“culturgeschicht,” the layer containing the objects of anti-
quity, was exposed ready for examination in the manner
already described.
   Some of the piles still stand two or three feet above the
level of the peat, but the greater number are broken off
lower down. We stood on one of the upper platforms,
which seems to have been the floor on which the huts were
           Cty                    erected, and the beams of which are
                                 still perfectly preserved.    It was at
                                 first a question in what manner the
                                platforms at this place were sup-
                                 ported; whether they rested like a
                                 raft on the surface of the water, rising
                                 and sinking with it*; or whether they
                                  were fixed, and rested on a sort of
                                  artificial island, formed by the clay,
                                  branches, etc., which now occupy
                                  the interspaces between the different
                                  platforms. Subsequent observations,
                                  however, confirmed as they have
                                  been by discoveries elsewhere, as, for
                           instance, at Inkwyl and Niederwy]l,
                           have decided the question in favour
         Swiss Stone Axe.
                           of the latter hypothesis.
      During my visit at Wauwyl we obtained four small stone
 axes, one arrow-head, four flint flakes, fifteen rude stone ham-

    * Dwellings of this characteroccnr       Sumatra, p. 395. Squier, American
 in the East and in S. America. See,         Naturalist, vol. iv. p. 18.
 for instance, Anderson’s     Mission to
                       AXES.   KNIVES.                           189

mers, eight whetstones, thirty-three slingstones, eight instru-
ments of bone, and two of wood, besides numerous bones, and
a great quantity of broken pottery. Col. Suter regarded this
as a fair average day’s work. Altogether about 500 instru-
ments of stone and bone have been discovered at Wauwy] ;
at Moosseedorf more than 3300; at Wangen no less than
5800, while M. Troyon estimates that those at Concise must
have amounted to 25,000.
   The axe was pre-eminently     the implement of antiquity.
It was used in war and in the chase, as well as for domestic
purposes, and great numbers have been found, especially at
Wangen (Lake of Constance) and Concise (Lake of Neuf-
chatel). With a few exceptions, they were small, especially
when compared with the magnificent specimens from Den-
mark ; in length they varied from one to six inches, while the
cutting edge bad generally a width of from fifteen to twenty
lines. Flint was sometimes used, and nephrite or jade, in a
few cases, but serpentine and diorite were the principal ma-
terials. Most of the larger settlements were evidently manu-
facturing places, and many spoilt pieces and half-finished
specimens have been found. After having chosen a stone,
the first step was to reduce it by blows with a hammer
to a suitable size.   Then grooves       were   made   artificially,
which must have been. a very tedious and difficult operation,
when flint knives,.sand, and water were the only available
instruments. Having carried the grooves to the required
depths, the projecting portions were removed by a skilful
blow with a hammer, and the implement was then sharpened
and polished on blocks of sandstone.
  The axes appear to have been fastened into the handles by
means of bitumen, obtained either from the Val de Travers
near Neufchatel or from the Perte du Rhone.
   The stone knives may be considered as of two sorts.
Some differ from the axes principally in having their width
190                SAWS.       SPINDLE        WHORLS.            FLAKES.

greater than their length.                  In other cases flint flakes were
set in wooden handles and fastened, like the axes, by means
of bitumen.          Saws also (fig. 126) were made in a similar
manner, but with their edges somewhat rudely dentated; we
do not find in Switzerland any of the semi-lunar stone im-
plements, which are frequent in Denmark. The arrow-heads
were made of flint, or in some cases of rock crystal, and
were of the usual forms. Spindle whorls of rude earthen-
ware (fig. 165) were abundant in some of the Lake villages
even of the Stone Age. This indicates a knowledge of
weaving, which, as we shall presently see, is proved by even
         Fis. 165.      more conclusive evidence. There are
                        also found rounded stones, pierced
                        with one or sometimes two holes.
                                       The use         of these is uncertain, but
                                   _ they may perhaps have been used to
                                     sink fishing lines.
                                        The flint flakes offer no peculiari-
                                     ties; the Swiss specimens are, how-
      Spindle Whorl (Stone Age).   | ever, of small size.                  Corn-crushers,
which are round balls of hard stone, two or three inches in
diameter, occur even in the villages of the Stone Age.
   The list of objects hitherto found at Wauwy] is as follows:
     Stone axes, principally of serpen-
         LINO Sek        er ae e        OO ees
       Smalt flint arrow-heads        . . .    86
       Blntiilakes =: \ 2, (inet.     wae e e O0
       Corn-erusiers.-       nn            eee LG
       Rude stones used as hammers,
                                               a6                          Not all
          common (say) . . .
                                                                           collected.
       Whetstones      > 4        eae      ere 26
        Nimpatones Obese                nae       ey   eee          nro

            Inallabout.            .    .     .   .    .     .     426 articles of stone.
       ARROWHEADS.       IMPLEMENTS     OF BONE AND    WOOD.      191

   The flint, of which the flakes and arrow-heads were
formed, must have come from a distance, and the best pieces
in all probability were obtained from France. Visits may
have been made to the French quarries, just as Catlin tells
us. that the American tribes, from far and near, visited the
red pipestone quarry of Coteau des Prairies. A few frag-
ments of Mediterranean       coral have been found at Concise,
and of Baltic amber at Meilen.           Some archeologists have
argued from these facts, that there must have been a certain
amount of commerce even in the Stone Age. As, however,
both these settlements appear to have belonged to the transi-
tional period between the age of Stone and that of Bronze,
it would be safer to refer both the amber-and the coral to the
later period.
   Like other savages, the Lake-dwellers made the most
of any animal they could catch. They ate the flesh, used
the skin for clothing, picked every fragment of marrow out
of the bones, and then, in many cases, fashioned the bones
themselves   into weapons.      The    larger and more      compact
ones, as well as horns of the deer, served as hammers, and
were used as handles for hatchets.   In some cases, pieces of
bone were worked to an edge, but they are neither hard nor
sharp enough to cut well. Bone awls are numerous, and
may have been used in preparing skins for clothes. Fig.
128 (p. 104) represents a chisel or scraper of bone, from
Wangen.     One purpose for which these were used was no
doubt to scrape off the hair in dressing skins.
  A few objects made of wood have also been found at
Wauwyl and elsewhere; but these, even if originally
numerous,    would   be difficult   to distinguish   from   the sur-
rounding peat, especially as it contains so many branches of
trees and other fragments       of wood; and it would also be
very difficult to extract them entire. Perhaps, therefore,
implements of wood may haye been much more varied and
192                          POTTERY.

common than the collections would appear to indicate. Tin-
der has been found in several of the Lake villages, and was
no doubt used in obtaining fire.
   The pottery of the Stone Age presents nearly the same
characters in all the settlements. Very rude and coarse, it
is generally found in broken pieces, and comparatively few
entire vessels have been obtained. There is no evidence that
the potter’s wheel was known, and the baking is very imper-
fect, having apparently taken place in an open fire.                  The
material is also very rude, and generally contains numerous
grains of quartz. The form is frequently cylindrical, but
several of the jars are rounded at the base, and without feet.
A curious character is the frequent presence of a row of de-
pressions which do not completely penetrate the thickness of
the vessel; but the commonest decorations are simple lines
or furrows, made sometimes by a sharp instrument, some-
                               Bie. 166,




                  Piece of Pottery.—Lake of Zurich,   °

times by the finger-nail (see fig. 166), and occasionally pro-
duced by pressing a cord on the soft clay.                Curved lines are
rare; no representation of any animal has yet been met
with; and the vase found at Wangen, which has been
figured both by Dr. Keller and by M. Troyon, is almost the
only instance in which any attempt has been made to repre-
                              DRESS.                          1938

sent a plant. In this case the design is ruder than might
be inferred from the figures given. In some of the Bronze
Age villages rings of pottery are found, which were evidently
intended to serve as supports for these earthenware tumblers,
but none of them have yet been met with in any of the Stone
Age villages. Possibly the earthenware during the Stone
Age rested on the soft earth, and tables were only intro-
duced in the Bronze Age, when by means of metallic imple-
ments it became so much easier to cut wood, and particularly
to make boards. Many of the vessels had small projections,
which were pierced in such a manner that strings might be
passed through them, and which may, therefore, have served
for suspension.  Some of the vessels, also, are pierced by
small holes at different levels; it has been suggested that
these may have been used in the preparation of curds, the
                                Fic. 1¢8.




                    Piece of Tissue from Robenhausen.


small holes being intended to permit the escape of the milk.
The ornaments on the pottery belonging to this age are of a
very rude and simple character. Sometimes a row of knobs
runs round the vase, just below the lip; this style of orna-
mentation is common on the pottery found by M. Gilliéron
at the Pont de Thiéle.
   Although there can be no doubt that the skins of animals
                                                        18)
194          THE FAUNA   OF THE   LAKE-DWELLINGS.

supplied the ancient Lakemen with their principal articles of
clothing, still in several of the settlements, and especially at
Wangen    and Robenhausen, both of which belong to the
Stone Age, pieces of rude fabric (fig. 168) have been found
in some abundance.    They consist either of flax fibres or
straw. The presence of spindle-whorls has been already
mentioned.
   For our knowledge of the animal remains from the Pile-
works we are almost entirely indebted to Prof. Riitimeyer,
who has published two memoirs on the subject (Mittheilungen
der Antig. Gesellschaft in Ziirich, Bd. xin. Abth. 2, 1860 ;
and, more recently, a separate work, Die Fauna        der Pfahl-
bauten in der Schweiz, 1861). The bones are in a very
fragmentary condition, and have been broken open for the
sake of the marrow.    There is also the same absence of
certain bones and parts of bones, so that it is impossible
to reconstruct   a perfect skeleton   even of the commonest
animal.
   The total number of species amounts to about seventy, of
which ten are fishes, four reptiles, twenty-six birds, and the
remainder quadrupeds.     Of tho latter, six species may be
considered as having been domesticated; namely, the dog,
pig, horse, goat, sheep, and at least two varieties of oxen.
The bones very seldom occur in a natural condition; but
those of domestic and wild animals are mixed together, and
the state in which they are found, the marks of knives upon
them, and their having been almost always broken open
for the sake of their marrow,     are all evidences   of human
interference.
   Two species, the one wild, the other domestic, are especially
numerous—the stag and the ox. Indeed, the remains of these
two equal those of all the others together. It is, however, an
interesting fact, that in the older settlements, as at Moossee-
dorf, Wauwyl, and Robenhausen, the stag exceeds the ox in
                            MOOSSEEDORF.                                  195

the number of specimens indicated, while the reverse is the
case in the more modern settlements of the western lakes, as,
for instance, those at Wangen and Meilen.
   Next to these in order of abundance is the hog. Less
numerous again, and generally represented by single speci-
mens where the preceding occur in numbers, are the roe, the
goat, and the sheep, which latter is most abundant in the
later settlements. With these rank the fox and the martens.
Foxes are occasionally eaten by the Esquimaux*, Captain
Lyon seems      to have   taken      rather a fancy to them+,            and
Franklin assures us that fox is better than lean venison tf.
They also appear, whether from choice or necessity, to have
been eaten during the Stone period. This conclusion is de-
rived from the fact that the bones often present the marks
of knives, and have been opened for the sake of the marrow.
While, however, the fox is very frequent in the Pileworks of
the Stone epoch, it has not yet been found in any settlement
belonging to the Bronze period. Oddly enough, the dog is
rarer than the fox, at least as far as the observations yet go,
in the Lake-dwellings of the Stone period, though more com-
mon than the horse; and of other species but few specimens
have been met with, though in some localities the beaver, the
badger, and the hedgehog appear in some numbers. The
bear and the wolf, as well as the urus, the bison, and the elk,
seem to have occasionally been captured; it is probable that
the latter species were taken in concealed pits.
   From the small lake at Moosseedorf, M. Riitimeyer has
identified the following list :—Of the dog, three specimens;
fox, four specimens; beaver, five specimens; roe, six speci-
mens; goat and sheep, ten specimens; cow, sixteen speci-
mens; hog, twenty specimens; stag, twenty specimens.                          It
is certainly very striking to find two wild species represented
  * Crantz, History of Greenland,         + Lyon’s Journal, p. 77.
vol. i p. 73.                             + Franklin, vol. if. pp. 219-239.
                                    0 2
196                      ‘THE FAUNA.

by the greatest number of specimens, and particularly so,
since this is no exceptional case; but the whole sum of the
wild exceeds that of the domesticated       individuals, a result
moreover, which holds good in other settlements of this
epoch. Not only does this indicate a great antiquity, but
also that the population must have been sometimes sub-
jected to great privations, partly from the unavoidable
uncertainty of supplies so obtaimed, partly because it is im-
probable that foxes would have been eaten except under the
pressure of hunger.
   The bones of the stag and the wild boar often indicate
animals of an unusual magnitude, while, on the other hand,
the fox appears to have been somewhat smaller than at present.
The dogs varied less than they do now; in fact they all belong
to one variety, which was of middle size, and appears to have
resembled our present beagles. (M. Rittimeyer describes it
as “resembling the Jagdhund” and the “ Wachtelhund.”)
The sheep of the Stone period differed from the ordinary form
in its small size, fine legs, and short goat-like horns; par-
ticulars in which it is nearly resembled by some northern
 and mountain   varieties at the present day, as, for instance,
by the small sheep of the Shetlands, Orkneys, Welsh hills,
and parts of the Alps.   At Wauwyl, however, M. Riitimeyer
found traces of an individual with large horns.       Our know-
ledge of the wild species of sheep is so deficient, that M.
Riitimeyer does not venture to express any opinion con-
cerning the origin of the domestic varieties, but his present
impression is that they will eventually be traced up to several
wild races.
   In his first memoir, Prof. Riitimeyer gives an interesting
table, which, with some additions which I owe to his kind
courtesy, is here subjoined, the relative frequency being
indicated by numerals:
          1 denotes a single individual ;
                                               THE FAUNA.                                                         197

                     2 indicates that the remains of several individuals
                           have been met with;
                     3 the species which are common ;
                    4 those which are very common;                                    and lastly,
                     5 those which are present in great number.

                                                      oi                      §
                   LIST OF SPECIES.
                                                       ENE
                                                       3 e 4                            5
                                                                                          as       S          g       &
                                                       eo)        2)          2)        a)      8)       3)
                                                       pee              oe                      =         & | 8

  POMS S VAM CUOR metas  taccsverecie                  2        2             2      2          oe        2
  Pie MGVES VATION, susececauctecm                     2        2             3      ve         af        3
  Seiustela, FOIA, o5... «.c.neeseee                   2        3             3       2         Bae       it
  4           oF       larbes vemos seestesente        2        3             3       2         ul        2
  5           ss       PO EOTITIS erence Waseca        2        2              1     Au         aise      A
  6       i            TORII ten acscoarekor          58       2              ans    ‘ei                 ree
  7       5            Lutra vulgaris ......          al       wl              2     Pa                  nee
  S\ AOE
       eliChUA)st ae ee                               mre       1             i       1         il       1
  9    ,, familiaris (palustris)...|                   2        2             2       3         3        3         3
 NO Mes femVOULPOSicccpeuccice weseee ate              3        3             3      2          2        2         aed
 11 Felis Catus (ferus)               ............|    2        2             1     2                   200: yh) aD05
 12 Erinaceus europzeus       .........                1       a              3      2                  bre       “3
 HSMOARbOL Hiei syescpascneeser.                       3      2               3      2                  2         eee
 14 Sciurus evropseus...............|                  2      2               2      2                  ne        ae
 ES Wns sylvaticns ....-....07..0-00>                 os      sh              2     Ao                  ace       ate
 WGm opus timmdus .2...0.s.cs- ocee-                   i      Me              1     1                   cos H) cop
 Aaa SUS SCLOLALOLUS 26.44.5010 00000                  3      2               4,    2          2        2      2
 Sire     RLOLUSGIAG snenta
                        cate ssciseeiens               5      5               3     5          5        3      3
 19 ,, Scrofa domesticus.........                     nie     il             iss    ia         ne      2          2
 20) Heuns) Caballus......ssvesse-+0s                  iL     2               2      2         i       2          3
 AOC VISA COS) oie ea siceiniecieltoeniecie            1      il              2     aah        2       ih          il
 22      rp ARNG SIAN coerce oncdacgnecs               5       5              5      5         5       5          5
 23      RECARO OLUS tenn sececan sr                  4        2              4      2         2       3          as
 HE (Obs onesh NWSey¢ Aen psecsopdoccLouce            Sie    palme ts        oA     ee         1       “te        a
 25      PM         LEINCTIS saseaanc
                                 seco sceece          2       2              2      2          ae      2          34
 26 Ovis Aries..        Sener                                2               a       2          i       3          3
 27 Antilope rupicapra_ Siasaduwcece                  el                            ash        ae      ig         ane
 28 Bos primigenius ...............                   2      2                3      1                  2         ane
 OM   MPSOM ea. secu esaseneessanes                    1     1                4      iy                vase       ie
 80 ,, Taurus primigenius......|                      2      y                5      ?         2        5         2
 81 ,, Taurus brachyceros......{                      5      5               2       5         6       2          5
 32 ,, Taurus froptosus .........                            i               oe     ae                 2          2



   The almost entire absence of the hare is doubtless owing
to the curious prejudice which was and is entertained by
many races against the flesh of this animal. It was never
eaten by the ancient Britons, and is avoided by the Lapps at
198                                BIRDS.

the present day. According to Burton* the Somal Arabs
will not touch it, and M. Schlegel also states that the preju-
dice against it existed among the ancient Chinese+. Among
the Hottentots it was eaten by the women, but was forbidden
to ment. It was regarded as unclean by the Jews, being
erroneously supposed to chew the cud. According to Crantz,
the Greenlanders §, if in want, will eat foxes rather than hares.
Finally, its remains do not occur in the Danish shell-mounds.
   The birds which have been discovered are :—
      Aquila fulva. The golden eagle. At Robenhausen.
      Aquila halietus. A smgle bone found at Moosseedorf
           is rather doubtfully referred to this species by
           M. Riitimeyer.
      Falco milvus. Robenhausen.
      Falco palumbarius. Wauwyl, Moosseedorf.
      Falco nisus. Moosseedorf.
      Falco buteo. Moosseedorf, Robenhausen.
      Strix aluco, Concise.
      Strix otus.
      Sturnus vulgaris. Robenhausen.
      Corvus corone.
      Corvus corax.
      Cinclus aquaticus.
      Columba palumbus.      5                         Moosseedorf.
      Tetrao bonasia.                    -
      Tetrao lagopus. Moosseedorf.
      Ciconia alba. Not unfrequent at Moosseedorf and Robenh.
      Ardea cinerea. Robenhausen.
      Grus cinerea.
      Fulica atra.                 ”
      Larus. Two sp.               Py,

  * First Footsteps, p. 155.                   { Le Vaillant, Voyages dans I’Af-
  + Notes and Queries on       China,        rique, vol. iv. p. 187.
Japan, Hongkong, May, 1868,                   § History of Greenland, p. 78.
                         MOUSE.          CAT.   ASS.                         199

      Cygnus olor.     Robenhausen.
     Anser segetum.            a
     Anas boschas.      Robenhausen, Moosseedorf, Wauwyl.
     Anas querquedula.        __,,                      -
     Podiceps minor.     Robenhausen.
     Mergus merganser.               =
   The reptiles and fishes are represented by about ten of our
commonest species.
  The common mouse and our two house-rats, as well as the
domestic cat, are absent from the Lake-habitations of Switzer-
land, as also from the Kjékkenméddings of Denmark;                           the
same is the case with the common fowl, which                   seems, more-
over, to have been unknown               to Homer       and Hesiod;        Prof.
Riitimeyer    attributes to a later period a single bone                  of the
latter bird which was found at Morges, a settlement belong-
ing to the Bronze period.
   The earliest remains of the ass mentioned by Prof. Riiti-
meyer are those found at Chayvannes and Noville, which,
however, were not connected with Pfahlbauten, and be-
longed to post-Roman times.              In the Bible the ass is first
mentioned in the time of Abraham, who had “sheep, and
oxen, and he-asses, and men-servants, and maid-servants,
and she-asses, and camels*.”    It will be observed that
in this enumeration    no mention is made of horses.                 Laban,
again, had sheep, and goats, and cattle, and camels, and
asses, but apparently no horses. Again, the present which
Jacob sent to Esau consisted of two hundred she-goats
and twenty he-goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams,
thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine and ten
bulls, twenty she-asses aud ten foalst.                Indeed, no mention
whatever is made of horses until the children of Isracl went
into Egypt; and from the copious and interesting detals of
their pastoral life, we may feel sure that horses would have
     * Gen. xii. 16.                                   + Gen. xxxi. 14.
200                    HORSE.    BOAR.

been alluded to if the Hebrews had possessed them. As
regards Egypt, the horse is not represented on any of the
monuments anterior to the 18th dynasty, after which, however,
it appears to have become abundant in that country.
  As regards the Swiss Lake-villages, it is singular, that
though remains of the horse have been found in all the Pile-
works, they are so rare that their presence may almost be
considered accidental: thus, Wangen has only produced a
single tooth;   Moosseedorf,    a metatarsal    bone, which   has
been polished on one side; Robenhausen, a single Os navi-
culare tarsi; and Wauwyl, only a few bones, which may all
have belonged to a single individual. On the other hand,
when we come to the Bronze period, we find at Nidau
numerous   bones   of this species;      so that, as far as these
slight indications go, the horse, even if present in the Stone
Age, seems to have been rarer than at subsequent periods.
All the remains of this animal belonged apparently to the
domestic horse (Eguus caballus), while those which occur in
the Drift gravel beds and in caves fall into two well-marked
races, named by Prof. Owen, H. fossilis and H. speleeus.
   Though he refers some bones to the wild boar, and others
to the domestic hog, yet Prof. Riitimeyer considers that the
greatest number of the remains of this genus belong to a dif-
ferent race, which he calls Sus palustris. This variety was,
in his opinion, less powerful and dangerous than the wild
boar, the tusks being much      smaller in proportion;    in fact,
he describes it as having, with the molar teeth of an ordi-
nary full-grown wild boar, premolars, canines, and incisors
resembling those of a young domestic hog. He considers
that all the bones of this variety from Moosseedorf belonged
to wild individuals, while of those from Nidau, Robenhausen,
Wauwyl, and Concise, some bear, in his opinion, evidences
of domestication. It has been supposed by some naturalists
that this variety was founded only on female specimens, but
                            SUS PALUSTRIS.                          201

in his last work Prof. Riitimeyer combats this opinion at some
length, and gives copious descriptions and measurements of
the different parts. He also points out numerous sexual
differences in the Sus palustris, of the same nature, but not
so well marked, as those of the wild boar. Relying also on
its well-defined geographical and historical range, he denies
that it can be considered’ as a cross between the wild boar
and domestic hog, or that the differences which separate
it from the former can be looked upon as mere individual
peculiarities. He considers, indeed, that as a wild animal
it became extinct at a very early period, though the tame
swine of India, which agree closely with this race, may perhaps
have descended from it.
  M. Schiitz, on the contrary, regards the Sus palustris as
derived from the Sus sennariensis, which still exists in central
Africa, and does not think that it ever inhabited Switzerland
in a wild state*. He moreover points out that the skulls of
this animal found in the later Pfahlbauten differ considerably
from those in the earlier ones, showing clearly the influence
of domestication, and affording an additional indication that
between the foundation of the earlier and later Lake-villages,
a considerable period must have elapsed.
  Our domestic hog first makes its appearance in the later
Pileworks, as, for instance, at Concise.       Prof. Riitimeyer does
not, however, believe that it was tamed by the inhabitants of
Switzerland, but is rather disposed to look upon it as having
been introduced during the Bronze Age, and the more so, as
he also finds at Concise traces of an ox (B. trochoceros) which
does not occur in the earlier Pileworks.
   The discovery of dung among the remains of the Pfahl-
bauten sufficiently proves that the Lake-dwellers had domestic
animals, but there are also other indications from which we
may draw the same conclusion
         * Zur Kenntniss des Torfschweins.   Berlin, 1868, p. 44.
202       COMPARISON      OF THE BONES           BELONGING        TO

  In endeavouring to ascertain whether any given bones
belonged to a wild or domesticated animal, we must be
guided by the following considerations: the number of indi-
                                    Fic. 169.




                                                         Wy
                        Part of tho Vertebra of a Cow.

                                    Fie. 170.




               Part of the corresponding Vertebra of the Bison.


viduals represented; the relative proportions of young and
old; the absence or presence of very old individuals, at least
                 WILD    AND   DOMESTICATED   RACES.         203

in the case of species that served for food; the traces of
long, though indirect, selection, in diminishing the size of
any natural weapons which might be injurious to man; the
direct action of man during the life of the animal; and,
finally, the texture and condition of the bones.
   Applying these considerations to the Sus palustris from
Moosseedorf, it is evident, says Prof. Riitimeyer, firstly, that
the argument derivable from the number of young specimens
loses much of its force on account of the great fertility of the
sow, and the ease with which the young can be found and
destroyed; secondly, in the number of individuals repre-
sented, it is equalled by the stag, which certainly was never
domesticated; thirdly, some bones of very old individuals
have been found, and some of very young, even of unborn
pigs; the smallness of the tusks is, according to Prof. Riti-
meyer, a characteristic of the race, and not an evidence of
domestication; the bones are of a firm and close texture, and
the only cases of decay have arisen from an extreme degrada-
tion of the teeth, which would certainly be unlikely to occur
in a domestic animal. Finally, none of the teeth show traces
of any filing or other preparation, except such as may have
taken place after the death of the animal; from all which
reasons Prof. Riitimeyer therefore infers that the inhabitants
of Moosseedorf had not yet succeeded in taming either the
Sus scrofa palustris or the Sus scrofa ferus.
   Prof. Rittimeyer has paid great attention to the texture
and condition of the bones themselves, and believes that he
can, in many cases, from these alone distinguish the species,
and even determine whether the bone belonged to a wild or
a domesticated animal.
  In wild animals the bones are of a firmer and closer tex-
ture; there is an indescribable, but to the accustomed      eye
very characteristic, sculpturing of the external surface, pro-
duced by the sharper andmore numerousimpressions ofvessels,
204                           OXEN,

and the greater roughness of the surfaces for the attachment
of muscles     There is also an exaggeration of all projections
and ridges, and a diminution of all indifferent surfaces. The
contrast thus produced will be seen from figs. 169 and 170,
the first of which represents a portion of a vertebra belonging
to a domestic cow, the second the correspondmg surface of
the same bone from the bison.         In the consideration of
the remains of oxen, these distinctions have proved of the
greatest importance. By their assistance, Prof. Riitimeyer
has convinced himself that besides the two wild species of
 bos, namely, the urus (B. primigenius) and the aurochs (B.
 bison or Bison Europceus), four principal races of domestic
 oxen occur in the Lake-villages*.
     The first of these, the Primigenius race, closely resembles
 the Urus or Bos primigenius, and was no doubt descended
 from it. It occurs in all the earlier Pileworks, and in the
 present day is best represented by the wild cattle of Chil-
 lingham, and the great oxen of Friesland, Jutland, and
  Holstein.
     The second, or Trochoceros race, resembles a fossil form
 first observed in the diluvium        of Arezzo      and Siena, and
described by F. von Meyer. It has not hitherto been found
in any of the Stone Age villages. Riitimeyer regards it as
scarcely distinguishable from the urus, and observes that its
peculiarities are principally, though not exclusively, developed
in the female sex.
   The third, or Frontosus race, occurs but sparingly in the
older Pfahlbauten; becomes more frequent in the Bronze
Age villages, and prevails at the present day in northern
Switzerland. Prof. Riitimeyer considers this variety also as
 derived from the urus, and remarks that while the wild cattle
 of Chillimgham are true to the primigenius form, some of
 the Lyme Park cattle approach to the frontosus type. He
                * Ar, fiir Anthropologie, 1866, p. 219.
                    ABSENCE    OF EXTINCT    SPECIES.                  205

has, however, never seen a skull of this type belonging to an
undoubtedly wild animal.
  The fourth is the Longifrons or Brachyceros race.                   The
name Brachyceros, by which it was at first known, must be
abandoned, because it had been previously applied by Dr.
Gray to an African ox. This variety is extremely abundant
in all the Pfahlbauten. - Prof. Riitimeyer regards it as de-
scended, not from the urus, but from a second and smaller
species. He remarks, however, that if it is derived from the
urus, it is at least a more distinct, and must be an older
variety than any of the preceding. Prof. Riitimeyer admits
that we have no evidence that B. longifrons ever existed in
a wild state in Central Europe.
   M. de Quatrefages* considers that all our domestic oxen
are descendants of the urus; while Mr. Darwin} regards B.
longifrons and B. frontosus as the modern representatives of
wild ancestors, specifically distinct from B. primigenius, and
concludes therefore that our “ domestic cattle are almost
certainly the descendants of more than one wild form.’
   Mr. Boyd Dawkins has recently { shown that as far as
this country is concerned, we have no conclusive evidence of
more than two species of wild oxen, namely, the urus and the
bison. The smaller varieties appear to have been introduced.
as domesticated animals, and do not go back beyond the
Neolithic period.      According to Nilsson, on the contrary,
both the Bos frontosus and B. longifrons inhabited Sweden
as wild races§.   My own impression is that the urus was
domesticated in Europe, but also that some at least of the
early settlers brought domestic        cattle with them, and these
may very probably have belonged to a distinct wild race.

   * Rey. des Cours Scientifiques,      t Boyd Dawkins, Geol. Jour. 1867,
1868, p. 563.                        p. 182.                      é
  + Animals and Plants under Do-        § Ann. and Mag. of Nat. His. 1849,
mestication, vol. i. p. 81.          pp. 349-351.
206          ABSENCE     OF EXTINCT      SPECIES.         AUROCHS.

Further evidence, however, is much needed on this interest-
ing subject.
  Making allowance then for the marine animals, such as
seals, fish, oysters,       cockles, whelks, etc., which we could
not expect to find so far away from the sea, the fauna
indicated by the remains found in the Swiss lakes agrees
remarkably with that which characterizes the Danish Kjék-
kenméddings, so far as wild animals are concerned, and
belongs evidently to a far later age than that of the cele-
brated stone hatchets, which were first made known to us by
the genius and perseverance of M. Boucher de Perthes.
   Instead of the elephant and rhinoceros we find in the Neo-
lithic or second Stone period—in that, namely, of the Kjok-
kenméddings and “ Pfahlbauten ”’—the urus and bison, the
elk and the red deer already installed as monarchs of the
forest. yen the reindeer is altogether absent. The red
deer on the contrary,     and the boar, appear to have been
very frequent, and to have formed a most important article
of food to the Lake-dwellers. The urus, or great fossil ox, is
now altogether extinct, at least as a wild species*. It is
mentioned by Cesar, who describes it as being little smaller
than an elephant. (Hi sunt magnitudine paulo infra ele-
phantos specie et colore et figura tauri). According to
Herberstein, it still existed in Germany during the sixteenth
 century,    soon after which, however,               it must have become
extinct.
   The aurochs, or Kuropean bison, seems to have disappeared
from Western Europe at about the same period as the urus.
There is no historical record of its existence in England or
Scandinavia. In Switzerland we cannot trace it later than
the tenth century; but it is mentioned in the “ Niebelungen

   * Prof. Riitimeyer, as   I have al.    Park      are     unmistakable,   though
 ready mentioned, considers that the      dwarfish,   descendants       of the   B.
 celebrated wild cattle of Tankerville    primigenius.
                           ELK.    IBEX.                    207

Lied,” of the twelfth century, as occurring in the Forest of
Worms, and in Prussia the last was killed in the year 1775.
At one period, indeed, it appears to have inhabited almost
the whole of Europe, much of Asia, and part even of America,
but at present it is confined in Europe to the imperial forests
in Lithuania, where it is preserved by the Emperor of Russia;
while, according to Nordmann and Von Baer, it still exists in
some parts of Western Asia.
   We have no notice of the existence of the elk in Switzer-
land during the historical period, but it is mentioned by
Cesar as existing in the great Hercynian forest; and even
in the twelfth century it was to be met with in Sclavonia
and Hungary, according to Albertus Magnus and Gesner. In
Saxony, the death of the last is recorded as having occurred
in 1746. At present it inhabits Prussia and Lithuania, Fin-
land and Russia, Scandinavia and Siberia, to the shores of
the Amoor.
   The ibex disappeared from most of the Swiss Alps, perhaps
not much later than the elk. It has lingered longest in the
West. In Glarus the last one perished in 1550, though near
Chiavenna it existed until the commencement of the seven-
teenth century, and in the Tyrol until the second half of the
eighteenth, while a few still exist in the neighbourhood of
Mont Iséran, where they are protected by the King of Italy.
  The extermination of the bear, like that of the ibex, seems
to have begun in the Hast, and is not yet complete, since
this animal still occurs in the Jura and the Grisons, whence
it occasionally visits the Valais, and the south-eastern parts
of Switzerland. The fox, the otter, and the different species
of weasels, are.still the common     carnivora of Switzerland,
and the wild cat, the badger, and the wolf, still occur in the
Jura and the Alps, the latter in cold winters venturing even
into the plains. The beaver, on the contrary, has at last
disappeared.   It had long been very rare in Switzerland, but
208                  GENERAL   CHARACTER

a few survived until the beginning of the present century in
Tiucerne and Valais. Red deer were abundant in the Jura
and Black Forest in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
though they do not appear to have been so large as those
which lived in earlier times.    The last was shot in the
canton of Basle, at the close of the eighteenth century,
while in western Switzerland and Valais they lingered some-
what longer. The roedeer still occurs in some places.
   It appears, therefore, that the animals of the Swiss Pile-
works belong to the fauna, which has occupied Europe from
the commencement of the Paleolithic period down to the
present time.
      While, however, we must regard the fauna of the Stone
Age as belonging to the same great zoological epoch with
that of the river drift gravels on the one hand, and the pre-
sent time on the other, we cannot forget that the immense
period which has elapsed since the end of the tertiary period
has produced great changes in the fauna of Kurope. In this
post-tertiary era the Pileworks occupy, so to say, the middle
position. Distmguished from the present fauna of Switzer-
land by the possession of the urus, the bison, the elk, the
stag, and the wild boar, as well as by the more general
distribution of the beaver, the bear, the ibex, etc., their
fauna differs from that of the drift gravels in the absence of
the mammoth, the rhinoceros, the musk ox, the cave hyana,
and the reindeer.
   Prof. Riitimeyer thinks that from similar considerations
alone, even if we had no other evidence, we might carry this
division farther; and if we take the settlements at Moossee-
dorf, Wauwyl, Robenhausen, and Nidau, which have been the
most carefully studied in this respect, it certainly appears
that the three former, which belong to the Stone Age, offer a
marked contrast to the latter, which is the locality whence the
largest number of bronze objects has as yet been obtained.
                          OF THE FAUNA,                       209
   It is of course unnecessary to point out the interest and
importance of such a distinction, which accords so well
with that indicated by the study of the weapons and the
state of preservation of the piles. Thus, the urus has only
occurred at Moosseedorf, Wauwyl, Robenhausen, Wangen,
and Concise; the -aurochs only at Moosseedorf, Wauwyl,
and Robenhausen ; the bear only at Moosseedorf, Wauwyl,
Robenhausen, Wangen, and Concise. A glance at the table
given at page 192 will show that several other species have
as yet only occurred at Moosseedorf and Robenhausen; a
fact, however, which indicates, perhaps, rather the richness
than the antiquity of these localities.     Possibly we may
consider the presence of these larger species as an indication
of their greater abundance in the oldest period; but we must
not forget that not only the bear and the elk, but also the
aurochs and the urus appear at a comparatively late period.
On the other hand, the abundance of wild animals, and the
fact that at Moosseedorf and Wauwyl the fox was more
abundant than the dog, while elsewhere the reverse is the
case, certainly speak in favour of the greater antiquity of these
two settlements.
   The evidence derived from the distribution of the domestic
animals, is, perhaps, more satisfactory. The sheep is present
even at Moosseedorf, though not so numerous as at Nidau.
On the other hand, the horse is frequent at Nidau, while at
Moosseedorf only a single bone of this animal was discovered,
in a different condition from that of the other bones, and
probably more recent.      Finally, the domestic     hog of the
present race is absent from all the Pileworks of the Stone
period, excepting the one at Wauwyl, and becomes frequent
only at Nidau. The following table shows the proportions
of wild and tame animals at Wauwyl, Moosseedorf, as repre-
senting the Age of Stone, and at Nidau, as perhaps the best
illustration of that of Bronze. 1 represents a single mdi-
                                                 E
210            COMPARISON                  OF      THE        DIFFERENT       LAKE         VILLAGES,


vidual; 2, several; 8, the species which are common;                                                   4, those
which are very common; and 5, those which are present in
large numbers.

                                                              Wauwyl.    | Moosseedorf.|      Nidau,
                    Witp        ANIMALS.




           se)sc,fe)Q &



                    See               ee     ey                 BO
                                                                bo
                                                                G9
                                                                hO
                                                                FH
                                                                bO
                                                                FE
                                                                69
                                                                 4




            by (eo)Q =) 8 wy

                                      ween      eee eee cee
                                                                |ex
                                                                  noroere: fol
                                                                           opmowHmetocw:
                                                                            rrr
                Domestic          ANIMALS.
           Domestic            Boar                             fe)
           Horse                                                                o>.

           (=)i)


                                                                     DD
                                                                     He
                                                                     Ne
                                                                     Od           Oe:
                                                                                  NNN            ow
                                                                                                 woskownw



   If succeeding investigations confirm the conclusions thus
indicated, we may infer that the domestic animals, which
were comparatively rare in the Stone period, became more
frequent after the introduction of bronze; a change which
indicates and perhaps produced an alteration of habits on the
part of the inhabitants.
   Rare, indeed, as they may have been, oxen, horses, sheep,
and goats could not be successfully kept through the winter
in the climate of Switzerland, without stores of provisions
and some sort of shelter, A pastoral people, therefore, must
have reached a higher grade than a mere nation of hunters.
  * Considered by Prof. Riitimeyer                                   mesticated at Nidau and in the later
to. have     been at first wild, but do-                             Pfahlbauten.                      ‘
               THE   FLORA   OF THE   PFAHLBAUTEN.           ila

We know, moreover, in another way, that at this period
agriculture was not entirely unknown,     This is proved in
the most unexpected manner, by the discovery of carbonized
cereals at various points. Wheat is most common, having
been discovered at Meilen, Moosseedorf, and Wangen. At
the latter place, indeed, many bushels of it were found, the
grains being united in large thick lumps. In other cases the
grains are free, and without chaff, resembling our present
wheat im size and form, while more rarely they are still in
the ear. Ears of the Hordeum hexastichon L. (the six-rowed
barley) are somewhat numerous.       This species differs from
the H. vulgare L. in the number of rows and in the smaller
size of the grains. According to De Candolle, it was the
species generally cultivated by the Ancient Greeks, Romans,
and Egyptians. In the ears from Wangen, each row has
generally ten or eleven grains, which, however, are smaller
and shorter than those now grown.
   Three varieties of wheat were cultivated by the Lake-
dwellers, who also possessed two kinds of barley, and two of
millet. Of these the most ancient and most important were
the small six-rowed barley and small “ Lake-dwellers” wheat.
The discovery of Egyptian wheat (Triticum turgidum) at
Wangen and Robenhauseu, is particularly interesting. Oats
were cultivated during the Bronze Age, but are absent from
all the Stone Age villages. Rye also was unknown.
   Wheat and millet only seem to have been used for making
bread. Prof. Heer thinks the barley was probably roasted.
In the six-rowed barley the husks adhere very closely to the
grain, and it would have been difficult to separate them;
when roasted, however, they are easily detached from        one
another.
  Still more unexpected was the discovery of bread, or
rather cakes, for their texture is so solid that leaven does
not appear to have been used.         They were flat and round,
                          Pod
pala                   GRAIN.   FRUITS.

from an inch to fifteen lines in thickness, and, to judge from
one specimen, had a diameter of four or five inches. In
other cases the grains seem to have been roasted, coarsely
ground between stones, and then either stored up in large
earthenware pots, or eaten after being slightly moistened.
Grain prepared in a similar manner is even now eaten in
Germany and Switzerland.     In what way the ground was
prepared for the cultivation of corn we know not, as no
implements have as yet been discovered, which can with
certainty be regarded as agricultural.
   Carbonized apples have been found at Wangen, sometimes
whole, sometimes cut into two or more rarely into four pieces,
and evidently dried and put aside for winter use. They have
occurred not only at Wangen, but also at Robenhausen in
Lake Pfeffikon, and at Concise in Lake Neufchatel.     They
are small, and resemble generally those which still grow wild
in the Swiss forests; at Robenhausen, however, specimens
have occurred which are of larger size and were probably
cultivated. No traces of the vine, the walnut, the cherry, or
the damson have yet been met with, but stones of the wild
plum and the Prunus padus have been found. Seeds of the
raspberry and blackberry, and shells of the hazel-nut and
beech-nut occur plentifully in the mud, but those of the
strawberry are rare.   Peas have been found at Moosseedorf,
but beans do not appear until the Bronze Age.
   From all this, therefore, it is evident that the nourishment
of the dwellers in the Pileworks consisted of corn and wild
fruits, of fish, and the flesh of wild and domestic animals.
Doubtless also milk was an important article of their diet.
  Altogether 115 species of plants have been determined.
The wild species are almost entirely the same as those now
living; the Silene cretica, however, a South European weed,
which was doubtless introduced originally and accidentally
with the cereals, and which has been found at Robenhausen,
                                     DRAPA           NATANS.           FLAX.                                          213

does not now inhabit Switzerland, and the Drapa natans,
which was used as food by the inhabitants of Moosseedorf
and Robenhausen, was supposed to be extinct in Switzer-
land, but is now known to occur in one locality.
   I subjoin a table which I have compiled from Dr. Heer’s
memoir, which shows the more interesting species and
varieties.
                                                      STONE AGE, TRANSITION,                       BRONZE AGE.
                                                                  |             3              ,                      E
                                                           a      3             g         &
                                                           OE     SSee ae ge
                                                           eee
                                                           a  = a=)  =
                                                                      ee av) a

   1 Hordeum          hexastichon sanc-
                      RUD ere coerce cee               ‘          ;                 oe                  ae
  2       i               -     densum.|               ...        ae                *          *         *
  3    -      distichum .........                           *    oe            aan        a
  4 Triticum vulgareantiquorum|                             *         *             *     a             ve             “2
  5       39              >»       compactum
      SUMLICUTIMMEE ee oe a tee                             *         *             *          *             *       ae
  6 Triticum turgidum (Egyp-
      PLATING COG) ata tasenesr
                             ates:                          af   Ace            *                                    ves
  % Triticum: spelta <.25.1.cceeses                    LS                                                              %
  8       5         GICOGCTIM. venccuere+e                 ze                            te
  9       a         monococcum       ......                *1                            eae
 10 Secale cereale             .........sccs0000-                                        Bs                          nes
 11 Avena sativa (Oats) .........                      ei                                  a                          *
 12 Panicum miliaceum                    .........         x                   os          g)
 13 Setaria italica ...........0..00-                                           *          a
 14 Silene cretica .............0000                                            3
 15 Centaurea cyanus ............                                wa             A
 16 Pastinaca sativa                         ie                   “0                                   oe             s
 i ZasHaino) yOletairid aycabesme reais sale           A         -                         *               *          =
 Se hisnue sAvlyilii meres   eereece                   os         zs           Bi        Ne            ae             x
 19 Ervum leus ..... Sennctea eee                                                        tes           see             d
 20 Pyrus         malus         (small      crab;
              Che) Oo) epReadoc: scgeieecane               *      iy            4
 LY Trae; DALAS)               easiscoacaielsias
                                              oe.      atte       *            wee
 22 Jinum angustifolium .........                                 f             ig       ote           a             ges
              ea                                 a                         ee                                    1




   Neither hemp, oats, nor rye have yet been found. Small
pieces of twine and bits of matting made of flax may have
been part of some article of clothing.                                     For this purpose also
                                                         used,
there can be little doubt that the skins of animals were

                                 1 Only one ear, subsequently lost.
214                     ANCIENT      AGRICULTURE.

fragments of leather have been met with, and some of the
stone implements seem well adapted to assist in their pre-
paration, while the bone pins, and the needles made from the
teeth of boars, may have served to fasten them together.
  Dr. Heer, from whose very interesting memoir* the above
facts are borrowed, calls particular attention to the fact that,
while the remains of wild species found in the Pfahlbauten
agree in the most minute particulars with those still iving in
Switzerland,    the cultivated plants, on the contrary, differ
from all the existing varieties, and invariably have smaller
seeds or fruits. Man has evidently in the course of time
effected considerable improvements. It is also very interest-
ing to observe how the evidence derived from these Swiss
Lake-dwellings agrees with the evidence contaimed in the
most ancient writings that have come down to us. Thus
flax is mentioned in the Pentateuch and m Homer, it was
also largely used by the ancient Egyptians, while hemp seems
to have been unknown until a later period. So also wheat and
barley, but neither oats nor rye+ are mentioned in Exodus
or by Homer. Even in the time of David, when Barzillai the
Gileaditet “brought beds, and basins, and earthen vessels,
and wheat, and barley, and flour, and parched corn, and
beans, and lentiles, and parched pulse, and honey, and butter,
and sheep, and cheese of kine,” it will be observed that
neither oats nor rye are mentioned.     Flax also is mentioned
nine times in the Old Testament, and linen thirteen times,
but hemp not once.
      To what race of men these interesting remains are ascrib-
able we have as yet no direct evidence.              Human      bones are
very rare in the Pileworks, and may probably be referred to
accidents, especially as we find that those of children are
   * Die Pflanzen der Pfahlbanten.     in Exodus ix. 32, really means spelt.
   + According to the best Hebrew         + 2 Sam.    xviii. 28,
                                                   ‘pies
scholars, the word translated “rye
                 SCARCITY   OF   HUMAN   REMAINS,          915

most numerous.     M. Desor, indeed, states that nota single
human skeleton has yet been found in any of the stations
belonging to the Stone Age, and Dr. Keller, in his fifth
report, informs us that all the Lake-villages taken together
have not yet produced more than halfa dozen. One mature
skull from Meilen has been described by Professor His, who
 considers that it does not differ much from the ordinary
 Swiss type. While his work was in the press, Prof. Riiti-
 meyer received from Col. Schwab four more skulls, two of
which were obtained at Nidau, one at Sutz, and one at Biel.
Another skull shown to me by Professor Desor, and found at
Auvernier, completes the number mentioned by Dr. Keller.
All these settlements, however, appear to have belonged to
the Bronze Age, nor has it yet been possible certainly to
refer any of the ancient tumuli found in Switzerland to the
earlier period.
   Passing now to the Lake-habitations belonging to the
Bronze Age, we find that they are less generally distributed
than those of the earlier period. They have as yet been
found principally on the Lakes of Geneva, Luissel, Neuf-
chatel, Morat, Bienne, and Sempach ; scarcely any in eastern
Switzerland.   It has been supposed from this that the Age
of Stone lasted longer in the east than in the west, and that
flint and serpentine were in use on Lake Constance long
after bronze had replaced them on the western lakes. We
can, however, hardly suppose that the inhabitants of Inkwyl
and Moosseedorf in Berne, who imported flint from France,
can have been ignorant of the neighbouring civilization on
the Lake of Bienne. Moreover, one settlement of the Bronze
Age has been found on the Lake of Constance; but as the
question now stands, Pileworks of the Metallic period are
almost peculiar to western and central Switzerland. The
constructions of the Bronze Age are more solidly built, but
do not otherwise appear to have differed materially from
216               BRONZE   AGE LAKE-VILLAGES.

those of the Stone Age.      They are often, however, situated
farther from the land and in deeper water, partly no doubt
on account of the greater facility of working timber, but
partly also, perhaps, because more protection was needed as
the means of attack were improved. The principal objects
of bronze are swords, daggers, axes, spear-heads, knives,
fish-hooks, sickles, pins, rings, and bracelets.    The number
of these articles which have been discovered is already very
great, the collection of Col. Schwab alone contaiming no less
than 4846 objects of metal. They are classified in the table
in p. 43, which gives an idea of the relative proportions in
which they occur.
   Many of them are really beautiful, and as bronze must
have been at that early period of considerable value, it is
difficult to understand how so many can have been left un-
 cared for and forgotten, along the shallow margins of the
 Swiss lakes. “Tl est évident,” says Prof. Desor, “ que ce ne
 sont pas des rebuts qui se seraient perdus, sans qu’on s’en
 inquiétat. Is ne sont pas tombés & leau par hasard, non
 plus que cette quantité de vases qui sont accumulés sur cer-
 tain points, ni les jattes & provisions qu’on retire intactes.”
 On the whole he is inclined to think that in some of these cases
 at least, we have “de simples magasins destinés aux usten-
 siles et aux provisions, et qui auraient été détruits par l’in-
 cendie, comme semble l’indiquer la trace du feu que montrent
 fréquemment les poutres aussi bien que les vases en terre.
 On expliquerait ainsi comment      il se fait que les objets en
 bronze sont presque tous neufs, que les vases       sont entiers
 et réunis sur un seul point.     Cette hypothése semble cor-
 roborée par Popinion de plusieurs de nos chercheurs d’an-
 tiquités les plus expérimentés, qui pretendent que lon n’a
 chance de faire de bonnes trouvailles que 14 ot les pieux
 sont brilée, tandis que l’on perd son temps & fouiller les
 stations ou les pieux ne sont pas charbonnés.”     Col. Schwab
                           THE WORSHIP   OF LAKES.                     Pe?
 however, than whom no man has had more experience in
 such matters, while agreeing that comparatively little is ever
 found except in such Lake-villages as show traces of fire,
 expresses himself decidedly, and I think with reason, against
 the “ bazaar ” theory.
    It has been suggested that the early inhabitants of Switzer-
 land may have worshipped the Lakes, and that the beautiful
 bracelets, etc., may have been offerings to the gods. In
 fact, it appears from ancient writers that among the Gauls,
Germans, and other nations, many lakes were regarded as
sacred. M. Aymard (Etude Archéol. sur le Lac du Bouchet.
Le Puy. 1862) has collected several instances of this kind.
According to Cicero*, Justin}, and Strabot, there was a lake
near Toulouse in which the neighbouring tribes used to de-
posit offerings of gold and silver. Tacitus, Pliny, and Virgil
also mention the existence of sacred lakes. Again, so late
as the sixth century, Gregory of Tours, who is quoted by M.
Troyon and M. Aymard, tells us (De Glor. Confes. chap. ii.)
that on Mount Helanus there was a lake which was the
object of popular worship. Every year the inhabitants of
the neighbourhood brought to it offerings of clothes, skins,
cheeses, cakes, etc. Traces of a similar superstition may still
be found lingering in the remote parts of Scotland and
Ireland; in the former country I have myself seen a sacred
spring surrounded by the offerings of the neighbouring pea-
santry, who seemed to consider pence and halfpence as the
most appropriate and agreeable sacrifice to the Spirit of the
Waters. Neither the coarse, broken pottery, the castaway
fragments of bones, nor the traces of habitations, can, how-
ever, be accounted for in this manner§.
  The pottery of the Bronze period is more varied and more

 * De Nat. Deor. lib. iii. xxx.         § See also Wylie “ On Lake-dwell-
             ii. iii                 ings of the Early Periods,” Archzol.
 t Geog. vol. iv.                    vol. xxxvili, p. 181.
218             THE POTTERY    OF THE    BRONZE     AGE.

skilfully made than that of the Stone Age, but the potter’s
wheel does not seem to have been in use. Rings of earthen-
ware are common, and appear to have been used as supports
for the round-bottomed vases. The ornaments are of the same
general character as those on the objects of bronze. Many of
the large urns appear to have been used as store-places for
the grain, etc., which were collected during the summer for
the winter’s use. In the absence, perhaps, of boxes and cup-
boards, even ornaments and instruments seem to have been
kept in large jars. Some beautiful bracelets were found with
several sickles in a jar at Cortaillod. Pieces of pottery, dis-
torted by fire during the process of baking, have, according
to M. Troyon, been found in many of the Lake-villages,
whence he concludes that the pottery was manufactured on
the spot.                .
   Colonel Schwab has found at Nidau more than twenty
crescents made of earthenware, and with the convex side
flattened to serve as afoot. They are compressed at the sides,
sometimes plain, sometimes ornamented, from ten to twelve
inches wide, and six to eight in height.            Dr. Keller was      at
 first inclined to regard them as emblems of moon worship,
but it is more probable that they were pillows*. Though this
seems at first very unlikely, and they must, one would think,
have been very uncomfortable,           still we know that several
barbarous races at the present day use wooden pillows or
neck-rests of the same kind, as, for instance, the Feegeeans,
who, having enormous        heads    of hair,     sacrifice   comfort   to
vanity, and use a mere wooden bar as a pillow.                 The very
long bronze pins found with these “crescents” indicate that
during the Bronze Age the hair was worn very long and
carefully arranged.
      M. Troyon is of opinion that the inhabitants of Switzer-
land during the Bronze Age were of a different race from
                   * Vogt’s Lectures on Man, p. 368.
              INHABITANTS   OF THE LAKE-VILLAGES.             219:
those who had lived there during the earlier period, and he
agrees with some of the Scandinavian archeologists in re-
garding them as the true “Celts,” and in attributing to them
the habit of burning their dead. “Dés que le bronze se
répand en Europe, l’incinération devient d’un usage général.
L’apparition d’un nouveau peuple répond évidemment A celle
de ce métal. L’urne cinéraire, de méme que la tombe cu-
bique, se retrouve sous la surface du sol ou dans le tumulus,
mais celui-ci généralement moins élevé que dans l’4ge pri-
mitif, ne recouvre plus guére de salle funéraire.    Quand on
voit combien il est rare que le bronze accompagne le premier
mode d’inhumation, on doit reconnaitre que l’envahisseur est
resté maitre du sol; du reste il ne pouvait en étre autrement
de la part d’un peuple possédant des armes en métal, or ces
armes sont celles des anciens Celtes qui n’inhumaient point
leur morts, mais les livraient au flammes    du bicher.    L/’in-
cinération étant une    partie intégrante   de leurs pratiques
religieuses, et Purne cinéraire devenant d’un usage général
avec le bronze, il en résulte que le Celte n’est pas le premier
habitant de ’ Europe dans laquelle il a introduit les arts
metallurgiques.” It would be very desirable to have some
statistics, in order that we might appreciate the value of
the evidence to be derived from these Swiss tumuli. M.
Troyon relies on the fact that many of the Lake-villages
were destroyed by fire, and that when, as appears to have
been the case at several places, they were rebuilt during the
Bronze Age, this was done, not exactly on the same spot,
but farther away from the bank. Dr. Keller, on the other
hand, considers that the primitive population did not differ,
either in disposition (anlage), mode of life, or industry, from
that which was   acquainted with the use of bronze; and that
the whole phenomena of the Lake-villages, from thei com-
mencement    to their conclusion,   indicate clearly a gradual
and peaceable development.      The number of instances in
22.0             CHARACTER   OF THE OBJECTS

which Lake-villages had been destroyed by fire has been,
he considers, exaggerated. Of the settlements on the Lakes
of Bienne and Neufchatel, amounting in all to sixty-six, only
a quarter have, according to Col. Schwab, shown any traces
of combustion; a proportion which is, perhaps, not greater
than might have been expected, remembering that the huts
were built of wood, and in all probability covered by thatch.
Moreover, if these conflagrations had resulted from the attacks
of enemies, we ought surely to have found numerous remains
of the slain, whereas all the Lake-villages together have not
as yet supplied us with the remains of more than half a dozen
human skeletons.
   It must, I think, be confessed that the arguments used by
M. Troyon do not justify us in believing with him that the
introduction of bronze was accompanied by an entire change
of population. The construction of Lake-dwellings is a habit
go unusual, that the continuance of similar habitations during
the Bronze Age seems to me a strong argument against any
such hypothesis.
   Towards the close of the Bronze Age the Lake-villages
appear to have gradually become less numerous. During the
Stone Age they were spread over the whole country. Bronze
Age settlements are very rare in the east of Switzerland, and
the Iron Age is represented only on the Lakes of Bienne and
Neufchatel.    In these settlements not only has a new sub-
stance made its appearance, but the forms of the implements
are different. We have, indeed, copies of the bronze axes
made in iron, just as we found before that some of the earlier
bronze celts resembled the stone axes in form; but these are
exceptional cases. The swords have larger handles, and are
more richly ornamented; the knives have straight edges; the
sickles are larger; the pottery is more skilfully made, and is
of the kind generally known as Roman; coins occur, the per-
sonal ornaments are more varied, and glass for the first time
                FOUND    IN DIFFERENT    LAKE-VILLAGES.                  221

makes its appearance. Bronze also is present; but i. the
first place it is no longer used for weapons, and in the
second it is worked in a different manner, being hammered*,
while, as already mentioned, all the objects of the Bronze
Age are cast.
   A field of battle at Tiefenau, near Berne (see p. 7), is
remarkable for the great number of iron weapons and imple-
ments which have been found on it. Pieces of chariots, about
a hundred swords, fragments of coat of mail, lance-heads,
rings, fibule, ornaments, utensils, pieces of pottery and of
glass, accompanied by more than thirty Gaulish and Massa-
hote coins of a date anterior to our era, enable us to refer
this battle-field to the Roman period. About forty Roman
coins have also been found at the small island on the Lake
of Bienne.
   After this period we find no more evidences of Lake-
habitations on a large scale. Here and there, indeed, a
few fishermen may have lingered on the half-destroyed plat-
forms, but the wants and habits of the people had changed,
and the age of the Swiss Puleworks was at an end.
   We have, however, traced them through the ages of Stone
and Bronze down to the beginning of the Iron period. We
have seen evidences of a gradual progress in civilization,
and improvement         in the arts, an increase in the number of
domestic animals, and proofs at last of the existence of an
extended commerce.     We found the country inhabited only
by rude savages, and we leave it the seat of a powerful nation.
Changes so important as these are not effected in a day; the
progress of the human mind is but slow; and the gradual
additions to human knowledge and power, like the rings in
trees, enable us to form some idea how distant must be the
date of their commencement.      So varied, however, are the
conditions of the human mind, so much are all nations affected
  * See Desor, Les Constructions lacustres da Lac de Neuchatel, p. 27.
222             ANTIQUITY   OF LAKE-VILLAGES.

by the influence of others, that when we attempt to express
our impressions, so to say, in terms of years, we are baffled
by the complexity of the problem.
   Some attempts have, indeed, been made to obtain a more
definite chronology, and they will be alluded to in a later
chapter. Though we must not conceal from ourselves the
imperfection of the archeeological record, still we need not
despair of eventually obtaining some     approximate   chrono-
logy.   Our knowledge of primitive antiquity has made an
enormous stride in the last ten years, and we may fairly look
forward with hope to the future.
  The Swiss archeologists are continuing their labours, and
they may rest assured that we in England await with interest
the result of their mvestigations.    Few things, indeed, can
be more interesting than the spectacle of an ancient and
long-forgotten people thus rising, as it were, from the waters
of oblivion, to take that place which properly belongs to it
in the history of the human race.
                               223




                       CHAPTER       VII.

       THE DANISH KJOKKENMODDINGS,     OR SHELL-MOUNDS,

      ENMARK occupies a larger space in the history, than
         on the map of Europe; the nation is greater than the
country.     Though, with the growth of physical power in
surrounding populations, she has lost much of her influence
in political councils, and has been recently deprived of a great
part of her ancient possessions, still the Danes of to-day are
no unworthy representatives of their ancestors. Many a
larger nation might envy them the position they hold in
science and in art, and few have contributed more       to the
progress of human knowledge. Copenhagen may well be
proud both of her museums and of her professors, and I
would especially point to the celebrated Museurn of Northern
Antiquities, as being most characteristic and unique.
   For the formation of such a collection Denmark offers
great opportunities. The whole country appears to have
been, at one time, thickly studded with tumuli: where the
land has not been brought into cultivation, many of them
are often in sight at once, and even in the more fertile and
thickly populated parts, the plough is often diverted from its
course by one of these ancient burial places. Fortunately,
the stones of which they are constructed are so large and
so hard, that their destruction and removal     is a laborious
and expensive undertaking. While, however, on the one
hand, land grows gradually more valuable, and the stones
themselves are-more and more coveted for building or other
224                   DANISH    TUMULI.

purposes: on the other, the conservative traditions, the
feeling of superstitious reverence for the dead, which have
so long protected them from desecration, is gradually be-
coming weaker; and it is estimated that not a day passes
without witnessing the destruction of one or more of these
tumuli, and the loss of some perhaps. almost 1rrecoverable
link in the history of the human race.
  Many of these barrows, indeed, contain in themselves          a
small collection of antiquities, and the whole country may
even be considered as a museum on a great scale. The peat
bogs, which occupy so large an area, may almost be said to
swarm with antiquities, and Professor Steenstrup estimates
that, on an average, every column of peat three feet square
contains some specimen of ancient workmanship.     All these
advantages and opportunities, however, might have been
thrown away, but for the genius and perseverance of Pro-
fessor Thomsen, who may fairly be said to have created the
museum over which he so long and so worthily presided.
   In addition to the objects collected from the tumuli and
the peat bogs, and to those which have been found from
time to time scattered at random      im the soil, the Museum
of Northern Antiquities contains an immense collection of
specimens from some very interesting shell-mounds, which are
known in Denmark under the name of “ Kjékkenméddings,”
and were long supposed to be raised beaches, like those
which are found at so many points along our own shores.
True raised beaches, however,     necessarily contain a variety
of species; the individuals     are of different ages, and the
ishells are, of course, mixed with a considerable quantity of
sand and gravel.   But it was    observed, in the first instance,
I believe, by Professor Steenstrup, that in these supposed
beaches, the shells belonged entirely to full-grown, or to
nearly full-grown, individuals: that they consisted of four
species which do not live together, nor require the same
                 KJOKKENMODDINGS,      OR SHELL-MOUNDS.               225
 conditions, and would not, therefore, be found together alone
 in a natural deposit: and thirdly, that the stratum con-
 tained scarcely any gravel, but consisted almost entirely
 of shells.
    The discovery of rude flint implements, and of bones still
 bearing the marks of knives, confirmed the supposition that
these beds were not natural formations, and it subsequently
became evident that they were, in fact, the sites of ancient
villages ; the primitive population having lived on the shore
and fed principally on shell-fish, but partly also on the pro-
ceeds of the chase. In many places hearths were discovered
consisting of flat stones, arranged in such a manner as to
form small platforms, and bearing all the marks of fire. The
shells and bones not available for food gradually accumulated
round the tents and huts, until they formed deposits generally
from three to five feet, but sometimes as much as ten feet in
thickness, and in some cases more than three hundred yards
in length, with a breadth of from one hundred to two hundred
feet. The name Kjékkenmédding, applied to these mounds,
is derived from Kjékken, “kitchen,” and médding (corre-
sponding to our local word        midding), “a refuse heap,” and
it was, of course, evident that a careful examination of these
accumulations would throw much light on the manners and
civilization of the then population.
   Under these circumstances a committee was formed, con-
sisting of Professor Steenstrup, the celebrated author of the
treatise   “On     the   Alternation    of Generations,’       Professor
Forchhammer, the father of Danish Geology, and Professor
Worsaae, the well-known archeologist: a happy combina-
tion, promising the best results to biology, geology, and
archeology. Much was naturally expected from the labours
of such a triumvirate, and the most sanguine hopes have
been fulfilled.     More than fifty of the deposits have been
carefully examined, many thousand specimens have been col-
                                                           Q
226            DESCRIPTION    OF THE    SHELL-MOUNDS.

lected, ticketed, and deposited in the Museum at Copenhagen,
and the general results have been embodied in six Reports,
presented to the Academy of Sciences at Copenhagen*.
   It is from these reports, and from the excellent Memoir by
M. Morlot, that the following information has principally
been derived. Being, however, anxious to present to my
readers a complete and accurate account of these mterest-
ing shell-mounds, I have twice visited Denmark; first in
1861, with Professor       Busk, and again in the           summer      of
1868. On both these occasions, through the kindness of
Professor Thomsen and Herr K. Herbst, every facility has
been afforded me of examining the large collections made
in different Kjdkkenméddings, in addition to which I had
the great advantage of visiting several of the shell-mounds
under the guidance of Professor Steenstrup himself—espe-
cially one at Havelse in 1861, and those at Meilgaard and
Fannerup,in 1863.
   Mr. Busk and I also visited by ourselves one at Bilidt, on
the Isefjord, close to Fredericksund;         but this is one of the
places at which it would seem that the inhabitants cooked
their dinners actually on the shore itself, so that the shells
and bones are much mixed up with sand and gravel; and we
were not very successful in the search for flint implements.
At Havelse, on the contrary, the settlement was on rather
higher ground, and, though close to the shore, quite beyond
the reach of the waves;       the shelis and bones are, therefore,
almost unmixed with extraneous substances. At this place
the Kjékkenmédding is of small extent, and is in the form
of an irregular ring, enclosing a space on which the ancient
dwelling or dwellings probably stood. In other cases, where

  * Untersdgelser i geologisk-anti-    lent abstract of the Reports in the
quarisk Retning af G. Forchhammer,     Mém. de la Société Vandoise, +t. vi.
J. Steenstrup, og J. Worsaae.    M.    1860.
Morlot also has published an excel-
              DESCRIPTION   OF THE   SHELL-MOUNDS.          227lol

the deposit is of greater extent, as, for instance in the cele-
brated shell-mound at Meilgaard, the surface is undulating,
the greater thickness of the shelly stratum in some places
apparently indicating the arrangement of the dwellings.
When the shell-mound at Havelse was previously visited
by Professor Steenstrup, the shells were being removed to
serve as manure, and the mound, presenting a perpendicular
section, was in a very favourable condition for examination
The small pit thus formed had, however, been filled in; so
that we were obliged to make a fresh excavation. In two or
three hours we obtained about a hundred fragments of bone,
many rude flakes, slingstones, and flint fragments, together
with nine rude axes of the ordinary “shell-mound” type
(figs. 108-110), several of which, however, were picked up
on the surface.
   Our visit to Meilgaard in 1863 was even more successful.
This, which is one of the largest and most interesting shell-
mounds hitherto discovered, is situated not far from the sea-
coast, near Grenaa in north-east Jutland, in a beautiful
beech-forest called “Aigt,” or “Aglskov,” on the property of
M. Olsen, who, with a praiseworthy devotion to science, has
given orders that the Kjékkenmodding should not be de-
stroyed, although the materials of which it consists are well
adapted for the improvement of the soil, and for other pur-
poses, to which, indeed, they had already been in part ap-
plied before the true nature of the deposit was discovered.
Arriving at his house, without invitation or notice, we were
received by M. Olsen and his family with kindness and
hospitality. M. Olsen immediately sent two workmen to
clear away the rubbish which had fallen in since the last
archeological visit, so that when we reached the spot we
found a fresh wall of the shell-mound ready for examination.
In the middle, this Kjékkenmédding has a thickness of about
ten feet, from which, however, it slopes away in all dlirec-
                              q 2
923          DISTRIBUTION   OF THE   SHELL-MOUNDS.

tions; round the principal mound are several smaller ones,
of the same nature.   Over the shells a thin layer of mould
has formed itself, on which the trees grow. A good section
of such a Kjékkenmédding can hardly fail to strike with as-
tonishment any one who sees it for the first time, and it is
difficult to convey in words an exact idea of the appearance
which it presents. The whole thickness consists of shells,
oysters being at Meilgaard by far the most numerous, with
here and there a few bones, and still more rarely stone im-
plements or fragments of pottery. Excepting just at the top
and bottom, the mass is quite unmixed with sand and gravel;
and, in fact, contains nothing but what has been, in some
way or other, subservient to the use of man. The only ex-
ceptions which I could see were a few, very few, rough flint
pebbles, which were probably dredged up with the oysters.
While we were in this neighbourhood, we visited another
Kjokkenmédding at Fannerup on the Kolindsund, which was
even in historical times an arm of the sea, but is now a fresh-
water lake. Other similar deposits have been discovered on
the Randersfjord and Mariagerfjord in this part of Jutland,
nor are the two settlements at Havelse and Bilidt by any
means the only ones on the Isefjord; in the neighbourhood
of Roeskilde,   Kjékkenméddings       occur    near   Gjerdrup, at
Kattinge, and Kattinge Verk, near Trallerup, at Gjershdi,
and opposite the island of Hyldeholme; besides several far-
ther north, others have been found on the islands of Fyen,
of Moen, and of Samsoe, and in Jutland along Liimfjord
and Horsensfjord, as well as on the Mariagerfjord, Randers-
fjord, and Kolindsund. The southern parts of Denmark have
not yet been carefully examined.  Generally it is evident that
deposits of this nature were    scattered here and there over
the whole coast, but that they were never formed inland.
The whole country was more intersected by fjords during
the Stone period even than it is now.         Under these circum-
                     SHELL-MOUNDS      IN     SCOTLAND.                   229
 stances it is evident that a nation which subsisted principally
 on marine mollusca would never form any large inland settle-
 ments. In some instances, indeed, Kjjkkenméddings have
 been found as far as eight miles from the Proves:Fie.171,
 coast, but in these cases there is good reason for sup- f~XA
 posing that the land has encroached on the sea. On
 the other hand, in those parts where Kjékkenméddings
 do not occur, their absence is no doubt occasioned by
 the waves having to a certain extent eaten away
 the shore: an explanation which accounts for their
 being so much more frequent on the borders of the
inland     fjords   than   on   the   coast     itself;   and   which
seems to deprive us of all hope of finding any similar
remains on our eastern and south-eastern shores.
Shell-mounds, although probably belonging to a later
date, have, however, actually been found on our coasts.
They were observed by Dr. Gordon, of Birnie, on the
shores of the Moray Firth. I have had the advantage
of visiting these shell-mounds with him. The largest of
the Scotch Kjékkenméddings is on Lech Spynie.                     We
did not find any implements or pottery in it, although
we searched for several hours, but a labourer, who had
been employed in carting it away for manure, had
previously found some fragments of rude pottery and
the bronze pin (fig. 171). Loch Spynie has been
partially drained, and is shut out from the sea by a
great accumulation of shingle, so that the water is now
perfectly fresh. From ancient records it appears that
the shingle barrier was probably completed, and tke                     Bronze
                                                                        pin from
lake shut out from         the sea, in the thirteenth and               a Scotch
                                                                         Shell-
                                                                        mound.
fourteenth centuries.       On the other hand, I have sub-
mitted the bronze pin figured here to Mr. Franks, who gives
it as his opinion that it is probably not older than 800 or
900 a.p.    If, therefore, it really belongs to the shell-monnd,
230               SHELL-MOUNDS          IN OTHER    COUNTRIES.

and there seems no reason to doubt the statement of the man
who found it, we thus get an approximate date for the
accumulation of the mound itself. At St. Valéry, close to
the mouth of the Somme, Mr. Evans, Mr. Prestwich, and I
found a large accumulation of shells, from which I obtained
several flint flakes and some pieces of rude pottery. Mr.
Pengelly and Mr. Spence Bate have recently described some
shell-mounds in Cornwall and Devonshire.      Similar remains
have been observed in various parts of the world, as, for
instance, in Australia and Dampier *, in Tierra del Fuego by
Mr. Darwin +, in the Malay Peninsula by Mr. Harle t, in the
Andaman islands by Dr. Stoliczka §, and in both North|| and
SouthY America.
   The fact that the majority of the Danish shell-mounds are
found at a height of only a few feet above the sea appears to
prove that there has been no considerable subsidence of the
land since their formation, while, on the other hand, it clearly
shows that there can have been no elevation. In certain
cases, however, where the shore is steep, they have been
found at a considerable height. It might indeed be sup-
posed that where, as at Bilidt, the materials of the Kjékken-
médding were rudely interstratified with sand and gravel,
the land must have sunk; but if for any length of time such
a deposit was subjected to the action of the waves, all traces
of it would be obliterated, and it is, therefore, probable that
an explanation is rather to be found in the fact that the
action of waves and storms may have been greater at that
time than they are now.   At present the tides only affect
the Kattegat to the extent of about a foot and a half, and
the configuration of the land protects it very much from the
   * Pinkerton’s Travels, vol. ii. p.           § Proc. As. Soc. Bengal, Jan.
473.                                         1870.
   + Journal, p. 234.                           || H. Wyman, The American Natu-
  t Ethnological        Soc, Trans.,   New   alist, vol. ii. Nos. 8, 9, and 11.
Ser. vol. ii. p. 119,                          { Brett's Indian Tribes of Guiana.
            FLORA   OF THE   DANISH   SHELL-MOUNDS,       231

action of the winds.  On the other hand, the tides on the
west coast of Jutland rise about nine feet, and the winds
have been known to produce differences of level amounting
to twenty-nine feet; and as we know that Jutland was
anciently an archipelago, and that the Baltic was more open
to the German Ocean than it is now, we can easily under-
stand that the fluctuations of level may have been greater,
and we can thus explain how the waves may have risen over
the Kjékkenmédding at Bilidt (which is after all not much
more than ten feet above the water), without resorting to the
hypothesis of a subsidence  and subsequent elevation of the
coast.
   In the Lake-habitations of the Stone Age in Switzerland,
grains of wheat and barley, and even pieces of bread, or
rather biscuit, have been found. It does not, however, appear
that the men of the Kjékkenméddings had any knowledge
of agriculture, no traces of grain of any sort having been
hitherto discovered.    The only vegetable remains found in
them have been burnt pieces of wood, and some charred sub-
stance, referred by M. Forchhammer to the Zostera marina,
a sea-plant which was, perhaps, used in the production of
salt.
   The four species which are the most abundant in the shell-
mounds are—
              The oyster, Ostrea edulis, L.
              The cockle, Cardium edule, L.
              The mussel, Mytilus edulis, L. and
              The periwinkle, Littorina littorea, L.
all four of which are still used as food for man.      Other
species occur more rarely, namely,—
              Nassa reticulata, L.
              Buceinum undatum, L.
              Venus pullastra, Mont.
              Heliw nemoralis, Mil.
292             FAUNA   OF THE    SHELL-MOUNDS.

               Venus aurea, Gm.
                Trigonella plana, Da. C.
               Littorina obtusata, L.
              Helix strigella, Mill. and
              Carocolla lupicida, L.
  It is remarkable that the speeimens of the first seven
species are well developed, and decidedly larger than any
now found in the neighbourhood. This is especially the case
with the Cardiwm edule and Itttorina littorea, while the
oyster has entirely disappeared, and even m the Kattegat
itself occurs only in a few places ; a result which may, perhaps,
be partly owing to the quantities caught by fishermen. Some
 oysters were, however, still living in the Isefjord at the be-
 ginning of this century, and their destruction cannot be alto-
 gether ascribed to the fishermen, as great numbers of dead
 shells are still present ; but in this case it is attributed to the
 abundance of starfishes, which are very destructive to oysters.
 On the whole, their disappearance, especially when taken in
 connexion with the dwarf size of the other species, is evi-
 dently attributable in a great measure to the smaller pro-
 portion of salt in the water.
    Of Crustacea only a few fragments of crabs have hitherto
 been found. The remains of vertebrata are very numerous
 and extremely mteresting. In order to form an idea of the
 number of bones, and of the relative proportions belonging
 to different animals, Professor Steenstrup dug out from three
 different parts of the shell-mound at Havelse, square pillars
 with sides three feet in length, and carefully collected the
 bones therein contained.        In the first pillar he found 175
 bones of mammals, and 35 of birds; m the second pillar he
 found 121 of mammals and 9 of birds; in the third 309 of
 mammals and 10 of birds.   The pillars, however, were not
 exactly comparable, because their cubic contents depended
 on the thickness of the shell-mound at the place where they
                      FISH.   BIRDS.    MAMMALS.                 200

were taken, and varied between seventeen and twenty cubic
feet. On the whole, Prof. Steenstrup estimates that there
were from ten to twelve bones in each cubic foot. It will be
seen, therefore, that the number of bones is very great.
Indeed, from the mound at Havelse alone the Committee
obtained in one summer 3500 bones of mammals, and more
than 200 of birds, besides many hundred of fishes, which
latter, indeed, are almost innumerable. The most common
species are—
                Clupea harengus, L. (the herring),
                Gadus callarias, L. (the dorse),
                Pleuronectes limanda, L. (the dab), and
                Murcena anguilla, L. (the eel).
   The remains of birds are highly interesting and instruc-
tive. The domestic fowl (Gallus domesticus) is entirely
absent. The two domestic swallows of Denmark (Hirundo
rustica and H. urbica), the sparrow and the stork are also
missing. On the other hand, fine specimens of the caper-
cailzie (Tetrao wrogallus) which feeds principally on the buds
of the pine, show that, as we know already from the remains
found in the peat, the country was at one time covered with
pine forests. Aquatic birds, however, are the most frequent,
especially several species of ducks and geese. The wild swan
(Cygnus musicus) which only visits Denmark in winter, is
also frequently found ; but, perhaps, the most interesting of
the birds whose remains       have been identified, is the Great
Auk   (Alea impennis, L.), a species which is now            almost,
if not altogether, extinct.
  Of mammalia by far the most common are—
               The stag (Cervus elephas, L.)
               The roedeer (Cervus capreolus, L.) and
               The wild boar (Sus scrofa, L.)
Indeed,   Professor    Steenstrup      estimates   that these three
234                              MAMMALS.

species form ninety-seven per cent. of the whole; the others
are—
              The urus (Bos urus, L.)
              The dog (Cants familiaris, L.)
              The fox (Canis vulpes, L.)
              The wolf (Canis lupus, L.)
              The marten (Martes sp.)
              The otter (Lutra vulgaris, Exl.)
              The porpoise (Delphinus phoceena, L.
              The seal (Phoca sp.)
              The water-rat        (Hypudceus      amphibius, L. and
                           Hypudeus agrestis, L.)
              The beaver (Castor fiber, L.)
               The lynx (Felis lynx, L.)
               The wild cat (Felis catus, L.)
               The hedgehog (Hrinaceus ewropeeus, L }
               The bear (Ursus arctos, L.)
               The mouse (Mus flavicollis, Mel.).
There are also traces of a smaller species of ox.               The Lithu-
anian   aurochs    (Bison europceus)        has   been     found,    though
rarely, in the peat bogs, but not yet in the Kjokkenméd-
dings. The musk ox (Ovtbos moschatus) and the domestic
ox (Bos taurus), as well as the reindeer, the elk, the hare, the
sheep, and the domestic hog, are all absent*.
   Professor Steenstrup does not believe that the domestic
hog of ancient Hurope was directly derived from the wild
boar, but rather that it was introduced from the east; and
the skulls which he showed me in support of this belief cer-
tainly exhibited very great differences between the two races.
The sheep, the horse, and the reindeer are entirely absent,
the domestic cat was not known in Europe until about the
  * It isa curious fact that,as Prof.   land indicate, asa general rule, larger
Steenstrup informs me, the bones        and more powerful animals than those
from the Kjékkenméddings of Jut-        of the Islands.
                      CONDITION    OF THE BONES.                            285

ninth century, and the bones of the urus are probably those
of wild specimens, so that the dog * appears to have been the
only domestic animal of the period; and though it may
fairly be asked whether the bones may not have belonged to
a race of wild dogs, the question admits of a satisfactory
answer.               :
   Among the remains of birds, the long bones which form
about one fifth of the skeleton, are, in the Kjékkenméddings,
about twenty times as numerous as the others, and are almost
always imperfect, the shaft only remaining. In the same
manner it would be impossible to reconstruct a perfect skele-
ton of the quadrupeds, certain bones and parts of bones being
always absent.        In the case      of the ox, for instance,             the
missing parts are the heads of the long bones (though while
the shaft only of the femur is found, in the humerus one end
is generally perfect), the back bone except the first two
vertebree, the spinous processes, and often the ribs, and the
bones of the skull except the lower jaw and the portion
round the eyes. It occurred to Prof. Steenstrup that these
curious results might, perhaps, be referred to dogs; and,
on trying the experiment, he ascertained that the bones
which are absent from the Kjékkenméddings are precisely:
those which dogs eat, and those which are present are the
parts which are hard and solid and do not contain                      much
nourishment. Prof. Steenstrup has since published a diagram
of a skeleton, tinted in such a manner as to show at a glance
which of the bones occur in the Kjékkenméddings, and
points out that it coincides exactly with one given by M.
Flourens to illustrate those portions of the skeleton which
are first formed.    Although a glance at the longitudinal
section of a long bone, as, for instance, of a femur, and a
comparison of the open cancellated tissue of the two ends
  * Prom the marks of knives onthe     was then, as it is still among several
bones, it seems evident that the dog   savage tribes, an article of food.
236             PREVALENCE   OF CERTAIN BONES.

with the solid, close texture of the shaft, at once justifies and
accounts for the selection made by the dogs, it is interesting
thus to ascertain that their predilections were the same in
primeval times as at present. Moreover, we may in this
manner explain the prevalence of some bones in fossil strata.
I have already mentioned that of the skull, the hard parts
round the eye and the lower jaw are the only parts left ;
now the preponderance of lower jaws in a fossil state is well
known.
    For instance, in the “ Proceedings of the Geological Society
for 1857,” p. 277, Dr. Falconer, after describing some of the
 fossils found by Mr. Beccles at Swanage, says :—“‘ The
 curious fact that only lower jaws should have turned up
 among the Stonesfield mammalian remains has often been the
 subject of speculation or remark. The same, to a certain
extent, has held good with the remains found in the Purbeck
bedshsusiaces In these minute creatures, unless the bone
be complete, and, supposing it to be a long bone, with both
its articular surfaces perfect, it is almost hopeless, or at any
rate very discouraging, to attempt to make out the creature
that yielded it; whereas the smallest fragment of a jaw, with
a minute tooth in it, speaks volumes of evidence at the first
glance. This I believe to be one great reason why we hear
so much of jaw remains, and so little of other bones.” No
doubt it is so, but these observations, made by Prof. Steen-
strup, afford a farther explanation of the fact, and it is to be
regretted that the parts of the long bones which are most
important to the paleontologist are also those which are
preferred by beasts of prey.
   In every case the bones which contained marrow are split
open in the manner best adapted for its extraction; this
peculiarity, which is in itself satisfactory proof of the pre-
sence of man, has not yet been observed in bones from the
true tertiary strata.
               HABITS   OF THE   MOUND-BUILDERS.               237

   The Kjékkenméddings were not mere summer quarters ;
the ancient fishermen resided on these spots for at least two-
thirds, if not the whole of the year.     This we learn from an
examination   of the bones of the wild animals, as it is often
possible to determine, within very narrow limits, the time of
year at which they were killed. For instance, the remains
of the wild swan (Cygnus musicus) are very common, and
this bird is only a winter visitor, leaving the Danish coasts
in March, and returning in November.        It might naturally
have been hoped that the remains of young birds would
have supplied evidence as to the spring and early summer,
but unfortunately, as has been already explained, no such
bones are to be found. It is, therefore, fortunate that among
the mammalia two periodical phenomena occur; namely, the
shedding and reproduction of stags’ antlers, which, with
slight variations according to age, have a fixed season ; and,
secondly, the birth and growth of the young. These, and
similar phenomena, render it highly probable that the
“ mound-builders ” resided on the Danish coast all the year
round, though I am disposed to think that, like the Fuegians,
who lead, even now, avery similar life, they frequently moved
from spot to spot. This appears to me to be indicated not
only by the condition of the deserted hearths, but by the
colour of the flint flakes, etc. ; for while many of these retain
the usual dull bluish black colour which is characteristic of
newly-broken flints, and which remains unaltered as long
as they are surrounded     by carbonate    of lime,   others   are
whitened, as is usual with those which have been exposed
for any length of time. Perhaps, therefore, these were lying
on the surface during some period of desertion, and covered
over only when the place was again inhabited.
   The flint implements found in the Kjokkenméddings re-
semble those which are characteristic of the “ coastfinds.”
They may be classed as flakes (figs. 82-96) ; “ Shell-mound ”
238                   FLINT IMPLEMENTS

axes, which, as we have already observed, present a peculiar
                          Fre. 172.




                           Awl.




                                                 Fre. 175.
      Fre, 173,                                    aay




                           Lance-heads,


form (figs. 108-110, and pl. 1, figs. 8, 9), awls (fig. 172),
                      FROM       THE    SHELL-MOUNDS,                 239

slngstones or net-weights (pl. 1, fig. 12), and rude lance-
heads (figs. 173-175). With these occur other forms, which,
though very rude, are evidently artificial, such as fig. 176,
which appears to have been a kind of axe, and others of which
the sharp edges were evidently used for cutting purposes.
                             -         Fic. 176.




                                 Rude Flint Implement.

   In the two days which we spent at Meilgaard, we found
the following objects :—
        Peepelemomia      ame        « » » s «            Ad
         takeseee           8 ce        at st       =    BD
         POMOADIE OBC. tel ak           es       bs        6
         CCG     Mere   Cat     ce” iy ies ip recy         6
         POmery OO          eo          a Ge               4 pieces
         OOM CMNS TUNEL        oe      le ye ss            1
         Dime stolice. 200Ute, 2s.         « » «          20)
                                                         195
  Of the three “ pillars” of material, just alluded to (p. 232),
the first contained    seven flint flakes, two axes, one worked
piece of horn, three worked pieces of bone, and some pottery;
in the second were sixteen flint flakes, one axe, and seven
slingstones; in the third, four flint flakes, two flint axes,
and a pointed    bone.           In short, without appearmg     to be
richer than other Kjékkenméddings, Meilgaard and Havelse
have each produced already more than a thousand of these
rude relics, though but a small portion of the mound has
240        ABSENCE   OF POLISHED    FLINT   IMPLEMENTS.

in either case been hitherto removed.         We need not, there-
fore, wonder at the number of axes found in the valley of
the Somme, where      so much      larger a mass   of material has
been examined.
   None of the large polished axes have yet been found in
the Kjékkenméddings: but a fragment of one, which was
discovered at Havelse, and which had been worked up intoa
scraper, shows that they were not altogether unknown.        A
very few carefully formed weapons have been found, but the
implements generally are very rude, and of the same types
as those which have been already described as characteristic
of the “‘Coastfinds.”” Small pieces of very coarse pottery
have also been discovered, and many of the bones from the
 Kjokkenméddings bear evident marks of a sharp mstrument;
 several of the pieces found by us were in this condition, and
had been fashioned into rude pins.
    The observations of Arctic travellers prove that even if
human bones had been found in the shell-mounds, this
would not of itself be any evidence of cannibalism; but the
absence of such remains satisfactorily shows that the primi-
tive population of the North were free from this practice.
On the other hand, the tumuli have supplied us with
numerous skeletons which probably belong to the Stone Age.
The skulls are very round, and in many respects resemble
those of the Lapps, but have a more projecting ridge over
the eye.   One curious peculiarity is, that their front teeth
did not overlap as ours do, but met one another, as do those
of the Greenlanders of the present day. This evidently
indicates a peculiar manner of eating.
  Much as still remains to be made out respecting the men
of the Stone period, the facts already ascertained, like a few
strokes by a clever draughtsman, supply us with the elements
of an outline sketch. Carrying our imagination back into
the past, we see before us on the low shores of the Danish
             FOOD   OF THE   SHELL-MOUND   BUILDERS.          241

Archipelago a race of small men, with heavy overhanging
brows, round heads, and faces probably much like those of
the present Laplanders. As they must evidently have had
some protection from the weather, it is most probable that
they lived in tents made of skins. The total absence of
metal in the Kjékkenméddings indicates that they had not
yet any weapons except those made of wood, stone, horn, and
bone. Their principal food must have consisted of shell-fish,
but they were able to catch fish, and often varied their diet
by game caught in hunting. It is, perhaps, not uncharitable
to conclude that, when their hunters were unusually suc-
cessful, the whole community gorged itself with food, as is
the case with many savage races at the present time. It is
evident that marrow was considered a great delicacy, for
every single bone which contained any was split open in the
manner best adapted to extract the precious morsel.
   We have already seen that the mound-builders were
regular settlers and not mere summer visitors; and on the
whole they seem to have lived in very much the same
manner as the Tierra del Fuegians, who dwell on the coast,
feed principally on shell-fish, and have the dog as their only
domestic animal. A very good account of them is given in
Darwin’s Journal (p. 234), from which      I extract the follow-
ing passages, which give us a vivid and probably correct
idea of what might have been seen on the Danish shores,
long, long ago. ‘The inhabitants, living chiefly upon shell-
fish, are obliged constantly to change their place of residence;
but they return at intervals to the same spots, as is evident
from the pile of old shells, which must often amount to some
tons in weight. These heaps can be distinguished at a long
distance by the bright green colour of certain plants which
invariably grow on them... . . . The Fuegian wigwam
resembles, in size and dimensions, a haycock. It merely
consists of a few broken branches stuck in the ground, and
                                                 R
242                        THE   FUEGIANS.

very imperfectly thatched on one side with a few tufts of
grass and rushes. The whole cannot be so much as the work
of an hour, and it is only used for a few days. ....          At a
subsequent period, the Beagle anchored for a couple of days
under Wollaston Island, which is a short way to the north-
ward. While going on shore, we pulled alongside a canoe
with six Fuegians. These were the most abject and miser-
able creatures I any where beheld. On the east coast, the
natives, as we have seen, have      guanaco     cloaks, and on the
west, they possess sealskins. Amongst the central tribes the
men generally possess an otter-skin, or some small scrap about
as large as a pocket-handkerchief, which is barely sufficient
to cover their backs as low down as their loins. It is laced
across the breast by strings, and according as the wind
blows, it is shifted from side to side.        But these Fuegians
in the canoe were quite naked, and even one full-grown
woman was absolutely so. It was raming heavily, and the
fresh water, together with the spray, trickled down her
body: £23  ai x These poor wretches were stunted in their
growth, their hideous faces bedaubed with white paint, their
skins filthy and greasy, their hair entangled, their voices
discordant,   their   gestures   violent     and without   dignity.
Viewing such men, one can hardly make oneself believe they
are fellow-creatures and inhabitants of the same world... .
At night, five or six human beings, naked, and scarcely pro-
tected from the wind and rain of this tempestuous climate,
sleep on the wet ground coiled up like animals.      Whenever
it is low water, they must rise to pick shell-fish from the
rocks; and the women, winter and summer, either dive to
collect sea eggs, or sit patiently in their canoes, and, with a
baited hair-line, jerk out small fish. If a seal is killed, or
the floating carcase of a putrid whale discovered, it is a
feast: such miserable food is assisted by a few tasteless
berries and fungi.     Nor are   they exempt from      famine, and,
   THE   RELATION   OF   THE   SHELL-MOUNDS   TO   THE   TUMULI.     243

as a consequence, cannibalism accompanied by parricide.”
In this latter respect, however, the advantage appears to be
all on the side of the ancients, whom we have no right to
accuse of cannibalism.
   If the absence of cereal remains justifies us, as it appears
to do, in concluding that they had no knowledge of agri-
culture, they must certainly have sometimes suffered from
periods of great scarcity, indications of which may, perhaps,
be seen in the bones        of the fox, wolf, and other carnivora,
which would hardly have been eaten from choice; on the
other hand, they were blessed in the ignorance of spirituous
liquors, and saved thereby from what is at present the
greatest scourge of Northern Europe.
   Prof. Worsaae has proposed to divide the Stone Age into
two divisions, the first of which he again sub-divides. His
classification stands as follows :—
                         The Older Stone Age.
  1. The stone implements found in the drift, and in caves
with remains of the mammoth, rhinoceros, hyzna, and other
extinct animals.
   2. The Kjdkkenméddings and Coastfinds.
                     The Later Stone Age.
   Characterized by the beautifully worked stone mmplements
and large tumuli.
   The shell-mounds and coastfinds, according to Professor
Worsaae, are characterized by very rough flint implements
(figs. 108-10, 172-6) and are the remains of a muchruder and
more barbarous people than that which constructed the large
Stone Age tumuli, and made           the beautiful weapons,        etc.,
found in them.      He does not altogether deny that a few
well-worked implements, and fragments of such, have been
found in the Kjékkenméddings, but he considers that some
of these at least may be altogether more recent than the
                           R 2
244           THE RELATION OF THE SHELL-MOUNDS

shell-mounds in which they are reported to have been found,
and, at any rate, that their presence is altogether exceptional.
At Meilgaard, for instance, the researches undertaken under
the superintendence of the late king in June, 1861, produced
more than five hundred flint flakes and other rude implements,
but not a single specimen with a trace of polishing, or in any
way resembling the flint implements found in the tumuli.
On the other hand these rude implements are said to be
wanting in the tumuli, where they are replaced by instru-
ments of a different character and more skilful workmanship.
Moreover, while it is admitted on all hands that the shell-
mound makers had no domestic animal but the dog, and no
knowledge of agriculture, Prof. Worsaae considers that during
the later Stone Age, the inhabitants of Denmark certainly
possessed tame cattle and horse~ and had in all probability
some knowledge of agriculture.
  Prof. Steenstrup is of an entirely different opinion, and
considers that the Kjdkkenméddings and Stone Age tumuli
were contemporaneous. He denies altogether that remains of
tame oxen or horses have been found in tumuli of the Stone
Age, except in very few instances, and in these he maintains
that the fragments which have occurred are evidently not
coeval with the mounds themselves, and that in all proba-
bility they have been introduced by foxes. He admits that
the stone implements from the shell-mounds and coastfinds
are altogether different from, and much ruder than, those
from the tumuli; he considers the two classes as representing,
not two different degrees, but two different phases of one
single condition of civilization. ‘The tumuli are the burial
places of chiefs, the Kjékkenméddings are the refuse heaps
of fishermen.    The first contain all that skill could contrive,
affection offer, or wealth command; the second, those things
only which art could not make available, which were
thrown away as useless, or accidentally lost.          In order,
                          TO THE   TUMULI.                  245

therefore, to compare these two classes of objects, we must
take,—not the ordinary rude specimens which are so numerous
in the shell-mounds, but the few better made implements which,
fortunately for science and for us, were lost among the oyster-
shells, or which had been broken, and therefore thrown away.
These, though few in number, are, in Professor Steenstrup’s
opinion quite as numereus as could have been expected under
the circumstances.     Moreover, the long flint flakes, which
are so common in the Kjékkenméddings, are sufficient evi-
dence that great skill in the treatment of flint had already
been attained.    Indeed, as Professor Steenstrup has pointed
out, we are apt, in consequence of their simplicity, and the
small number of blows required in forming these flakes, to
underrate the skill required for their manufacture. Any one,
however, who will try to make some for himself, while he
will probably be very unsuccessful, will at least learn a
valuable lesson in the appreciation of flint implements. Some
of the flakes found in the Kjékkenméddings are equal to any
from the tumuli; several of those which we found at Meil-
gaard were more than five, and one was more than six, inches
in length, while I have in my possession a giant flake from
Fannerup (figs. 82-84), given to me by Professor Steenstrup,
which has a length of eight inches and three quarters. As
regards the rude, more or less triangular “axes” (figs.
108-10) which are so characteristic of the Kjékkenméddings
and coastfinds,   Prof. Steenstrup,   as we have already seen,
declines to compare    them with the polished axes      of the
tumuli, because in his opinion they were not intended for
the same purposes.      In addition to the direct evidence
derived from the discovery of some few well-made flint axes
of the tumulus type, Professor Steenstrup relies much on the
indirect evidence derivable from the other contents of the
shell-mounds.    Thus the frequent remains of large and
full-grown animals, for instance of the seal, and the wild
246                     1HE OPINIONS   OF

ox, are in his opinion sufficient evidence that the shell-mound
builders must have had weapons more useful and destructive
than any which Prof. Worsaae will concede to them; more-
over, he considers that many of the cuts which are so common
on the bones found in the shell-heaps must have been made
by polished implements, and are too smooth to be the marks
of flint flakes, according to the suggestion of Professor
Worsaae.    Finally, Professor Steenstrup, though not at-
tributing so much weight as Professor Worsaae to the
absence of the ruder implements from the tumuli, even if
this had been the case, disputes the fact on the ground
that these implements would not until recently have been
recognized and collected, and that they have, im fact, been
found whenever they were looked for.
   After having carefully considered the evidence on both
sides, I find myself, as might naturally be expected, unable
altogether to agree with either.
      The small rude axes seem to me even less well adapted to
the purpose suggested by Prof. Steenstrup, than for those
which have generally been attributed to them. ‘There are,
no doubt, some which could never have been used for cutting,
but these may have been failures, owing to some want of skill
on the part of the manufacturer, or some flaw in the flint
itself. Others appear to me, as to Prof. Worsaae, serviceable,
though rude; and well adapted for some purpose (possibly for
oyster dredging or chopping wood), which required a strong,
rather than a sharp edge. They also very closely resemble
 in form some of the adzes used by the South Sea Islanders,
 one of which I have figured for comparison (see pp. 98, 99).
 They seem to me, however, as to Prof. Steenstrup, to differ
 in character from the well-made and generally polished
 axes, and not to be ruder implements of the same type.
 Although the carefully formed knives, axes, lance-heads, etc.,
 would not be likely to abound in the Kjékkenméddings, any
              MESSRS.   STEENSTRUP   AND   WORSAAE,             247

more than works of art, or objects of value, in modern dust-
heaps; still I confess I should have expected that fragments
of these instruments, recognizable to us, though useless to
their original owners, would have been more numerous than,
in reality, they appear to be.
   In addition to the five hundred rude implements, described
by Prof. Worsaae, as having been found at Meilgaard during
the king’s visit, I myself obtained a hundred and forty flint
flakes, with about fifty other implements, in the visit to
this celebrated locality which I made last year under the
guidance   of Prof. Steenstrup.      To    these, again, must   be
added many which had previously been collected by M.
Olsen, and the members of the Kjékkenmidding committee ;
and yet among so large a number of instruments of various
kinds there is only one which in any respect resembles the
well-worked implements of the tumuli. So, again, at Havelse
only a single fragment of a polished axe has been found
among more than a thousand objects of the ruder kind. It
might, however, fairly be urged that in such a comparison,
neither the flakes nor “slingstones” ought to be brought
into consideration;   in this case, and if we were to count the
axes only, the numbers would be greatly diminished.
   There is also much weight in Prof. Steenstrup’s argument
derived from the flint flakes, and he has not at all exag-
gerated the skill shown in their manufacture.         Their edges,
however, are so sharp that it would, I cannot help thinking,
be very difficult to distinguish a cut produced by a flake,
from one made by a ground axe. On the other hand, the
alleged absence of rude implements in the Stone Age barrows
has been satisfactorily explained by Professor Steenstrup.
In this country it might be argued from the statements of so
intelligent an antiquary as Sir R. Colt Hoare, that rude im-
plements were never, or very rarely, found in tumuli, but
the more recent researches    of Mr. Bateman, Mr. Greenwell,
248           ANTIQUITY   OF THE   SHELL-MOUNDS.

and other archeologists, have shown that this is very far
from being the case, and have made it evident that the ruder
implements of stone were overlooked by the earlier arche-
ologists. In the tumuli examined by Mr. Bateman, he ob-
tained many flint flakes, etc., quite as rude as those which
are found in the shell-mounds.     So faras I am aware, however,
none of the small triangular axes, which are so characteristic
of the shell-mounds, have yet been met with in the tumuli.
Nor, on the other hand, has a single specimen resembling
those which are characteristie of the Paleolithic Age, yet
been found in the shell-mounds.
   Finally, as regards the supposed remains of domestic
animals (other than the dog) in Stone Age tumuli, the evi-
 dence brought forward by Professor Worsaae seems to me
inconclusive, which, however, is of the less consequence, as
the poimt will certainly be determined ere long, now that
attention has specially been directed to it.
   On the whole, the evidence appears to show that the
Danish shell-mounds represent a definite period in the history
of that country, and are probably referable to the early part
of the Neolithic Stone Age, when the art of polishing flint
implements was known, but before it had reached its greatest
development.
  It is, however, as yet, impossible to affix even an approxi-
mate date in years to the formation of the Kjékkenméddings.
Their accumulation, indeed, must      evidently have occupied a
considerable period, and it is of course highly probable that
some are much older than others. They must all, however,
be of very considerable antiquity.       We know that the
country has long been covered by beech forests, and yet it
appears that during the Bronze Age beeches were absent,
or only represented by stragglers, while the whole country
was covered with oaks. This change implies a great lapse
of time, even if we suppose that but a few generations of
              ANTIQUITY   OF THE   SHELL-MOUNDS.           249

oaks succeeded one another. We know also that the oaks
had been preceded by pines, and that the country was in-
habited even then.
  Again, the immense number of objects belonging to the
Bronze Age, which have been already found in Denmark,
and the great number of tumuli, appear to justify the
Danish archeologists in assigning to this period a great
lapse of time. This argument applies with peculiar force
to the remains of the Stone period; for a country, the inhabi-
tants of which live by hunting and fishing, can never be
thickly populated; and, on the whole, the conclusion is forced
upon us, that the country must have been inhabited for a
lengthened period, although none of the Danish remains yet
discovered belong to a time as ancient as some of those
which have been found in other parts of Europe, and which
will be described in subsequent chapters.
                             250




                      CHAPTER      VIII.

                NORTH AMERICAN ARCHHOLOGY.

    UR knowledge of North American Archeology is de-
      rived mainly from the valuable researches of Mr. Caleb
Atwater, contained   in the first volume   of the Archeologia
Americana, and from four excellent memoirs published under
the auspices of the Smithsonian Institution:—1. Ancient
Monuments of the Mississippi Valley, comprising the Re-
sults of extensive Original Surveys and Explorations, by
EH. G. Squier, A.M., and HE. H. Davis, M.D.       2. Aboriginal
Monuments     of the State of New       York,   comprising    the
Results of Original Surveys and Explorations, with an illus-
trative Appendix; by H.G. Squier, A.M.      3. The Antiqui-
ties of Wisconsin, as surveyed and described by J. A.
Lapham. 4. The Archeology of the United States, or
Sketches,   Historical and Biographical,    of the Progress    of
Information and Opinion respecting Vestiges of Antiquity in
the United States; by Samuel F. Haven.          Nor must I
omit to mention Schoolcraft’s History, Condition, and Pro-
spects of the Indian Tribes of the United States.
   The memoir by Messrs. Squier and Davis, occupying more
than three hundred pages, is chiefly descriptive of ancient
fortifications, enclosures, temples, and mounds, and of the
different implements, ornaments, etc., which have been ob-
tained from them.      It is embellished with forty-eight plates,
and two hundred and seven woodcuts.
                            BIBLIOGRAPHY.                      Do

   In his second work, Mr. Squier confines himself to the
antiquities of the State of New York. Within these limits,
however, he describes many ancient monuments of various
kinds, and he feels “warranted in estimating the number
which originally existed in the State at from two hundred
to two hundred and fifty.’ He comes to the conclusion,
“little anticipated,” he-says, “when I started on my trip of
exploration,” that the earthworks of Western New York
were erected by the Iroquois, or their western neighbours,
and do not possess any very great antiquity.
   The systematic exploration of the ancient remains in the
State of Wisconsin, described in the memoir by Mr. Lapham,
was undertaken on behalf of the American Antiquarian
Society, by which the necessary funds were provided. The
cost of the publication, however, which from the great num-
ber of engravings (fifty-five plates, besides sixty-one wood
engravings) was considerable, was defrayed by the Smith-
sonian Institution, and the work is included in the seventh
volume of “ Contributions.”
  Mr. Haven’s work is well described in the title, and forms
an interesting introduction to the study of North American
Archeology.     He gives us comparatively few observations or
opinions of his own; but after a careful examination of what
others have written, he comes to the conclusion that the
ancient earthworks of the United States “ differ less in kind
than in degree from other remains concerning which history
has not been entirely silent. They are more numerous, more
concentrated, and in some particulars on a larger scale of
labour, than the works which approach them on their several
borders, and with whose various characters they are blended.
Their numbers     may   be the result of frequent    changes   of
residence by a comparatively limited population, in accord-
ance with a superstitious    trait of the Indian nature, leading
to the abandonment of places where any great calamity has
252               CLASSIFICATION   OF ANTIQUITIES.

been suffered; but they appear rather to indicate a country
thickly inhabited for a period long enough to admit of the
progressive enlargement and extension of its movements.”
  Although Mr. Schooleraft’s work is more                especially de-
voted to the present, or recent, condition and habits of the
Indian tribes, still he gives us much archeological informa-
tion, and I shall have occasion frequently to quote from his
elaborate work.
  The antiquities themselves fall into two great divisions:
Implements (including ornaments) and Harthworks.        The
earthworks have been again divided by the American Archee-
ologists into seven classes:—1. Defensive enclosures; 2.
Sacred and miscellaneous enclosures; 3. Sepulchral mounds;
4, Sacrificial   mounds;     5. Temple      mounds;       6. “ Animal”
mounds;      and 7. Miscellaneous       mounds.       These      classes   I
shall treat separately, and we can then better consider the
* mound-builders” themselves.
   The simple weapons of bone and stone, found in America,
closely resemble those which occur in other countries.
The flakes, hatchets, axes, arrow-heads, and bone imple-
ments     are, for instance, very similar      to those which occur
in the Swiss Lakes, if only we            make       allowance     for the
differences of material. In addition to the simple forms,
which may almost be said to be ubiquitous, there are some,
however, which are more complicated. In many cases they
are perforated, as for instance those figured by Messrs. Squier
and Davis*. The perforated axes found in Europe are gene-
rally considered to belong to the Metallic Age; but as far as
America is concerned, we have not yet any evidence as to
the relative antiquity of the perforated and imperforated
types.
      At the time of the discovery of America, iron was abso-
  * Ancient Monuments   of the Mississippi Valley.    By E. S. Squier and
E. H. Davis.
                          IMPLEMENTS.                     200

 lutely unknown to the natives, with the exception, perhaps,
 of a tribe near the mouth   of the La Plata, who had arrows
tipped with this metal, which they are supposed to have
obtained from masses of native iron. The powerful nations
of Central America were, however, in an age of Bronze,
while the North Americans were in a condition of which we
find in Europe but scanty traces—namely, in an age of
Copper. Silver is the only other metal which has been found
in the ancient tumuli, and that but in very small quantities.
it occurs sparingly in a native form with the copper of Lake
Superior, whence, in all probability, it was derived. It does
not appear to have been ever smelted.         From the large
quantity of galena which is found in the             Fra. 177,
mounds,    Messrs.   Squier and Davis are   dis-
posed to think that lead must have been used
to a certain extent by the North American
tribes: the metal itself, however, has not, I
believe, yet been found.
   Copper, on the other hand, both wrought
and unwrought, occurs frequently in the
tumuli. It is interesting to observe that the
copper arrow- or spear-heads (fig. 177) resemble
the American type of stone arrow-heads. The
axes have a striking resemblance to those simple
European forms, which contain the minimum
quantity of tin, and as in them the socket,
when there is one, is made by flattening
the copper and turning over the edge (fig. copper Arrowhead.
178) ; and some of the Mexican paintings give us interesting
evidence as to the manner in which they were handled and
used.   These, however, were of bronze, and had, therefore,
been fused; but the Indian axes, which are of pure metallic
copper, appear in all cases to have been worked in a cold
state, which is remarkable, because, as Messrs. Squier and
254                    THE   USE     OF COPPER.

Davis have pointed out, “the fires upon the altar were suf-
ficiently intense to melt down the copper implements and
ornaments deposited upon them. The hint thus afforded
              does not seem to have been seized upon*.” This
    Fig. 178,
              is the more surprising, because, as Schoolcraft +
            tells us, “in almost all the works lately opened,
            there are heaps of coals and ashes, showing that
            fire had much to do with their operations.” Thus,
            though they were acquainted with metal, they did
            not know how to use it; and as Professor Dana has
            well observed in a letter with which he has favoured
            me, they may in one sense be said to have been in
            an age of Stone, since they used the copper, not
             as metal, but as Stone.          This mtermediate con-
             dition between an age of Stone and one of metal
             is most interesting.
               In the neighbourhood of Lake Superior, and in
            some other still more northern localities, copper
            is found native in large quantities, and the In-
            dians had therefore nothing to do but to break
            off pieces and hammer them into the required
            shape. Hearne’s celebrated journey to the mouth
            of the Coppermine River, under the auspices of the
            Hudson’s Bay Company, was undertaken in order
            to examine the locality whence the natives of that
            district obtained the metal. In this case it oc-
    Copper  curred in lumps actually on the surface, and the
  Spearies’ “Indians seem to have picked up what they could,
without attempting any thing that could be called mining.
Round Lake Superior, however, the case is very different. A
short account of the ancient copper-mines is given by Messrs.

  * One “cast” copper axe is re-        evidence to show by whom it was
corded as having been found in the      made.
State of New York, but there is no         + Indian Tribes, p. 97.
                    ANCIENT   COPPER-MINES.                     250

Squier and Davis in the work already so often cited,
by Mr. Squier in “The Aboriginal Monuments of the State
of New York,” by Mr. Lapham *, and by Mr. Schooleraft +,
while the same subject is treated at considerable length by
Professor Wilson.     The works    appear to have been first
discovered in 1847 by the agent of the Minnesota Mining
Company.              ’
   “Following up the indications of a continuous depression
in the soil, he came at length to a cavern where he found
several porcupines had fixed their quarters for hybernation;
but detecting evidences of artificial excavation, he proceeded
to clear out the accumulated soil, and not only exposed to
view a vein of copper, but found in the rubbish numerous
stone mauls and hammers of the ancient workmen.           Sub-
sequent observations brought to light ancient excavations of
great extent, frequently from twenty-five to thirty feet deep,
and scattered over an area of several miles. ‘The rubbish
taken from these is piled up in mounds alongside ; while the
trenches have been gradually refilled with the soil and decay-
ing vegetable matter gathered through the long centuries
since their desertion; and over all, the giants of the forest
have grown, and withered, and fallen to decay.     Mr. Knapp,
the agent of the Minnesota Mining Company, counted three
hundred and ninety-five annular rings on a hemlock-tree,
which grew on one of the mounds of earth thrown out of an
ancient mine.   Mr. Foster also notes the great size and age
of a pine stump, which must have grown, flourished, and died
since the works were deserted; and Mr. C. Whittesley not
only refers to living trees now flourishing in the gathered
soil of the abandoned trenches, upwards of three hundred
years old, but adds, ‘On the same spot there are the decayed
trunks of a preceding generation or generations of trees that
have arrived at maturity, and fallen down from old age.’
     #lie, p. 74.                             ap i, @syeh whe
256                  ANCIENT     COPPER-MINES.

According to the same writer, in a communication made to
the American Association, at the Montreal meeting in 1857,
these ancient works extend over a tract from 100 to 150
miles in length, along the southern shore of the lake.”
   In another excavation was found a detached mass of native
copper, weighing upwards of six tons.         It rested on an
artificial cradle of black oak, partly preserved by immersion
in water. Various implements and tools of the same metal
were found with it. The commonest of these are the stone
mauls or hammers, of which from one place ten cart-loads
were obtained.     With these were “stone axes of large size,
made of greenstone, and shaped to receive withe-handles.
Some large round greenstone masses, that had apparently
been used for sledges, were also found. They had round
holes bored in them to a depth of several inches, which
seemed to have been designed for wooden plugs, to which
withe-handles might be attached, so that several men could
swing them with sufficient force to break the rock and the
projecting masses of copper.    Some of them were broken,
and some of the projecting ends of rock exhibited marks of
having been battered in the manner here suggested *.”’
   Wooden implements are so perishable that we could not
expect many      of them to have been found.               Two or three
wooden bowls, a trough, and some shovels with long handles,
are all that appear to be recorded.
   It has often been stated that the Indians possessed some
method, at present unknown, by which they were enabled to
harden the copper. This, however, from examinations insti-
tuted by Professor Wilson, seems to be an error.       Some
copper implements, which he submitted to Professor Crofts,
were found to be no harder than the native copper from
 Lake Superior. “The structure of the metal was also
 highly laminated, as if the instrument had been brought
       * Prof. W. W. Mather in a letter to Mr. Squier, l. c. p. 184,
                             POTTERY.                         957

to its present shape by hammering         out a solid mags     of
copper.”
   Before the introduction    of metallic vessels, the art of the
potter was more important even than it is at present. Ac-
cordingly, the sites of all ancient habitations are generally
marked by numerous fragments of pottery: this is as true
of the ancient Indian settlements, as of the Celtic towns of
England, or the lake villages of Switzerland.     These frag-
ments, however, would generally be those of rude household
vessels, and it is principally from the tumuli that we obtain
those better-made urns and cups from which the state of the
art may fairly be inferred. Yet very few indeed of the
British sepulchral urns, belonging to ante-Roman times,
have upon them any curved lines. Representations of ani-
mals or plants are also almost entirely wanting. They are
even absent from all articles belonging to the Bronze Age in
Switzerland, and I might almost say in Western Europe
generally, while ornaments of curved and spiral lines are
eminently characteristic of this period. The ornamental
ideas of the Stone Age, on the other hand, are confined, so
far as we know, to compositions of straight lines, and the
idea of a curve scarcely seems to have occurred tothem. The
most elegant ornaments on their vases are impressions made
by the finger-nail, or by a cord wound round the soft clay.
   Dr. Wilson has well pointed out, that, as regards Hurope,
“in no single case is any attempt made to imitate leaf or
flower, bird, beast, or any simple natural object ; and when,
in the bronze work of the later Iron period, imitative forms
at length appear, they are chiefly the snake and dragon
shapes and patterns, borrowed seemingly by Celtic and Teu-
tonic wanderers, with the wild fancies of their mythology,
from the far Hastern cradle-land of their birth.”
   Very different was the condition of American Art. “The
art of pottery attained to a considerable degree of perfection.”
                                                      S
258                             ORNAMENTS.

Some of the vases found in the tumuli are said to rival, “ in
elegance of model, delicacy, and finish,” the best Peruvian
specimens. The material used is a fine clay: in the more
delicate specimens, pure; in the coarser ones, mixed with
pounded quartz. The art of glazing and the use of the
potter’s wheel appear not to have been known, though that
“* simple approximation to a potter’s wheel may have existed,”
which consists of “a stick of wood grasped in the hand by
the middle, and turned round inside a wall of clay formed
by the other hand, or by another workman*.”’
    Among the most characteristic specimens of ancient Ameri-
 can pottery are the pipes. Some of these are simple bowls,
 smaller indeed, but otherwise not unlike a common every-day
 pipe, from which they differ, however, in having generally no
 stem, the mouth having apparently been applied direct to the
bowl. Many are highly ornamented, others are spirited
representations of monsters or of animals, such as the beaver,
otter, wild cat, elk, bear, wolf, panther, raccoon,             opossum,
squirrel, manatee, eagle, hawk, heron, owl, buzzard, raven,
swallow, parroquet, duck, grouse, and many others.      The
most interesting of these, perhaps, is the Manatee or Laman-
tin, of which seven       representations have been found in the
mounds of Ohio. These are no mere rude sculptures, about
which there might easily be a mistake, but “the truncated
head, thick semicircular snout, peculiar nostrils, tumid, fur-
rowed upper lip, singular feet or fins, and remarkable
moustaches, are all distinctly marked, and render the recog-
nition of the animal complete+.”             This curious animal is not
at present found nearer than the shores of Florida, a thousand
miles away.
   The ornaments which have been found in the mounds
consist of beads, shells, necklaces, pendants, plates of mica,
bracelets, gorgets, etc.        The number of beads is sometimes
  * Squier and Davis, 1. c. p. 195.      + Squier and Davis, 1. c. p. 252.
                          FORTIFICATIONS.                            259

 quite surprising.     Thus the celebrated Grave Croek mound
 contained   between    three and       four   thousand     shell-beads,
besides about two hundred and fifty ornaments of mica,
several bracelets of copper, and various articles carved in
stone. The beads are generally made of shell, but are some-
times cut out of bone   or teeth; in form they are generally
round or oblong; sometimes the shell of the Unio is cut and
strung so as to “exhibit the convex surface and pearly nacre
of the shell.” The necklaces are often made of beads or
 shells, but sometimes of teeth.        The ornaments     of mica are
thin plates of various forms, each of which has a small hole.
The bracelets are of copper, and generally encircle the arms
of the skeletons,    besides   being frequent      on the     “ altars.”
 They are simple rings “ hammered out with more or less skill,
 and so bent that the ends approach, or lap over, each other.”
 The so-called “‘ gorgets” are thin plates of copper, always
 with two holes, and probably therefore worn as badges of
 authority.
    The earthworks are most abundant in the central parts of
 the United States. They decrease in number as we approach
 the Atlantic, and are very scarce in British America and on
 the west of the Rocky Mountains.
    The works belonging to this class “ usually occupy strong
natural positions,” and as a fair specimen of them we may
take the Bourneville Enclosure in Ross County, Ohio. “This
work,” say Messrs. Squier and Davis (l.c. p. 11), ‘ occupies
the summit of a lofty detached hill, twelve miles westward
from the city of Chillicothe, near the village of Bourneville.
The hill is not far from four hundred feet in perpendicular
height; and is remarkable, even among the steep hills of the
west, for the general abruptness of its sides, which at some
points are absolutely inaccessible. .... The defences con-
sist of a wall of stone, which is carried round the hill a little
below the brow; but at some places it rises, so as to cut off
                               5 2 at
260                      EARTHWORKS.

the narrow spurs, and extends across the neck that connects
the hill with the range beyond.” It must not, however, be
understood that any thing like a true wall now exists; the
present appearance is rather what might have been “ expected
from the falling outwards of a wall of stones, placed, as this
was, upon the declivity of a hill.’ Whereit is most distinct
it is from fifteen to twenty feet wide, by three or four in
height. The area thus enclosed is about one hundred and
forty acres, and the wall is two miles and a quarter in length.
The stones themselves vary much in size, and Messrs. Squier
and Davis suggest that the wall may originally have been
 about eight feet high, with an equal base. At present, trees
 of the largest size are growing upon it. On a similar work
 known as “Fort Hill,” Highland County, Ohio, Messrs.
 Squier and Davis found a splendid chestnut tree, which they
 suppose to be six hundred years old. “If,” they say, “to
this we add the probable period intervening from the time
of the building of this work to its abandonment, and the
 subsequent period up to its invasion by the forest, we are
led irresistibly to the conclusion that it has an antiquity
 of at least one thousand years. But when we notice, all
around us, the crumbling trunks of trees, half hidden in the
accumulating soil, we are induced to fix on an antiquity still
more remote.”
  The enclosure known as “ Clark’s Work,” in Ross County,
Ohio, is one of the largest and most interesting. It consists
of a parallelogram, two thousand eight hundred feet by
eighteen hundred,   and enclosing      about   one   hundred   and
eleven acres. To the right of this, the principal work is a
perfect square, containing an area of about sixteen acres.
Hach side is eight hundred and fifty feet in length, and in
the middle of each is a gateway thirty feet wide, covered by
a small mound. Within the area of the great work are
several smaller mounds and enclosures; and it is estimated
                             ENCLOSURES.                            261

that not less than three millions of cubic feet of earth were
used in this great undertaking. Yet from the peculiarly
mottled character of the earth forming these mounds, it would
appear to have been brought in bags or small parcels*. It
has also been observed that water is almost invariably found
within, or close to these enclosures.
   It is remarkable that there is not a single case in which
counter-works occur near any of the ancient North American
fortifications.  Col. Whittlesey+ draws from this fact the
conclusion that the period during which the mound-builders
turned “ their attention to military affairs was probably short,
and, when their preparations were made, they may have with-
drawn farther south without a vigorous defence.” I should
rather infer that the warfare of the mound-builders, like that
of the more modern Red Indians, consisted not of persevering
sieges, but of sudden attacks and surprises.
   If the purpose for which the works belonging to the first
class were erected is very evident, the same cannot be said
for those which we have now to mention.      That they were
not intended for defence is inferred by Messrs. Squier and
Davis from their small size, from the ditch being inside the
embankment,      and from their position, which is often com-
pletely commanded by neighbouring heights.
   Dr. Wilson also (vol. i. p. 824) follows Sir R. C. Hoare in
considering the position of the ditch as being a distinguish-
ing mark between military and religious works. But Catlin
expressly tells us that in a Mandan village, which he describes,
the ditch was on the inner side of the embankment, and the
warriors were thus sheltered while they shot their arrows
through the stockade. We see, therefore, that in America
at least, this is no reliable guide.
   While, however, the defensive earthworks occupy hill tops,
  # Whittlesey, On the Weapons and Character of the Mound-builders.
Mem. Boston Soc. of Nat. Hist., vol. i. pt. iv. p. 473. + lic. p. 479.
262                   SACRED    ENCLOSURES.

and other situations most easy to defend, the so-called sacred
enclosures are generally found on “ the broad and level river
bottoms, seldom occurring upon the table-lands or where the
surface of the ground is undulating or broken.” They are
usually square or circular in form; a circular enclosure being
often combined with one or two squares. Occasionally they
are isolated, but more frequently in groups. ‘The greater
number of the circles are of small size, with a nearly uniform
diameter of two hundred and fifty or three hundred feet,
and the ditch is invariably inside the wall. Some of the
circles, however, are much larger, enclosing fifty acres or
more. The squares or other rectangular works never have a
ditch, and the earth of which they are composed appears to
have been taken up evenly from the surface, or from large
pits in the neighbourhood.      They vary much in size; five or
six of them, however, are “ exact squares, each side measur-
ing one thousand and eighty feet—a coincidence which could
not possibly be accidental, and which must possess some
significance.” The circles also, in spite of their great size,
are so nearly round, that the American archeologists con-
sider themselves justified in concluding that the mound-
builders must have had some standard of measurement, and
some means of determining angles.
   The most remarkable group is that near Newark, in the
Scioto Valley, which covers an area of four sguare miles! A
plan of these gigantic works is given by Messrs. Squier and
Davis, and another, from a later survey, by Mr. Wilson.
They consist of an octagon, with an area of fifty, a square
occupying twenty acres, and two large circles occupying
respectively thirty and twenty acres. From the octagon an
avenue formed by parallel walls extends southwards for two
 miles and a half; there are two other avenues which are
 rather more than a mile in length, one of them connecting
 the octagon with the square.
               EARTHWORKS   OF THE   SCIOTO   VALLEY.          263

   Besides these, there are various other embankments          and
 small circles, the greater   number     about     eighty feet in
 diameter, but some few much larger.          The walls of these
small circles, as well as those of the avenues          and of the
irregular portions of the works generally, are very slight,
and for the most part about four feet in height.         The other
embankments are much more considerable;           the walls of the
large circle are even now twelve feet high, with a base of
fifty feet, and an interior ditch seven feet deep and thirty-
five in width. At the gateway, however, they are still more
imposing;   the walls being sixteen feet high, and the ditch
thirteen feet deep. The whole area is covered with “ gigantic
trees of a primitive forest ;” and, say Messrs. Squier and
Davis, “in entering the ancient avenue for the first time,
the visitor does not fail to experience a sensation of awe,
such as he might feel in passing the portals of an Egyptian
temple, or gazing upon the silent ruins of Petra of the
desert.”
   The city of Circleville takes its name from one of these
embankments,    which, however, is no more remarkable than
many others. It consists of a square and a circle, touching
one another; the sides of the square being about nine hun-
dred feet in length, and the circle a little more than a
thousand feet in diameter.  The square had eight doorways,
one at each angle, and one in the middle of each side, every
doorway being protected bya mound. The circle was peculiar
in having a double embankment.       This work, alas! has been
entirely destroyed; and many others have also disappeared,
or are being gradually obliterated by the plough. Under
these circumstances, we read with pleasure that “ The Direc-
tors of the Ohio Land Company, when they took possession
of the country at the mouth of the Muskingum River, in
1788, adopted immediate measures for the preservation of
these monuments.     To their credit be it said, one of their
264                         AZTALAN,

earliest official acts was the passage of a resolution, which is
entered upon the Journal of their proceedings, reserving the
two truncated pyramids and the great mound, with a few
acres attached to each, as public squares.”’ Such enlightened
conduct deserves the thanks of archeologists, and I sincerely
hope that the Company has prospered.
   Both as being the only example of an enclosure yet ob-
served in Wisconsin, and also as haying in many respects a
great resemblance to a fortified town, the ruins of Aztalan
are well worthy ofattention.     They are situated on the west
branch of Rock River, and were discovered in 1836 by N. F.
Hyer, Esq., who surveyed them hastily, and published a
brief description, with a figure, in the “ Milwaukie Adver-
tiser.”” In “ Silliman’s American Journal,” No. XLIV., is a
paper on the subject by Mr. Taylor, from which was derived
the plan and the short account given by Messrs. Squier
and Davis*. The most complete description is contained in
Mr. Lapham’s ‘ Antiquities of Wisconsint.”        The name
“ Aztalan’’ was given to this place by Mr. Hyer, because the
Aztecs had a tradition that they originally came from a
country to the north, which they called Aztalan. It is said
to be derived from two Mexican words, Atl, water, and An,
near. “The main feature of these works is an enclosure of
earth (not brick, as has been erroneously stated), extending
around three sides of an irregular parallelogram ;” the river
“forming the fourth side on the east. The space thus en-
closed contains seventeen acres and two-thirds. The corners
are not rectangular, and the embankment         or ridge is not
 straight.”      “The ridge forming the enclosure is 631 feet
long at the north end, 1419 feet long on the west side, and
700 feet on the south side; making a total length of wall of
2750 feet. The ridge or wall is about 22 feet wide, and from
one foot to five in height. The wall of earth is enlarged on
         Ik, Choy disiks                          + p. 41.
                       VITRIFIED   WALLS.                    265

the outside, at nearly regular distances, by mounds       of the
same material.    They are called buttresses, or bastions; but
it is quite clear that they were never intended for either”
the one or the other. They vary from sixty-one to ninety-
five feet apart, the mean distance being eighty-two feet.
Near the south-west angle are two outworks, constructed in
the same manner as the main embankment.
   In many places the earth forming the walls appears to
have been burnt. “Irregular masses of hard reddish clay,
full of cavities, bear distinct impressions of straw, or rather
 wild hay, with which they had been mixed before burning.”
 “This is the only foundation for calling these ‘brick walls.’
 The ‘ bricks’ were never made into any regular form, and it
 is even doubtful whether the burning did not take place in
 the wall after it was built.’ These walls must therefore
 present some faint resemblance to the celebrated vitrified forts
 of Scotland, and to fortifications of a similar character which
 have recently been observed in France and Germany. Some
 of the mounds or buttresses, though forming part of an
 enclosure, were also used for sepulchral purposes, as was
 proved by their containing skeletons in a sitting posture,
 with fragments of pottery.       The highest pomt inside the
 enclosure is at the south-west corner, and is “occupied
by a square truncated mound, which . . . . presents
the appearance of a pyramid, rising by successive steps like
the gigantic structures of Mexico.”         “At the north-west
angle of the enclosure is another rectangular, truncated,
pyramidal elevation, of sixty-five feet level area at the top,
with remains of its graded way, or sloping ascent, at the
south-west corner, leading also towards a ridge that extends
in the direction of the river.”
   Within the enclosure are some ridges about two feet high,
and connected with them are several rings, or circles, which
are supposed to be the remains of mud houses. “ Nearly the
266                 MODERN    EARTHWORKS.

whole interior of the enclosure appears to have been either
excavated or thrown up into mounds and ridges; the pits
and irregular excavations being quite numerous over much
of the space not occupied by mounds.”        These excavations
and ridges are, in all probability, the ruins of houses. Some
years ago a skeleton was found in one of the mounds, wrapped
apparently in cloth of open texture, “like the coarsest linen
fabric ;” but the threads were so rotten as to make it quite
uncertain of what material they were made.
   The last Indian occupants of this interesting locality had no
tradition as to the history or the purpose of these earthworks.
   Among the Northern tribes of existing Indians there do
not appear to be any earthworks corresponding to these so-
called Sacred Enclosures.      ‘‘ No sooner, however, do we pass
to the southward, and arrive among the Creeks, Natchez,
and affiliated Floridian tribes, than we         discover   traces   of
structures which, if they do not entirely correspond with the
regular earthworks of the West, nevertheless seem to be
somewhat analogous to them*.”’ These tribes, indeed, appear
to have been more civilized than those of the North, since
they were agricultural in their habits, lived in considerable
towns, and had a systematized religion, so that, in fact, they
must have occupied a position intermediate, as well econo-
mically as geographically, between the powerful monarchies
of Central America and the hunting tribes of the North.
The “structures” to which Mr. Squier alludes are described
by him, both in his “Second            Memoir,”    and also in the
 “ Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley” (p. 120).
 The “ Chunk Yards,” now or lately in use among the Creeks,
 and which have only recently been abandoned among the
 Cherokees, are rectangular areas, generally occupying the
 centre of the town, closed at the sides, but with an opening
 at.each end.   They are sometimes from six to nine hundred
                        * Sqwer, |. c.-p. 186,
                        CHUNK   YARDS.                    267

feet in length, being largest in the older towns. The area is
levelled and slightly sunk, being surrounded by a low bank
formed of the earth thus obtained. In the centre is a low
mound, on which stands the Chunk Pole, to the top of which
is some object which serves as a mark to shoot at. Near each
corner at one end, is a small pole, about twelve feet high;
these are called the “slave posts,” because in the “ good old
times,” captives condemned to the torture were fastened to
them. The name “ Chunk Yard” seems to be derived from
an Indian game called “ Chunke,” which was played in them.
At one end of, and just outside, this area stands generally
a circular eminence, with a flat top, upon which is elevated
the Great Council House. At the other end is a flat-topped,
square eminence, about as high as the circular one just men-
tioned; ‘upon this stands the public square.”
   These, and other accounts given by early travellers among
the Indians, certainly throw much light on the circular and
square enclosures; some of which, though classed by Messrs.
Squier and Davis under    this head, seem   to me   to be the
slight fortifications which surrounded villages, and were un-
doubtedly crowned by stockades. We have already seen that
the position of the ditch is in reality no argument against
this view; nor does the position of the works seem conclu-
sive, if we suppose that they were intended less to stand a
regular siege than to guard against a sudden attack.
   The Sepulchral mounds are very numerous in the central
parts of the United States. “To say that they are innumer-
able in the ordinary sense of the term, would be no exag-
geration. They may literally be numbered by thousands and
tens of thousands,”      They vary from six to eight feet in
height; generally stand outside the enclosures; are often
isolated, but often also in groups; they are usually round,
but sometimes elliptical or pear-shaped.    They cover gene-
rally a single skeleton, which, however, is often burnt.  Oc-
268                       SEPULCHRAL     MOUNDS.

casionally there is a stone cist, but urn burial also prevailed
to a considerable extent, especially in the Southern States.
The corpse was generally buried in a contracted position.
Implements both of stone and metal occur frequently ; but
while personal ornaments, such as bracelets, perforated plates
of copper, beads of bone, shell or metal, and similar objects,
are very common, weapons are but rarely found; a fact
which, in the opinion of Dr. Wilson, “indicates a totally
different condition of society and mode of thought” from
those of the present Indian.
      Certain small tumuli found in America have been regarded
as the remains of mud huts. Mr. Dille* has examined and
described some small tumuli observed by him in Missouri.
He dug into several, but never succeeded in finding any thing
except coal, char, and a few pieces of pottery, whence he
concluded that they were the remains of mud houses+. The
 Mandans, Minatarees, and some other tribes, even until quite
 lately, built their huts of earth, resting on a framework of
wood.
   On the other hand, there are some tumuli to which it
would seem that this explanation is quite inapplicable, and
which are full of human remains. This was long supposed
to be the case with the great Grave Creek Mound, which
indeed was positively stated by Atwater t, to be full of human
remains.      This has turned out to be an error, but the state-
ment is not the less true as regards other mounds.    In
conjunction with them may be mentioned the “ bone pits,”
many of which are described by Mr. Squier§.                          “One of
these pits, discovered some years ago in the town of Cam-
bria, Niagara County, was estimated to contain the bones of
several thousand individuals. Another which I visited in the
  * Smithsonian   Contributions, vol.     t See also Lapham, 1. c. p. 80.
i. p. 186.                                 SHER jayon iis Goh Gira (lel, Vale (Gh.
   + Archzologia Americana, vol. i      106, 107. Squier and Davis, l. c. p.
p. 228.                                 118, etc.
                             OSSUARIES.                          269

town of Clarence, Erie County, contained not less than four
hundred skeletons.” A tumulus described by Mr. Jefferson
in his “ Notes on Virginia,” was estimated to contain the
skeletons of a thousand       individuals, but in this    case   the
number was perhaps exaggerated.
   The description given by various old writers of the solemn
“ Festival of the Dead” satisfactorily explains these large
collections of bones. It seems that every eight or ten years
the Indians used to meet at some place previously chosen,
that they dug up their dead, collected the bones together,
and laid them in one common burial place, depositing with
them fine skins and other valuable articles. Several of these
ossuaries are described by Schoolcraft*.
   The so-called “ Sacrificial Mounds,” are, says Dr. Wilson,
“a class of ancient monuments, altogether peculiar to the
New World, and highly illustrative of the rites and cus-
toms of the ancient races of the mounds.     This remarkable
class of mound has been very carefully explored, and their
most   noticeable   characteristics    are, their almost mvariable
occurrence within enclosures;          their regular construction
in uniform layers of gravel,           earth, and sand, disposed
alternately in strata conformable to the shape of the mound;
and their covering, a symmetrical altar of burnt clay or
stone, on which are deposited numerous relics, in all in-
stances exhibiting traces, more or less abundant, of their
having been exposed to the action of fire.” The so-called
“altar” is a basin, or table of burnt clay, carefully moulded
into a symmetrical form, but varying much both in shape
and size.      Some are round, some elliptical, and others
squares or parallelograms, while in size they vary from two
feet to fifty feet by twelve or fifteen. The usual dimensions,
however, are from five to eight feet.        They are almost
always found within sacred enclosures.    Of the whole number
                            FRVEC. Dan 02:
270             SO-CALLED   SACRIFICIAL MOUNDS.

examined by Messrs. Squier and Davis there were only four
which were exterior to the walls of enclosures, and these
were but a few rods distant from them.
   The “altar” is always on a level with the natural soil,
and bears traces of long continued heat; in one instance,
where it appears to have been formed of sand, imstead of
clay, the sand for a depth of two inches is discoloured, as if
fatty matter of some sort had been burnt on it. In this case
a second deposit of sand had been placed on the first, and
upon this stones a little larger than a hen’s egg were
arranged, so as to form a pavement, which strongly reminds
us of the ancient hearths in the Danish Kjékkenméddings.
    In a few instances traces of timber were found above the
 altar. Thus in one of the twenty-six tumuli forming the
 “Mound City” on the Scioto River were a number of pieces
of timber, four or five feet long, and six or eight inches
thick. “ These pieces had been of nearly uniform length;
and this circumstance, joined to the position in which they
occurred in respect to each other and to the altar, would
almost justify the inference that they had supported some
funeral or sacrificial pile*.” The contents of these mounds
vary very much.        The one just mentioned contained a
quantity of pottery and many implements of stone and
copper, all of which had been subjected to a strong heat.
The pottery may have formed a dozen vessels of moderate
size. The copper articles consisted of two chisels, and about
twenty thin strips. About fifty or a hundred stone arrow-
heads, some flakes, and two carved pipes, completed the list
of articles found in this interesting tumulus. In another
mound nearly two hundred pipes were buried.                  Generally
speaking,   the deposit is homogeneous:               “that is to say,
instead of finding a large variety of relics, ornaments,
weapons, and other articles, such as go to make up the pos-
                  * Squier and Davis, 1. c. p. 151.
                   SO-CALLED     SACRIFICIAL   MOUNDS.                     OTA

sessions ofa barbarian dignitary, we find upon one altar pipes
only, upon another a single mass of galena, while the next
one has a quantity of pottery, or a collection of spear-heads,
or else is destitute of remains, except perhaps a thin layer of
carbonaceous material.      Such could not possibly be the case
upon the above hypothesis, for the spear, the arrows, the pipe,
and the other implements, and personal ornaments of the
dead, would then be found in connexion with each other*.”
   This conclusion does not seem altogether satisfactory;
and, although these altar-containing mounds differ in so
many respects from the above-described tumuli, I still feel
disposed to regard them as sepulchral rather than sacrificial.
Not having, however, had the advantage of examining them
for myself, I throw this out as a suggestion, rather than
express it as an opinion. It is difficult to understand why
“altars”? should be covered up in this manner; I can call
to mind no analogous case. On the other hand, if Professor
Nusson’s suggestion with reference to ancient tumuli be
correct, the long continued          fire will offer no           difficulty.
Among     the   Buraets, for instance, the          hearth     is made of
beaten earth, on which a good fire is kept blazing at all
timest.    Such a house, if used finally as a sepulchre, would
present an altar very much like those above described; while
the wooden constructions and the burnt bones will all be
explicable on the hypothesis that we have before us a
sepuichre, rather than a temple.
  Nor does the “ homogeneousness”’ of the deposits found in
these mounds appear so decisive to me as to Messrs. Squier
and Davis.   Take, for instance, the cases in which pipes are
found. The execution of these isso good that “pipe-carving”
was no doubt a profession ; the division of labour must have
already begun. Exactly the same feeling which induces
many savage races to bury weapons with the dead hunter,
   * Squier and Davis, p. 160.           + Ernan, l. c. vol. il. p. 408.
272,                 GRAVE   CREEK   MOUND.

in order that he may supply himself with food in Hades as
on earth; that feeling, which among some ancient nations
suggested the placing of money in the grave, would account
not only for the presence of these pipes, but also for their
number.     The hunter could use but few weapons, and must
depend for success mainly on his strength and skill; whereas
the pipe-seller, if he could dispose of a pipe at all im the
grave, might render his whole stock-in-trade available.
   I have already mentioned     the great number     of objects
found in the Grave Creek Mound, which was undoubtedly
sepulchral, and in which one of the skeletons was accom-
panied by seventeen hundred bone beads, five hundred sea-
shells, and one hundred and fifty pieces of mica, besides
other objects. Many flakes, arrow-heads, etc., have been at
times found in tumuli, so that the mere number of objects
seems no argument against the sepulchral nature of these
so-called “ sacrificial mounds.”
   If, therefore, “the accumulated    carbonaceous matter, like
that formed by the ashes of leaves or grass,” which suggests
to Professor Wilson “the graceful offerings of the first-fruits
of the earth, so consonant    to the milder forms    of ancient
sacrifice instituted in recognition of the Lord of the Harvest,”
seems to me only the framework of the house, or the material
of the funeral pyre; on the other hand, I avoid the con-
clusion to which he is driven, that on “the altars of the
mound-builders, human sacrifices were made; and that
within their sacred enclosures were practised rites not less
hideous than those which characterized the worship which
the ferocious Aztecs are affirmed to have regarded as most
acceptable to their sanguinary gods.”
   Another class of mounds, called by Messrs. Squier and
Davis “Temple Mounds,” “are pyramidal structures, trun-
cated, and generally having graded avenues to their tops.
In some instances they are terraced, or have successive
                       TEMPLE   MOUNDS.                       7S

stages.    But whatever their form, whether round, oval,
octangular, square, or oblong, they have invariably flat or
level tops, of greater or lesser area.’’? These mounds much
resemble the Teocallis of Mexico, and had probably a similar
origin. They are rare in the North, though examples occur
even as far as Lake Superior, but become more and more
numerous as we pass down the Mississippi, and especially on
approaching the Gulf, where they constitute the most nume-
rous and important portion of the ancient remains.     Some
of the largest, however, are situated in the North.   One of -
the most remarkable is at Cahokia, in Dlinois.      This gigantic
mound is stated to be seven hundred feet long, five hundred
feet wide at the base, and ninety feet in height. Its solid
contents have been roughly estimated at twenty millions of
cubic feet.
  Probably, however, these mounds were       not used as tem-
ples only, but also as sites for dwellings, especially for
those of the chiefs. We are told that among the Natchez
Indians “the temples and the dwellings of the chiefs were
raised upon mounds, and for every new chief a new mound
and dwelling were constructed.” Again, Garcilasso de la
Vega, in his history of Florida, quoted by Mr. Haven*,
says, “The town and house of the Cacique of Osachile are
similar to those of all other caciques in Florida, and, there-
fore, it seems best to give one description that will apply
generally to all the capitals, and all the houses of the chiefs
in Florida. I say, then, that the Indians endeavour to place
their towns upon   elevated   places; but because    such situa-
tions are rare in Florida, or that they find a difficulty
in procuring suitable materials for building, they raise
eminences in this manner.       They choose a place, to which
they bring a quantity of earth,  which they elevate into a kind
of platform two or three pikes in height (from eighteen to
                          FCM   DEO
274:                       ANIMAL    MOUNDS.

twenty-five feet), of which the flat top is capable of holding
ten or twelve, fifteen or twenty houses, to lodge the cacique,
his family, and suite*.”
   Not the least remarkable of the American antiquities are
the Animal Mounds, which are principally, though not ex-
clusively, found in Wisconsin. In this district “thousands
of examples occur of gigantic basso-relievos of men, beasts,
birds, and reptiles, all wrought with persevering labour on
the surface of the soil,’ while enclosures and works of de-
fence are almost entirely wanting, the “ancient city of
Aztalan” being, as is supposed, the only example of the
former class.
   The “Animal Mounds” were discovered by Mr. Lapham
in 1836, and described in the newspapers of the day, but the
first account of them in any scientific journal was that by
Mr. R. C, Taylor, in the American Journal of Science and
Art, for April, 1838. In 1843 a longer memoir, by Mr. S.
Taylor, appeared in the same journal. Professor J. Locke
gave some account of them in a “ Report on the Mineral
Lands of the United States,”’ presented to Congress in 1840.
Messrs. Squier and Davis devoted to the same subject a part
of their work on the “Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi
Valley ;” and, finally, the seventh volume of the Smithsonian
Contributions contains the work, by Mr. Lapham, which
gives the most complete account of these interesting remains.
  Mr. Lapham      adds a map, showing the distribution                of
these curious earthworks.       They appear to be most numerous
in the southern counties of Wisconsin;              and extend from the
Mississippi to Lake Michigan, following generally the course
of the river, and being especially numerous along the great
Indian trail, or war-path, from Lake               Michigan, near   Mil-
waukie, to the Mississippi, above the Prairie du Chien. This,
however, does not prove any connexion between the present
               * See also Schoolcraft, 1. c. vol. iii. p. 47.
                        ANIMAL   MOUNDS.                        215

Indians and the mounds; the same line has been adopted ag
the route of the United States’ military road, and may have
been in use for an indefinite period.
  The mounds     themselves not only represent animals, such
as men, buffaloes, elks, bears, otters, wolves, raccoons, birds,
serpents, lizards, turtles, and frogs, but also some inanimate
objects, if at least the American archeologists are right in
regarding some of them as crosses, tobacco-pipes, etc.
   Many of the representations are spirited and correct, but
others, probably through the action of time, are less definite;
one, for instance, near the village of Muscoda, may be either
“a bird, a bow and arrow, or the human figure.”           Their
height varies from one to four feet, sometimes, however, rising
to six feet, and as a “regular elevation of six inches can be
readily traced upon the level prairies” of the West, their
outlines are generally distinctly defined where they occupy
favourable positions. It seems probable that many of the
details have disappeared under the action of rain and vege-
tation. At present a “man” consists generally of a head
and body, two long arms, and two short legs, no other details
being visible. The “birds” differ from the “men” principally
in the absence of legs. The so-called “lizards,” which are
among the most common forms, have a head, two legs, and a
long tail; the side view being represented, as is, indeed, the
case with most of the quadrupeds.
   One remarkable group in Dale County, close to the Great
Indian War-path,    consists   of a man    with   extended   arms,
seven more or less elongated mounds, one tumulus and six
quadrupeds. The length of the human figure is one hundred
and twenty-five feet, and it is one hundred and forty feet
from the extremity of one arm to that of the other. The
quadrupeds vary from ninety to a hundred and twenty-six
feet in length.
   At Waukesha are a number of mounds, tumuli, and animals,
                            saa
276                    ANIMAL   MOUNDS.

iucluding several “lizards,” a very fine “bird,” and a mag-
nificent “turtle.” “This, when first observed, was a very
fine specimen of the art of mound-building, with its graceful
curves, the feet projecting back and forward, and the tail,
with its gradual slope, so acutely pointed, that it was im-
possible to ascertain precisely where it terminated. The
body was fifty-six feet in length, and the tail two hundred
and fifty; the height six feet.” This group of mounds is
now, alas, covered with buildings: “A dwelling-house stands
on the body of the turtle, and a Catholic church is built
upon the tail.”
   “But,” says Mr. Lapham, “the most remarkable collection
of lizards and turtles yet discovered is on the school section,
about a mile and a half south-east from the village of Pew-
aukee.    This consists of seven turtles, two lizards, four ob-
long mounds, and one of the remarkable excavations before
alluded to. One of the turtle mounds, partially obliterated
by the road, has a length of four hundred and fifty feet,
being nearly double the usual dimensions.      Three of them
are remarkable for their curved tails, a feature here first
observed.”
   In several places a very curious variation occurs.      The
animals, with the usual form and size, are represented, not in
relief, but intaglio ; not by a mound, but by an excavation.
   The few “Animal Mounds” which have been observed out
of Wisconsin differ in many respects from the ordinary type.
Near Granville, in Ohio, on a high spur of land, is an earth-
work, known in the neighbourhood as the “ Alligator.”        It
has a head and body, four sprawling legs, and a curled tail.
The total length is two hundred and fifty feet; the breadth
of the body forty feet, and the length of the legs thirty-six
feet.   “The   head, shoulders, and rump    are more elevated
than the other parts of the body, an attempt having evidently
been made to preserve the proportions of the object copied.”
                        ANIMAL   MOUNDS.                      O77.

 The average height is four feet, at the shoulders six.     Even
 more remarkable is the great serpent in Adams            County,
 Ohio. It is situated on a high spur of land, which rises a
 hundred and fifty feet above Brush Creek. ‘“ Conforming to
the curve of the hill, and occupying its very summit, is the
serpent, its head resting near the point, and its body winding
back for seven hundred feet, in graceful undulations, termi-
nating im a triple coil at the tail.     The entire length, if
extended, would be not less than one thousand feet. The
accompanying plan, laid down from accurate survey, can
alone give an adequate conception of the outline of the work,
which is clearly and boldly defined, the embankment being
upwards of five feet in height, by thirty feet base at the
centre of the body, but diminishing somewhat toward the
head and tail. The neck of the serpent is stretched out, and
slightly curved, and its mouth is opened wide, as if in the act
of swallowing or ejecting an oval figure, which rests partially
within the distended jaws. This oval is formed by an em-
bankment of earth, without any perceptible opening, four
feet in height, and is perfectly regular in outline, its trans-
 verse and conjugate diameters being one hundred and sixty,
 and eighty feet respectively.”
    When, why, or by whom these remarkable works were
erected, as yet we know not. The present Indians, though
they look upon them with reverence, can throw no light
upon their origin. Nor do the contents of the mounds
themselves assist us in this inquiry. Several of them have
been opened, and, in making the streets of Milwaukie, many
of the mounds have been entirely removed; but the only
result has been to show that they are not sepulchral, and
that, excepting by accident, they contain no implements or
ornaments.
  Under these circumstances      speculation would be useless;
we can but wait, and hope that time and perseverance        may
278                           ROCK CARVINGS.

solve the problem, and explain the nature of these remark-
able and mysterious monuments.
   There is one class of objects which I have not yet men-
tioned, and which yet ought not to be left entirely un-
noticed.
  The most remarkable of these is the celebrated Dighton
Rock, on the east bank of the Taunton River.    Its history,
and the various conclusions which have been derived from it,
are very amusingly given by Dr. Wilson*.                     In 1783, the
Rev.   Hzra    Stiles, D.D., President         of Yale     College, when
preaching before the Governor of the State of Connecticut,
appealed to this rock, inscribed, as he believed, with Pheeni-
cian characters, for a proof that the Indians were descended
from Canaan, and were therefore accursed. Count de Gebelin
regarded the inscription as Carthaginian. In the eighth
volume of the “ Archzeologia,” Colonel Vallency endeavours
to prove that it is Siberian ; while certain Danish antiquaries
regard it as Runic, and thought that they could read the
name “Thorfinn,” “with an exact, though by no means so
manifest, enumeration of the associates who, according to the
Saga, accompanied Karlsefne’s expedition to Vinland, in
A.D. 1007.” Finally, Mr. Schoolcraft submitted a copy of it
to Chingwauk, an intelligent Indian chief, who “ interpreted
it ag the record of an Indian triumph over some rival native
tribe,’ but without offering any opinion as to its antiquity.
   In the “Grave Creek Mound” was found a small oval
disk of white sandstone, on which were engraved twenty-two
letters. Mr. Schoolcraft, who has especially studied this relic,
finally concludes, after corresponding with many American
and Huropean Archeeologists, according to Dr. Wilson +, that
of these twenty-two letters, four corresponded “ with ancient
Greek, four with the Etruscan, five with the old Northern
Runes, six with the ancient Gaelic, seven with the old Erse,
       * Pre-historic Man, vol. ii. p. 172.              + Ibid. p. 180.
                            WAMPUM.                          279

ten with the Phoenician, fourteen with the Anglo-Saxon, and
 sixteen with the Celtiberic; besides which possibly equiva-
lents may be found in the old Hebrew. It thus appears that
this ingenious little stone is even more accommodating than
the Dighton Rock, in adapting itself to all conceivable
theories of ante-Columbian colonization.” A stone of such
doubtful character could prove little under any circumstances;
but it must also be mentioned that “Dr. James W. Clemens
communicated to Dr. Morton all the details of the exploration
of the Grave Creek Mound;        . . . . without any refer-
ence to the discovery of the inscribed stone. Nor was it till
the excavated vault had been fitted up by its proprietor for
exhibition, to all who cared to pay for the privilege of admis-
sion, that the marvellous inscription opportunely came to
light, to add to the attractions of the show.”
   One or two other equally doubtful cases are upon record,
but upon the whole we may safely assert that there is no
reason to suppose that the nations of America had developed
for themselves any thing corresponding to an alphabet. The
art of picture-writing, which they shared with the Aztecs and
the Quipa of the Peruvians, was supplemented among the
North American Indians by the “wampum.”            This curious
substitute for writing consisted of variously-coloured beads,
generally worked upon leather. One very interesting example
‘is the belt of wampum     “ delivered by the Lenni Lenape
Sachems to the founder of Pennsylvania, at the Great Treaty,
under the elm-tree at Shachamox in 1682.”       It is still pre-
served in the collection of the Historical Society at Phila-
delphia, and consists of “eighteen strings of wampum formed
of white and violet beads worked upon leather thongs,” the
whole forming a belt twenty-eight inches long, and two-and-
a-half broad. “On this five patterns are worked in violet
beads on a white ground, and in the centre Penn is repre-
sented taking the hand of the Indian Sachem.” The numerous
280                    THE   MOUND-BUILDERS.

beads found in some of the tumuli were perhaps in a similar
manner intended to commemorate the actions and virtues of
the dead.
   Just as the wigwam of the recent Mandan consisted of an
outer layer of earth supported on a wooden framework, so
also, in the ancient sepulchral tumuli, the body was pro-
tected only by beams and planks; when therefore these latter
decayed, the earth sank in and crushed the skeleton within.
Partly from this cause, and partly from the habit of burying
in ancient tumuli, which makes it sometimes difficult to dis-
tinguish the primary from secondary interments, it happens
that from so many thousand tumuli we have very few well-
preserved skulls which indisputably belong to the ancient
race. ‘These are decidedly brachycephalic; but it is evident
that we must not attempt to build much upon so slight a
basis.               .
   No proof of a knowledge of letters, no trace of a burnt
brick, have yet been discovered; and so far as we may judge
from their arms, ornaments, and pottery, the mound-builders
closely resembled some at least of the recent Indian tribes,
and the earthworks agree in form with, if they differ in mag-
nitude from, those still, or until lately, in use. Yet this very
magnitude is sufficient to show that, at some early period, the
great river valleys of the United States must have been more
densely populated than they were when first discovered by
Kuropeans. ‘The immense number of small earthworks, and
the mounds, “ which may be counted by thousands and tens
of thousands,” might indeed be supposed to indicate either a
long time or a great population; but in other cases we have
no such alternative.     The Newark constructions;   the mound
near Florence in Alabama, which is forty-five feet in height
by four hundred and forty feet in circumference at the base,
with a level area at the summit of one hundred and fifty feet
in circumference;      the still greater mound on the Etowah
               EVIDENCE   OF ANCIENT          POPULATION.       281

river, also in Alabama, which has a height of more than
seventy-five feet, with a circumference of twelve hundred
feet at the base, and one hundred and forty at the summit;
the embankments at the mouth of the Scioto river, which are
estimated to be twenty miles in length; the great mound at
Selserstown, Mississippi, which covers six acres of ground;
and the truncated pyramid at Cahokia, to which we have
already alluded; these works and many others which might
have been quoted, indicate a population both large and
stationary ; for which hunting cannot have supplied enough
food, as it has been estimated that in a forest country each
hunter requires an area of not less than 50,000 acres for his
support; and which must, therefore, have derived its sup-
port, in a great measure, from agriculture. ‘There is not,”
say Messrs. Squier and Davis, “and there was not in the
sixteenth century, a single tribe of Indians (north of the
semi-civilized nations) between the Atlantic and the Pacific,
which had means of subsistence sufficient to enable them to
apply, for such purposes, the unproductive labour necessary
for the work; nor was there any in such a social state as to
compel the labour of the people to be thus applied.” We
know also that many, if not most of the Indian tribes, at
that time still cultivated the ground to a certain extent, and
there is some evidence that, even within historic times, this
was more the case than at present. Thus De Nonville esti-
mates the amount of Indian corn destroyed by him in four
Seneca villages at 1,200,000 quarters.
   Mr. Lapham* has brought forward some ingenious reasons
for thinking that the forests of Wisconsin were at no very
distant period much less general than at present.           In the
first place, the largest trees are probably not more than five
hundred years old; and large tracts are now covered with
“young trees, where there are no traces of antecedent
                          ch TUE Keb gle SO
282            TRACES      OF ANCIENT    AGRICULTURE.

growth.” Every year many trees are blown down, and
frequent storms pass through the forest, throwing down
nearly every thing before them. Mr. Lapham gives a map of
these windfalls in one district; they are very conspicuous,
firstly, because the trees, having a certain quantity of earth
entangled among their roots, continue to vegetate for several
years; and, secondly, because           even when      the trees them-
selves have died and rotted away, the earth so torn up forms
little mounds, which are often mistaken by the inexperienced
for Indian graves. ‘“ From the paucity of these little ‘ tree-
mounds,” we infer that no very great antiquity can be
assigned to the dense forests of Wisconsin, for during a
long period of time, with no material change of climate,
 we would expect to find great numbers of these little monu-
 ments of ancient storms scattered every where over the
 ground.”
    But there is other more direct evidence of ancient agricul-
 ture. In many places the ground is covered with small
mammillary elevations, which are known as Indian corn-hills.
“They are without order of arrangement, being scattered
over the ground with the greatest irregularity. That these
hillocks were formed in the manner indicated by their name,
is inferred from the present custom of the Indians. The corn
is planted in the same spot each successive year, and the soil
is gradually brought up to the size of a little hill by the
annual additions*.”        But Mr. Lapham has also found traces
of-an earlier and more systematic cultivation.  These consist
“of low, parallel ridges, as if corn had been planted in
drills. They average four feet in width, twenty-five of them
having been counted in the space of a hundred feet; and
the depth of the walk between them is about six inches.

  * Lapham, |. c. p. 19.    See also    Report of the Regents of the Uni-
 Cheney, “On Ancient Monuments in       versity of the State   of New York,
 Western New York:      in the 13th     1860, p. 40.
                     ANTIQUITY   OF THE   REMAINS.                   283

These appearances, which are here denominated ‘ancient
garden-beds,’ indicate an earlier and more perfect system of
cultivation than that which now prevails; for the present
Indians do not appear to possess the ideas of taste and order
necessary to enable them to arrange objects in consecutive
rows. Traces of this kind of cultivation, though not very
abundant, are found in several other parts of the State (Wis-
consin). The garden-beds are of various sizes, covering,
generally, from twenty to one hundred acres.        Some of them
are reported to embrace even three hundred acres. As a
general fact, they exist in the richest soil, asit is found in the
prairies and bun oak plains. In the latter case, trees of the
largest kind are scattered over them.”
   In the “ Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley”
it is stated that no earthwork has ever been found on the first
or lowest terrace of any of the great rivers, and that “ this
observation is confirmed by all who have given attention to
the subject.”      If true, this would, indeed, have indicated a
great antiquity, but in his subsequent work Mr. Squier
informs us that “they occur indiscriminately upon the first
and upon the superior terraces, as also upon the islands of the
lakes and rivers.” Messrs. Squier and Davis* are of opinion
that the decayed state of the skeletons found in the mounds
may enable us to form “some approximate estimate of their
remote antiquity,” especially when we consider that the earth
round them “is wonderfully compact and dry, and that the
conditions for their preservation are exceedingly favourable.”
‘Tn the barrows      of the ancient Britons,” they add, “ entire
well-preserved: skeletons are found, although possessing an
undoubted antiquity of at least eighteen hundred years.”
Dr. Wilson+     also relies much    on    this fact, which,      in his
opinion, “ furnishes a stronger evidence of their great anti-
quity than any of the proofs that have been derived either
     TIC. Palos.                             + 1c. vol. i. p. 359.
284                      CONDITION        OF THE BONES.

from the age of a subsequent forest growth, or the changes
wrought on the river terraces where they most abound.” It
is true that the bones in Stone Age graves are often ex-
tremely well preserved; but it is equally true that those in
Saxon barrows have in many cases entirely perished. In
fact, the condition of ancient bones depends so much on the
circumstances in which they have been placed, that we must
not attribute much importance to this argument.
   The evidence derived from the forests is more reliable.
Thus Captain Peck * observed near the Ontonagon river, and
at a depth of twenty-five feet, some stone mauls and other
implements in contact with a vein of copper. Above these
was the fallen trunk of a large cedar, and “over all grew a
hemlock-tree, the roots of which spread entirely above the
fallen treet ae mr.               and indicated, in his estimation, a
growth of not less than three centuries, to which must then
be added the age of the cedar, which indicates.a still ‘longer
succession of centuries, subsequent to that protracted period
during which the deserted trench was slowly filled up with
accumulations of many winters.”
   The late President Harrison, in an address to the Historical
Society of Ohio, made some very interesting remarks on this
subject, which are quoted by Messrs. Squier and Davis +.
“The process,” he says, “ by which nature restores the forest
to its original state, after being once cleared, is extremely
slow.     The rich lands of the west are, indeed, soon covered
again, but the character of the growth is entirely different,
and continues so for a long period. In several places upon
the Ohio, and upon the farm which I occupy, clearings were
made in the first settlement of the country, and subsequently
abandoned and suffered to grow up. Some of these new
forests are now sure of fifty years’ growth, but they have
made so little progress towards attaining the appearance of
        * Wilson, |. c.,vol. i. p. 256.                   t lc. p. 806.
                           AMERICAN     FORESTS.                     285

the immediately contiguous forest, as to induce any man of
reflection to determine         that at least ten times fifty years
must elapse before their complete assimilation be effected.
We find in the ancient works all that variety of trees which
give such unrivalled beauty to our forests, in natural pro-
portions.     The first growth of the same kind of land, once
cleared and then abandoned to nature, on the contrary, is
nearly homogeneous, often stinted to one or two, at most
three kinds of timber. If the ground has been cultivated,
the yellow locust will quickly spring up; if not cultivated,
the black and white walnut will be the prevailing growth.
        . . Of what immense age, then, must be the works so
often referred to, covered as they are by at least the second
growth, after the primitive forest state was regained* ? ”
   We obtain another indication of antiquity in the “ garden-
beds,” which we have already described. This system of cul-
tivation has long been replaced by the irregular “ cornhills ;”’
and yet, according to Mr. Lapham+, the garden-beds are
much   more    recent than some         of the mounds, across which
they sometimes extend in the same manner as over the
adjoining grounds. If, therefore, these mounds belong to the
same area as those which are covered with wood, we get thus
indications of three periods; the first that of the mounds
themselves;    the second,      that of the garden-beds;     and the
third, that of the forests.
   But American agriculture was not imported from abroad ;
it resulted from, and in return rendered possible, the gradual
development of American semi-civilization.      This is proved
by the fact, that the grains of the Old World were entirely
absent, and that American agriculture was founded on the
maize, an American plant. Thus, therefore, we appear to
have indications of four long periods.
  1. That in which, from an original barbarism, the Ameri-
   * See also Arch. Amer., vol. i. p. 306.            ap dhe i LEE
286              INDICATIONS    OF FOUR PERIODS.

can tribes developed a knowledge of agriculture and a power
of combination.
  2. That in which for the first time mounds were erected,
and other great works undertaken.
   3. The age of the “ garden-beds,”’ which occupy some at
least of the mounds. Hence it is provable that these par-
ticular “‘garden-beds” were not in use until after the
mounds had lost their sacred character in the eyes of the
occupants of the soil; for it can hardly be supposed that
works executed with so much care would be thus desecrated
by their builders.
   4, The period in which man relapsed into partial bar-
barism, and the spots       which     had been first forest, then,
perhaps, sacred monuments, and thirdly, cultivated ground,
relapsed into forest once more.
   But even if we attribute to these changes all the import-
ance which has ever been claimed for them, they will not
require an antiquity of more than three thousand years. I
do not, of course, deny that the period may have been very
much greater, but, in my opinion at least, it need not be
greater. At the same time there are other observations,
which if they shall eventually prove to be correct, would
indicate a very much higher antiquity.
   One of these is an account* by Dr. A. C. Koch of a mas-
todon found in Gasconade County, Missouri, which had
apparently been stoned to death by the Indians, and then
partially consumed by fire. ‘The fire, he says, was evidently
“not an accidental      one, but, on the contrary,          it had been
kindled by human agency, and, according to all appearance,
with the design of killing the huge creature, which had been
found mired in the mud and in an entirely helpless condition.
                                              e




      * Trans. of the Academy of Science of St. Louis, 1857, p. 61.
                    MAN AND THE MASTODON.                           287

I found, also, among the ashes, bones and rocks, several
arrow-heads, a stone spear-head, and some stone axes.”
   In a second case the same writer assures us that he found
several stone arrow-heads mingled with the bones of a mas-
todon. ‘ One of the arrow-heads lay underneath the thigh-
bone of the skeleton, the bone actually resting in contact
upon it; so that it could not have been brought thither after
the deposit of the bone; a fact which I was careful tho-
roughly to investigate.” These statements, however, have
not generally been accepted by geologists.
   In the valley of the Mississippi, Dr. Dickeson, of Natchez,
found the os innominatum of a man with some bones of the
Mastodon ohioticus, which had fallen from the side of a cliff
undermined by a rivulet. Sir C. Lyell has suggested that
this bone may have been derived from one of the Indian
graves, which are very numerous in this locality. Dr. Usher,
on the contrary *, regards this bone as “ an undoubted fossil,”
belonging to the same period as the remains of the Mas-
todon with which it was discovered.       Again, Count Pour-
talis has found some human bones in a calcareous conglome-
rate, estimated by Agassiz to be ten thousand years old.
The last case to which I will refer is that recorded by Dr.
Douler, who obtained from an excavation near New Orleans
some charcoal and a human skeleton, to which he is inchned
to attribute an antiquity of no less than fifty thousand years.
  The plain on which the city of New Orleans is built, and
which rises only about ten feet above the sea level, consists
of alluvial soil, which has been proved by borings to have a
depth of more than five hundred feet, and which contains
several successive layers of cypresses. The river banks show
similar remains of ancient foresis, and Messrs. Dickeson and
Brown have found remains of no less than ten cypress forests

       Dr. Usher, in Nott and Gliddon’s Types of Mankind, p. 344.
288              ANTIQUITY    OF MAN    IN AMERICA.

at different levels below the present surface. These trees are
not unfrequently as much as ten feet in diameter, and there
are from 95 to 120 rings in an inch. The human skeleton
above referred to was found at a depth of sixteen feet, and
“beneath the roots of a cypress-tree belonging to the fourth
forest level below the surface*.””         Whether,     therefore, we
accept Dr. Douler’s calculation or not, it is obvious that, if
the statements are thoroughly trustworthy, this skeleton cer-
tainly must carry back the existence of man in America to a
very early period.
   Yet, until further evidence is obtained, the question can-
not, I think, be regarded as entirely decided; and even if,
on & priort grounds, the idea seems probable, there does not
as yet appear to be any conclusive proof that man co-existed
in America with the mammoth and mastodon.
      * Dr. Usher, in Nott and Gliddon’s Types of Mankind, p. 338.
                              289




                        CHAPTER      IX.

                    QUATERNARY   MAMMALIA.


    N addition to those still existing, the fauna of Northern
       Europe during the Paleolithic period comprised several
 species of mammalia which have either become entirely
 extinct, or very much restricted in their geographical distri-
 bution, since the appearance of man in Europe. The principal
 of these are—
          Ursus speleus (the cave-bear).
          U. priscus.
          Hycena spelea (the cave-hyzna).
         Felis spelea (the cave-lion).
         Elephas primigenius (the mammoth).
         EL. antiquus.
         Rhinoceros tichornunus (the hairy rhinoceros),
         RL. leptorhinus, Cuv.
         R. hemiteechus.
        Hippopotamus major (the hippopotamus).
         Ovibos moschatus (the musk ox).
        Megaceros hibernicus (the Irish elk),
        B. fossilis (the wild horse).
         Giulo luseus (the glutton).
        Cervus tarandus (the reindeer).
        Bison Europceus (the aurochs).
        Bos primigenius (the urus).
   The first ten of these have been regarded, uutil lately, os
altogether extinct, but recent researches have induced many
                                                   U
290                 SUCCESSION    OF SPECIES.

naturalists to regard some of them as the direct ancestors of
species still existing in other parts of the world, so that the
Trish elk, the elephants, and the three species of rhinoceros
are perhaps the only ones which are absolutely extinct. Most
of the smaller species now inhabiting Europe already existed
in Quaternary times, from which we may conclude that the
changes which have taken place were due to a gradual
change of circumstances, rather than to any sudden cataclysm,
or general destruction of life: it is also very improbable that
the extinction of the different species was simultaneous;   and,
acting on this idea, M. Lartet has attempted* to construct
a paleontological chronology.
   He considers that we may establish tour divisions, namely,
the age of the cave-hear, of the mammoth and rhinoceros, of
the reindeer, and of the aurochs. It is evident, I think, that
the appearance of these mammalia in Hurope was not simul-
taneous, and that their disappearance has been successive.
The evidence is very strong that in Central and Western
Europe the aurochs survived the reindeer, and that the rein-
deer, on the other hand, lived on to a later period than the
mammoth or the woolly-haired rhinoceros. But the chrono-
logical distinction between these two species and the cave-bear
does not appear to be so well established. Admitting that the
cave-bear has not yet been found in the river gravels of the
Somme valley, we must remember that the animal was essen-
tially a cave-dweller, and that its absence is, perhaps, to be
attributed rather to the absence of caves than to the extinction
of the species. Moreover, the bones found in the gravel are
very much broken, and are seldom in such a condition as to
enable the palzontologist to distinguish the remains of U.
spelceus from those of other large bears,
   There is as yet no evidence that the cave-bear existed in
Europe before the commencement of the quaternary period,
                  * Ann. des Sci. Nat. 1861, p. 217.
                             THE   CAVE-BEAR.                           291


 when it appears to have been             abundant   in Central Europe,
 and in the southern parts of Russia.            It is doubtful whether
 it has been     discovered north         of the Baltic, nor has it yet
 been found in Spain. In Italy, on the contrary, it has been
 met with, and in one instance apparently in conjunction with
 a polished stone implement, and even pottery*. Mr. Regnoli
 has been so good as to forward me a cast of the speci-
 men on which this statement rests; it belongs to the
 cave-bear, but I can hardly regard it as being undoubtedly
 contemporaneous with the pottery and stone axe which were
found near it. In Northern Europe no such case has yet
been met with, but it is of course possible that in Italy the
cave-bear may have survived to a more recent period than in
the region north of the Alps. No trace of it has yet been
found by Mr. Busk and Dr. Falconer, among the numerous
remains from Gibraltar.
   Perhaps the most interesting discovery of remains belong-
ing to this species was that in Brixham Cave, which is thus
described by Dr. Falconer in a letter to me, from which I
quote, as the facts have not been so clearly stated in any
published report :—‘ All the circumstances connected with
the entire leg of cave-bear—femur,              with tibia and fibula
folded together, with the ball of astragalus partly dislocated,
and its position in comminuted shale, below the ochreous
cave-earth, and above a well-defined flint implement, were
determined by me at Torquay and Brixham on September 2
Mr. Pengelly gave us the data.                          ;              ORR
   *‘T identified the remains and the flint, and aeew neein-
ference that the leg must have been introduced with its liga-
ment ai least fresh, after the flint manufactured by the hand
of man had been introduced into the lower cave deposit.”
   Mr. Busk, however, who has carefully examined these

   * Richerche Paleoetnologiche nelle Alpi Apuane.   Nota del Dott. C. Reg-
noli.
                                    uc2
992                         THE   CAVE-BEAR.

bones, and detached them more completely from the matrix
in which they were imbedded than was the case when
they were examined by Dr. Falconer, is of opinion that
there is no sufficient reason for referring them to Ursus
spelceus rather than to one of the other large species of fossil
bear.
   It has been stated that remains of the cave-bear have
occurred in the river gravels at Ilford and Gray’s Thurrocks.
In the opinion, however, both of Mr. Busk and Mr. Boyd
Dawkins we have no clear case of the remains of this species
being found in river-drift gravels. In fact, as materials for
comparison have increased, it has proved more and more diffi-
cult to separate Ursus spelceus from other large species of bear.
The jaws and teeth are characteristic, but the other portions
of the skeleton are scarcely distinguishable, especially when
they are so much fractured, as is generally the case with those
found in gravel deposits.
   Vogt, indeed, has expressed the opinion that every grada-
tion may be traced between this species and our common
brown bear      (Ursus Arctos), and Brandt leans to the same
opinion*. Mr. Boyd Dawkins also says that “those who
have compared the French, German, and British specimens
gradually realize the fact that the fossil remains of the bears
form a graduated series, in which all the variations that at
first sight appear specific vanish away+.”  Whether, how-
ever, the cave-bear will eventually be regarded as belonging to
the same species as the brown bear or not, it will still remain
a well-characterized variety, and one which has never yet
been met with in the peat mosses, in the tumuli of Western
Europe, in the Danish    shell-mounds, the Swiss lake-villages,
or, in short, associated with Neolithic remains.


   * Zoogeographische und Palzon-       + Pleistocene Mammalia, Palzeon-
tologische Beitriige, 1867, p. 220.   tographical Soc. y. xyiii. p. xxii.
                     THE CAVE-HYENA.        THE CAVE-LION.                  293

    My. Busk* has recently made the very interesting obser-
 vation that some remains of bear found in our British caves
 and gravels are identical with the corresponding bones of
 U. ferox, or grizzly bear of the Rocky Mountains.
    The cave-hycena, like the preceding species, is in Hurope
 characteristic of the Paleolithic age, but it is now regarded as
 scarcely distinguishable specifically from the Hyena crocuta,
 or spotted hyzena of Southern Africa.
    Felis spelcea, the cave-lion, was             on the whole of a larger
  size than the lions of the present day, and possesses in an
  exaggerated degree the characters by which that species is
  distinguishable from the tiger. It has hitherto been regarded
 as a distinct species, but Messrs. Dawkins and Sanford now
 considert it as only a large variety of the lion. It has
 not yet been found in Scotland, Ireland, Scandinavia, Den-
 mark, or Prussia. It occurs, however, in France, Germany,
 Italy, and Sicily. As long ago as 1672, Dr. John Hains figured
 a bone of this species from the Carpathians, an observation
 of considerable interest, as it carries the area of the I’. speleu
 so near to the mountains of Thessaly where, as Herodotus
tells us, the camels attached to the army of Xerxes were
attacked by lionst. Messrs. Boyd Dawkins and Sanford refer
also to the same species, the remains found at Natchez, in
Mississippi, and which were described by Dr. Leidy as a new
species under the name of Felis atrov. The characters, how-
ever, which induced Dr. Leidy to regard his specimens as
distinct, are met with in some of the bones of F’. spelea from
the Mendip Hills. If this opinion is correct, F'. spelea must
have stretched        eastwards across Russia and Siberia, where
no remains of it have yet been observed.                  Inasmuch, how-
ever,   as the mammoth,             the   musk    ox, the reindeer,        the
  * Geol. Journal.                        ing Memoir   on the Zoology of An-
  + Paleontological     Soc,   V.   for   cient Europe, Cam. Phil, Soc., March,
1868, p. 149.                             1862.
  t See also Mr. Newton’s interest-
294,                          THE MAMMOTH.

bison,   the elk, the horse,          the wolf,—in         short,      many   of
our most characteristic quaternary mammalia—occur also in
America, jt seems & priori rather probable than otherwise,
that Messrs. Dawkins and Sanford are correct in regarding
F. atroz of that Continent as specifically identical with the
LF’. spelcea of Europe.
    Remains of a second large species of Felis, considered to
be identical with the leopard, have been discovered in the
bone-caves      of England, France, Germany, Belgium, Italy,
and Spain; and the lynx has been found by Dr. Ransom, in
a Derbyshire cave.
   The Mammoth, or Elephas primigenius, had very exten-
sive geographical range. Its remains are found in North
America, from the Atlantic coast to Escholtz Bay, and from
Behring’s Straits to Texas; in the old continent, from the
farthest extremity of Siberia, to the extreme west of Hurope,
occurring, though rarely, even in Ireland; it crossed the
Alps, and established itself in Italy as far southward as
Rome, but it has not yet been discovered in Naples, south of
the Pyrenees, in any of the Mediterranean Islands or in
Scandinavia. In Denmark it occurs, though rarely.
   In the extreme north, on the contrary, remains o this
species are remarkably abundant. Kotzebue was struck by
this in Escholtz Bay (N. W. America), and his remarks
have been fully confirmed by Beechey*.                      The islands of
Lachowski and New            Siberia, are said to be almost made
up of the bones of extinct animals, but particularly of the
mammoth;        from them and from other parts of Siberia so
much fossil ivory is obtained that it forms a regular article
of commerce. Nor have skeletons alone been discovered.
In 1799 a Tungusian hunter discovered the body of a mam-
 moth embedded         in a cliff of frozen soil, where it remained
 for several years.       In 1806 it was visited by Mr. Adams,
             * Narrative of a Voyage to the Pacific, vol. i. p. 257,
                         THE MAMMOTH.                        295

who found it partly devoured by wolves and other wild
animals, and partly removed by the Yakuts, who used it as
food for their dogs. Fortunately, however, a considerable
portion of the animal still remained. The skin was dark
grey, covered with reddish wool, mixed with long black
bristles, somewhat thicker than horsehair.   Since that time
several other well-preserved portions of the mammoth have
 been discovered in Siberia, and it was probably from earlier
 discoveries of a similar nature that the Siberian tribes came to
 regard the mammoth as a gigantic burrowing animal.
    It is hardly necessary to observe that the state of preserva-
tion in which mammoths have been found is no evidence of
recent existence, for when once enveloped in frozen soil they
might remain unchanged for an indefinite period. The best
authorities consider that the mammoth and the woolly-haired
rhinoceros lived in Siberia before, as well as during the glacial
period, but neither of them has yet been found in Europe in
any stratum anterior to the river-drift gravels, from which
Murchison, De Verneuil, and Keyserling conceived that these
animals lived in Siberia long before they found their way
into Europe; that, in fact, they belong to the tertiary fauna
of Northern Asia, though they did not make their appearance
in Europe until the quaternary period.   Falconer, on the con-
trary, was inclined to believe, principally from the specimens
collected by the Rev. John Gunn and the Rev. S. W. King,
that H. primigentus existed in England before the deposition
of the boulder-clay. Mr. Gunn himself, however, regards
these specimens as post-glacial, and we certainly do not at
present appear to have any satisfactory evidence that the
mammoth existed in England in pre-glacial times. What-
ever doubt, however,    there may be as to the date at which
this species made its appearance in Hurope, we can no longer
doubt that our ancestors, or at least our predecessors, co-
existed in England with the mammoth, which they no
996   EXISTENCE    OF THE     AFRICAN           ELEPHANT      IN EUROPE.

doubt: hunted,    as   the wildest        tribes       of Africa and       India
do now.
  In Southern Europe undoubted remains of the existing
African elephant have been met with, but the only other
species which inhabited northen Hurope during the quater-
nary period was the Hlephas antiquus, remains of which have
been found in English caves and river gravels, though, on
the whole, it had a more southerly range than the mammoth,
It is generally associated with Rhinoceros leptorhinus Cuv.,
while, on the contrary, the mammoth and QZ. tichorhinus
usually occur together.
                                  Fig. 179.




                         Molar Tooth of Z. antiquus.


   Fig. 179 represents a molar tooth of H. antiquus, and Fig.
180 one belonging to L. primigenius ; it will at once be seen
that the plates are much narrower in the latter than in the
former.
                                   Fira, 180.
                                              SS         ee




                          Molar Tocth of Mammoth.

  Ai least three species of rhinoceros inhabited Europe
during the quaternary period; on this all are agreed, but,
unfortunately the nomenclature is involved in very consider-
          THE    QUATERNARY     SPECIES    OF RHINOCEROS.       297

able confusion. . leptorhinus was originally so named by
Cuvier in 1812, from a drawing of a specimen found in the
Val d’Arno, and in which the osseous septum between the
nostrils was    represented    as deficient.    In 1835, however,
M. De Christo] stated that he had examined the specimen in
question, that the drawing was incorrect, and the name con-
sequently inapplicable. Subsequently, however, Dr. Falconer
visited Italy and satisfied himself that, after all, the original
drawing was correct, and that therefore Cuvier’s name must
be restored. In the mean time Prof. Owen had unfortunately
described another species of rhinoceros found at Clacton as
fh. leptorhinus, which name must of course be abandoned if
Cavier’s name is permitted to stand. Hence Dr. Falconer
proposed to call this latter species BR. hemitechus.    It is
necessary therefore to bear in mind that the BR. leptorhinus
of Owen is not the PM. leptorhinus of Cuvier, but that it is the
Fi. hemitechus of Falconer, while M. Lartet maintains that it
is identical with the #. Merckii of Kaup. On the other hand,
M. De Christol, in 1835, described a rhinoceros, which
undoubtedly wanted the nasal septum, and believing himself
to have proved that the figure on which Cuvier based his
description    of R.   leptorhinus   was   incorrect, he named this
species R. megarhinus.       Hence Cuvier’s Lt. leptorhinus is
identical with De Christol’s R. megarhinus. The third species
is the R. tichorhinus of Cuv., a name which has been generally
adopted, although Blumenbach had previously proposed that
of R. antiquitatis.
   Mr. Boyd Dawkins considers that there is still some doubt
about the real, character of the specimen on which Cuvier
founded his R. leptorhinus, and consequently adopts the fol-
lowing nomenclature: QR. megarhinus, De Christol; 2. lep-
torhinus, Owen; and R. tichorhinus, Cuvicr.   AL. Lartet uses
the names R. leptorhinus, Cuv.; Lt. Merkii, Kaup; and R.,
tichorhinus, Cuvier. These differences of opinion, however,
298                         RHINOCEROS       TICHORHINUS.

relate merely to the nomenclature, and do not touch the
existence of the species themselves. The first two belonged
to the pre-glacial as well as to the post-glacial period. The
woolly-haired, two-horned, smooth-skinned R. tichorhinus,
on the contrary, which appears to have been the commonest
in post-glacial times, has not yet been proved to have existed
in Hurope in the period before the glacial epoch. The first
two species also have a more southerly range, having been
found in Italy and Spain, while R. tichorhinus, though it has
been met with from the extreme north of Siberia*, through-
out Central Europe and England, does not appear to have
crossed either the Alps or the Pyrenees. It is somewhat
remarkable that no remains of rhinoceros have yet been
discovered in Sicily, Malta, Ireland +, or America} in all of
which countries the elephant has been met with. On the
other hand a single tooth has, according to Brandt, been
found in Scandinavia, where no remains of elephant have yet
been met with.
      The Musk-or,          or   rather   mushk-sheep,       is at present          con-
fined to the northern part of Arctic America.                             Its remains,
however, occur in Siberia; and in 1856 Mr. Kingsley and
I were so fortunate as to obtain a portion of a skull from the
large gravel-pit near Maidenhead station. Since then I have
met with it again at Greenstreet Green, near Bromley, in
Kent; it has also been found in the gravel of the Avon, near
Bath, in that of the Severn, near Gloucester, and at Cray-
ford. In France it has been found twice; namely, in the
valley of the Oise, and in the Dordogne.
   The Hippopotamus, though hitherto regarded as a distinct
species from the H. anphibius of Africa, was, if not identical
      * In more      than one instance the       + Lartet, Note      sur deux tétes de
 actual    carcase     of this animal has      Carnassiers    Fossiles.     Ann.   d. Sci.
 been found preserved like the Mam-            WNat., 5 ser. yol. viii.
 moth, by being imbedded         in frozen       t D’Archiac, Lecons sur le Faune
 soil,                                         quaternaire, p, 196.
                    THE    MUSK   OX.    THE    HIPPOPOTAMUS.                      299

 with, at any rate very closely allied to it. Some paleontolo-
 gists believe that, like the mammoth and the R. tichorhinus,
 it was   covered         with hair;     we    have, however, no           distinct
 evidence in support of this view.                 It may,        moreover,         be
remarked, though too much importance must not be attached
to the observation, that our ancient hippopotamus has been
less frequently found in association with these two species,
than with H. antiquus and R. hemitechus, Falc. (leptorhinus,
 Owen),    which,         as just mentioned;       have a more            southerly
range.      ‘Thus, in this country, it has only been found in four
bone-caves, those of Durdham Down, Kirkdale, Kents Hole
Cavern, and Ravenscliff in Gower, and in the two former it
was associated with H. antiquus and ft. hemiteechus. In the
river gravels its remains are found at Grays and Ilford,
associated with the 2. tichorhinus, R. leptorhinus, and R.
hemitechus ; at Walton             and    Folkestone, with         Hlephas an-
tiquus; at Peckham, with #. antiquus and H. primigenius;
at Bedford, with H. antiquus, the tichorhine rhinoceros, and
the reindeer; and at Barton, with the mammoth and A.
hematechus*.
  The magnificent Irish Elk, or Megaceros hibernicus, which
attained a height of more than ten feet, with antlers measur-
ing eleven feet from tip to tip, may perhaps have lived to a
somewhat more recent period, but appears to have had a
much more restricted range. Its remains have been found in
Germany as far as Silesia, in France as far as the Pyrenees,
and in Central Italy. It seems, however, to have been most
abundant in the British Isles, and especially in Ireland. It
is reported to have been frequently found in peat bogs, but
Professor Owen believes that, in reality, the bones generally
occur in the lacustrine shell marl, which underlies the peat
or bog earth t.
  * The   British   Pleistocene   Mammalia.     Paleontological    Soc.    1866,    p.
xxviii,                                               + Owen, 1. c. p. 465.
300                          THE    IRISH     ELK.

  In the Niebelungen Lied of the twelfth century, a mys-
terious animal is mentioned under the name of schelch:
        After this he straightway slew a bison and an elk,
        Of the strong uri four, and one fierce schelch :

  It has been supposed by some writers that the schelch was,
in fact, the Megaceros hibernicus.              There is, however, no suf-
ficient reason for this hypothesis, and we must remember
that the same poem, as Dr. Buckland has pointed out, con-
tains allusions to giants, dwarfs, pigmies, and fire-dragons.
Neither Ceesar nor Tacitus mention the Irish elk, and they
would surely not have omitted such a remarkable animal, if
it had existed in their time.
   No remains of the Irish elk have yet been found in asso-
ciation with bronze, nor mdeed am I aware of any which can
be referred to the later Stone, or Neolithic Age.
   These twelve species, then, are characteristic of the river-
drift deposits. Most of them occur also in the loéss of the
Rhine and its principal tributaries, but they have not yet
been met with in the peat bogs. They never occur in the
Kjékkenméddings, the Lake-habitations, or the tumuli; nor
are there any traditions in Western Hurope which can be
regarded as indicating, even in the most obscure manner,
any recollection of these gigantic mammalia.
   The Wild Horses, which in ancient times inhabited Europe,
differed somewhat from our present breed, and have been
described as separate races by Professor Owen, under the
names of Hquus fossilis and Hquus speleus. The latter is the
race which was largely used for food by the ancient inhabi-
tants of the Bruniquel Cave in Dordogne*. It was rather
small in size, but appears to have resembled the true horse
more    than the ass*.         Some     naturalists      have, indeed, been

  * Owen,    Philosophical   Transac-       meyer, Beitriige zur Kenntniss   der
tions, 1869, p.535.   See also Ruti-        fossilen Pferden.
                              WILD HORSES.                                301

disposed to believe that Europe contained two wild species
of the genus Hquus during quaternary times. This opinion,
however, seems to depend on difference of size, rather than
 of form, and we know that the varieties of the horse differ
 considerably in magnitude.
  Hkkehard in the “Benedictiones ad mensas Ekkehardi
monachi Sangellensis”” mentions “ ferales equi” as existing
in the eleventh century in Switzerland. Lucas David also
(Reuss. Chronik. Bd. II. s. 121) alludes to the wild horse as
existing in 1240 in Russia. Even at the beginning of the
seventeenth century, Herberstain expressly says, “ Feras
habet Lithuania, preter eas, que in Germania referuntur,
bisontes, uros, alces, eqguos sylvestres,”’ etc.
   Perhaps, however, these medizval wild horses were merely
 tame ones which had escaped and bred in the extensive forests
 of Central Europe. Indeed, the history of the horse in Europe
seems to have been much the same as in America. In the
one country, as in the other, wild horses were at one time
frequent, and their remains are abundant.      The Spanish con-
querors, however, found no trace or tradition of the horse at
the time of the discovery of America, and so also in the
Danish shell-mounds, and at the earlier Swiss lake-villages,
the horse was either unknown, or at least extremely rare.
Gradually it seems to have become again abundant, both in a
domesticated and a wild condition; until at length, as popu-
lation increased, the wild horse finally disappeared in Hurope,
as he seems destined ere long to do in America*.
   The Reindeer still exists in Northern Europe, in Siberia,
and in North America, where it has been found as far north
as man has yet penetrated. Even so recently as the time of
Pallas it might still be met with on the wooded summits of
the Oural Mountains, as far south as the Caucasus.      In
   * See for further particulars   Brandt,   Zoographische   und Palwontolo-
gische Beitriige, p. 176.
302                        THE   REINDEER.

Western Europe it is now an extinct species, though it was
at one time abundant in England and France, whence, how-
ever, it is unnecessary to say, it has long disappeared. M.
Lartet found no traces of it in any of the Spanish caves
examined by him; but Ponzi mentions it, though appa-
rently with some little doubt, as occurrmg among the
animal remains collected by M. Regnoli, at Cantalupo, near
Rome *.
  At the present day the reindeer, like the Laplander, is
gradually retirimg northwards, unable to resist the pressure
of advancing civilization. Even within the last ten years
a few families of Lapps might still be found in the neigh-
bourhood of Nystuen, on the summit of the Fillefjeld, and
some other places in the south of Norway, but none are now
to be found on this side of the Namsen river.            The reindeer,
in a wild state, indeed, even at the present day, is generally
distributed, though in small numbers, over the highest and
wildest of the Norwegian fjelds, protected, however, by
stringent game laws, but for which it would, probably, have
ere now ceased to exist.
   On the other hand, this species must have been at one
time very abundant in Great Britain, no fewer than 1000
horns having been discovered by Col. Wood in some of the
Welsh caves.
   As far as we can judge from the present evidence, the first
appearance of the reindeer in Hurope coincided with that of
the mammoth, and took place at a later period than that of
the cave-bear or Irish elk. It is generally found wherever
the mammoth and woolly-haired rhinoveros occur; but, on
the other hand, as its remains         are abundant in some of the
bone-caves in which the gigantic Pachyderms are wanting, it
is probable that it survived toa still later period. The rein-
  * Rapporto sugli Studie sulle Scoperte Paleoetnologiche nel Bacino della
Campagna Romana,     Roma, 1867.
                                 THE REINDEER.                             303
deer has not, however, been found in the Kj dkkenméddings
of Denmark, nor in any of the tumuli of England, France, or
Germany.          It is also wanting in the Swiss lake-villages,
although we know that it was at one time an inhabitant of
Switzerland, bones of it having been found in a cave at
L’Echelle, between the great and little Saléve, near Geneva,
where they were mixed with worked flints, ashes, and
remains of the ox and horse.
   As might naturally have been expected, the reindeer has
been occasionally met with in the peat mosses of Sweden, as
well as in those of Scotland and England. It is not, how-
ever, represented on any of the ancient British or Gallic
coins. Cesar, indeed, mentions it as existing in the great
Hercynian forest ; but his description is both imperfect and
incorrect.  He seems to have heard of it only at second
hand, and never to have met with any body who had actually
seen one. It does not appear to have ever been exhibited in
the Roman circus.
   Buffon stated on the authority of Gaston, Comte de Foix,
that in his time (1331 to 1390) the reindeer still lived in
the south of France.     Cuvier, however, by examining an
ancient manuscript, sent by Gaston himself to Philippe le
Hardi, showed that, though his expression is a little ambi-
guous, he probably intended to say exactly the reverse, his
words being—
   “ J’en ay veu en Nourvegne et Xuedene et en ha oultre
mer, mes en Romain pays en ay je peu veu*.”
   Remains of the reindeer have been found in Scotland in
beds of marl and till, and also, though very rarely, in peat +.
Dr. Hibbert}, Brandt§, Dawkins, J. A. Smith, and other good

  * Recherches    sur   les Ossements     Soc. Ant. Scot., 1869, p. 186.
Fossiles, vol. vi. p. 125.                  { Edinburgh Journal of Sci., 1831.
  + See Dawkins, Popular Science            § Zoogeogr.und Paleont, Beitrige
Review, Jan. 1868.         Smith, Proc.   (1867), pp. 62, 256.
304                        THE    REINDEER.

authorities, consider that it survived in the extreme north
down to the twelfth century; relying on the statement of
Torfaus, that the Norwegians used to make incursions from
the Orkneys into Caithness for the purpose of hunting rein-
deer (hreina) and other game*.
  While, however, fully admitting the high authority of
Torfzeus, I cannot regard a casual statement of this charac-
ter as conclusively deciding the question, and I may add that
Dr. Dasent, who is so great an authority on all questions
connected with Scandinavian literature, is convinced that the
reindeer was extinct in Scotland at the period in question.
It may also be remarked that several attempts which have been
made to introduce the reindeer into Scotland have completely
failed, the animals dying without any very apparent reason,
while, on the contrary, in Iceland they have become numerous.
IT admit that these experiments are far from conclusive;           but,
on the other hand, in Scandinavia the deer are said to be
larger in the northern districts than in the southern, while
the Spitzbergen specimens are the finest of all.
   If indeed Torfeeus had distinctly stated that the reindeer
existed in northern Scotland during the twelfth century, the
state of the case would have been very different; the passage
referred to, however, could hardly be accepted as conclusive
by itself, especially as long as no traces of reindeer had been
found among the ancient ruins which abound in that district.
On the other hand, since the last edition of this work was
published, Mr. J. A. Smith has carefully examined the horns
and bones found in the ruins of the curious towers known as
“Brochs,” or “ Burghs,” and has shown that some of them
certainly belonged to the reindeer+. Thus fragments of rein-
deer’s horns have been collected by Mr. Joass among the
ruins of the Cill-Trdlla Broch, on the farm of Kintradwell,
            * Rerum Orcadensium His., i. 36.
            tT Proc. Soc. Antig. Scot., 1869, vol. viii. p. 186.
                          THE    AUROCHS.                      300

near Brora, on the sea-coast of Sutherlandshire. Mr. Smith,
on carefully examining the remains of deer obtained by Mr.
Laing at Keiss, in Caithness, finds that they do not all belong,
as ab first supposed, to the red deer, but that some of them
belonged to the reindeer. Lastly, remains of this species have
been collected by Mr. Anderson in the ruins of the Yarhouse
Broch, in the same county. It is indeed more than probable
that in other cases remains of the reindeer have been incor-
rectly ascribed to the red deer.
   We do not unfortunately know the date at which these
Burghs or Brochs were first constructed, but it is on record
that some of them were in use down to the twelfth century
(see ante, pp. 54, 55).
   It must be admitted     that these observations strongly
support the inference derived from the statement of Torfeeus,
and   we have therefore     now,   not   I think conclusive,   but
still very strong grounds for believing that the reindeer
Survived in northern Scotland down to a comparatively
recent period.
   The glutton of Northern Europe, which is the wolverine of
the North American fur-hunters,
                              has been found in three of the
English bone-caves, and is very abundant in those of Belgium.
  The Aurochs, or European Bison, appears to have been
abundant in Western Europe.      It has been found in Scot-
land, England, France, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Poland,
and Italy, as well as in Russia.    Its remains occur in the
river-drift gravels, the bone-caves, the lake-villages of Swit-
zerland, and in the peat-bogs, though none have yet been
found in the shell-mounds       of Denmark, nor, so far as I am
aware, in any of our British peat-bogs or tumuli. M. Lartet
thinks that it is represented on a coin of the Santones, which
was shown to him by M. de Saulcy. It is stated by Pliny
and Seneca to have existed in their times, with the urus, in
the great forests of Germany.    Though not mentioned by
                                                      be
306                        THE URUS.

Cesar, it is alluded to in the Niebelungen Lied, and is said
to have existed in Prussia down to the year 1775.         Accord-
ing to Nordmann and Von Baer, it still survives in some
parts of Western Asia.
   It is also preserved by the Emperor of Russia in the im-
perial forests of Lithuania,    where, however,      its existence
seems to be very precarious. In 1830 the herd numbered
711 head, of which, during the Polish revolution in 1831,
115 were killed. From that time they gradually increased
until 1857, when the numbers       were 1898, but during the
late Polish rebellion they fell to 874. Since 1863 no num-
bers have been given.
    According to Riitimeyer, than whom it is impossible to
 cite a greater authority on such a question, our ancient bison
 (B. priscus) was identical with the existing American bison.
Every stage, however, between the fossil form and the exist-
ing European aurochs can be traced, so that it is impos-
sible to separate the two specifically, an opinion in which
Brandt also coincides.  It would appear, therefore, that the
American form of bison is the more archaic.     We have here,
moreover, a clear case, in which two now distinct species
are connected by the evidence of fossil remains.
  The Urus or Bos primigenius      did not extend its range to
America, nor, so far as I am      aware, have     its remains   yet
been met with in North-Eastern Asia. They occur, however,
throughout Hurope, in England, Scotland, Denmark, and
the South of Sweden, in France and Germany.            Across the
Alps and Pyrenees, it occurs in Italy and Spain, and even,
according to M. Gervais, in Northern Africa. In the museum
at Lund is a skeleton belonging to this species, in which one
of the vertebree still shows   traces of a wound, made, in the
opinion of Professor Nilsson, by a flint arrow.      Bones of this
species have also been met with in ancient tumuli, as well as
in the lake-habitations, and the Kjékkenméddings.
                    ELK.    LEMMING.              SNOWY    OWL.                   807

   Ceesar particularly mentions the urus as occurring in the
Hercynian forest; it is alluded to in the Niebelungen Lied,
and, according to Herberstain, it existed in Germany down
to the sixteenth century. In England wild bulls are men-
tioned by Fitz-Stephen, in his Life of Becket, as occurring
near London as late as the twelfth century. It does not seem
certain, however, that these were uri. The celebrated wild
cattle of Chillmgham, and some of our domestic breeds, are
generally regarded by Palzontologists as being descended
from the ancient urus.
  Mr. Dawkins is also of opinion that Machairodus latidens,
one of the most remarkable                of the Pliocene         carnivora,     sur-
vived to post-glacial times. It was found by MacHnery in
Kent’s Hole, but has not been met with in the present exami-
nation of that interesting cavern. Nor has it occurred in any
other of our bone-caves or river gravels with remains of
post-glacial mammalia.     The Norway Hk, which is identical
with the American moose, was also au inhabitant                               of this
country, but has long become extinct here, as                                 indeed
throughout Western Europe.                  Even in Prussia it is said that
there are only about 226 remaining*.       The lemming has
been discovered by Dr. Blackmore, in the river gravels at
Fisherton, near Salisbury ;and the lagomys, or tailiess hare, a
genus now confined to the Himalayas, Siberia, and the colder
regions of North America, has been identified by Prof. Owen
among the bones from Kent’s Cavern, and by Dr. Falconer
among those from the Brixham Cave.           Another glacial
genus, that of the marmots, is represented by two species,
one of them very closely resembling that now lying in
Siberia. Lastly, it may be observed that remains of the
great snowy owl (Strie nivea) have recently been discovered
in France.
  * See Report from Her Majesty’s           and    regulations    relating   to game.
representatives abroad, on the laws         Presented to Parliament, 1871.
                                      5
308                        MOLLUSCA.

   The river gravels contain also thirty-six species of shell-
fish, of which thirty-four at present live in Sweden*, and
twenty-nine in Lombardy.      These latter, however, are prin-
cipally species having a very wide range, and we shall see
still more clearly that the leaning of the molluscan fauna is
towards the north, if we remember that out of seventy-seven
Finland species, thirty-one have been found in the upper level
gravels, while of 193 Lombard species, only twenty-nine have
as yet occurred.
    Another very interesting point connected with this quater-
nary fauna is the manner in which it connects together species
now quite distinct. Opponents of Mr. Darwin’s theory often
 ask with misplaced triumph for the links connecting any two
 species. In fact, however, every species is a link between
 other allied forms. Of course, indeed, as long as any varie-
 ties remain undescribed there will be intervals—indicating,
however, gaps in our knowledge, not in nature. More-
over, it is admitted by every one that there are variable
species, that is to say, species which present two or more
extreme forms, with intermediate gradations. Now we may
fairly ask those who assert that no two species are connected
by links, how they would separate the instances of variable
animals (which they admit to occur) from the case which
they say does not exist. If we were to obtain to-morrow all
the links between any two species which are now considered
distinct, no one can deny that the two would at once be
united, and would hereafter appear in our classifications as
one variable species. In fact, therefore, they first unite into
one species all those forms, however different, between which
a complete series 1s known, and then argue in favour of the
permanence of species because no two of them are united
by intermediate links.
  Moreover, if species were in reality perfectly distinct from
                  * Proc. Roy. Soc., 1862, p. 44.
              LINES   BETWEEN   EXISTING   SPECIES.        3809

one another, then it would necessarily follow that as our
knowledge of any group increased, the separations betweep
the different species would become more and more unmis:
takable. On the contrary, however, it is a well-known fact
that the difficult genera become still more difficult as they
are more profoundly studied. If, indeed, we consider existing
forms only, no doubt the distinctions between the greater
number of species are well marked, nor does any one expect
to find a living series of links between them. The interme-
diate forms lived in tertiary and quaternary times.      Thus
directly we commence to study the extinct forms, all the con-
venient lines of separation gradually thin out. For instance,
the larger species of mammalia are at present in most cases
well marked, but it becomes much more difficult satisfactorily
to distinguish them from one another, when we consider fossil
specimens as well as recent ones.      Thus, to take only two
eases from the group of quaternary mammalia, we have seen
that, according to Riitimeyer, the European and American
bisons, which are now quite distinct, are connected by the
Bison priscus, while between our brown bear and the grizzly
bear of the Rocky Mountains a series of links has been
discovered among the abundant remains in our bone-caves.
   Great as is the interest attaching to the existence of man
at a period so much more ancient than that hitherto assigned
to him, there is something which, to many minds, will appear
even more fascinating in the presence of such a fauna as that
which I have thus briefly indicated. For it must be regarded
as a well-ascertained fact, that, even during the human
period, the pleasant and sunny valleys of England and
of France have been inhabited by the gigantic Irish elk, two
species of elephant, and three of rhinoceros, together with
the reindeer, a large bear closely resembling the grizzly bear
of the Rocky Mountains, a bison scarcely distinguishable
from that of the American Prairies, the musk ox of Arctic
310            CLIMATE   OF THE       QUATERNARY    PERIOD.

America, the lemming of the Siberian Steppes, the lion of
the Tropics, the hyena of the Cape, and a hippopotamus
closely resembling that of the great African rivers.
   Influenced mainly by the presence of the great pachy-
derms, and particularly by that of the Hippopotamus, M.
WArchiac is disposed to consider that the climate of the
quaternary period was warmer than ours*, while M. Lartet +
suggests that we may have had a climate like that of Chih,
where, as Mr. Darwin has pointed out, glaciers actually come
down to the sea-level in latitudes corresponding with that of
our south coast, and the northern provinces of France.
   In other respects, however, the fauna of the quaternary
deposits indicates a more severe climate. The presence of
the reindeer     and musk      ox, the lemming         and the marmot,
corroborated as we shall see in the next chapter by physical
evidence, leave little doubt on this subject.              Moreover, we
must remember that the tichorhine rhinoceros and the mam-
moth were not only well provided against cold, but in some
cases were enveloped in the ice and frozen mud of the
Siberian rivers so soon after death that the flesh had not had
time to decay.        Much weight is also to be attributed, I
think, to the smaller quadrupeds, as, for instance, the lem-
ming and lagomys.
   Yet I feel strongly that some of the species, and particu-
larly the hippopotamus, point to a warmer climate. Even if
protected by fur, as Mr. Prestwich supposes, the animal could
never live in a country where the rivers were frozen every
winter. To meet this difficulty a suggestion has been thrown
out that it may have made annual migrations.                  In the Gulf
of Penas, on the west coast of South America, lat. 47° S.,
Mr. Darwin has pointed out that glaciers now “descend to
the sea within less than nine degrees of latitude from where
   * Leconssurla Faune Quaternaire,        + Lartet, Ann. des Sc. Nat., 1867,
pp. 15, 16.                             p. 37.
             PROBABLE    FLUCTUATIONS     OF CLIMATE.           311

paims grow, less than two and a half from arborescent
grasses, less than two from orchideous parasites, and within
a single degree of tree-ferns*.” The reindeer in America
makes, we know, very extensive           annual   migrations, but a
heavy animal like the hippopotamus would hardly do so. I
am, therefore, rather disposed to believe that the presence of
the hippopotamus, the B. antiquus, and BR. leptorhinus, indi-
cates that the climate of the quaternary period was not
uniformly severe, but contained at least one interval of
exceptional mildness.
   It is remarkable also that the late M. Morlot, well known
as an excellent and careful observer, considered it to be certain
that, in Switzerland, there were two periods of great exten-
sion of the glaciers, separated by an epoch of comparative
warmth.
   We shall also see presently that if the cold of the glacial
epoch was due to the astronomical causes pointed out by Mr.
Adhemar and Mr. Croll, the period of extreme cold must
have been followed by one of unusual warmth, or rather
there must have been several oscillations of climate from
unusual heat to extreme cold.
   I am disposed then, on the whole, to consider that the
quaternary fauna consists of two distinct groups, belonging
to different periods and to two different conditions of climate,
one warmer than the present, the other colder. The whole
subject, however, while it is of great interest, is also of
extreme difficulty. On many points we must be contented to
suspend our judgment, but we may at least regard it as
proved that, since the appearance of man, there have been
great changes in the fauna of Western Europe, which then
contained several important species, either now altogether
extinct or existing only in distant parts of the world.

         * Researches in Geology and Natural History, p. 285.
                           CHAPTER         X.

                               CAVE MEN,


   T would be quite impossible, within the limits of a single
      chapter, to describe all the caves in which human
remains have been found, in association with, and apparently
belonging to the same period as, those of the extinet mam-
malia. I will only call attention to a few of those which
have been most thoroughly examined, and in which the con-
clusions appear to be satisfactorily established.
   It is unnecessary to observe that a great number of caves
present evidence of having been inhabited during times long
subsequent to those which we are now considering; but for
the Neolithic Age, as well as for all later periods, we have,
as has been already mentioned, other sources of information,
and more satisfactory evidence than ary which can be derived
from the examination of caves.
   Some writers, indeed, have gone so far as to question
altogether the value of what may be called cave-evidence.
They have suggested that the bones of extinct animals may
have lain in the caves for ages before the appearance of man;
that the relics of the human period may have been introduced
subsequently; and that remains belonging to very different
periods may have been mixed together. This was, for instance,
the conclusion arrived at by M. Desnoyers, even so recently
as the year 1845, in his article on Bone-caves*.             Unless this
   * Recherches Géologiques et His-   ments. Dictionnaire Universe! d’ Hiss
toriques sur les Cavernes, particu.   toire Naturelle.
litrement sur les cavernes A osse-
                  CAVES    IN THE      SOUTH   OF FRANCE.                 313

argument admitted of a satisfactory answer, it must be con-
ceded that the evidence derivable from cave contents would
always be liable to grave suspicion. I trust, however, to be
able to show that this is not the case.
   Already, in the year 1828, MM. Tournal and Christol in
the south of France had found fragments of pottery and
human bones and teeth, intermingled with remains of extinct
animals; and M. Tournal distinctly expressed: the opiion
that these had certainly not been washed in by any diluvial
catastrophe, but must have been introduced gradually. The
presence of pottery, however, throws much doubt on the sup-
posed antiquity of these remains.
  A few years later, in 1833 and 1834, Dr. Schmerling*
published an account of his researches in some caves near
Liége in Belgium.    In four or five of these he found human
bones, and in all of them rude implements, principally flint
flakes, were discovered, scattered in such a manner among
the remains of the mammoth, Rhinoceros tichorhinus, cave-
hyzena, and cave-bear, that Dr. Schmerling referred them to
the same period. One feels a natural surprise that such
animals as these should ever have been natives of England
and France, ever have wandered about among our woods or
along our streams; but when it was also suggested that they
were contemporary with man, surprise was succeeded by
incredulity. Yet these cave-researches appear to have been
conducted     with care,     and the principal results have been
confirmed by more recent discoveries.
  The hesitation, however,             with which     the   statements      of
Dr. Schmerling were received by scientific men arose, no
doubt, partly from the fact that some of the fossil remains
discovered by him were certainly referred to wrong species,
and partly because, with reference to several of the extinct
   * Recherches sur les Ossements        de la Province de Liége.   Par le Dr.
Fogsiles découverts dans lesCavernes     PP. C. Schmerling.
314                          BELGIAN   CAVES.

species, and especially to the mammoth, he expressed the
opinion that the remains had been brought from a distance,
and had very likely been washed out of some earlier bed.
“Nous n’hésitons point,” he says, “a exprimer ici notre
pensée, c’est que nous doutons fort que l’éléphant, lors de
Vépoque du remplissage de nos cavernes, habitat nos con-
trées. Au contraire, nous croyons plutdt que ces restes ont
été amenés de loin, ou bien que ces débris ont été déplacés
dun terrain plus ancien et ont été entrainés dans les
cavernes.”
   Even, therefore, thongh Dr. Schmerling might be quite
right in his conclusion that the human remains had been
“enfonis dans ces cavernes & la inéme époque, et par consé-
quent par les mémes causes qui y ont entrainé une masse
d’ossements de différentes espéces éteintes,”’ still it would not
necessarily follow that man had lived at the same period as
these extinct species.
   Careful explorations of the Belgian caves have recently
been carried on under the auspices of the Government by
M. E. Dupont*. These caverns belong principally to the
so-called Reindeer period, and the flint implements are never
ground.     Thus out of 30,000 worked flints found                 in the
cavern of Chaleux, and 1200 in those of Furfooz, not one
presents a trace of polish.  Some of these flint flakes, etc.,
appear to consist of Pressigny flint, and in the opinion of
Dr. Dupont, as well as of M. de Mortillet, must have come
from that distant locality. In this cavern the humerus of an
elephant was discovered, but in M. Dupont’s opinion, founded
on the state of the bone, it belonged to an earlier period than
the other remains. Human bones have been found in several
of these caverns. The Trou du Frontal contained bones
belonging to no less than thirteen individuals. They had
   * Notices Preliminaires sur les     du Gouvernement Belge dans        les
Fouilles exécutées sous les Auspices    Cavernes de la Belgique. 1867.
                          KENT’S HOLE.                       315

probably been buried in the cave, the door of which seemed
to have been purposely closed by a large block of stone.
When discovered they were in great confusion, having in the
opinion of MM. Dupont and Van Beneden been disturbed
and rearranged by water.     The form of the cavern, and the
fact that the opening was in great measure closed by the
above-mentioned stone, seem to me to speak strongly against
this suggestion, and I should rather regard the disturbance
of the bones as due to foxes and badgers.        The Trou de la
Naulette contamed a very remarkable lower jaw, of which
M. Dupont says that “regardée dans la face interne, elle offre
une telle proclivité d’arriére en avant de la partie symphy-
saire qu’on est porté ay voir un prognatisme tout animal.
Les apophyses géni ne sont pas indiquées; les fossettes
latérales sont tres-prononcées et le rebord mentonnier est
réduit 4 son minimum.     Les alvéoles des canines, bien que
trés-rapprochées   des alvéoles des incisives, et les molaires,
nous rappellent la disposition qu’on observe sur la machoire
du singe.   En effet, Valvéole qui logeait la canine est fort
vaste et bombée 4 la face externe.           Ce qui semble plus
étrange encore, c’est que les trois alvéoles des grosses molaires
présentent absolument Vordre typique du maxillaire simien
par ’augmentation progressive des alvéoles de la premiére 4
la deuxiéme et a la troisiéme molaire.”
   The celebrated cavern of Kent’s Hole, near Torquay, was
examined by Mr. MacEnery as long ago as 1825. He did
not, however, publish his notes on the subject, and they
remained in manuscript until 1859, when Mr. Vivian suc-
ceeded in obtaining them. Mr. MacHnery found human
bones, flint flakes, etc., but all either on the surface or in
disturbed soil, so that on the whole he regarded them,
though apparently with much doubt, as posterior to the
remains of the cave-bear, hyzena, etc.
   In the year 1840 Mr. Godwin-Austen communicated to
316                          KENT’S HOLE.

the Geological Society a memoir on the Geology of the South
Hast of Devonshire*, and in his description of Kent’s Hole,
he says that “human remains and works of art, such as
arrow-heads and knives of flint, occur in all parts of the cave,
and throughout the entire thickness of the clay: and no
distinction   founded on condition,           distribution,     or relative
position, can be observed, whereby the human can be sepa-
rated from the other reliquie,’”’ which included bones of the
“elephant, rhinoceros, ox, deer, horse, bear,                  hysetia,   and
a feline animal of large size.” The value, he truly adds, “of
such a statement mus’ rest on the care with which a collec-
tor may have explored. I must therefore state that my own
researches were constantly conducted in parts of the cave
which had never been disturbed, and in every instance the
bones were procured from beneath a thick covering of stalag-
mite; so far, then, the bones and works of man must have
been introduced into the cave before the flooring of stalag-
mite had been formed.” Notwithstanding the high authority of
Mr. Godwin- Austen, these statementsattracted little attention ;
and the very similar assertions made by Mr. Vivian, in a paper
read befcre the Geological Society, were considered so impro-
bable that the memoir containmg them was not published.
   They have, however, been completely confirmed by the
systematic examination which is now being carried on by the
British Association.    Worked flints are less abundant in
the lower layers than near the surface, but several have been
discovered under circumstances which leave no doubt that
they were deposited at the same time as the bones of the
large mammalia. ‘The researches are carried on by a com-
mittee, consisting of Sir C. Lyell, Mr. Busk, Mr. Evans,
Prof. Philips, Mr. Vivian, Mr. Pengelly, and myself, and
the work is under the more immediate superintendence of
Mr. Pengelly and Mr. Vivian.
         * Transactions of the Geol. Soc., Ser. 2, vol. vi. p. 433.
                        BRIXHAM CAVE.                      B17.

  In May, 1858, Dr. Falconer called the attention        of the
Geological Society to a newly-discovered cave at Brixham,
near Torquay, and a committee was appointed to assist him
in examining it. Grants of money were obtained for the
same object from the Royal Society and Miss Burdett Coutis.
In addition to Dr. Falconer, Mr. Pengelly, Mr. Prestwich,
and Professor Ramsay were entrusted with the investigations.
In September, 1858, a preliminary report was made to the
Geological Society, but it is very much to be regretted that
the results have not yet been published in extenso.
   The deposits in the cave were, in descending order—
     1. Stalagmite of irregular thickness.
    2. Ochreous cave-earth with limestone breccia.
    3. Ochreous cave-earth with comminuted shale.
    4, Rounded gravel,
The organic remains belonged chiefly to the following species:
    1. Hlephas primigenius.
    2. Ehinoceros tichorhinus. Teeth in considerable numbers
         and an astragalus.
    3 . Bos sp. Teeth, jaws, and other bones.
    4,. Equus sp. A few remains.
    5 . Cervus tarandus.   The reindeer—skull and horns.
    6. Cervus elaphus. Horns.
     7 . O. capreolus.
    8 . Ursus speleeus—the cave-bear. Lower jaws, teeth, etc.
    9 . Uz feroe.
   10. U. arctos.
   1l. Hyena spelea.       Lower jaws, teeth, fragments of
         skulls, and other bones.
   12. Felis speleea.
   13. Lagomys.

  Several flint flakes were also found indiscriminately mixed
with these bones, and, according to all appearance, of the
318                     SICILIAN CAVES.

same antiquity. They occurred at various depths, from ten
inches to eleven feet, and some of them were in the gravel,
below the whole of the ochreous cave-earth.
    Again, in the grotto of Maccagnone, in Sicily, Dr. Falconer
found human traces, consisting of ashes and rude flint imple-
ments, in a breccia containing bones of the Elephas antiquus,
of the hyeena, of a large Ursus, of a Felis (probably F’. spelcea),
and especially with large numbers of bones belonging to the
hippopotamus. The “ ceneri impastati,” or concrete of ashes,
had at one time filled the cavern, and a large piece of bone
breccia was still cemented to the roof, but owing to some
change in the drainage, the greater part had been washed out
 again. The presence of the hippopotamus sufficiently proves
 that the geographical conditions of the country must have
 been very different from what they are now; but I cannot
 do better than quote Dr. Falconer’s own summary of his
 observations in this case:
    “The vast number of Hippopotami implied that the phy-
 sical condition of the country must have been greatly different,
at no very distant geological period, from what obtains now.
He considered that all deposits above the bone breccia had
been accumulated up to the roof by materials washed in from
above, through sinuous crevices or flues in the limestone, and
that the uppermost layer, consisting of the breccia of shells,
bone-splinters, siliceous objects, burnt clay, bits of charcoal,
and hyzena coprolites, had been       cemented to the roof by
stalagmitic infiltration.    The entire condition of the large
fragile Helices proved that the effect had been produced by
the tranquil agency of water, as distinct from any tumultuous
action.   There was nothing to indicate that the different
objects in the roof breccia were other than of contemporaneous
origin: subsequently a great physical alteration in the con-
tour, altermg the flow of superficial water and of the subter-
ranean springs, changed all the conditions previously existing,
                        GIBRALTAR     CAVES.                 319

and emptied out the whole of the loose incoherent contents,
leaving only the portions agglutinated to the roof.     The
wreck of these ejecta was visible in the patches of ‘ceneri
impastati,’ containing fossil bones, below the mouth of the
cavern.    That a long period must have operated in the
extinction of the hyzena, cave-lion, and other fossil species
is certain, but no index remains for its measurement.    The
author would call the careful attention of cautious geologists
to the inferences—that the Maccagnone Cave was filled up
to the roof within the human period, so that a thick layer
of bone   splinters, teeth, landshells, hyzenas’ coprolites, and
human objects, was agglutinated to the roof by the infiltra-
tion of water holding lime in solution. That subsequently,
and within the human period, such a great amount of change
took place in the physical configuration of the district as to
have caused the cave to be washed out and emptied of its
contents, excepting the patches of material cemented to the
roof and since coated with additional stalagmite.”’
   Similar proofs of great and recent geographical changes
have been afforded by the examination of certain Spanish
caves. The rock of Gibraltar abounds in caverns containing
human remains, with stone, bone, and bronze implements,
mixed with those of domesticated animals, such as the goat
and ox.     In the bone breccia from the Genista Cave and
fissure, Mr. Busk and Dr. Falconer have discovered Hyena
crocuta, an existing African species, the leopard, lynx, serval,
and Barbary stag, together with Rh. hemitechus and a species
of ibex. But, although it is more than probable, it does not
appear to be proved, that man co-existed with these animals
on the rock of Gibraltar. Among some bones found in
another cave near Madrid, M. Lartet has discovered molars
of the existing African elephant.
   M. Lartet* has also described with his usual ability an
                  * Ann. des Sc. Nat., 1861, p. 177.
320                          AURIGNAC.

interesting grotto, or small cave, which was discovered some
years ago at Aurignac, in the south of France. A peasant
named Bonnemaison, seeing a rabbit run into a hole on a
steep slope, put his hand in, and to his surprise pulled out a
human bone. Curiosity urged him to explore farther, and
on removing a quantity of rubbish, he found a large block
of stone, which almost closed up the entrance to a small
chamber, in which were no less than seventeen human
skeletons.   Unfortunately for science, the mayor of Au-
rignac, hearing of these discoveries, collected the human
bones, had them reburied, and when M. Lartet some years
afterwards explored the cavern, they could not be found
again.
   After carefully examining the locality, M. Lartet came to
the conclusion that this small cavern had been used as a
burial place, and from the remains of bones broken for
marrow, and marks of fire immediately outside the cave, he
inferred that funeral feasts had been held there.
   The following is the list of species determined by M.
Lartet, together with the approximate number of individuals
belonging to each :—
                                               Number of individuals.
       1. Cave Bear (Ursus speleus)        . . . . 5—6
       Ze Drow ear Un Gretigieeras             0       een
       8. Badger (Meles tawus) . . . . . . 1—2
       4. Polecat (Putorius vulgaris) . . . . 1
       5.) Cave Lion (felis spelen) a 5 2) a as ok
       Ga WildiCat (i icaiis)=     eee     sue            ee)
       (otigena (Hyena spelca\er           ou.    tes     wo 26
       Se Wolts(Cantsel apis).         —se e e        e ees
       Omi ox (GC vulpes\y      an     eee,      Ae      e200
      10. Mammoth (Hlephas primigenius).
              Two molars and an astragalus.
        4 . Rhinoceros
      BRA              (Fhinoceros tichorhinus)       . 1
                                AURIGNAC.                                 321

      2. tlorse (Baus eaballus)    2...      12-15
      Perence) (heasimiaye,     (0       a Sad
      14. Boar (Sus scrofa). Two incisors.
      15. Stag (Cervus elaphus) .                   :           1
      16.   Irish Elk (Megaceros hibernicus)                   1
      Py    eine (OC. capreolus)   Gs                          BS
      18.   Reindeer (0. tarandus) . . .                .   . 10—12
      19.   Aurochs (Bison Huropeeus)     . .           .   . 12—15

Some of these were found in the grotto, others outside; the
latter had been gnawed by some large carnivorous animal, no
doubt the byzena, coprolites of which were found among the
ashes. On the other hand, the bones inside the cave were
untouched, from which          M. Lartet concludes that after the
funeral feasts, hyzenas came and devoured all that had been
left by the men, but that they could not effect an entrance
into the cave on account of the large block of stone by which
the entrance was closed, and which was actually found in its
place by Bonnemaison.
   In addition to the hyena, the animals occurring in this
list, and yet no longer existing, or known historically to have
existed in France, are the reindeer,             cave-bear,    rhinoceros,
cave-lion, Irish elk, and mammoth.    The contemporaneity
of the reindeer with man is very evident; all the bones are
broken      for marrow,     and many      bear the marks        of knives,
besides which, the greater number of the bone implements
are made out of the bones or horns of this species. That the
rhinoceros also was contemporaneous with man is inferred
by M. Lartet, firstly, on chemical grounds, the bones of this
species, as well as those of the reindeer, aurochs, etc., having
retained the same amount of nitrogen as the human bones
from the same locality; and secondly, because the bones

  * This is, I presume, a small variety of horse, and not the true Ass.   The
query is in the original.
                                                                NG
322                        AURIGNAC.

appear to have been broken by man, and in some cases are
marked by knives. Moreover, he has ingeniously pointed
out that these bones must have belonged to an individual
recently killed, because, after having been broken by man,
they were gnawed by the hyznas, which would not have
been the case if they had not been fresh and still full of
their natural juices.
   The elephant was represented only by some detached
plates of molars anda calcaneum. This latter was the only
gnawed bone found in the interior of the grotto. He is of
opinion that these plates were purposely separated, and the
calcaneum appears to have been placed in the vault at the
time of the last interments; but there is no evidence that it
was then in a fresh condition.    Indeed, the fact of its being
gnawed seems rather to point the other way.
  Remains of the Ursus speleus (cave-bear) were much more
abundant, and some of them were found in the grotto. In
one case a whole limb appears to have been buried with the
flesh on, as the different bones were all found together. It
is well known that food and drink were in ancient times fre-
quently buried with the dead, and M. Lartet thinks that we
may account in this manner for the bones of quadrupeds
found in the grotto at Aurignac.
   Ihave given the particulars of this case at length, because, if
the evidence was well-established, we should here have an in-
stance ofa sepulture belonging to the period at which the cave-
bear, the reindeer, the Irish elk, the woolly-haired rhinoceros,
and probably the mammoth, still lived in the south of France.
It is, however, much to be regretted that M. Lartet was not
present when the place was first examined; and, under all
the circumstances, we cannot, I think, feel satisfied that the
human remains found in this cave were certainly coeval with
those of the extinct mammalia.
   Another remarkable case is that of the Hyzna-den at
                               WOKEY HOLE.                                       393

Wokey Hole, near Wells, which has been ably explored and
described by Mr. Boyd Dawkins*. In this instance the cave
was filled with débris up to the very roof, and it appears that
the accumulation of material was partly due to the disinte-
gration of the dolomitic conglomerate forming the roof and
walls of the cavern, and partly to the sediment washed in
gradually by rain and small streams. It is evident that the
bones and stones were not brought into the cave by the
action of water; firstly, because none of the bones are at all
rolled; secondly, because, though several rude flint imple-
ments were found in the cave, on/y one single unworked flint
was met with ; and thirdly, because, in some cases, fragments
of the same bone have been found close together, while, if
they had been brought from a distance, it is almost incredible
that they should have been again deposited close to one
another. Again, there are several layers—one over the other
—of album grzcum, that is to say, the excrement of hyzenas,
each of which indicates, of course, an old floor, and a separate
period of occupation; so that the presence of, at least, one
such floor above some of the flint implements, proves two
things; firstly, that the hyzenas which produced the album
greecum occupied the cave after the savages who used the
flint   instruments;       and, secondly,           that    these   implements
have not been disturbed by water since the period of the
hyena.
   During the last years of his life, Mr. Christy, whose death
has been so great a loss to science, examined, in conjunction
with M. Lartet, with great care a number of small caves and
rock-shelters in the Dordogne, some of which had already
attracted the attention of archeologistst.     These caves are
particularly interesting, because, so far, at least, as we can
judge from the present state of the evidence, the remains
  * Geol. Journal, May, 1862, p. 115.        Arts   en Périgord.    Par   M.   |’Abbé
  + De lOrigine et de !’Enfance des          Audierne.
                                        yy
324                 CAVES   IN THE DORDOGNE.

found in them belong to: M. Lartet’s reindeer period, and
tend, therefore, to connect the later Stone or Neolithic Age
with the period of the river-drifts and the great extinct
mamialia; representing a period about which we had pre-
viously very little information. Those which have been most
carefully examined are ten in number, viz. Laugerie, La
Madelaine, Les Hyzies, La Gorge d’Enfer, Le Moustier,
Liveyre, Pey de ’Azé, Combe-Granal, and Badegoule, most
of which I have myself had the advantage of visiting. Some
of these, as, for instance, Les Eyzies and Le Moustier, are at
a considerable height above the stream, but others—as those
at La Madelaine and Laugerie—are little above the present
flood-line, showing, therefore, that the level of the river is
now nearly the same as it was at tbe period during which
 these caves were inhabited.
   The rivers of the Dordogne run in deep valleys cut through
calcareous strata; and while the sides of the valleys in chalk
districts are generally sloping, in this case, owing probably
to the hardness of the rock, they are frequently vertical.
Small caves and grottoes frequently occur; besides which,
as the different strata possess unequal power of resistance
against atmospheric influences, the face of the rock is, as it
were, scooped out in many places, and thus “rock-shelters”
are produced. In very ancient times these caves and rock-
shelters were inhabited by men, who have left behind them
abundant evidences of their presence.       But as civilization
advanced, Man, no longer content with the natural but in-
convenient abode thus offered to him, excavated         chambers
for himself, and in places the whole face of the rock is honey-
combed with doors and windows leading into suites of rooms.
often in tiers one over another, so as to suggest the idea of a
French Petra. Down to a comparatively recent period, as, for
instance, in the troublous times of the Middle Ages, many of
these, no doubt, served as very efficient fortifications, and even
                    FAUNA    OF THE    DORDOGNE   CAVES.               32a

now some of them are still in use as storehouses, and for
other purposes, as, for instance, at Brantéme, where there is
an old chapel cut in the solid rock. Apart from the scientific
interest, it was impossible not to enjoy the beauty of the
scene which passed before our eyes as we dropped down
the Vezére.     As the river visited sometimes one side of
its valley, sometimes the other, so we had at one moment
rich meadow-lands         on each side, or found       ourselves close
to the perpendicular and almost overhanging cliff. Here
and there we came upon some picturesque old castle, and
though     the    trees   were   not   in full leaf, the rocks were     in
many     places   green     with box and ivy and evergreen            oak,
which harmonized well with the rich yellow brown of the
stone itself.
   But to return to the bone-caves.     Remains of the cave-
bear have been found at the Pey de l’Azé, of the cave-hyena
at Le Moustier, and separated plates of elephant molars have
occurred at Le Moustier and at Laugerie, accompanied at the
latter place by a piece of a pelvis. As regards the two first
species, MM. Christy and Lartet regard them as probably
belonging to an earlier period than the human remains found
in the same caves. The presence of the pelvis has been
regarded as an evidence of the contemporaneity of the mam-
moth with the remdeer hunters of Laugerie, and it is cer-
tainly difficult to see why they should have brought a fossil-
bone into their cave, more especially as the bones of ele-
phants, from the looseness of their texture, are not well
adapted for implements.      Still MM. Christy and Lartet do
not commit themselves to any opinion, having, as they say,
laid down “une loi de ne procéder dans nos inductions que
par évidences incontestables.”
   As regards the Felis spelew, ametacarpal bone belonging
probably to this species, and bearing marks                of knives, was
found in the cave of Les Eyzies.
326              ABSENCE    OF DOMESTIC     ANIMALS.

  Still, so far as the positive zoological evidence is con-
cerned, the antiquity of the human remains found in these
grottoes rests mainly on the presence of the reindeer, as
regards which the evidence is conclusive. The bones of this
species are all broken open for the marrow; many of them
bear the marks of knives, and at Les Hyzies a vertebra was
found which had been pierced by a flint flake. MM. Christy
and Lartet are quite satisfied that this bone must have been
fresh when it was thus transfixed.            Moreover, as we shall
presently see, there is still more conclusive evidence that
man and the reindeer were contemporaneous in this locality.
   But in its negative aspect the zoological evidence is also
very instructive. No remains have been found which, in the
opinion of MM. Christy and Lartet, can be referred to do-
mestic animals. It is true that bones of the ox and horse
occur, but there is no evidence that they belonged to domes-
ticated individuals.    Remains of the boar are very rare,
and if these animals had been domesticated we might have
expected to find them in greater abundance. The sheep and
goat are entirely wanting, and, what is still more remarkable,
even the dog appears to be absent.      At the same time the
bones of the horse and reindeer, especially of the latter, are
very numerous;   but MM. Christy and Lartet do not think
that they were domesticated.   On the other hand, M. Riiti-
meyer seems to be of a different opinion*. Of the bones
from the cave of Veyrier he has drawn out the following list:
Ptarmigan 81 individuals, reindeer 18, ibex 6, horse 5,
stag 4, mountain hare 4, marmot 4, chamois 1, wolf 1,
bear 1, ox 1, fox 1, and stork 1.          He points out that this
is decidedly an Alpine fauna, and he asks why, if the rein-
deer were wild, they did not retire into the high Alps with
the bear, the ibex, and the chamois?    The condition of the
bones, and especially of the horns, will enable us some day
                 * Revue Savoisienne, 25th April, 18€8.
                 FLINT     IMPLEMENTS     FOUND     IN CAVES.                Sy7/

to answer this question, but we have at present no case in
which the reindeer and the horse are held in domestication
together by the same race, and we must be satisfied to wait
for further evidence before the question can be decided.
   In the collections made by MM. Christy and Lartet, as
well as that of M. le Vicomte de Lastic from Bruniquel, a
very large proportion of the animal remains consists of teeth,
lower jaws, and horns.              Other bones do indeed occur, but
they form a small fraction of the whole. Yet we cannot
attribute this to the presence of dogs, partly because no
remains of this species have yet been discovered, partly
because the bones which remain have not been gnawed,
but principally because dogs eat only certain bones and parts
of bones, as a general rule selecting the spongy portions,
and rejecting the solid shafts.
   Mr. Galton has pointed out that some of the savage tribes
of Africa, not content with the flesh of the animals                    which
they kill, pound up also the bones in mortars,                     and then
suck out the animal              juices contained      in them.    So       also,
according to Leems, the Danish Laplanders used to break
up with a mallet all the bones which contained any fat or
marrow, and then boil them until all the fat was extracted*.
The Esquimaux also mash up the bones for the sake of the
marrow contained in themt+t. Some of the ancient stone
hammers and mortars were no doubt used for this purpose,
and the proportions of'the different bones afford us, I think,
indirect evidence that a similar custom prevailed among the
ancient inhabitants of Southern France.
   Passing on now to the flint implements found in these
caves, we must first call attention to their marvellous abun-
dance. Without any exaggeration they may be said to he
  * Account of Danish Lapland, by         p. 396.                       :
Leems,   Copenhagen,     1767.   Trans-     + Hall, Life with the Hsquimaux,
lated in Pinkerton’s Voyages, vol. i.     vol. ii, pp. 147. 176.
328            FLAKES.      SCRAPERS.      AWLS, ETC.

innumerable.     Of course this adds greatly to the value of
the conclusions; nor need it surprise us, because flint is
so brittle, that implements made of it must have been easily
broken, and, in that case, the fragments would be thrown
away as useless; especially in a chalk district, where the
supply of flint would, of course, be practically inexhaustible.
Many implements, no doubt, would be left unfinished, having
been rendered useless, either by some misdirected blow, or
some flaw in the flint. Moreover, we should naturally expect
that, in a bone-breccia of this nature, the flint implements
would be relatively more abundant than in a Kjékkenmdd-
ding. Hach oyster furnishes but a single mouthful, so that
the edible portions evidently form a greater proportion of the
whole in the mammalia than in the mollusca. The Kjdk-
kenméddings,    therefore, would grow,             ceteris paribus, more
rapidly than the bone-breccia, and supposing the flint imple-
ments to be equally numerous in both cases, they would, of
course, be more sparingly distributed in the former, than in
the latter.
   The principal objects of stone found in the bone-caves
which we are now considering, are flakes, both simple and
worked, scrapers, cores, awls, lance-heads, cutters, hammers,
and mortar-stones.
    The simple and worked flakes are, of course, very nume-
rous, but they do not call for any special observations. They
present the usual varieties of size and form.
    Though less numerous than the flakes, the scrapers* are
still very abundant.    On the whole they seem to me longer
and narrower than the usual Danish type. Some of them
were probably intended to be used in the hand, as both ends
are fashioned for scraping. These may be called double-
scrapers. Others were apparently fixed in handles, as the
end opposite to the scraper is broken, sometimes on one side,
                         * See ante, pp. 96, 97.
                  HAMMERS.        LANCE-HEADS.                  329

sometimes on both, so as to form a tapering extremity, which
may have been fixed in a handle either of wood, bone, or
horn. Many of the flakes are also nipped off at one end, in
the same manner. Perhaps, as no trace of sucha handle has
yet been discovered by MM. Christy and Lartet, wood was
the material used for this purpose.
   Of course, where there was a manufactory of flint flakes,
the cores or nuclei, from which they were struck, must also
be present. I was, however, astonished at the number of
them in these caves; during my short visit, I myself picked
out more than ninety.
                                Fig. 181.




                             Flint Implement.


  Awls ana saws are very much less frequent, but some few
good specimens have been found. At some of the stations,
curious flat implements (fig. 181) are met with. From the
constancy of their form, which, moreover, is somewhat pecu-
liar, we may safely infer that they were applied to some
definite purpose. For hammers, the reindeer hunters seem
to have used round stones, a good many of which occur in
the caves, and which bear unmistakable marks of the pur-
pose to which they were applied. Some of them, however,
may haye served also as heaters. The North American
Indians, the Esquimaux, and some other savages, having no
pottery, but only wooden vessels, which could not be put
on the fire, used to heat stones,           and then place them in
the water which they wished to boil.             Many of the stones
330         RELATIVE       ANTIQUITY       OF   THE    REMAINS.

found in these caverns appear to have been used in this
manner.

            Fie, 182.




                        Fiint Implement from Le Moustier.
  ‘hese, the commonest sorts of flint implements, are found
indiscriminately in all the grottoes, but there are some other
types which appear to be less generally distributed.     Thus,
at Laugerie and Badegoule, fragments of leaf-shaped lance-
                ABSENCE   OF POLISHED   IMPLEMENTS               331

heads, almost as well worked as some of those from Denmark,
are far from uncommon.      If, therefore, we were to attempt
any classification of the grottoes, according to the periods of
their occupation, we might be disposed to refer these to a
somewhat later period than most of the others. On the con-
trary, to judge from the flint implements, the station at Le
Moustier would be the-most ancient.              Though it would
perhaps be premature to attempt any             such classification,
there can be no doubt that Le Moustier presents some types
not yet found in the other caves, and resembling in some
respects those of the drift.
   One of these peculiar forms has one side left unchipped,
and apparently intended to be held in the hand, while the
other has a cutting edge, produced by a number of small
blows.   Some    of these instruments     are   of large size, and
they are supposed by MM. Christy and Lartet to have been
used for cutting wood, and perhaps also the large bones of
mammalia.    Another very interesting type is figured on p.
330 (figs. 182-4). This specimen is worked on both sides,
but more frequently one of them is left flat. MM. Christy
and Lartet regard this type as identical with the “ lance-
head’ implements found in the drift. I cannot altogether
agree with them in this comparison. Not only are the Le
Moustier specimens smaller, but the workmanship is different,
being much less bold. Moreover, the flat surface (A) is no
individual peculiarity. It is very frequently, not to say
generally, present, and occurs also on the similar implement
found by Mr. Boyd Dawkins in the hyzna-den at Wokey
Hole, and figured by him in the Geological Journal, May,
1862, No. 70, p. 119. This very interesting type seems
rather to be derived from the “cutters” above described, in
which case its resemblance to the drift forms would be acci-
dental and insignificant.     MM. Christy and Lartet, indeed,
call the implements of this type “lance-heads,” but it may
332                        BONE    IMPLEMENTS.

well be doubted whether they were intended for use in this
manner, though there are specimens at Le Moustier which
have all the appearance of having been intended for this
purpose. On the whole, then, although these Le Moustier
types are of great interest, we must pause before we regard
them as belonging to the drift forms.
   Doubtless, among the immense variety of forms presented
by the flint implements from these caves, further study will
distinguish other types, and we may fairly hope that it will
throw more light on the purposes for which they were
designed. No polished implements have yet been found in
any of these caverns. Yet the collection made by the late
M. Mourcin, in the neighbourhood of Perigueux, contains,
among 5025 objects of stone, no less than 3002 polished axes,
of which, however, many are imperfect.
   The station at Moustier has not as yet produced any im-
plements made of bone, but a good many have been obtained
from the other caves. ‘‘ They consist of square chisel-shaped
wmplements ; round, sharply-pointed, awl-like tools, some of
which also may have served as the spike of a fish-hook ; har-
poon-shaped lance-heads; plain or barbed arrow-heads with
many      and   double barbs, cut         with wonderful vigour; and
lastly, eyed needles of compact bone finely pointed, polished,
and drilled with round eyes, so small and regular that some
of the most assured and acute believers in all the other find-
ings might well doubt whether they could indeed have been
drilled with stone, until their repetition by the hand of that
practical and conscientious observer, Monsieur Lartet, by the
very stone implements found with them, has dispelled their
honest doubts*.”?         Moreover,      we must remember         that the
New Zealanders were able with their stone tools to drill
holes even through glass ft.
      So far, then (with the exception, perhaps, of the well-
 * Christy, Trans. Ethn. Soc., N. S. vol. iii.   + Cook’s First Voy. p. 464.
                  REPRESENTATIONS        OF ANIMALS.                     3390

worked lance-heads of Laugerie and Badegoule), all the evi-
dence we have yet obtained from these caves points to a very
primitive period, earlier even than that of the first Swiss
lake-villages, or Danish shell-mounds.     No fragments of
metal or pottery have yet been found which can be referred
with confidence to the Reindeer period.
  But there is one class of objects in these caves which,
taken alone, would have led us to a very different conclusion.
No representation, however rude, of any animal has yet been
                                  Fis. 185.




                              Drawing of a Fish.
found in any of the Danish shell-mounds, or the Stone-age
lake-villages. Even on objects of the Bronze Age, they are
so rare, that it is doubtful whether a single well authen-
                                                   ticated instance could
                                                   be produced. Yet, in
                                                   these archaic bone-
                                                   caves, many very fair
                                                   sketches have been
                                                   found,    scratched   on
                                                   bone or stone with a
                                                   sharp point, probably
                                                   of a flint implement.
                                                   In some cases there is
            aes cia                                even an attempt at
shading.    In the Annales         des Sciences Naturelles*, M.
Lartet had already made known to us some rude drawings
found in the Caye of Savigné, and in his last memoir he has
described   and    figured    some      more       objects    of a similar
character.
   In the Dordogne caves also, several of these remarkable
                   * Ann. des Sc. Nat., 1861, vol. xv.
                                SCULPTURE.                               335

of a mammoth’s tusk, and indications of long hair will readily
be perceived.
   Another interesting specimen is a poniard, cut out of a
reindeer’s horn (fig. 189).      The artist has ingeniously
adapted the position of the animal to the necessities of the
cease. The horns are thrown back on the neck, the fore-legs
are doubled up under~the belly, and the hind-legs are
stretched out along the blade. Unfortunately the poniard
seems to have been thrown away before it was quite finished,
but several of the details indicate that the animal was in-
tended for a reindeer. Although it is natural to fecl some
surprise at finding these works of art, still there are in-
stances among recent savages of a certain skill in drawing
and sculpture being accompanied by an entire ignorance of
metallurgy. This is particularly the case with the Esquimaux,
some of whose drawings will be given in a future chapter.
                                  Fic. 189,




                              Handle of a Poniard.


   In considering the probable condition of these ancient
Cave-men, we must give them full credit for their love of
art, such as it was; while, on the other hand, the want of
metal, ot polished flint implements, and even of pottery*;
the ignorance of agriculture, and the apparent absence of all
domestic animals, including even the dog, certainly imply
a very low state of civilization, and a very considerable
antiquity.
   * Pottery is, however, veryrarein      and is not by any means abundant in
the remains of the Irish Crannoges,       the Danish shell-mounds.
336             HABITS   OF THE   CAVE-DWELLERS.

   There is also evidence that a considerable change of
climate must have taken place. The reindeer is the most
abundant animal, and evidently formed the principal article
of food, while we know that this species is now confined to
arctic climates, and could not exist in the south of France.
Again, the ibex and the chamois, both of which are now
restricted to the snowy summits of the Alps and Pyrenees,
and a species of spermophilus, also point to the same con-
clusion. The presence of the two former species in some of
the Swiss lake-dwellings is not equally significant, because
they are in the neighbourhood of high mountains, while
the highest hills of the Dordogne do not reach to an alti-
tude of much more than 800 feet.
   Another very interesting species recently determined
by M. lartet, is the Antilope Saigo of Pallas, which
now   abounds   on the    Steppes   of North       Hastern   Hurope
and Western Asia, in the plains of the Dnieper and the
Volga, round the shores of the Caspian, and as far as the
Altai Mountains.      Mr. Christy tells us that the northern
plains of Poland, and the Valley of the Dnieper, are the
southern limits of this species at the present day.
   Again, the accumulation of animal remains in these caves
is itself, as Mr. Christy has ingeniously suggested, a good
evidence of change in the climate.         We know that the
Esquimaux at present allow a similar deposit to take place
in thew dwellings, but this can only be done in Arctic
regions ; in such a climate as that now existing in the south
of France, such an accumulation would, except of course in
the depth of winter, soon become intolerably offensive.
   So far then as the present evidence is concerned, it appears
to indicate a race of men living almost as some of the Esqui-
maux do now, and as the Laplanders did a few hundred
years ago; and a period intermediate between that of the
Polished Stone implements and of the great extinct mam-
                             HUMAN    REMAINS.                        837


malia: apparently also somewhat more ancient than that of
the shell-mound builders of Denmark. But if these Cave-
men shall eventually be shown to have been contemporaneous
with the cave-tiger, the cave-bear, the cave-hyzna, and the
mammoth, remains of which have been found in doubtful
association with them, then, indeed, they must be referred to
an even more remote period.
   As regards the Cave-men themselves, we have, unfortu-
nately, but very little information.     For, although frag-
mentary human bones have been frequently found, there are,
as yet, very few cases on record in which the caves have
furnished us with skulls in such a condition as to allow of
restoration.   It is, however, remarkable that these few differ
greatly among themselves. Some are dolichocephalic or long-
headed, others brachycephalic or shortheaded.       One of the
most interesting, that discovered by Dr. Schmerling in the
cave of Engis, near Liége (figs. 190, 191), might have been
that of a modern European, so far at least as form is con-
cerned.    ‘There is no mark of degradation about any part
of its structure.      It is, in fact, a fair average human       skull,
which might have belonged to a philosopher, or might have
contained the thoughtless brains ofa savage*.” Very different
is the case with the celebrated skull, found in a limestone
cave in the Neanderthal, near Hochdal, between Diisseldorf
and Elberfeld.      This remarkable specimen was first described
by Schaafhausent, and “under whatever aspect,” says Prof.
Huxley t, “we view this cranium, whether we regard its ver-
tical depression, the enormous thickness of its supraciliary
ridges, its sloping occiput, or its long and straight squamosal
suture, we meet with ape-like characters, stamping it as the
most pithecoid of human crania yet discovered.” It has been
suggested that this Neanderthal skull may have been that of
 * Huxley, Man’s    Place in Nature, p. 156.
 } Muller’s Archiv., 1858.    Nat. Hist. Rev., 1S61.   Be tes yaks Maher,
                                                         Z
338                         THE ENGIS   SKULL.

an idiot.   There is not, however, any sufficient reason for this
                                                         hypothesis;
                                                         and   though
                                                         the shape of
                                                         the skull is
                                                         so   remark-
                                                         able,         the
                                                         brain appears
                                                         to have been
                                                         of consider-
                                                         able size, and,
                                                         indeed, is esti-
                                                         mated by Pro-
                                                         fessor Huxley
                                                         at      about
                                                         seventy-five
                                                         cubic      inches,
                                                         which is the
                                                         average capa-
                                                         city of the
                                                         Polynesian
                                                         and Hotten-
                                                 tot skulls. It must,
                                                 however, be admitted
                                                 that though the anti-
                                                 quity of this skull is
                                                 no doubt great, there
                                                 is no satisfactory proof
                                                 that it belonged to the
                                                 period of the extinct
                                                 Mammalia.         More-
                  Tize Engis Skull,
                                                 over,   as   Mr.     Busk
                                                 pointed out*, and as
                    * Nat. Hist. Rey., 1861, p. 172.
THE NEANDERTHAL          SKULL.   359




     ‘The Neanderthal Skull.

           z 2
340                         CAVE MEN.

Dr. Barnard Davis maintains, “we have yet to determine whe-
ther the conformation in question be merely an individual
peculiarity, or a typical character.”” Recent researches have
brought to light at Cro Magnon*, in the Dordogne, an inter-
ment which has been referred, though scarcely, perhaps, on
sufficient grounds, to the Reindeer period, and which com-
prises dolichocephalic skulls of a type very different to that of
the Belgian caves ; and Professor Owen has described a human
skull from Bruniquel, whichis oval, rather dolicho- than brachy-
cephalic, and shows most affinity with the oldest Celtic types.
It would appear then that, even at this early period, Kurope
was already occupied by more than one race of man.
   Thus, as regards the Engis skull, there seems no reason to
doubt that it really belonged to a man who was contempora-
neous with the mammoth, the cave-bear, and other extinct
mamumalia; yet it is a perfectly well developed skull, so that,
as Professor Huxley has well-pointed out, “the first traces
of the primordial stock whence man has proceeded need no
longer be sought, by those who entertain any form of the
doctrme of progressive development, in the newest ter-
tiaries ; but that they may be looked for in an epoch more
distant from the age of the Elephas primigenius than that is
from us.”
   If space permitted, I would gladly have referred to other
cave explorations ; to those, for instance, of Dr. Regnoli and
others in Italy, of the Marquis de Vibraye, M. Garrigon, M.
Bourguignet, M. Filhol, and many other archeologists in the
south of France, where these researches           have   been prose-
cuted with great energy       and    success.     In fact, a whole
volume might be written on the subject, and it is impossible
in the limits of a single chapter to do justice to these and
other observers.
   I trust, however that the evidence brought forward in this
                  * Reliquiee Aquitanices, part vi.
                          CAVE   MEN.                      3841

chapter has been sufficient to prove that the presence, in
bone-caves, of ancient implements and human remains, asso-
ciated with those of extinct mammalia, is no rare or excep-
tional phenomenon.     Nor, if we look at the question from a
scientific point of view, is there any thing in this that ought
to excite our astonishment.     Since the period at which these
caves were filled up, the changes which have taken place
have resulted rather in the extinction than in the creation of
species. The stag, the horse, the boar, the dog, in short, all
our existing forms of mammalia, were already in existence ;
and there would have been in reality more just cause for
surprise if man alone had been unrepresented.
                              342




                      CHAPTER XI.

                  RIVER-DRIFT GRAVEL-BEDS.

       HILE we have been straining our eyes to the East,
         and eagerly watching excavations in Egypt and
Assyria, suddenly a new light has arisen in the midst of us;
and the oldest relics of man yet discovered have occurred,
not among the ruims of Nineveh or Heliopolis, not on the
sandy plains of the Nile or the Euphrates, but in the
pleasant valleys of England and France, along the banks
of the Seine and the Somme, the Thames and the Waveney.
   So unexpected were these discoveries, so irreconcilable
with even the greatest antiquity until lately assigned to the
human race, that they were long regarded with neglect and
suspicion. M. Boucher de Perthes, to whom we are so much
indebted for this great step in the history of mankind, ob-
served, as long ago as the year 1841, in some sand contain-
ing mammalian    remains,   at Menchecourt,   near Abbeville,
a flint, rudely fashioned into a cutting instrument.    In the
following years other weapons were found under similar cir-
cumstances, and especially during the formation of the Champ
de Mars at Abbeville, where   a large quantity of gravel was
moved and many of the so-called “hatchets” were dis-
covered. In the year 1846 M. Boucher de Perthes published
his first work on the subject, entitled “De !’Industrie Primi-
tive, ow les Arts et leur Origine.” In this he announced
that he had found human implements in beds unmistakably
te (QC jo   PRL
                  M. BOUCHER    DE PERTHES.                  343

belonging to the age of the drift. In his “ Antiquités
Celtiques et Antédiluviennes” (1847), he also gave numerous
illustrations of these stone weapons, but unfortunately the
figures were rude, and did but scanty justice to the originals.
For seven years M. Boucher de Perthes made few converts ;
he was looked upon as an enthusiast, almost as a madman.
At length, in 1853, Dr. Rigollot, till then sceptical, examined
for himself the drift beds at the now celebrated St. Acheul, near
Amiens, found several weapons, and believed.        Still the new
creed met with but little favour; prophets are proverbially
without honour in their own country, and M. Boucher de
Perthes was no exception to the rule.     At last, however, the
tide turned in his favour.     In 1859 Dr. Falconer, passing
through Abbeville, examined his collection, and on his return
to England called the attention of Mr. Prestwich, Mr. Evans,
and other English geologists, to the importance of his dis-
coveries.   In consequence, the Valley of the Somme was
visited in 1859 and 1860, firstly, by Messrs. Prestwich and
Evans, and shortly afterwards by Sir C. Lyell, Sir R. Mur-
chison, Messrs. Busk, Flower, Mylne, Godwin-Austen, and
Galton; Professors Henslow, Ramsay, Rogers; Messrs. H.
Christy, Rupert Jones, James Wyatt, myself, and other geo-
logists. M. L’ Abbé Cochet, therefore, in his ‘Rapport adressé
i Monsieur   le Sénateur Préfet de la Seine-Inférieure,” does
no more than justice to our countrymen, when after a well-
merited tribute of praise to M. Boucher de Perthes and Dr.
Rigollot, he adds, “Mais ce sont les Géologues Anglais, en
téte desquels il faut placer d’abord MM. Prestwich et Hyans
     . qui.... ont fini par élever & la dignité de fait
See la découverte de M. Boucher de Perthes.”
  My visit to the Somme Valley was made in company with
Mr. Busk, Captain Galton, and Mr. Prestwich, and I com-
municated the results to the Natural History Review, in an
article “On the Evidence of the Antiquity of Man        afforded.
O44                MR. PRESTWICH       AND MR. EVANS.

by the Physical Structure of the Somme Valley *.”                    I have
seen no reason to modify the general conclusions contained
in that article, of which, indeed, this chapter is in the main a
reprint.
   We examined carefully not only the flint weapons, but also
the beds in which they were found.           For such an investigation,
indeed, our two countrymen were especially qualified: Mr.
Prestwich, from his long study and profound knowledge of
the tertiary and quaternary strata; and Mr. Evans, from his
intimate acquaintance with the stone implements belonging
to what we must now consider as the second, or at least the
more recent, Stone period.            On their return to England Mr.
Prestwich communicated the results of his visit to the Royal
Society+, while Mr. Evans described the implements them-
selves in the Transactions of the Society of Antiquaries +.
   Soon after his first visit, Mr. Prestwich addressed a com-
munication to the Academy of Sciences, through M: Blie de
Beaumont, in which he urged the importance of these dis-
coveries, and expressed a hope that they would stimulate
“les géologues de tous les pays 4 une étude encore plus
approfondie des terrains quaternaires.” The subject being
thus brought prominently before the geologists of Paris,
M. Gaudry, well known for his interesting researches in
Greece, was sent to examine the weapons themselves, and
the localities im which they were found.
   M. Gaudry was so fortunate as to find several flint weapons
an situ, and his report, which entirely confirmed the state-
ments made by M. Boucher de Perthes, led others to visit

   * On the Evidence of the Anti-       plements associated with the Re-
quity of Man afforded by the Physi.     mains of Extinct Species, in Beds of
cal Structure of the Somme Valley.      a late Geological Period, May 19,
By J. Lubbock, Esq., F.R.S. With        1859. Phil. Trans. 1860.
Plate vii. Natural History Review,         t Flint Implements in the Drift.
vol. ii.                                Archzologia, 1860-62.
  + On the Occurrence of Flint Im-
               MR. FRERE’S    DISCOVERY   IN 1800.            345

the valley of the Somme, among whom I may mention MM.
de Quatrefages, Lartet, Collomb, Hébert, de Verneuil, and
G. Pouchet.
   In the “ Antiquités Celtiques,” M. Boucher de Perthes
suggested some gravel-pits near Grenelle at Paris, as being,
from their position and appearance, likely places to contain flint
implements. M. Gosse shortly afterwards found flint imple-
ments in these pits, being the first discovery of this nature in
the valley of the Seine, while in that of the Oise, a small
hatchet has been found by M. Peigné Delacourt, at Précy,
near Creil.
   Nor have these discoveries been confined to France. There
has long been in the British Museum a rude stone weapon,
described as follows :—“No. 246.       A British weapon, found
with elephant’s tooth, opposite to black Mary’s, near Grayes
inn Jane. Conyers. It is a large black flint, shaped into the
figure of a spear’s point.”     Mr. Evans    tells us, moreover,
(l.c. p. 22) “that a rude engraving of it illustrates a letter
on the Antiquities of London, by Mr. Bagford, dated 1715,
printed in Hearne’s edition of Leland’s Collectanea, vol. i. 6,
p. lxiii. From his account it seems to have been found with
a skeleton of an elephant in the presence of Mr. Conyers.”
This most interesting weapon agrees exactly with some of
those found in the valley of the Somme.
  Mr. Evans, on his return from Abbeville, observed in the
museum belonging to the Society of Antiquaries, some spe-
cimens exactly like those in the collection of M. Boucher de
Perthes. On examination, it proved that they had been
presented by Mr. Frere, who found them with bones of
extinct animals in a gravel-pit at Hoxne in Suffolk, and had
well described and figured them in the Archzologia for the
year 1800. This communication is of so much interest that
I have thought it desirable to reproduce his figures, reduced
one-half (figs. 195-198).
346           SIMILAR DISCOVERIES            ELSEWHERE.

   Again, twenty-five years ago, Mr. Whitburn, of Godal-
ming*, while examining the gravel-pits between Guildford
and Godalming, remarked a peculiar flint, which he carried
away, and has since preserved in his collection. It belongs
to the “drift” type, but is very rude. Thus, this peculiar
type of flint implement has been actually found in association
with the bones of the mammoth on various occasions during

                 Fie,   195,                                Fre. 196.




                        Flint Implement from Hoxne.


nearly a hundred and fifty years!               While, however, these
instances remarkably corroborate the statements made by
M. Boucher de Perthes, they in no way detract from the
credit due to that gentleman.
               * Prestwich, Geol. Jour, August, 1861.
         SIMILAR    DISCOVERIES       IN OTHER        COUNTRIES.                347

  In addition to the above-mentioned, similar hatchets have
been found in various other localities, as for instance by

                   Fre, 197,                                       Fre.   198




                        Flint Implement frem Hoxne.


Mr. Warren, at Icklingham ; by Mr. Leech, near Herne Bay ;
by Mr. Evans himself at Abbot’s Langley; by Mr. Norman
348                           ASSYRIA.     INDIA.

at Green Street Green, in Kent; by Messrs. Whitaker and
Hughes, near Dartford; in fact, similar discoveries have been
made in most of our south-eastern counties.
    In the gravel near Bedford, again associated with the
remains     of the mammoth,            rhinoceros,     hippopotamus,         ox,
horse, and     deer,   Mr. Wyatt*         has   found       flint implements
resembling both of the two principal types found at Abbe-
ville and Amiens.  This case is very interesting, because it
shows that the drift flint hatchets are subsequent to the
boulder clay; the Bedford valley being cut through hills
capped by a deposit of that period.             At Hoxne, also, the bed
containing flint implements appears actually to rest on the
boulder clay.
   The number of localities on the Continent in which stone
implements have been obtained from beds of the Quaternary
period has also largely increased.
    Stone implements more or less resembling those charac-
teristic of the Paleolithic Age, have also been found in other
parts of the world, as for instance, in Assyria, North America,
 and Hindostan; though except in the latter case we have no
 reason for attributing to them any very great antiquity.
The Indian specimens have been described by Mr. Bruce
Foote+: they were found in the Madras and North Arcot
districts, and are of quartzite, and in several cases were
found by Messrs. Foote and King in sitw at depths of
from 3 to 10 feet. The specimens figured (figs. 199, 200)
will show how closely they resemble our European specimens,
and it is interesting that in the words of Mr. Foote, “the
area, over which the lateritie formations were spread, has
undergone, as already stated, great changes since their

  * Flint Implements in the Drift.         + On the Occurrence of Stone im.
By J. Wyatt.   Bedfordshire   Archi-     plements in lateritic formations in va-
tectural and Archzological Society,      rious parts of the Madras   and North
1862,                                    Arcot Districts.    By R. Bruce Foote.
         ANTIQUITY   AS SHOWN      BY PHYSICAL        GEOGRAPHY.   349

deposition. A great part of the formation has been ro-
moved by denudation, and deep valleys cut into them, now
occupied by the alluvium of various rivers*.” Unfortunately
no bones have yet been found in these beds. Worked agates
have also been found in the deposits of the Nerbudda, and
                                 Fra. 199.




                      Stone Implement fromm Madras,


in the bone-beds of the upper Godavery, “which are, there
is little doubt, the same age as those of the Nerbudda, which
contain Elephas insignis, LD. Namadieus, Hippopotanus pale-
indicus, Bos palceinidicus, and B. Numadicus +.”
 * 1s Cp. 2c.           + Blandford, Geol. Magazine, February, 1866.
350               ANTIQUITY    AS SHOWN           BY

   The specimens found in the Somme Valley are, as I shall
endeavour to show, connected with the present river system,
and the same was the case with those first discovered in
England. Further researches, however, have brought to
light cases in which flint implements have been found in beds
                               Bie, 200.




                   Stone Implement from Madras.


of gravel having no relation to the existing river systems.
Mr. Flower has called attention to several of these in our
eastern counties, and I have had the advantage of visiting
them with him. The Shrub Hill gravel-bed, for instance, is
alow mound of gravel of about fifteen feet thick, rising in
the middle of the fen near Ely, and surrounded on all sides
                      PHYSICAL     GEOGRAPHY,               351

by a low flat district. Yet in this bed, and especially in the
lowest part of it, numerous flint implements of the palzo-
lithic types have been discovered.
   Some of the Hampshire specimens also have been found
in situ, ina mass of drift gravel which covers the Tertiary
beds, and is intersected by all the streams which now run
into the Southampton water. This mass of drift gravel,
moreover, is not confined to the mainland, but caps also the
Foreland Cliffs on the east of the Isle of Wight, where an
oval flint implement has recently been discovered by Mr. T.
Codrmgton. As Mr. Evans has pointed out, we seem, in
this discovery, to have clear evidence that man existed in
this country before the Southampton water was formed, or
the Isle of Wight was separated from the mainland, and we
may therefore regard these implements as among the most
striking proofs of Man’s Antiquity, which they carry back to
a period far more ancient than that which had previously been
assigned to him.
   We cannot therefore wonder that the statement by Mr.
Frere has been distrusted for more than half a century; that
the weapon found by Mr. Conyers has lain unnoticed           for
more   than double that    time;    that the discoveries by M.
Boucher de Perthes have been ignored for fifteen years ; that
the numerous cases in which caves have contained the
remains of men together with those of extinct animals have
been suppressed or explained away: these facts show how
deeply rooted was the conviction that man belonged alto-
gether to a more recent order of things; and whatever other
accusation may be brought against them, geologists can at
least not be said to have hastily accepted the theory of the
co-existence of the human race with the now extinct Pachy-
dermata of Western Europe.
  Though, however, geologists are now almost unanimous
as to the great antiquity of these curious weapons, still, it is
352               THE QUESTIONS     AT ISSUE.

not necessary that they should be received as judges; I only
propose to summon them as witnesses.
   The questions to be decided may be stated as follows :—
   Ist. Are the so-called flit implements of human work-
manship ?
   2ndly. Are the flint implements of the same age as the
beds in which they are found, and the bones of the extinct
animals with which they occur ?
   3rdly. What are the conditions under which these beds
were deposited? And how far are we justified in imputing
to them a great antiquity?
   To the first two of these questions an affirmative answer
would be given by almost every geologist who has paid any
special attention to the subject.    Fortunately, however, for
the sake of the discussion, there is one exception. Black-
wood’s Magazine for October, 1860, contains an able article
in which the last two questions are maintained to be still
unanswered, and in which, therefore, a verdict of ‘ Not
Proven” is demanded.      Not, indeed, that there is any dif-
ference of opinion as to the weapons themselves.       “They
bear,” admits the writer (p. 438), “unmistakably the indica-
tions of haying been shaped by the skill of man.”       ‘For
more than twenty years,’ says another competent wit-
ness—Prof. Ramsay—“ I have daily handled stones, whether
fashioned by nature or art, and the flint hatchets of Amiens
and Abbeville seem to me as clearly works of art as any
Sheffield whittle*.” But best of all, an hour or two spent in
examining the forms of ordinary flint gravel, would,     Iam
sure, convince any man that these stones, rude though they
be, were undeniably fashioned by the hand of man.
   Still it might be supposed that they were forgeries made
by ingenious workmen to entrap unwary geologists.      They
have, however, been actually found by Messrs. Boucher de
                   * Athenzum, July 16, 1859.
         EVIDENCE DERIVABLE FROM THE FLINTS THEMSELVES.       353

Perthes, Henslow, Christy, Flower, Wyatt, Evans, myself, and
others, under circumstances which preclude all idea of decep-
tion. One seen, though not found by himself in situ, is thus
described by Mr. Prestwich: “it was lying flat in the gravel
at a depth of seventeen feet from the original surface, and six
and a half feet from the chalk. One side slightly projected.
The gravel around was undisturbed, and presented its usual
perpendicular face. I carefully examined the specimen, and
saw no reason to doubt that it was in its natural position, for
the gravel is generally so loose, that a blow with a pick
disturbs and brings it down for some way round; and the
matrix is too little adhesive to admit of its being built up
again as before with the same materials. .... T found also
afterwards, on taking ont the flint, that it was the thinnest
side which projected, the other side being less finished and
much thicker*.”      But evidence of this nature, though in-
teresting, is unnecessary; the flints speak for themselves.
Many of them are more or less rolled or worn at the edges.
Those which have lain in siliceous or chalky sands are more
or less polished and have a beautiful glossiness of surface,
very unlike that of a newly-broken flint. In ochreous sand,
“ especially if argillaceous, they are stained yellow, whilst in
ferruginous sands and clays they assume a brown colour,”
and in some beds they become white and porcellaneous.
In many    cases, moreover,     they have incrustations of carbo-
nate of lime and small dendritic markings.          The freshly-
broken    chalk flints, on the contrary, are of a dull black or
leaden colour ; they vary a little in darkness but not in colour,
and do not present white or yellow faces; moreover, the
new surfaces are dead, and want the glossiness of those which
have been long exposed. It is almost unnecessary to say,
that they have no dendritic markings, nor are they encrusted
by carbonate of lime.
                     * Phil. Trans. 1860, p. 292.
354                    THE FORGERIES.

  Now the forgeries—for there are forgeries—differ from the
genuine implements by just those characters which distin-
guish newly-broken flints from those which have lain long in
sand or gravel, or exposed to atmospheric agencies. They
are black; never white or yellow; their surfaces are not
glossy, but dull and lustreless, and they have no dendritic
markings or incrustations. Nor would it be possible for an
ingenious rogue to deceive us by taking a stained flint and
fashioning it into a hatchet; because the discoloration of
the flint is quite superficial, seldom more than a quarter of
an inch in thickness, and follows the outline of the present
surface, showing that the change of colour was subsequent to
the manufacture; while if such a flint were tampered with,
the fraud would be easily detected, as each blow would re-
move part of the outer coating, and expose the black flint
inside, as may be seen in pl. 1, fig. 11.
   Moreover, it must be remembered, that when M. Boucher de
Perthes’ work was published, the weapons therein described
were totally unlike any of those familiar to archeologists.
Since that time, however, not only have similar implements
been found both in England, France, and other countries,
but, as already mentioned, it has since come to light that
similar weapons were in two cases actually described and
fisured in England many years ago, and that in both these
instances they were found in association with the bones of
extinct animals.   On this point, therefore, no evidence could
be more conclusive.
   We may, then, pass on to the second subject, and consider,
Whether the Flint implements are as old as the beds in which
they occur, and as the remains of extinct mammalia with
which they are associated.
   It has been suggested by some writers, that though they
are really found in the mammaliferous gravel, they may be
comparatively recent, and belong really to the Neolithic or
          CHARACTER      OF THE    TRUE    DRIFT   IMPLEMENTS.        355

later Stone Age, but have gradually sunk down from above
by their own weight, or perhaps have been buried in arti-
ficial excavations.     There are, however, no cracks or fissures
by which the hatchets could have reached their present
positions, and the strata are “altogether too compact and
immovable to admit of any such insinuation or percolation
of surface objects*.” Nor could any ancient excavations
have been made and filled in again without leaving evident
traces of the change. Moreover, we may in this case also
appeal to the flint implements themselves, which, as we have
already seen, agree in colour and appearance with the gravel
in which they occur ; and it seems, therefore, only reasonable
to infer that they have been subjected to the same influences.
Moreover, if they belonged to the later Stone period, and had
found their way by any accident into these gravels, then they
ought to correspond with the other flint implements of the
Stone period. But this is not the case. The flakes, indeed,
offer no peculiarities of form.      Similar splinters of flint, or
obsidian, have been used in the absence of metal by savage
tribes in almost all ages and all countries. The other imple-
ments, on the contrary, are very characteristic.         They are
almost always made of flint, whereas many other minerals,
such, for instance, as serpentine, jade, clayslate, etc., were
used in the later Stone Age. Their forms are also peculiar ;
some are oval (pl. 1, fig. 11), chipped up to an edge all round,
and from two to eight or nine inches in length. A second
type is also oval, but somewhat pointed at one end (pl. 1,
fig. 10, and figs. 195, 196). Others again (figs. 197, 198)
have a more or less heavy butt at one end and are pointed
at the other. Mr. Evans regards these+ as having served
as spear or lance heads. He treats as a mere variety of this
type those implements in which the cutting end is rounded
off but not pointed. Some of these, however, were evidently
        * Blackwood, l. c.                     + 1. c. 1860, p. 11.
                                  Aa   2
856           DRIFT   IMPLEMENTS   NEVER   GROUND.

intended to be held in the hand, and probably served a dif-
ferent purpose; they may, I think, fairly be considered as a
fourth type, though it must be confessed that all these types
run very much into one another, and in any large collection
many intermediate forms may be found. The smaller endis,
in all cases, the one adapted for cutting, while the reverse is
almost invariably the case in the oval celts of the Neolithic
Stone Age (figs. 97 and 98).
   Again, the flint implements of the drift are never polished
or ground, but are always left rough. We may safely esti-
mate that five thousand at least have been already found in
the drift gravels of England and France, and of this large
number there is not one which shows a trace of polishing or
grinding; while we know that the reverse was almost always
the case with the celts of the later Stone period. It is true
that the latter is not an invariable rule; thus, in Denmark
there are two forms of so-called “axes” which are left rough
—namely, the small triangular axes of the Kjékkenméddings
(figs. 108-110) which are invariably so, and the large square-
sided axes with which this is often the case. But these two
forms of implements resemble in no other way those which
are found in the drift, and could not for a moment be mis-
taken for them. It is not going too far to say, that there is
not a single well-authenticated instance of a “ celt ” being
found in the drift, or of an implement of the drift type being
discovered either in a tumulus, or associated with remains of
the later Stone Age.
   It is useless to speculate upon the use made of these rude
yet venerable weapons.       Almost as well might we ask, to
what use could they not be applied? Numerous and spe-
cialized as are our modern instruments, who could describe
the exact use of a knife? But the primitive savage had
no such choice of weapons; we see before us perhaps the
whole contents of his workshop; and with these implements,
                       SCARCITY OF HUMAN        BONES.                  357

rude    as they seem         to us, he may have cut down trees,
scooped them out into canoes, grubbed up roots, attacked his
enemies, killed and cut up his food, made holes through the
ice in winter, prepared firewood, etc.
   The almost entire absence of human bones, which has ap-
peared to some so inexplicable as to throw a doubt on the
whole question, is, on consideration, less extraordinary than
it might at first sight appear to be. If, for instance, we turn
to other remains of human settlements, we shall find a
repetition of the same phenomenon.     Thus in the Danish
shell-mounds, where worked flints are by far more plentiful
than in the St. Acheul gravel, human bones are of the
greatest rarity, only one piece in fact having ever been
found. At that period, as in the Drift age, mankind lived
by hunting and fishing, and could not, therefore, be very
numerous.        In the era, however, of the Swiss Lake-habi-
tations, the case was different.            M. Troyon estimates         the
population of the “ Pfahlbauten”’ during the Stone Age at
about 82,000; in the Bronze era, 42,000.  On these calcu-
lations, indeed, even their ingenious author would not
probably place much reliance; still the number of the Lake-
villages already known is very considerable; in four of the
Swiss lakes only, more than seventy have been discovered,
and some of them were of great extent: Wangen, for in-
stance, being, according to M. Lohle, supported on more than
50,000 piles. Yet, if we exclude a few bones of children,
human remains have been obtained from these settlements in
six cases only. The number of flint implements obtained
hitherto from the drift of the Somme valley probably does
not much exceed 5000*; the settlement at Concise alone
(Lake of N euchatel) has supplied about 24,000, and yet has

   * One of the tumuli in the Missis-    implements.    This, however, must
sippi Valley isestimated to have alone   have been a very exceptional case.
contained nearly four thousand stone
358              SCARCITY     OF MEN IN ANCIENT TIMES.

not produced a single human skeleton*.        Probably this
absence of bones is in part attributable to the habit of
burying or burning; the instinct of man has long been in
most cases to bury his dead out of his sight. Still, so far as
the drift of St. Acheul is concerned, the difficulty will alto-
gether disappear, if we remember that no trace has ever yet
been found of any animal as small as a man. Hyven of the ele-
phant and rhinoceros, the ox, horse, and stag}, only the larger
and more solid bones remain; every vestige of the smaller
ones has perished. No one supposes that this scanty list
fairly represents the mammalian fauna of this time and place.
When we find at St. Acheul the remains of the wolf, boar,
roedeer, badger, and other animals which existed during the
drift period, then, and not till then, we may perhaps begin
to wonder at the entire absence of human skeletons.
   We must also remember that when man lived on    the
produce of the chase there must have been a very large
number of wild animals to each hunter. Among the Lap-
landers, 100 reindeer is the smallest number on which a man
can subsist, and no one is considered rich who does not pos-
sess at least from 300 to 500.            But these are domesticated,
and a large supply of nourishment is derived                      from their

  * Rapport    & la Commission     des    them in preference to all others, nay,
Musées, October, 1861, p. 16.             almost exclusively, in the manufac-
  + The bones of the stag owe their       ture of those instruments which
preservation perhaps      to another      could be made of bone (Fauna der
cause.   Prof. Riitimeyer tells us that   Pfahlbauten, p. 12). How common
among the bones from the Pfahl-           the bones of the stag are in quater-
bauten none are in better condition       nary strata, geologists know, and.we
than those of the stag: this is the       have here, perhaps, an explanation of
consequence, he says, of their “ dich-    the fact. The antler of the reindeer
ten Gefiige, ihrer Harte und Sprédig-     is also preferred at the present day
keit, so wie der grossen Fettlosig-       by the Esquimaux in the manufac-
keit,” peculiarities which recom-         ture of their stone weapons.   (Sir BH.
mended them so strongly to the men        Belcher, Trans. Ethn. Soc. vol. i. p.
of the Stone Age, that they used          139.)
            PROPORTION        OF MEN             TO OTHER                      ANIMALS.                   359

milk, In the case of wild animals we may safely assume
that a much larger number would be necessary. The Hud-
son’s Bay territory is said to comprise about 900,000,000
acres.  The number of Indians is estimated at 139,000.
Allowing one wild animal to each twenty acres, this would
give about 300 animals to each Indian; and, if we consider
the greater longevity of man, we must multiply this by six,
or even more.
   Or again, we may attempt to form an estimate in the
followmg manner.      The number of skins received by the
Hudson’s Bay Company in 1866 amounted to 1,250,000,
made up as follows:
          ipeaver™  cop’.   0) e t  4 iat Eads
         Poteet           as: Anew      be                                eS            Does
         pats      sere         at Cem.      8                                          G8 040
         Micrtoien      es, 6   aa         oe                         A                 9287S
         WER ches OMe              We      acy                                          Lao
         Mesquasit       9               Gi,                   4.7                  008,896
         Cerio     oe     elie                 OG!       sy     hgh   e-at          1 140876
         apOiiel         te s (Os:       .     os        are   a                    (105,909
         Seater amen!            tah           O               258                       6,457
         Racsoiewn=..                    0h,   sa              s «                      ~24;860
         AC      es i    et     ee                   i         rr                           7,429
         pandrics#,     9       a        Gls             a>.          «.                68,950
                                                                                                    1,242,765
The number of Indians is éstimated at 139,000,
   and Hearne states that every one requires at
   least twenty deerskins for clothes, without
   counting those required for tent-cloths, bags,
   ete.; this therefore would give us 139,000
    ao OE       ee            eC.              ete                                 ne         4     2,790,000

                                       Carried over                            .        .     .     4,022,765
360                          HUMAN      REMAINS.

                                  Brought over         .   .   .   4,022,765
But the deerskins are fit for clothes only during
      2 months in the year, and as it will be ob-
      served that the majority of the animals
      enumerated above are not fit for food, others
      must have been killed in sufficient quantities
      to serve as food for 10 months.              Assuming
      that an Indian requires one every month, which
      is probably within the mark, we shall again
      require 139,000 x 10 (the number of months)                  1,390,000

            Making therefore atotalof              .   .   .   .   5,412,765

   And assuming that one animal out of twenty is killed by
the Indians, we shall have 108,000,000 to 139,000 Indians,
or about 750 animals to each man, besides which, a further
allowance must be made as before on account of man’s
greater longevity. Dr. Rae, who has had so much experi-
ence in these matters, has been good enough to look over the
above calculation, which he considers fairly estimated, but it
has of course no pretensions to accuracy.
   Lastly, it may be observed that man is less likely to be
drowned by sudden river floods, than is the case with other
land mammalia * ; and, on the whole, therefore, it is natural
that the bones of animals would be far more common in these
gravels than those of man.
   It must not, however, be supposed that the latter are alto-
gether absent. Without relying on the human lower jaw,
stated to have been found in the pit at Moulinguignon, and
about which there has been so much discussion and difference
of opinion, I may instance the discovery of human remains
by M. Bertrand +, at Clichy, in the valley of the Seine.

  * See, for instance, Bakie, Explor-      + Les Mondes, 1869, p. 64.
ing Voyage up the Kwora, p. 215.
          COEXISTENCE   OF MAN      WITH    THE     MAMMOTH.        361

Among these bones, about the authenticity and antiquity
of which there seems to be no doubt, was a skull which
has been examined by M. Lartet, and which is decidedly
dolichocephalic.
  We have as yet but partly answered the second of the two
questions with which we started. Hven admitting that the
flint hatchets are coeval with the gravel in which they occur,
it remains to be shown that the bones of the extinct animals
belong also to the same period. This was at first doubted by
some geologists, who suggested that they might have been
washed out of earlier strata.
  If, however, these bones belonged to a period earlier than
that of the gravel, where, we may ask, are the remains of the
animals which did exist at that time? Moreover, the bones,
though sometimes much worn and broken, are at others, and
even, according to Mr. Prestwich, “asa general rule*, either
not rolled at all, or are slightly so.” Secondly, these species,
and particularly the mammoth and the woolly-haired rhino-
ceros, are the characteristic and commonest species of these
beds, not only in the valley of the Somme, but in all the
drift gravels of England and France; while, if they belonged
in reality to an earlier period, they would not occur so con-
stantly, and they would be accompanied by other species
characteristic of earlier times.
   Thirdly, the materials forming the drift gravels of the
Somme Valley have all been obtained from the present area
of drainage, and there are in this district no older beds from
which the remains of these extinct mammalia could possibly
have been derived. There are, indeed, outliers of tertiary
strata, but   the mammalian       remains      found    in those   beds
belong to other, and much older, species.
  Fourthly, as regards the rhinoceros, we have the express
testimony of M. Baillon, that on one occasion all the bones
                     * Phil. Trans. l. c. p. 300.
362           THE MAMMOTH        AND RHINOCEROS.

of a hind-leg were found in their natural positions at Men-
checourt, near Abbeville, while the rest of the skeleton was
found at a little distance. In this case, therefore, the animal
must have been entombed before the ligaments had decayed
away.
  M. Casciano de Prado has made a very similar discovery
in Spain, not far from Madrid.      There the section was as
follows: First, vegetable soil; then about twenty-five feet of
sand and pebbles, under which was a layer of sandy loam, in
which during the year 1850, a complete skeleton of the mam-
moth was discovered. Underneath this stratum was about
ten feet of coarse gravel, in which some flint axes, very
closely resembling those of Amiens, have been discovered.
   Finally, as regards the rhinoceros, M. Lartet assures us *
that some of the bones bear the marks of flint implements;
nay more than this, he has even satisfied himself, “‘ by com-
parative trials on homologous portions of existing animals,
that incisions, presenting such appearances, could only be
made in fresh bones, still retaining their cartilage.”
 -There is, then, no more reason for believing that the bones
of these extinct mammalia were washed out of earlier strata
into the drift gravels, than for attributing such an origin to
the implements themselves; and we may, I think, regard it
as well-established,   that the     mammoth         and woolly-haired
rhinoceros, as well as the other above-mentioned mammalia,
co-existed with the savages who used the rude “ drift
hatchets,” at the time when the gravels of the Somme were
being deposited.
   The second of the three questions with which we state
(p. 842) may therefore be answered in the affirmative.
   Must we, then, carry man back far into the past, or may
we retain our date for the origin of the human race by bring-
ing the extinct animals down to comparatively recent times ?
                 * Geological Journ. vol. xvi. p. 471.
                CHARACTERISTICS   OF   THE      DRIFT   BEDS.                    363
The absence of all tradition of the elephant                    Fie, 201,
and rhinoceros in Europe carries us back
far indeed in years, but a little way only,
when measured by geological standards, ville
and we must therefore solve this question
by examining the drift gravels themselves,
                                            on
                                            Hitt
                                            Road,oe
                                                 ‘)
                                                 SW
the materials of which they are composed, loMoyenrevi
and the positions which they occupy, so as
to determine,    if possible, the conditions
under which they were deposited, and the
lapse of time which they indicate.
   Fig. 201 gives a section across the
valley of the Somme at Abbeville, taken
from the memoir in the Philosophical
Transactions*, by Mr. Prestwich, who has
long studied the quaternary beds, and has
done more than any other man to render
them intelligible. We should find almost
the same arrangement and position of the
different beds, not only at St. Acheul, but
elsewhere along the valley of the Somme,
wherever the higher beds of gravel have
not been removed by subsequent action
of the river. Hven at St. Valéry, at the                                        eaacee

present mouth     of the river, I found a bed              Seren.
                                                            epee            2        x
                                                                                     SEF
of gravel at a considerable height above
the level of the sea. This would seem to
show that at the period of these high-level             Winn


gravels, the English Channel was narrower                        ,      :i { \ | !
than it is at present, as indeed we know
                                                                                      meaniide
                                                                                      Level
                                                                                      at
                                                                                     :op
                                                                                       Ys
to have been the case even in historical
times. So early as 1605 our countryman
Verstegan   pointed that the waves and tides were                           eating
                         # Phil. Trans, 1860.
864      PHYSICAL    GEOGRAPHY        OF THE          SOMME   VALLEY.

away our coasts. Sir C. Lyell* gives much information on
this subject, and it appears that, even so lately as the reign
of Queen Elizabeth, the town of Brighton occupied the site
of the present Chain Pier.
   Mr. Prestwich has pointed out} that a section, similar to
that of the Somme,         is presented by the Lark, Waveney,
Ouse, etc., while it is well shown also along the banks of the
Seine. Probably, indeed, it holds good of most of our rivers,
that along the sides of their valleys are patches of old gravels
left by the stream at various heights, before they had ex-
cavated the channels to their present depth. Mr. Prestwich
considers that the beds of sand and gravel can generally be
divided into two more or less distinct series, one continuous
along the bottom of the valleys and rising little above the
water level—these he calls the low-level gravels; the other,
which he terms the upper or high-level gravels, occurring in
                                   Fia. 202,




                             Section at St. Acheul.


detached masses at an elevation of from fifty to two hundred
feet above the valley.       They seem to me, on the contrary,
only the two extremes of a single series, once continuous, but
now generally presenting numerous interruptions. A more
magnified view of the strata at St. Acheul, near Amiens, is
shown in fig 202.      The upper layer of vegetable soil having
been removed, we haye—
 * See Principles of Geology, p. 315,                     + Phil. Trans, 1864.
                         ST. ACHEUL.                      363
  1. A bed of brick earth (a) from four to five feet in thick-
ness, and containing a few angular flints.
   2. Below this is a thin layer of angular gravel (b), one to
two feet in thickness.
  3. Still lower is a bed of sandy marl (c), five to six feet
thick, with land and freshwater shells, which, though very
delicate, are in most cases perfect.
   4. At the bottom of all these, and immediately overlying
the chalk, is the bed of partially rounded gravel (d) in which
principally the flint implements are found. This layer also
contains many well-rolled tertiary pebbles.
   In the early Christian period this spot was used as a
cemetery: the graves generally descend into the marly sand,
and their limits are very distinctly marked, as in fig. 202 f;
an important fact,as showing that the rest of the strata have
lain undisturbed for 1500 years. Some of the coffins were
of hard chalk (fig. 202 e), some of wood, in which latter case
the nails and clamps only remain, every particle of wood
having perished, without leaving even a stain behind.
Passing down the hill towards the river, all these strata
are seen to die out, and we find ourselves on the bare chalk;
but again at a lower level occurs another bed of gravel,
resembling the first, and capped also by the bed of brick
earth which is generally known as loéss. This lower bed of
gravel is that called by Mr. Prestwich the lower-level gravel.
  These strata, therefore, are witnesses; but of what?    Are
they older than the valley, or the valley than they? are they
the result of causes still in operation, or the offspring of
cataclysms now, happily, at an end?
   If we can show that the present river, somewhat swollen
perhaps, owing to the greater extension of forests in ancient
times, and by an alteration   of climate, has excavated the
present valley, and produced the strata above enumerated;
then “the suggestion of an antiquity for the human family
366                        ST, ACHEUL.

so remote as is here implied, in the length of ages required
by the gentle rivers and small streams of eastern France to
erode its whole plain to the depths at which they now flow,
acquires, it must be confessed, a fascinating grandeur, when,
by similitude of feature and geology, we extend the hypo-
thesis to the whole north-west frontiers of the continent, and
assume, that from the estuary of the Seme to the eastern
shores of the Baltic, every internal feature of valley, dale and
ravine—in short, the entire intaglio of the surface—has been
moulded by running waters, since the advent of the human
race*,””
  But, on the other hand, it has been maintained that the
pliant facts may be read as “expressions                of violent and
 sudden mutations, only compatible with altogether briefer
periods.” The argument of the Paroxysmist, I still quote
from Blackwood, would probably be something like the
 following :—
    “ Assuming the pre-existing relief, or excavation rather, of
the surface to have approximated to that now prevailing, he
will account for the gravel by supposing a sudden rocking
movement of the lands and the bottom of the sea of the
nature of an earthquake, or a succession of them, to have
launched a portion of the temporarily uplifted waters upon
the surface of the land.”
  Let us, however, examine the strata, and see whether the
evidence they give is in reality so confused and contradictory.
   Taking the section at St. Acheul and commencing at the
bottom, we have first of all the partially rounded high-level
gravel, throughout which, and especially at the lower part,
the flint implements occur.
   These beds but rarely contain vegetable remains. Large
pieces of the oak, yew, and fir, have, however, been deter-
mined at Hoxne.     The mammalia, also, are but few; the
               * Blackwood s Magazine, October, 1860.
                             ORGANIC    REMAINS.                         367

mammoth, the Hlephas antiguus, with species of Bos, Cervus,
and Hquus are the only ones which have yet occurred at
St. Acheul, though beds of the same age in other parts of
England and France have added the Rhinoceros tichorhinus,
the reindeer, and several other species.      The mollusca are
more numerous; they have been identified by Mr. J. G.
Jeffreys, who finds in the upper-level gravel thirty-six species,
all of them land or freshwater forms, and all belonging to
existing species.         It is hardly necessary to add, that these
shells are not found in the coarse gravel, but only here and
there, where quieter conditions, indicated by a seam of finer
materials, have preserved them from destruction.        Here,
therefore, we have a conclusive answer to the suggestion
that the gravel may have been heaped up to its present
height by a sudden irruption of the sea. In that case we
should find some marine remains; but as we do not, as all
the fossils belong to animals which                live on the land, or
inhabit fresh waters, it is at once evident that this stratum,
not being subaerial, must be a freshwater deposit, and as the
most delicate shells are entire, it 1s equally evident that they
were deposited in tranquil water, and not by a cataclysm.
   But the gravel itself tells us even more than this: the
river Somme flows through a country in which there are no
rocks older than the chalk, and the gravel in its valley con-
sists entirely of chalk flints and tertiary débris*. The Seine,
on the other hand, receives            tributaries    which    drain other
formations. In the valley of the Yonne we find fragments of
the crystalline rocks brought from the Morvant. The Aube
runs through cretaceous and Jurassic strata, and the gravels
along its valley are entirely composed of materials derived
from these formations. The valley of the Oise is in this
respect particularly instructive: “De Maquenoise 4 Hirsont
 * Buteux, l. c. p. 98.        + D’Archiac, Progrés de la Géologie, p. 163.
                           { D’Archiace, 1. c. p. 155.
368             MINERALOGICAL     CONSTITUENTS.

la vallée ne présente que des fragments plus ou moins
roulés des roches de transition que traverse le cours de
la riviére. En descendant 4 Htréaupont, on y trouve des
calcaires jurassiques et des silex dela craie, formations
qui ont succédé aux roches anciennes. A Guise, le dépdt
erratiqueast.) cays est composé de quartzites et de schistes
de transition de quelques grés plus recents, de silex de
la craie, et surtout de quartz laiteux, dont le volume varie
depuis celui de la téte jusqu’a celui de grains de sable... .
Au dela les fragments de roches anciennes diminuent gra-
duellement en volume et en nombre.”              At Paris the
granitic débris brought down by the Yonne forms a notable
proportion of the gravel; and at Précy, near Creil on the
Oise, the fragments of the ancient rocks are abundant;     but
lower down the Seine at Mantes, they are smaller and less
numerous, while at Rouen and Pont de Arche I found none,
though a longer search would doubtless have shown frag-
ments of them. This case of the Oise is, however, interesting,
not only on account of the valuable evidence contained in
the above quotation; but because, though the river flows, as
a glance at the map will show, ummediately across and at
right angles to the Somme, yet none of the ancient rocks
which form the valley of the Oise have supplied any débris to
the valley of the Somme: and this, though the two rivers
are at one point within six miles of one another, and
separated by a ridge only eighty feet in height.
   The same division occurs between the Seine and the Loire:
“Bien que la ligne de partage des eaux de la Loire et. de
la Seine, entre St. Amand (Niévre) et Artenay, au nord
d’Orléans, soit & peine sensible, aucun débris de roches
venant du centre de la France, par la vallée de la Loire n’est
passé dans le bassin de la Seine*.”
  In the Vivarais near Auvergne, “Les dépdts diluviens
                      * D’ Avchiac, 1. c. p. 164.
               OBJECTIONS     TO THE   PROPOSED      THEORY.              369

sont composés des mémes roches que celles que les riviéres
actuelles entrainent dans les vallées, et sont les débris des
seules montagnes de la Lozin, du Tanargue et du Mézéine,
qui entourent le bassin du Vivarais*.”’
   Again,
   “Te diluvium des vallées de I’Aisne et de l’Aire ne ren-
ferme que les débris plus ou moins roulés des terrains que
ces riviéres coupent dans leur courst.”
   Finally, Mr. Prestwich has pointed out that the same
thing holds good in various English rivers. The conclusion
deduced by M. D’Archiac from the consideration of these
observations, and specially from those concerning the valley
of the Seine, is “Que les courants                diluviens ne venaient
point d’une direction unique, mais qu’ils convergaient des
bords du bassin vers son centre, suivant les dépressions pré-
existantes, et que leur élévation ou leur force de transport ne
sufisait pas pour faire passer les débris qu’tls charriaient dune
de ces vallées dans l autre t.””
   Considering, however, all these facts, remembering that
the constituents of these river-drift gravels, are, in all cases,
derived from ‘beds now im situ along the valley, that they
have not only followed the lines of these valleys, but have
done so in the direction of the present waterflow, and
without in any case passing across from one river system
to another, it seems quite unnecessary to call in the assistance
of diluvial waves, or indeed any other agency than that of
the rivers themselves.
   There are, however, certain facts in the case which have
been regarded by most geologists as fatal to this hypothesis,
and which prevented M. D’Archiac, as well as the French
geologists generally, from adopting an explanation appa-
rently so simple and so obvious. These difficulties appear
  * D’Archiac, l.c. p. 160.          + Malbos. Bull. Geol. vol. iii. p. 631.
                                £ Le. p. 163.
                                                             Bb
370         OBJECTIONS   TO THE          PROPOSED   THEORY.

to have been twofold; or at least the two principal were,
firstly, the large sandstone blocks which are scattered,
throughout the river gravels of Northern and Central France;
and secondly, the height at which the upper-level gravels
stand above the present water-line. We will consider these
two objections separately.
   It must be admitted that the presence of the sandstone
blocks in the gravels appears at Grst sight to be irreconcilable
with our hypothesis. In some places they occur frequently,
and are of considerable size; the largest I have myself seen
is represented in the section, fig. 203, taken close to the
railway-station at Joinville.       It was 8ft. 6in. in length, with




                                   & 9. ey>
                                 Saito    Sh

                          Section at Joinville.


a width of 2ft. 8. and a thickness of 3ft.4im.                Even when
we remember that at the time of its deposition the valley was
not excavated to its present depth, we must still feel that a
body of water with power to move such masses as these must
have been very different from any floods now occurring in
those valleys, and might fairly deserve the name of a
cataclysm. But whence could we obtain so great a quantity
of water?    We have already seen that the gravel of the
Oise, though so near, is entirely unlike that of the Somme,
while that of the Seine, again, is quite different from that of
any of the neighbouring rivers.       These rivers, therefore,
cannot have drained a larger area than at present; the river
                            ICE    ACTION.                    rill


systems must have been the same as now. Nor would the
supposition, after all, account for the phenomena.       We
should but fall from Scylla into Charybdis. Around the
blocks we see no evidence of violent action; in the section
at Joinville, the grey subangular gravel passed under the
large block above-mentioned, with scarcely any traces of dis-
turbance.    But a flood which could bring down so great a
mass would certainly have swept away the comparatively
hght and movable gravel below. We cannot, therefore,
account for the phenomena by aqueous action, because a
flood which would deposit the sandstone blocks would re-
move the underlying gravel, and a flood which would deposit
the gravel would not move the blocks. The Deus ex ma-
china has not only been called in most unnecessarily, but,
when examined, turns out to be but an idol after all.
  Driven, then, to seek some other explanation of the diffi-
culty, Mr. Prestwich falls back on that of floating ice. Here
we have an agency which would satisfactorily explain all
the difficulties of the case.  The “‘ packing” and propelling
action of ice would also account for some irregularities in the
arrangement of the beds which are very difficult otherwise
to understand.    We are, indeed, irresistibly reminded of the
figure given by Sir Charles Lyell* from a view taken by
Lieut. Bowen,    of the boulders     drifted by ice on the shores
of the St. Lawrence.   Sir C. Lyell’s work is in the hands
of almost every geologist, and it will, perhaps, therefore,
be unnecessary for me to quote the accompanying descrip-
tion, accurately as it portrays what must, we         think, have
been taking place in the valley of the Somme thousands
of years ago, just as it does in that of the St. Lawrence at
the present time.    Nor is it the physical evidence only,
which points to an arctic climate during the period now

                     * Principles, 1853, p. 220.
                              Bb     2
372         FRESHWATER     ORIGIN    OF   THE   GRAVELS.

under consideration; the fauna, as we have             already   seen,
tells the same tale.
   But though the presence of the sandstone blocks and the
occasional contortions of the strata are in perfect accordance
with the view of Mr. Prestwich, that the gravels have been
deposited by the rivers, our second difficulty still remains—
namely, the height at which the upper-level gravels stand
above the present water-line. We cannot wonder that these
beds have generally been attributed to violent cataclysms.
   M. Boucher de Perthes was always of this opinion. “Ce
coquillage,” he says, “cet éléphant, cette hache, ou la main
qui la fabriqua, furent donc témoins du cataclysme qui donna
a notre pays sa configuration présente*.”
   M. C. D’Orbigny, observing that the fossils found in these
 quaternary beds are all either of land or freshwater animals,
wisely dismisses the theory of any marine action, and ex-
presses himself as follows :—‘ En effet opinion de la plupart
des géologues est que les cataclysmes diluviens ont eu pour
causes prédominantes de fortes oscillations de l’écorce ter-
restre, des soulévements de montagnes au milieu de l’océan,
d’ow seraient résultées de grandes érosions.   Par conséquent
les puissants courants d’eau marine, auxquels on attribue ces
érosions diluviennes, auraient da laisser sur les continents
des traces authentiques de leur passage, tels que de nom-
breux débris de coquilles, de poissons et autres animaux
marins analogues a ceux qui vivent actuellement dans la
mer. Or, ainsi que M. Cordier l’a fait remarquer depuis
longtemps 4 son cours de géologie, rien de semblable n’a été
constaté. Sur tous les points du globe oi Von a étudié les
dépéts diluviens, on a reconnu que, sauf quelques rares ex-
ceptions trés contestables, il n’existe dans ces dépdts aucun
fossile marin: ou bien ce sont des fossiles arrachés aux
terrains préexistants, dont la dénudation a fourni les ma-
            * Mem. Soc. d’Em. l’Abbeville, 1861, p. 475.
                    INAPPLICABILITY      OF CATACLYSMS.                  373

tériaux qui composent le diluvium.             En sorte que les dépéts
diluviens semblent avoir eu pour cause des phénoménes
météorologiques, et paraissent étre le résultat d’immenses
inondations d’eau douce et non d’eau marine, qui, se pré-
cipitant des points éléyves vers la mer, auraient dénudé une
grande partie de la surface du sol, balayé la généralité des
étres organisés et pour ainsi dire nivelé, coordonné les bassins
hydrographiques actuels*.”’
  Such cataclysms, however, as those thus suggested by
M. D’Orbigny, and many other French geologists, even if
admitted, would not account for the results before us.                   We
have seen that the transport of materials have not followed
any single direction, but has in all cases followed the lines of
the present valleys, and the direction of the present water-
flow; that the rocks of one valley are never transported into
another ; that the condition of the loéss is irreconcilable with
a great rush of water ; while, finally, the perfect preservation
of many of the most delicate shells is clear proof that the
phenomena are not due to violent or cataclysmic action.
  We must, moreover, bear in mind that the gravels and
sands are themselves both the proof and the results of an
immense denudation.       In a chalk country, such as that
through which the Somme flows, each cubic foot of flint,
gravel, or sand, represents the removal of, at the very least,
twenty cubic feet of chalk, all of which, as we have already
seen, must have been removed from the present area of
drainage. In considering, therefore, the formation of these
upper and older gravels, we must not picture to ourselves the
original valley as it now is, but must, in imagination, restore
all that immense mass of chalk which has been destroyed in
the formation of the lower-level gravels and sands.       Mr.
Prestwich has  endeavoured  to illustrate this by a diagram,
  * C. D’Orbigny, Bul. Geo. 2nd ser. V. xvii. p. 6. See also D’Archiac, 1. c.
passim,                               + Proceed. Roy. Soc. p. 1862, p. 41.
RYE!               ALTERATION       OF    THE   RIVER   LEVEL.

and I must once more repeat that this is no mere hypothesis,
since the mass of sand and gravel cannot have been pro-
duced without an immense removal of the chalk. On the
whole, then, we may safely conclude that the upper-level
gravels were deposited by the existing river, before it had
excavated the valley to its present depth and when conse-
quently it ran at a level considerably higher than                          the
present.
   Far, therefore, from requiring an immense flood of water,
two hundred feet in depth, the accumulation of the gravel
may have been effected by an annual volume of water, differ-
ing little from that of the present river.
   A given quantity of water will, however, produce very
different effects, according to the rapidity with which it flows.
 “We learn from observation, that a velocity of three inches
per second at the bottom will just begin to work upon fine
clay fit for pottery, and however firm and compact it may be,
it will tear it up. Yet no beds are more stable than clay
when the velocities do not exceed this: for the water even
takes away the impalpable particles of the superficial clay,
leaving the particles of sand sticking by their lower half in
the rest of the clay, which they now protect, making a very
permanent bottom, if the stream does not bring down gravel
or coarse sand, which will rub off this very thin crust, and
allow another layer to be worn off. A velocity of six inches
will lift fine sand, eight inches will lift sand as coarse
as     limseed,   twelve   inches        will sweep     along    fine   gravel,
twenty-four inches will roll along rounded pebbles an inch
diameter, and it requires three feet per second at the
bottom to sweep along shivery angular stones of the size of
an egg.”
  If, therefore, we are justified in assuming a colder climate
than that now existing, we should much increase the erosive
                    * Cyc. Brit. Article “ Rivers,” p. 274.
              GRADUAL    EXCAVATION    OF THE    VALLEY.            370

action of the river, not only because        the rains would fall on
a frozen surface, but because the rainfall of the winter months
would accumulate on the high grounds in the form of ice and
snow, and would every spring produce floods much greater
than any which now occur *.
  We now come to the light-coloured marl (fig. 202 ¢, p. 864).
It is composed, according to Mr. Prestwich, as follows: Of
white siliceous sand and light-coloured marl, mixed with
fine chalk grit, a few large sub-angular flints, and an oc-
casional sandstone block, irregular patches of flint gravel,
bedding waved and contorted, here and there layers with
diagonal   seams, a few ochreous        bands, portions concreted.
Sand and      freshwater     shells   common,      some    mammalian
remains.
   In the pits at Amiens this bed is generally distinct from
the underlying gravels, owing perhaps to the upper portion
of the gravel having been removed; but in several places
(Précy, Ivry, Bicétre, etc.) this section is complete, the
coarser gravel below becoming finer and finer, and, at length,
passing above into siliceous sand. These sections evidently
indicate a gradual Joss of power in the water at these parti-
cular spots; rapid enough at first to bring down large
pebbles, its force became less and less until at length it was
only able to carry fine sand. This, therefore, appears to
indicate a slight change in the course of the river, and
gradual excavation of the valley, which, by supplying the
floods with a lower bed, left the waters at this height with a
gradually diminishing force and velocity.
   The upper part of the section at St. Acheul consists of
brick earth (fig: 202 a), passing below into angular gravel,
while between this and the underlying sandy marl is some-
times a small layer of darker brick earth.         These beds, how-
ever, vary much even        in adjoining sections.         Taken as a
  * See Murchison’s Geology of Russia and the Ural Mountains, p. 572.
374            ALTERATION     OF   THE   RIVER   LEVEL.

and I must once more repeat that this is no mere hypothesis,
since the mass of sand and gravel cannot have been pro-
duced without an immense removal of the chalk. On the
whole, then, we may safely conclude that the upper-level
gravels were deposited by the existing river, before it had
excavated the valley to its present depth and when conse-
quently it ran at a level considerably higher than the
present.
   Far, therefore, from requiring an immense flood of water,
two hundred feet in depth, the accumulation of the gravel
may have been effected by an annual volume of water, differ-
ing little from that of the present river.
   A given quantity of water will, however, produce very
different effects, according to the rapidity with which it flows.
 “We learn from observation, that a velocity of three inches
 per second at the bottom will just begin to work upon fine
 clay fit for pottery, and however firm and compact it may be,
it will tear it up. Yet no beds are more stable than clay
when the velocities do not exceed this: for the water even
takes away the impalpable particles of the superficial clay,
leaving the particles of sand sticking by their lower half in
the rest of the clay, which they now protect, making a very
permanent bottom, if the stream does not bring down gravel
or coarse sand, which will rub off this very thin crust, and
allow another layer to be worn off. A velocity of six inches
will lift fine sand, eight inches will lift sand as coarse
as lmseed, twelve inches will sweep along fine gravel,
twenty-four inches will roll along rounded pebbles an inch
diameter, and it requires three feet per second at the
bottom to sweep along shivery angular stones of the size of
an egg*,”’
  If, therefore, we are justified in assuming a colder climate
than that now existing, we should much increase the erosive
               * Cyc. Brit. Article ‘ Rivers,” p. 274.
              GRADUAL    EXCAVATION    OF   THE   VALLEY.           375


action of the river, not only because the rains would fall on
a frozen surface, but because the rainfall of the winter months
would accumulate on the high grounds in the form of ice and
snow, and would every spring produce floods much greater
than any which now occur *,
  We now come to the light-coloured marl (fig. 202 ¢, p. 864).
It is composed, according to Mr. Prestwich, as follows: Of
white siliceous sand and light-coloured marl, mixed with
fine chalk grit, a few large sub-angular flints, and an oc-
casional sandstone block, irregular patches of flint gravel,
bedding waved and contorted, here and there layers with
diagonal seams, a few ochreous bands, portions concreted.
 Sand and freshwater shells common, some mammalian
remains.
   In the pits at Amiens this bed is generally distinct from
the underlying gravels, owing perhaps to the upper portion
of the gravel having been removed; but in several places
(Précy, Ivry, Bicétre, etc.) this section is complete, the
coarser gravel below becoming finer and finer, and, at length,
passing above into siliceous sand. These sections evidently
indicate a gradual loss of power in the water at these parti-
cular spots; rapid enough at first to bring down large
pebbles, its force became less and less until at length it was
only able to carry fine sand. This, therefore, appears to
indicate a slight change in the course of the river, and
gradual excavation of the valley, which, by supplying the
floods with a lower bed, left the waters at this height with a
gradually diminishing force and velocity.
   The upper part of the section at St. Acheul consists of
brick earth (fig. 202 a), passing below into angular gravel,
while between this and the underlying sandy marl is some-
times a small layer of darker brick earth. These beds, how-
ever, vary much even        in adjoining sections.          Taken as a
  * See Murchison’s Geology of Russia and the Ural Mountains, p. 572.
373                         THE PEAT.

   In such a group of species as this the hippopotamus seems
singularly out of place, and in the preceding chapter I have
discussed the conclusions which are, I think, to be drawn
from its presence; taking the fauna as a whole, however,
and looking more especially to such animals as the musk ox,
the reindeer, the lemming, the Myodes torquatus, the Sibe-
rian mammoth, and its faithful companion the woolly-haired
rhinoceros, we have clear evidence      of a climate unlike that
now prevailing in Western Europe.
   Finally, the lowest portion of the valley is at present occu-
pied by a bed of gravel, covered by silt and peat, which
latter is in some places more than thirty or even forty feet
thick, and is extensively worked for fuel.       These strata have
afforded to the antiquaries of the neighbourhood, and espe-
cially to M. Boucher de Perthes, a rich harvest of interesting
relics belonging to various periods. The depth at which these
objects are found has been carefully noted by M. Boucher de
Perihes.
   “Prenant,” he says, “pour terme moyen du sol de la
vallée, une   hauteur   de 2 métres   audessus    du niveau   de la
Somme, c’est 4 30 a 40 centimétres de la surface qu’on
rencontre le plus abondamment les traces du moyen-fge.
Cinquante centimétres plus bas, on commence & trouver des
débris romains, puis gallo-romains.   On continue & suivre
ces derniers pendant un métre, c’est & dire jusqu’au niveau
dela Somme.     Aprés eux, viennent les vestiges gaulois purs
qui descendent sans interruption jusqu’é prés de 2 métres
audessous de ce niveau, preuve de la longue habitation de ces
peuples dans la vallée. C’est & un métre plus bas, ou a 4
métres environ audessous de ce méme niveau, qu’on arrive
au centre du sol que nous avons nommé Celtique, celui que
folérent les Gaulois primitives ou les peuples qui les précé-
dérent ;” and which belonged, therefore, to the Neolithic
period. Jt is, however, hardly necessary to add that these
                OBJECTS    FOUND    IN   THE   PEAT,             879


thicknesses are only given by M. Boucher de Perthes “ comme
terme approximatif.”
   The “ Antiquités Celtiques” was published several years
before the Swiss archeologists had made us acquainted with
the nature of the Pfahlbauten;           but, from some   indications
given by M. Boucher de Perthes, it would appear that there
must have been, at one time, lake-habitations in the neigh-
bourhood of Abbeville. He found considerable platforms of
wood, with large quantities of bones, stone implements, and
handles closely resembling those which come from the Swiss
lake-villages.
    These weapons cannot for an instant be confounded with
the ruder ones from the drift-gravel. They are ground to a
smooth surface and a cutting edge, while those of the more
ancient types are merely chipped, not one of the many hun-
dreds already found having shown the slightest trace of
grinding. Yet though the former belong to the Stone Age,
to a time so remote that the use of metal was apparently
still unknown in Western Europe, they are separated from
the earlier weapons of the upper-level drift by the whole
period necessary for the excavation of the Somme Valley,
to a depth of more than one hundred feet.
   If, therefore, we get no definite date for the arrival of man
in these countries, we    can at least form a vivid idea of his
antiquity. He must have seen the Somme running at a
height of about a hundred feet above its present level. It
is, indeed, probable that he dates back in Northern France
almost, if not quite, as far as the rivers themselves. The
fauna of the country was indeed unlike what it is now.
Along the banks of the rivers ranged a savage race of
hunters   and fishermen,    and      in the forests wandered     the
mammoth, the two-horned            woolly rhinoceros, a species of
lion, the musk ox, the reindeer, and the urus.
  Yet the geography of France cannot have been very dif-
380         RELATION    OF THE    LOESS TO THE      GRAVEL.

ferent from what it is at present. The present rivers ran in
their present directions, and the sea even then lay between
the Somme and the Adur, though the channel was not so
wide as it 1s now.
   Gradually the river deepened its valley; ineffective, or
even perhaps constructive, in autumn and winter, the melt-
ing of the snows turned it every spring into a roarimg
torrent. These floods were perhaps more destructive to
animals even than man        himself; while, however          rude they
may have been, our predecessors can hardly be supposed to
have been incapable of foreseeing and consequently escaping
the danger.
   While the water had sufficient force to deposit coarse gravel
at any given level, at a still higher one it would part with
finer particles, and would thus form the loéss, which at the
same time would here and there receive angular flints and
shells brought down from the hills in a more or less trans-
verse direction by the rivulets after heavy rains.
   Mr. Prestwich regards the difference of level between the
upper gravels and the loéss as “‘a measure of the floods of
that period.” Ifthe gravel-beds were complete, this would
no doubt be the case; but it seems to me that the upper-
level gravels are mere fragments of an originally almost con-
tinuous deposit, and under such circumstances the present
cannot be taken as evidence of the original difference.
   As the valley became deeper and deeper the gravel would
be deposited at lower and lower levels, the loéss always fol-
lowing it *; thus we must not consider the loéss as a dis-
tinct bed, but as one which was being formed during the
same time, though never at the same place, as the beds of
gravel. In fig. 204 I have given a diagram, the better to
illustrate my meaning ; the loéss is indicated by letters with

* See Mr. Prestwich’s paper read before the Royal Society, June 19, 1862.
            CONTINUAL   CHANGES    OF RIVER   COURSES.        381

a dash and is dotted, while the gravels are represented        as
rudely stratified. In this case I suppose the river to have
run originally on the level (1), and to have deposited the
gravel (a) and the loéss (a’); after a certain amount of
erosion, which would reduce the level to (2), the gravel
would be spread out at (b), and loéss at (b’). Similarly the
loéss (c’) would be contemporaneous with the gravel (c).

                              Fie, 204.




  Thus, while in each section the lower beds would of course
be the oldest, still the upper-level gravels as a whole would
be the most ancient, and the beds lying in the lower parts of
the valley the most modern.
   For convenience I have represented the sides of the valley
as forming a series of terraces; and though this is not
actually the case, there are places in which such terraces do
occur.
   It is, however, well known that rivers continually tend to
shift their courses; nor is the Somme any exception to the
rule ; the valley itself indeed is comparatively straight, but
within it the river winds considerably, and when in one of
its curves, the current crosses    “its general line of descent,
it eats out a curve in the opposite bank, or in the side of the
hills bounding the valley, from which curve it is turned back
again at an equal angle, so that it recrosses the line of de-
scent, and gradually hollows out another curve lower down
in the opposite bank,” till the whole sides of the valley, or
river-bed, “present a succession of salient and retiring
382                     ELEVATION       OF THE    LAND.

angles*.”      During these wanderings from one side of the
valley to the other, the river continually undermines and
removes the gravels which at an earlier period it had de-
posited. Thus the upper-level gravels are now only to be
found here and there, as it were, in patches, while in many
parts they have altogether disappeared ; as, for instance, on
the right side of the valley between Amiens and Pont Rémy,
where hardly a trace of the high-level gravels is to be seen.
   The neighbouring shores of England and France show
various traces of a slight and recent elevation of the land.
Raised beaches have been observed at an elevation of from
five to ten feet at various points along the coasts of Sussex
and the Pas de Calais. Marine shells also occur at Abbeville
about twenty-five feet above the sea levelt, and no doubt
this change of level has had an important bearing ou the
 excavation of the valley.
   Mr. A. Tylor ¢, im a recent memoir, agrees with me that
the upper-level and lower-level gravels are merely the ex-
tremes of a series, seldom complete, but generally imperfect,
sometimes in one part, sometimes                 in another.     But he also
maintains that the surface of the chalk in the valley of the
Somme had assumed its present form prior to the deposition
of any of the gravel or loéss now existing in it. As, how-
ever, he admits that the materials forming this gravel and
loéss are derived exclusively from the area drained by the
Somme and its tributaries, he involves                himself in a double
difficulty.    In the first place he maintains that the materials,
by the removal of which the valley was formed, were swept
completely out of the valley, which, considering its length,
depth, and narrowness, appears to be impossible ; and in the
  * Lyell's Principles, p. 206.           be disposed to refer principally to an
   t+ The higher-level gravelsin some     encroachment of the sea on the land,
places fringe the coast at an eleva-      and the consequent intersection of
tion of as much as one hundred feet;      the old river-beds at a higher level.
this phenomenon, however, I should          t Geol. Journal, vol. xxiv. p. 103.
                        RECAPITULATION,                        383

second place, the admission that the gravel and sand consist
of flint débris brought down by the Somme and its tribu-
taries, is fatal to his argument, since you cannot remove
matter from one place to another, without affecting the con-
figuration of the surface in both. In admitting then that
“the gravel in the valley of the Somme at Amiens is partly
derived from débris brought down by the river Somme, and
by the two rivers, the Celle and the Arve, and partly con-
sists of material from the adjoining higher grounds, washed
in by land-floods *,’” Mr. Tylor virtually adopts the explana-
tion of the phenomena given in this work, since the for-
mation or removal of this gravel necessarily involved an
alteration of the surface and a deepening of the valley.
   When finally the excavation of the valley was completed,
the climate had gradually become more like our own, and
either from this change, or rather perhaps yielding to the
irresistible power of man, the great Pachydermata became
extinct.   Under   the altered   conditions   of level, the river,
unable to carry out to sea the finer particles brought down
from the higher levels, deposited them in the valley, and
thus raised somewhat its general level, checking the velocity
of the stream, and producing     extensive marshes, in which a
thick deposit of peat was gradually formed. We have, un-
fortunately, no trustworthy means of estimating the rate of
formation of this substance, which indeed varies considerably,
according to the conditions of the case, but on any supposi-
tion the production of a mass in some places more than
thirty feet in thickness must have required a very consider-
able period. Yet it is in these beds that we find the remains
of the Neolithicor later Stone period. From the tombs at
St. Acheul, from the Roman remains found in the superficial
layers of the peat, at about the present level of the river, we
know that fifteen hundred years have produced scarcely any
                          = WNecup LO;
384                    RECAPITULATION.

change in the configuration of the valley.    In the peat, and
at a depth of about fifteen feet in the alluvium at Abbeville,
are the remains of the Neolithic period, which we have
ample reason for believing, from the researches in Denmark,
Switzerland, and other countries, to be of no slight antiquity.
Yet all these are subsequent to the excavation of the valley.
‘What date then are we to ascribe to the men who lived when
the Somme was but beginning its great task? No one can
properly appreciate the lapse of time indicated, who has not
stood on the heights of Liercourt, Picquigny, or on one of the
other points overlooking the valley: nor, I am sure, could
any geologist return from such a visit without an overpower-
ing sense of the changes which haye taken place, and the
length of time which must have elapsed since the first ap-
pearance of man in Western Europe.
                                 iS)(ea)or




                         CHAPTER XII.
                   ON   THE   ANTIQUITY      OF   MAN,


     LTHOUGH the facts recorded in the preceding chapters
       have been for the most part discovered within a com-
paratively recent period, it is by no means merely of late
years, or among archeologists only, that the difficulties in
Archbishop Usher’s chronology have been felt to be insuper-
able. Historians, philologists, and physiologists have alike
admitted that the short period allowed could hardly be recon-
ciled with the history of some         eastern    nations; that it did
not leave room for the development either of the different
languages, or (assuming the unity of the human race) for the
important physical peculiarities, by which the various races
of men are distinguished.
  Thus, Dr. Prichard      says, “ Many writers who have been
by no means inclined to raise objections against the authority
of the Sacred Scriptures, and in particular Michaelis, have
felt themselves embarrassed by the shortness of the interval
between the Noachic Deluge and the period at which the
records   of various nations commence, or the earliest date to
which their historical memorials lead us back. The extrava-
gant claims to a remote and almost fathomless antiquity,
made by the fabulists of many ancient nations, have vanished
before the touch of accurate criticism; but after abstracting
all that is apparently mythological from the early traditions
of the Indians, Egyptians, and some other nations, the pro-
bable history of some of them seems still to reach up toa
                                                 cc
386                      HISTORICAL    EVIDENCE.

period too remote to be reconciled with the short chronology
of Usher and Petavius. This has been so universally felt
by all those writers who have entered on the investigation
of primeval history that it is superfluous to dwell upon the
subject*.”
  Baron Bunsen, one of the ablest among those who regard
the various forms of language as having                 had a common
origin, is forced to claim for the human race an antiquity of
at least 20,000 years. Again, the ingenious author of “ The
Genesis of the Earth and of Mant,” says truly that “one
of the greatest of the difficulties that beset us when we
endeavour to account for the commonly supposed descent of
all. mankind froma single pair,     . . . . lies in the fact
of our finding, upon Egyptian monuments, mostly of the
thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries before the
 Christian era, representations of individuals of numerous
nations, African, Asiatic, and Huropean, differing in phy-
sical characteristics as widely as any equal number of nations
of the present age that could be grouped together; among
these being negroes, of the true Nigritian stamp, depicted
with a fidelity, as to colour and features, hardly to be sur-
passed by an accomplished modern artist. That such diver-
sities had been produced by natural means in the interval
between that remote age and the time of Noah, probably no
one versed in the sciences of anatomy and physiology will
consider   credible,”    and he concludes,         therefore,    that   the
human race cannot have been derived from a single pair.
For, just as the philological difficulties will not, of course,
affect those who accept literally the account given in our
English Version of the miraculous creation of languages at
the Tower of Babel; so in the same way “the shortness
of the period allowed by the received chronology, for the
 * Prichard, Researches into the Physical Hist. of Mankind, vol. v. p. 553.
                               Gell sib Lalys
                   ETHNOLOGICAL       EVIDENCE.                  387

development of those physical varieties which distinguish
the different races of men*,” though felt as “one of the
greatest difficulties connected with the opinion that all
mankind are descended from one primitive stock,” will not
affect those who believe in the existence of separate species
of men.
   Prof. Huxley has also deduced a very interesting argu-
ment from the geographical distribution of the races of men.
He divides mankind into four groups, the Australoid, Ne-
groid, Mongoloid, and Xanthochroid. The latter are the fair,
light-haired, blue-eyed people who occupy a large part of
Europe; the Mongoloid are the Tartar, American, and Poly-
nesian races; the Negroid are the Negroes, Hottentots, and
Negritos; and the Australoid type contains all the inhabi-
tants of Australia, and the native races of the Deccan, with
whom he also associates the Ancient Egyptians. Whatever
difference of opinion may exist among ethnologists about the
other three divisions, still as to the Negroid race most are-
agreed, and this is the one to which J now wish to call atten-
tion. The geographical distribution of the Xanthochroid and
Mongoloid races presents no difficulty, nor will I here discuss
that of the Australoid group. But I entirely agree with
Prof. Huxley that the present position of the Negro race
cannot be explained excepting on the hypothesis that since
the appearance of that race immense geographical changes
have taken place,—that      continent      has become   ocean,   and
sea, land. The negroes are essentially a non-navigating
race; they build no ships, and even the canoes of the Fee-
geeans are evidently copied from those of the Polynesians.
Now what is the geographical distribution of the race?
They occupy all Africa south of the Sahara,—which neither
they nor the rest of the true African fauna have ever crossed,
and though they do not occur in Arabia, Persia, Hindostan,
                      * Prichard, ]. c. p. 552.
                              Cucee
888    EVIDENCE   DERIVABLE   FROM   PHYSICAL   GEOGRAPHY.

Siam, or China, we find them in Madagascar, and in the
Andaman Islands,—not in Java, Sumatra, or Borneo, but in
the Malay peninsular, in the Philippines, New Guinea, the
New Hebrides, New Caledonia, the Feegee Islands, and in
Tasmania.
   This remarkable distribution is perhaps most easily ex-
plicable on the hypothesis that since the Negroid race came
into existence there must have been an immense tract of land
or a chain of islands stretching from the eastern coast of
Africa right across the Indian Ocean, and secondly, that sea
then occupied the area of the present great desert. In
whatever manner, however, these facts are to be explained,
they certainly indicate that the Negro race is of very great
antiquity.
   I have often been much struck, when standing at the feet
of glaciers, by the great size of the terminal moraines, and
the length of time which must have been required for their
formation.    Let us take as an instance the Nigaard glacier
in the Justedal, on the Sognefjord. The Norwegian glaciers
no doubt covered formerly a much larger area than that which
they now occupy. They retreated as the cold diminished;
but we have already seen that man was present in Western
Europe when the general temperature was several degrees
at least lower than it is at present; and we’'shall probably,
therefore, be within the mark if we suppose that the glacier
at Justedal has retreated at least a mile up the valley since
the period of the river-drift gravels, and the entrance of
man into Hurope.     Now the terminal moraine of the glacier
covers the whole of this space with great blocks of stones,
thousands and hundreds of thousands in number, and yet,
although all these have probably been brought down in the
human period, I could only see a few blocks on the lower
end of the glacier itself.
  As far as Denmark is concerned we must, for the present,
                THE   VEGETATION   OF DENMARK.            389

rely principally on the double change which has taken place
in the prevalent vegetation. Beech forests are now the
pride of the country, and, as far as tradition goes, they have
always been so. But, as is shown by the peat-bogs, this is a
mistake. The large peat-mosses do not help us very much
in this matter, but there are in many of the forests, small
and deep depressions, filled with peat, and called skov-mose.
These, as might naturally be expected, contain many trees
which grew on their edges, and at length fell into them. At
the bottom is usually an amorphous peat, above is a layer of
pines—a tree which does not now grow naturally in Den-
mark. Higher up the pines disappear, and are replaced by
oaks, and white birches, neither of which are now common
in Denmark; while the upper layer consists principally of
the Betula verrucosa, and corresponds to the present, which
we may call the Beech period. Professor Steenstrup has
found stone implements among the stems of the pines, and
as the capercailzie, which feeds on the young shoots of the
pine, has been found in the Kjékkenmoddings, it seems
likely, to say the least, that these shell-mounds belong to
the pine period, and that the three great stages of civiliza-
tion correspond in some measure to these three periods
of arborescent vegetation.  For one species of tree thus
to displace another, and in its turn to be supplanted by
a third, would evidently require a great, though at pre-
sent we have no means      of measuring how great, lapse of
time.
   Turning now from Denmark to Switzerland, there are two
cases in which a more definite estimate has been attempted.
We must not, indeed, place too much reliance on them as
yet, but if many calculations made on different data shall
agree in the main, we may at length come to some approxi-
mate conclusion.
   The first of these calculations we owe to M. Morlot.   The
390               THE CONE   Of THE TINIERE.

torrent of the Tiniére, at the point where it falls into the
Lake of Geneva, near Villeneuve, has gradually built up a
cone of gravel and alluvium.     In the formation of the rail-
way this cone has been bisected for a length of one thousand
feet, and to a depth, in the central part, of about thirty-two
feet six inches above the level of the railway. The section
of the cone thus obtained shows a very regular structure,
which proves that its formation was gradual. It is composed
of the same materials (sand, gravel, and large blocks) as
those which are even now brought down by the stream. The
amount of detritus does, mdeed, differ considerably from
year to year, but in the long-run the differences compensate
for one another, so that, when considering long periods, and
the structure of the whole     mass, the influences of the tem-
porary   variations, which   arise from meteorological causes,
altogether disappear, and need not, therefore, be taken into
account. Documents preserved in the archives of Villeneuve
show that in the year 1710 the stream was dammed up, and
its course a little altered, which makes the present cone
slightly irregular. That the change was not of any great
antiquity is also shown by the fact that on the side where
the cone was protected by the dykes, the vegetable soil,
where it has been affected by cultivation, does not exceed
two or three inches in thickness. On the side thus pro-
tected by the dykes the railway cutting has exposed three
layers of vegetable soil, each of which must, at one time,
have formed the surface of the cone. They are regularly
intercalated among the gravel, and parallel to one another,
as well as to the present surface of the cone, which itself fol-
lows a very regular curve. The first of these ancient surfaces
was traced on the south side of the cone, over a surface of
15,000 square feet : it had a thickness of four to six inches,
and occurred at a depth of about four feet (1.14 metre mea-
sured to the base of the layer) below the present surface of
                  THE   CONE   OF THE   TINIERE.           391

the cone.   This layer, which belonged to the Roman period,
contained tiles and a Roman coin.
   The second layer was traced over a surface       of 25,000
square feet; it was six inches in thickness, and lay at a
depth of about ten feet (2.97 metres) including the thickness
of the layer. In it have been found several fragments of
unglazed pottery, and a pair of tweezers in bronze.       The
third layer has been followed for 3500 square feet; it was
six or seven inches in thickness, and lay at a depth of nine-
teen feet (5.69 metres) below the present surface: in it were
found some fragments of very rude pottery, some pieces of
charcoal, some broken bones, and a human skeleton with a
small, round, and very thick skull. Fragments of charcoal
were even found a foot deeper, and it is also worthy of notice
that no trace of tiles was found below the upper layer of
earth.
   Towards the centre of the cone, the three layers disappear,
since, at this part, the torrent has most force, and has de-
posited the coarsest materials, even some blocks as much as
three feet in diameter. The farther we go from this central
region, the smaller are the materials deposited, and the more
easily might a layer of earth, formed since the last great
inundations, be covered over by fresh deposits. Thus, at a
depth of ten feet, in the gravel on the south of the cone, at
a part where the layer of earth belonging to the Bronze Age
had already disappeared, two unrolled bronze implements
were discovered. They had probably been retained by their
weight, when the earth which once covered them was washed
away by the torrent. After disappearing towards the centre
of the cone, the:three layers reappear on the north side, at a
slightly greater depth, but with the same regularity, and the
same relative position. The layer of the Stone Age was but
slightly interrupted, while that of the Bronze era was easily
distinguishable by its peculiar character and colour.
392                    THE   CONE   OF THE   TINIERE.

   It must be confessed that the starting-point of this argu-
ment, viz. the so-called “Roman” layer, is far from being
satisfactorily determined. It is quite possible that tiles were
used in Switzerland before the “Roman” period; it is pro-
bable that they continued in use to a later period. The coin
found in the “‘ Roman” layer was so much worn as to be un-
determinable; it had, therefore, probably been long in use.
M. Uhlmann has also argued* that the bones found in the
lower layer are not such as we should expect to find in a
Stone Age deposit, since they are not so much discoloured as
those from the Stone Age pfahlbauten, and all belong to
domestic animals.     Only fourteen determinable fragments,
however, were found, and of these several probably belonged
to a single individual. Moreover, it would be very illogical
to compare the condition of bones from a peat-moss with
those which had been lying in a material such as that forming
the cone of the Tiniére.
   M{. Morlot did not disguise from himself that there were
certain elements        of doubt    in the case, but on the whole it
seemed to him that the phenomena were so regular and so
well marked that he was justified in applying to them a cal-
culation, with some little confidence of at least approximate
accuracy.       Making some allowances ; for instance, admitting
three hundred years instead of one hundred and fifty, for the
period since the embankment,.and taking the Roman period
as representing an antiquity of from sixteen to eighteen
centuries, he obtains for the age of Bronze an antiquity of
from 2900 years to 42U0 years, for that of the Stone period
from 4700 to 7000 years, and for the whole cone an age of
from 7400 to 11,000 years. M. Morlot thought that we
should be most nearly correct in deducting two hundred
years only for the action of the dykes, and in attributing to
  * Ueber Thierreste und Gebisstheil   gefunden in den Schuttablagerungen
der Tiniére.   Bern, 1868.
                     THE   VALLEY     OF THE THIELE.                       393

the Roman layer an antiquity of sixteen centuries, that is to
say, in referring it to the middle of the third century.                  This
would give an antiquity of 3800 years for the Bronze Age,
and 6400 years for that of Stone; and, on the whole, he is
inclined to suppose for the former an antiquity of from 3000
to 4000 years, and for the latter of from 5000 to 7000 years.
   Not less ingenious is the attempt which has been made
by M. Gilliéron*, Professor at the College of Neuveville, to
obtain a date for the lake-habitation at the Pont de Thiéle.
This stream connects the lakes of Neufchatel and Bienne.
During the first part of its course, the valley is narrow, and
the bridge, close to which the lake-dwelling has been dis-
covered, is situated at the narrowest spot. A little farther
down the valley suddenly expands, and from this point re-
mains of the same width until it joins the Lake of Bienne.
It is evident that the valley, as far as the bridge over the
Thiéle, was once occupied by the lake, which has gradually
been silted up by the action of forces still in operation, and,
if we could ascertain how long it would have taken to effect
this change, we should then know approximately the date of
the remains found at the Pont de Thiéle, which are evidently
those of a lake-dwelling.    The Abbey of St. Jean, which
stands in this valley, about 875 metres from the present
shore of the lake, was founded, according to ancient docu-
ments, between       the years 1090           and 1106, and is therefore
about 750 years old. It is possible that the abbey may not
have been built exactly on the then edge of the lake; but
even if this were the case, the gain of land will only have
been 375 metres in 750 years. Prof. Gilliéron does not com-
pare with this the whole space between the convent and the
lake-dwelling, because in the narrower part of the valley,
in which the latter is situated, the gain may have been more
   * Notice sur les Habitations   Lacustres    du Pont de Thisle.   Porrentruy,
1862.
394,              THE FORMATION   OF EGYPT.

rapid; but if we only go to the point at which the basin
contracts, we shall have a distance   of 3000 metres, which
would upon these data indicate a minimum antiquity of 6750
years. This calculation assumes that the shape of the bottom
of the valley was originally uniform. M. Morlot agrees with
Prof. Gilliéron in believing that this was the case, and from
the general configuration of the valley it seems to me also to
be a reasonable supposition. Moreover, the soundings taken
by M. Hisely in the Lake of Bienne show that the variations
in depth are but of slight importance. These two calcula-
tions, then, appear to indicate that 6000 or 7000 years ago
 Switzerland was already inhabited by men who used polished
 stone implements, but how long they had been there, or how
 many centuries elapsed before the discovery of metal, we
 have as yet no evidence to show.
    A still greater antiquity was obtained by Mr. Horner as
 the result of his Egyptian researches, which were undertaken
at the joint expense of the Royal Society and the Egyptian
 Government.      Every year the Nile, during its periodical
 overflow, deposits a certain amount of fine mud, and even
as long ago as the time of Herodotus it was inferred that
Egypt had been formerly an arm of the sea, filled up gradually
and converted into dry land by the mud brought down from
the upper country.
   In the great work on Egypt which we owe to the French
philosophers who accompanied Napoleon’s expedition to that
country, an attempt was made to estimate the secular eleya-
tion thus produced, and it was assumed to be five inches in
a century. This general average was consistent, however,
with great differences at different parts, and Mr. Horner,
therefore, did not consider himself justified in applying this
estimate to particular cases, even if he had been satisfied
with the evidence on which it rested. He preferred to exa-
mine the accumulation which had taken place round monu-
          THE   GRADUAL   ELEVATION     OF THE    COUNTRY.   395

ments of known age, and selected two—namely, the obelisk
at Heliopolis, and the statue of Rameses II., in Memphis.
“The obelisk is believed to have been erected 2300 years
B.c., and adding 1850, the year when the observation was
made (June, 1851, i.e. before the inundation of that year),
we have 4150 years in which the eleven feet of sediment
were deposited, which is at the rate of 8.18 inches in a
century*.” But Mr. Horner himself admits that “entire
reliance cannot be placed on this conclusion, principally
because it is possible that the site originally chosen for the
temple and city of Heliopolis was a portion of land some-
what raised above the level of the rest of the desert.” He
relies, therefore, principally on the evidence supplied by the
colossal statue in Memphis. In this case the present surface
is 10 feet 62 inches above the base of the platform on which
the statue stood. Assuming that the platform was sunk
142 inches below the surface of the ground at the time it
was laid, we have a depth of sediment from the present
surface to that level of 9 feet 4 inches. Rameses is sup-
posed by Lepsius to have reigned between 1394 and 1328 B.c.,
which would give an antiquity of 8215 years, and con-
sequently a mean increase of 84 inches in a century.
Having thus obtained an approximate measure of the rate
of deposit in that part of the Nile valley, Mr. Horner dug
several pits to a considerable depth, and in one of them,
close to the statue and at the depth of 39 feet, a piece of
pottery was found, which upon the above data would indicate
an antiquity of about 13,000 years.
   In many other excavations, pieces of pottery and other
indications of man were found at even greater depths, but
it must be confessed that there are several reasons which
render the calculations somewhat doubtful.    For instance, it
is impossible to ascertain how far the pedestal of the statue
                 * Torner, Phil. Trans., 1858, p. 73.
396     OWING   TO THE ANNUAL    DEPOSIT    OF NILE   MUD.

was inserted into the ground; Mr. Horner has allowed 142
inches, but if it was much deeper, the rate of deposition
would be diminished, and the age increased.           On the other
hand, if the statue was     on   raised    ground, of course   the
reverse would be the case.
   It has also been argued that the ancient Egyptians were
in the habit of making embankments round the areas on
which they erected temples, statues, etc., so as to keep out
the waters of the Nile.
   “‘ Whenever, then,” says Sir Charles Lyell, “ the waters at
length break into such depressions, they musi at first carry
with them into the enclosure much mud washed from the
steep surrounding banks, so that a greater quantity would
be deposited in a few years than, perhaps, in as many cen-
 turies on the great plain outside the depressed area, where
 no such disturbing causes intervened.” This objection is,
however, untenable, because the rapidity of depression will
be in proportion to the previous retardation, and will only
tend to bring the depressed area up to the general level.
Supposing, for instance, that the monument of Rameses,
erected on the flat plain of Memphis 3200 years ago, was
protected by embankments for the first 2000 years, and
that during that time the plain outside was gradually raised
5 feet 10 inches, being at the rate of 3$ inches in a century.
When the embankment gave way the space enclosed would
soon be filled up to the general level, and a thickness of 5 feet
10 inches might be deposited in a few years: still this
exceptionally rapid accumulation would only be the comple-
ment of the exceptional want of deposit which had preceded
it; and, consequently, when the level of the surrounding
plain had been attained,    then, although the mud covering
the base of the statue may have been altogether deposited
in the last few hundred years, i.e. since the embankments
have been neglected, the thickness of the deposit will still
              MR.   HORNER’S   EGYPTIAN   RESEARCHES.            397

be a measure of the general elevation which has taken place
on the surrounding plain since the erection of the monu-
ment.
   Kven if the embankments had remained intact to this day,
and the monument stood now in the hollow thus produced,
Mr. Horner’s argument would not be invalidated, but rather
confirmed. The depth of the hollow would give us a measure
of the deposit which had taken place since the erection of the
monument, or rather since the formation of the embankment.
If, however, the monument had been erected in an area
already depressed by the action of still older embankments,
the calculation would be vitiated, but in this case the rate of
deposition would appear to be greater than it really is, and
the true age consequently would be even greater than the
above estimate.  There are other causes, however, which
prevent me from accepting unreservedly the conclusions of
Mr. Horner, although his experiments          are of great impor-
tance, and much credit is due to the Egyptian government
for the liberal manner in which they assisted Mr. Horner
and the Royal Society in this investigation.
   I have already mentioned the evidence on which M. Morlot
has endeavoured to estimate the age of the Cone de la
Tiniére, and which gave about six thousand years for the
lower layer of vegetable soil, and ten thousand years for the
whole of the existing cone. But above this existing cone is
another, which was formed when the lake stood at a higher
level than at present, and which M. Morlot refers to the
period of the river-drift gravels. This drift-age cone is about
twelve times as large as that now forming, and would appear,
therefore, on the same data, to indicate an antiquity of more
than one hundred thousand years.
   In his “Travels in North America,’           Sir C. Lyell has
endeavoured    to estimate     the age of the Mississippi   delta in
the following manner :—“ Dr. Riddle,” he says, “ communi-
398            AGE   OF THE   MISSISSIPPI   DELTA.

cated   to me, at New     Orleans,   the result      of a series   of
experiments which he had made to ascertain the proportion
of sediment contained in the waters of the Mississippi. He
concluded that the mean annual amount of solid matter was
to the water as 4,      in weight,   or about >,4, in volume,
Since that period he has made another series of experiments,
and his tables show that the quantity of mud held in sus-
pension, increases regularly with the increased height and
velocity of the stream. On the whole, comparing the flood
season with that of clearest water, his experiments, continued
down to 1849, give an average annual quantity of solid
matter somewhat less than his first estimate, but not varying
materially from it. From these observations, and those of
Dr. Carpenter and Mr. Forskey (an eminent engineer, to
whom    I have before alluded), on the average width, depth,
and velocity of the Mississippi, the mean annual discharge of
water and sediment were deduced.         I then assumed 528
feet, or the tenth of a mile, as the probable thickness of the
deposit of mud and sand in the delta; founding my con-
jecture chiefly on the depth of the Gulf of Mexico between
the southern point of Florida and the Balize, which equals,
on an average, one hundred fathoms, and partly on some
borings six hundred feet deep, in the delta near Lake Pont-
chartrain, north of New Orleans, in which the bottom of the
alluvial matter is said not to have been reached.          The area
of the delta being about 13,600 square statute miles, and the
quantity of solid matter annually brought down the river,
38,702,758,400 cubic feet, it must have taken 67,000 years
for the formation of the whole; and if the alluvial matter of
the plain above be 264 feet deep, or half that of the delta, it
must have required 33,500 more years for its accumulation,
even if its area be estimated only as equal to that of the
delta, whereas it is, in fact, larger.”
   Moreover, as Sir Charles has himself pointed out, a very
    LAPSE OF TIME AS INDICATED BY CHANGE OF CLIMATE.                      399
large proportion of the mud brought down by the river is
not deposited in the delta, but is carried out into the gulf,
In the “ Antiquity of Man*,” he refers to the above given
calculation, and admits that the discharge of water seems to
have been much underrated by the earlier experiments,
Messrs. Humphrey and Abbot, who have recently surveyed
the delta, also      “remark      that    the   river pushes    along its
bottom into the gulf a certain quantity of sand and gravel,
which would,” they suppose, “augment the volume of solid
matter by about one-tenth.”  This, of course, would greatly
diminish the time required; but taking into consideration
the quantity of mud which is carried out to sea, and which
was not allowed for in the previous calculation, Sir Charles
Lyell still regards 100,000 years as a moderate estimate ; and
he considers      that, “the alluvium of the Somme containing
 flint implements and the remains of the mammoth and
hyzena,’’ is no less ancient.
    Again, whatever cause or causes may have produced the
great change which has taken place in the climate of Western
Europe, there can be little doubt that this change indicates
a very considerable lapse of time. Weare indebted to Mr.
Hopkins for a very interesting memoir on this subject.
Among the possible causes of change he discusses—
    Firstly, A variation in the intensity of solar radiation.
    To this theory Mr. Hopkins sees no @ priort objection ; but
he does not feel disposed to attach much weight to it, because
it is “a mere hypothesis framed to account for a single and
limited class of facts, and unsupported by the testimony of
any other class of allied, but independent phenomena.”
   It is, moreover, open to the objections stated with great
force by Professor Tyndall+, who argues that the ancient

  * Appendix to third edition of the     p. 1.               ’
Antiquity of Man, p. 16. See also           + Heat considered as a Mode    of
Geological Journal, 1869, vol. xxv.      Motion, p. 192.
400   LAvtSE OF TIME AS INDICATED      BY CHANGE OF CLIMATE.

glaciers indicate the action of heat as much as of cold.
“ Cold,” he says, “ will not produce glaciers. You may have
the bitterest north-east winds here in London throughout
the winter, without a single flake of snow.    Cold must have
the fitting object to operate upon, and this object—the
aqueous vapour of the air—is the direct product of heat.
Let us put this glacier question in another form: the latent
heat of aqueous vapour, at the temperature of its produc-
tion in the tropics, is about 1000° Fahr., for the latent
heat augments as the temperature of evaporation descends.
A pound of water thus vaporized at the equator, has absorbed
one thousand times the quantity of heat which would raise a
pound of the liquid one degree in temperature. .... It is
perfectly manifest that by weakening the sun’s action, either
through a defect of emission, or by the steeping of the entire
solar system in space of a low temperature, we should be
cutting off the glaciers at their source.”
   Professor Frankland has even gone so far as to express the
opinion that “ the sole cause of the phenomena of the glacial
epoch was a higher temperature of the ocean than that which
obtains at present*,” having no doubt overlooked the fact
that the fauna of the sea, as well as of the land, had an Arctic
character.
   Secondly. Admitting the proper motion of the sun, it
has been suggested that we may have recently passed from
a colder into a warmer region of space.
  I must refer to Mr. Hopkins’ memoir for his objections to
this suggestion ; they certainly appear to “ render the theory
utterly inapplicable to the explanation of the changes of
temperature at the more recent geological epochs.”
   This hypothesis, moreover, is liable to the same fatal
objection as the first. To produce snow requires both heat
and cold; the first to evaporate, the second to condense.
                    * Phil. Mag. 1864, p. 328.
          SIR J. W.   LUBBOCK     ON THE     EARTH’S   AXIS.          401

In fact, what we require is a greater contrast between the
temperature of the tropics and that of our latitudes; so that,
paradoxical as it may appear, the primary cause of the
“glacial” epoch may be, after all, an elevation of tempera-
ture in the tropics, causing a greater amount of evaporation
in the equatorial regions and consequently a greater supply
of the raw material of snow in the temperate regions during
the winter months.
   Thirdly. An alteration in the earth’s axis.
   The possibility of such a change has been denied by many
astronomers.    My father, the late Sir J. W. Lubbock, has,
on the contrary, maintained*           that this would         necessarily
follow from upheavals and depressions of the earth’s surface,
if only they were of sufficient magnitude.     The same view
has recently been taken by other mathematicians.          This
suggestion, hike the preceding, presupposes immense geo-
graphical changes, which would therefore necessarily imply
an enormous lapse of time.
   Fourthly. Mr. Hopkins inclines to find the true solution
of the difficulty in the supposition that the Gulf-Stream did
not at this period warm the shores of Hurope.      “A depres-
sion of 2000 feet would,” he says, “convert the Mississippi
into a great arm of the sea, of which the present Gulf of
Mexico would form the southern extremity, and which would
communicate at its northern extremity with the waters occu-
pyig the... . great valley now occupied by the chain. of
lakes.” In this case the Gulf-Stream would no longer be
deflected by the American coasts, but would pass directly up
this channel into the Arctic Sea; and as a very great ocean
current must have its counter current, it is probable that
there would be a flow of cold water from the North between
the coasts of Norway and Greenland. The absence of the
Gulf-Stream would probably lower the January temperature
                      * Geol. Journ. vol. v. p. 4.
                                                         bd
4.02        EFFECT    OF A CHANGE   IN THE    GULF-STREAM.

of Western Europe ten degrees, while the presence of a cold
current from the north would make a further difference of
about three or four degrees*, an alteration of the climate
which would apparently be sufficient to account for all
the phenomena. This theory Mr. Hopkins considers as no
mere hypothesis, but as necessarily following from the sub-
mergence of North America, which has been inferred from
evidence of a different nature.
   In this case, of course, the periods of great cold in Europe
and in America must have been successive, and not synchro-
nous; and it may also be observed, that in this suggested
deflection of the Gulf-Stream, Mr. Hopkins was contem-
plating a period anterior to that of the present rivers. For
if we are to adopt this solution of the difficulty, an immense
time would be required. If, when the gravels and loéss of
the Somme and the Seine were being deposited, the Gulf-
Stream was passing up what is now the valley of the Missis-
sippi, then it follows that the formation of the loéss in that
valley and its delta, an accumulation which Sir C. Lyell has
shown to require a period of about           100,000 years, would be
subsequent to the excavation of the Somme valley, and to
the presence of man in Western Europe.
   The deflection of the Gulf-Stream from our coasts might,
however, be owing to another cause, namely, a subsidence of
the isthmus of Panama; in support of which suggestion may
be mentioned the remarkable fact recently observed by Dr.
Gunther, that out of 173 tropical marine fish, no less than
57, or 30 per cent., occur on both sides of the isthmus; in
both the Atlantic and the Pacific +.
  Mr. Croll, however, has pointed out that at present the
“S.H. trade winds of the Atlantic blow with greater force
than the N.H. trades, and the consequence is that the S.H.
trades sometimes extend to 10° or 15° N. lat., whereas the
  * Hopkins, 1. c. p. 85.           tT Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. vi. p. 397.
            EFFECT   OF   A CHANGE      IN    THE   GULF-STREAM.,     403

N.E. trades seldom blow south of the equator. But during
the glacial epoch the very reverse must have occurred.
Hence the great equatorial current of the Atlantic must
during that period have been driven considerably south of
its present position *.” Even at present, while the greater
part of the water enters the Gulf of Mexico, one portion is
deflected   southwards,      which      in the case      mentioned   above
would happen to the greater portion, if not the whole.
   Under existing circumstances, however, the southern divi-
sion is comparatively small; by far the larger portion of the
great equatorial current        turns        northwards, and warms     the
northern hemisphere, so that the comparatively high tempe-
rature of the Northern Atlantic is in some measure due to
heat derived from the Southern hemisphere. In a recent
memoir + Mr. Croli has shown the great effect produced by
the Gulf-Stream on the present climate of Europe. He cal-
culates that it conveys as much heat as is received from the
sun by 3,121,870 square miles at the Equator, nearly as much
as is received from the sun by the entire Arctic regions, the
proportions being as 15 to 18. Our present climate is 12°
higher than     the normal      due to its latitude, but Mr. Croll
points out that this is by no means to be considered as mea-
suring the effect of the Gulf-Stream.      The temperature of
the whole hemisphere is raised by the equatorial currents,
and the 12° “‘ only represent the number of degrees that the
mean normal temperature of our island stands above what is
called the normal temperature of the latitude.”
   There is yet another cause to. which the present mild tem-
perature of Europe is partly due, and which must not be
altogether neglected. At the period under consideration,
indeed, the geography of Western Europe must have been
very nearly what it is now.    There is, however, good reason
              * Croll, Philosophical Magazine, Aug. 1864.
              + 1. c. Feb. and Oct. 1870.
                                   D d.2
404,                   ASTRONOMICAL     CAUSES.

for considering that the desert of Sahara then formed part of
the Atlantic Ocean. Mr. Tristram has called attention to
cliffs, ancient sea-beaches, and lines of terraces along the
northern margin of the desert, and the common cockle is
still found livmg in some of the salt lakes. Mr. Tristram
also discovered a species of Haligenes, which inhabits the
Gulf of Guinea, in a salt lake in lat. 82° N. and long. 7° E.,
separated, therefore, from its present marine habitat by the
whole extent     of the Great    Desert.      Moreover, as we have
already seen, the present geographical distribution of animals
can only be explained on the hypothesis that the existing
fauna, including man, occupied Africa long before the Sahara
became dry land.
   Mr. Croll has shown in the memoir already cited that
 currents of warm water: produce a far greater effect upon
 chmate than aerial currents of equal volume and tempera-
ture, yet it is evident that such a change would have a
great effect on the climate of Europe.         At present we
receive   from   the   south, hot      dry winds,     which    warm    us
both directly and also indirectly by melting the snow and
ice on our mountain-tops.     If the Sahara was a sea, the
“Fohn,” mstead of being a burning, dry wind, which strips
the snow cff the Alps, both by melting and evaporation,
would be a moist,        damp   wind,     and when      it reached    the
mountains would produce dense clouds and thick fogs, which
would prevent the sun’s rays from warming the earth or
melting the glaciers. So that to the barren desert of the
Sahara, which we are apt to look upon as a useless waste,
we are in reality much indebted for the fertility and civi-
lization of Hurope.
   M. Adhémar* has suggested a mode of accounting for
the cold of the glacial epoch, which, if the true one, would
give us means of calculating its antiquity.             If the plane of
             * Revolutions dela Mer.    J. Adhémar.   Paris.
                PRECESSION   OF   THE   EQUINOXES,              405

the equator coincided exactly with that of the ecliptic, i.e.
with that of the earth’s orbit, then it is evident that every
day would be followed by a night of equal length. In con-
sequence, however, of the obliquity of the ecliptic, there are
only two days in the year when this is actually the case,
namely, the 20th of March and the 28rd September.         Thus
our year is divided into four well marked periods.           “ Win-
ter” begins on the 22nd December, which is the shortest
day of the year, and continues until the 20th March, which
is called the spring equinox, because on it the day and
night are of equal lengths. ‘‘Spring’? commences on the
20th March and continues till the 21st June, during which
time the days continue to elongate at the expense of the
night.
  From the 21st June, however, which is the first day of
“summer,” the days begin to shorten, until, on the 28rd of
September, day and night are again equal, and we have the
autumn equinox.
  Autumn commences on the 23rd September, and the days
continue to diminish till the 22nd December, which is the
shortest day, and after which they begin to lengthen.
   At present, then, the northern hemisphere enjoys in each
year seven days more of spring and summer than of autumn
and   winter, while, on the other       hand, the southern   hemi-
sphere has seven days more of autumn and winter than of
spring and summer.        This inequality of the seasons is due
to the greater rapidity with which the earth moves when it
is in perihelion, or nearest the sun, as is the case on the 31st
December.
   The dates of perihelion and spring equinox have not
always been, nor will they always continue to be, the same
as at present.   On the contrary, a constant though slow
movement is continually taking place: the spring equinox,
which is now on the 20th March, will after a while be on the
406                 M. ADHEMAR’S   ARGUMENT.

19th, then on the 18th, and so on; whilst perihelion, which
now happens on the 31st December, will in the lapse of time
fall on the 1st of January, then on the 2nd, and soon.    The
interval between the two occurrences, therefore, is diminish-
ing; at some future day they will be coincident, and in
about 21,000 years they will be as far apart again as they
now are. The longest and shortest days, and the autumnal
equinox, move of course in the same manner as the spring
equinox, and consequently the northern and southern hemi-
spheres alternately enjoy a preponderance of summer.      The
year 1248 a.p. was that in which the first day of winter cor-
responded with the passage of the earth into perihelion, and
consequently was the period when the balance of summer in
favour of the northern hemisphere was greatest. Up to that
date the duration of summer was increasing ; it is now, and
has been for 620 years, gradually diminishing.
      zistronomers have not, however, generally considered that
these changes, or even those which affect the excentricity of
our orbit, would produce any material difference between the
climates of the two hemispheres, because whatever the excen-
tricity of our orbit may be, the two hemispheres must receive
exactly the same amounts of heat, “ the proximity of the sun
in perigee, or its distance in apogee, exactly compensating
the effect of its swifter or slower motion ;” in other words,
the southern hemisphere has a shorter summer than ours
because it is nearer    the sun, and for the same reason it re-
ceives in a given time more heat, so that the two differences
neutralize one another.
   M. Adhémar points out, however, that the temperature of
each hemisphere does not depend on the quantity of heat
received from the sun, but on the difference between the
amount received, and the amount      radiated away into space;
in other words, on the quantity retained.        If, he says in
illustration, you burn a given quantity of wood in two iden-
           THE       CUPOLA   OF ICE AT THE      SOUTH         POLE.           407

tical rooms, and then open the windows in one and not
in the other, you will soon have a difference of tempe-
rature, though the supply of heat has been the same in
both*.
   Now our northern hemisphere has 186 x 24 = 4464 hours
of day in the year, and 179            x 24 = 4296 hours of night,
while the southern hemisphere has 4464 hours of night, and
only 4296 of day. We may admit that the southern hemi-
sphere will receive as much heat from the sun in its 4296
hours of day, as we do in our 4464, but it is evident that it
will retain less, because it will have 168 hours more of night,
during which radiation will be going on. Though, therefore,
the heat received by the two hemispheres will be equal, the
temperature of the two will not be by any means the same,
and though at first this difference may be slight, it will in
its nature be to a certain extent cumulative.
   That the southern hemisphere is colder than the northern
is evident on account of the much greater accumulation of
ice in the former; but it is also clear that this very fact tends
to aggravate the difference to which it is due.
   Moreover, M. Adhémar affirms that the immense cupola
of ice which is known to exist round the South Pole must
affect the centre of gravity of the earth, and consequently
attract the ocean       southwards.       In this manner,              indeed, he
attempts to explain the remarkable preponderance of land in
the north, and of sea in the southern hemisphere. A glance
at the map will show this difference, but the following table
makes it more apparent. Taking each parallel as unity, the
proportion of sea is as follows :—
  60° North      .       ~    80.08       10° South.                   Sein   oo
  con              e e oz                 aoe     8,                   0777
  Lis            oe WY                    a)              ea             OE
                       * Revolutions de la Mer, p. 344.
408          THE      CUPOLA   OF ICE AT THE    SOUTH        POLF.

  30° North .             . 0.536       40° South       .            2200951
  COS     a               POLO          50°. eae                     wet.O ye
  LO2aaa;       Des       O21 10        GOS   Si        he           1000
     OSs 5,0 be as        eOched

Certainly a progressive increase of sea, which is so remark-
ably regular, can hardly be the result of accident.
   M. Adbémar maintains that this is due to the alteration of
the centre of gravity of the earth, caused by the great
southern cupola of ice, and consequently that 11,120 years
ago (i.e. 10,500 years before 1248), when the northern hemi-
sphere was at its coldest, the northern glacier consequently
at its maximum, and the southern at its minimum, the pre-
ponderance of water would have been in the northern hemi-
sphere, and the submersion of the lower lands of Europe and
America may have been due to an alteration, not in the level
of the land, but in that of the sea.           He   conceives that when
the increasing cupola counterbalances the decreasing one,
there is a sudden transfer of the centre of gravity of the
earth from one side of the centre of the solid part to the
other, and consequently a rush of water, or deluge, alter-
nately from north to south and from south to north, occur-
ring every 10,500 years. It seems to me, however, that the
alterations of the ice cupolas would be too slow, and conse-
quently the change in the centre of gravity too gradual to
cause any sudden rush or deluge of water from the one pole
to the other.                                                |
   According to this theory, the year 1248 was that in which
our northern hemisphere was at its period of greatest heat,
the southern at that of greatest cold; and as 600 years have
since elapsed we ought to find some evidence of subsequent
change.
  As regards the southern hemisphere, M. Adhémar points
out that the great southern glacier has considerably retreated
                  OBJECTIONS    TO M. ADHEMAR’S       THEORY.             4.09

since the time of Captain Cook, but it is in the northern
hemisphere that he finds the greatest evidence of alteration.
He dwells much on the increase, during the last few cen-
turies, of the Swiss glaciers, and of the ice in Greenland,
and points out that the cultivation of the vine does not now
extend so far northwards as was once the case. M. Adhémar,
then, considers that the last epoch of greatest cold must
have been 11,120 years ago, since which                time the climate of
our hemisphere gradually improved up to the year 1248,
when it was most genial, and after which it has, in his opinion,
gradually commenced again to deteriorate.           Sir Charles
Lyell*, however, does not think that this change, “ which
could hardly produce more than a difference of half a degree
Fahrenheit between the cold of the present winter and that
of 1248, would be appreciable.”      He adds that the whole
effect which can be produced by secular astronomical changes
must “always be very subordinate to the influence of geo-
graphical conditions +.”
    Sir John Herschell { also “is very far from supposing it
competent” to account for so great an alteration. Moreover
it is remarkable as showing how far we are from possessing the
data necessary for any satisfactory conclusions, that while, as
we have seen, M. Adhémar regards the enormous cupola of
ice at the South Pole as the reason for the almost entire
absence of land at that Pole, Sir C. Lyell, on the other hand,
states as a fact, that the chief cause of the intense celd of
high southern latitudes is “the vast height and extent
of the Antarctic continent,” the very existence of which
is denied by, and is indeed incompatible with, the theory
of M. Adhémar, while it is necessary to that of Sir C.
Lyell.

  * Principles of Geology, 1867, vol. i.     + Outlines of Astronomy, 1858, p.
p. 278.                                    235.
   + Ibid. vol. i. p. 243.
410            PROBABLE     EFFECT    OF   PRECESSION.

   It must, I think, be confessed that the existence of Vic-
toria Land, Enderby’s Land, and other coasts, as well as the
great volcano of Mount Hrebus, are unfavourable to the
theory advocated by M. Adhémar, so far at least as he applies
it to explain the present remarkable distribution of land and
sea; and it must also be remembered, as tending to show
that the geographical distribution of land and sea has more
influence on climate than M. Adhémar             is disposed to admit,
that according to his theory the southern hemisphere ought
at the present time to be, as a whole, far colder than the
northern, which, however, is not the case.
   Although, then, there can be no doubt that astronomical
changes would, to a certain extent, affect our climate in the
manner indicated by M. Adhémar, those best qualified to
form an opinion do not consider that the cause assigned by
him would by itself be sufficient to account for changes so
great as those which have taken place. The effect produced
increases, however, with the excentricity of the earth’s orbit.
The form of this orbit is always altering; as it approaches to
a circle, the effect produced by precession and change of
position of perihelion diminishes, while on the other hand it
increases as the orbit elongates. At present the excentricity
of our orbit is only 0.0168,—that is to say, the orbit is nearly
circular; but there have been periods when it was much more
elongated, and when consequently the extremes of tempera-
ture dependent on precession and the position of perihelion
must also have been much greater.
   Mr. Croll and Mr. Stone have calculated the excentricity
for the last million years, and Mr. John Carrick Moore has
worked out the effect upon our climate, assuming other
things to remain unchanged, in the four last columns of the
following table which is given by Sir C. Lyell in the last
edition of the “ Principles of Geology *.”
                          * lc. vol. inp. 298.
                        THE        EXCENTRICITY           OF     THE     EARTH’S       ORBIT.                411
Table showing the variations in the excentricity of the earth’s
      orbit for a million years before a.p. 1800, and some of the
      climatal effects of such variations.

                         ell                2      =I                    a            5               6S
                    Number of | Excentricity |Difference!          Number          Mean of        Mean of
  |                 years before            of      of distance} of winter          hottest        coldest
                     A.D. 1800.           Orbit.    in millions}       daysin   [month in lat./month in lat
                                                        of miles. | excess.     | of London.   | of London.

                  1,000,000               .0151             23           a3           83°F,         Zeon
          D         950,000               -0517             93          25.1         109°            3°
                    900,000               .0102             1i           4.9          80°           23.
              [=    850,000               .0747            134          36.4         126°            We
       C       .b   800,000               -0132             22           6.4          82°           222
              Le}     750,000 | .0375                      103 | 27.8                113°             0°6
                      700,000             .0220             4           10.2          87°            sl
                      650,000             .0226             4           ae            88°            16°
                      600,000             .0417             7%          20.3         101°9            79
                      550,000 | .0166                       3            8            84°            20°
                      500,000             .0388             7           18.8          O98             9°
                      450,000             .0308             54          15            94°            oe
                      400,000       |     .0170             3            8.2          84°            20°
                      350,000 |           0195              34           9.5          86°            18°
                      800,000             0424              7           20.6        102°              im
                      250,000             .0258             4s          12.5         90°            5°
      B       fa      210,000       |     0575             103          27.8        TRS              0°7
              Lb;     200,000       |     .0567            10;          27.7        Ibis             i)
                      150,000             .0332             6           16.1         95°            12°
 | A                  100,000             -0473             8h          23          105°             De
                        50,000            .0131             22           6.3          82°           22°
                         0                .0168             3            8.1          84°           20°



                                   EXPLANATION               OF THE          TABLE.
      Corumn         1.—Division of a million years preceding 1800 into twenty equal
parts.
      Cotusn 2.—Computed by Mr. James Croll, by aid of Leverrier’s formula,
gives the excentricity of the earth’s orbit, in parts of a unit equal to the
mean distance, or half the longer diameter of the ellipse.
   Cotumy 3.—Which, together with the three following columns, has been
computed by Mr. John Carrick Moore, gives in millions of miles the differ-
ence between the greatest and least distances of the earth from the sun,
during the excentricities given in Column 2.
   Coruun 4.—Gives the number of days by which winter, occurring in
aphelion, is longer than the summer in perihelion.
   Cotuun 5.—Gives the mean temperature of the hottest summer month in
the latitude of London when the summer occurs in perihelion.
      Coruxn         6.—Gives           the mean temperature of the coldest winter month in
the latitude of London when the winter occurs in aphelion.
412           DATE   SUGGESTED    FOR THE    GLACIAL    EPOCH.

  This table shows that there are four periods marked A, B,
C, and D, in which there has been a large excentricity, and
an extreme climate. The periods marked A and B, says Sir
Charles Lyell, ‘‘ would not, I conceive, be sufficiently distant
from our era to afford time for that series of glacial and post-
glacial events which we can prove to have happened since
the epoch of the greatest cold.         These events relate tc
changes in the level of the land in opposite directions, as well
as the excavation of valleys, and variations in the range and
distribution of aquatic and terrestrial animals, all of which
take place at so slow a rate that 200,000 years would not be
sufficient to allow of the series of changes with which we are
acquainted.      I agree, therefore, with Mr. Croll, that if the
date of the most intense glacial cold can be arrived at by aid
of a very large excentricity, it would be a more probable
 conjecture to assign C than B as the period in question, “in
other words, to regard the glacial epoch as representing a
period 800,000 years ago.”
   In differing from such a great authority as Sir C. Lyell,
Ido so with great diffidence, but I confess that I should
be disposed rather to assign the glacial era to the periods
A and B, than to either C or D*,
   It seems to me unlikely that the present fauna of Europe
should have continued to exist, almost without alteration, for
so long a period as 800,000 years, and the “ variations in the
range and distribution of aquatic and terrestrial animals,”
might, [think, have occurred in even less than 200,000 years
under the great changes in climate which have taken place.
Moreover the Geological Magazine for June, 1868, contains an
interesting paper by Mr. Geikie, “On denudation now in pro-
gress,” in which he discusses the general effect produced by
rivers in excavating valleys and lowering the general level
   * In a recent memoir, Mr. Croll also expresses this opinion.   Phil. Mag.
1868, p. 367.
      EFFECT   OF RIVERS   ON THE   LEVEL    OF ConTINENTS.       413

of the country. “For it is clear that if a river carries so
many millions of cubic feet of sediment every year into the
sea, the area of the country drained by it must have lost
that quantity of solid material, and if we could restore the
sediment so as to spread it over the basin, the layer so laid
down would represent the fraction of a foot by which the
basin had been lowered during a year.” From observations
made on the Mississippi, Ganges, Rhone, Danube, and other
great rivers, Mr. Geikie estimates the annual       loss at aoe    Of
a foot. But he points out that this would not be uniform.
The plains and watersheds would lose little, the slopes and
valleys much.    ‘ There can be no doubt,” he says, “ that the
crosion of the slopes and watercourses is very much greater
than that of the more level grounds. Let it be assumed that
the waste is nine times greater in the one case than in the
other (in all likelihood it is more): in other words, that
while the plains and table-lands have been having one foot
worn off their surface, the declivities and river-courses have
lost nine feet. Let it be further assumed that one-tenth part
of the surface of a country is occupied by its water-courses
and glens, while the remaining nine-tenths are covered by
the plains, wide valleys, or flat grounds.     Now, according to
the foregoing data, the mean annual quantity of detritus
carried to the sea is equal to the yearly loss of gy54 of a foot
from the general surface of the country. ‘The valleys, there-
fore, are lowered by +5y of a foot, and the more open and
flat land by +4. of a foot.”
  Mr. Geikie calculates in this manner that Europe would
disappear in little more than 4,000,000 of years. I cannot
altogether accept this conclusion, for when a river has less
than a given amount of fall, it ceases to excavate.     Thus the
effect of the Nile is to raise, not to lower the level of Egypt,
and most of our large rivers near their mouths act im a some-
what similar manner.      As regards the higher districts, how-
Al4,              THE    OBLIQUITY    OF THE   ECLIPTIC.

ever, his data are perhaps not far wrong, and if we apply
them to the valley of the Somme, where the excavation is
about 200 feet in depth, they would indicate an antiquity for
the Paleolithic epoch of from 100,000 to 240,000 years,
which, though arrived at from perfectly different data,
agrees with the periods A and B in the calculation made
by Messrs. Croll and Stone.
   In addition to the causes already alluded to, there is at
least one other astronomical phenomenon, namely, the change
in the obliquity of the ecliptic, which must be taken into
account in considering the effects which cosmical causes
may, or must, have exercised on climate. The whole ques-
tion then is one, not only of extreme             interest, but also of
very great difficulty, and we are not, I think, at present in
a position to estimate with confidence the effects on climate
which may have been produced by these various causes.
   Several other points connected with the glacial period
would receive a natural explanation if we were able to adopt
the suggestions of M. Adhémar and Mr. Croll. Thus M.
Morlot * some years ago pointed out that there are in Swit-
zerland evidences of two periods of cold, during what is
called the glacial epoch, separated by an interval of mildness.
   Whether M. Adhémar is right in attributing the prepon-
derance of ocean in the southern hemisphere to the influence
of the great Antarctic glacier, cannot, I think, in the present
state of our knowledge, be conclusively determined.       There
can, however, be no doubt that an accumulation of snow and
ice at one pole would, by affecting the position of the centre
of gravity of the earth, attract the waters towards that pole.
Mr. Croll calculates that a diminution of 470 feet in the
thickness of the Antarctic glacier would raise the sea level
at the North Pole 26 feet 5 inches, and 25 feet at the lati-
  * Bull. de la Soc. Vaudoise des Sciences Naturelles.   March, 1854.   Bibl.
Universelle de Geneve.   May, 1858.
         M. ADHEMAR    ON   CHANGES   IN THE   SEA-LEVUL.   415

tude of Glasgow. A mile of ice removed in the same way
would produce a change of 280 feet. M. Adhémar dwells
on various considerations which induce him to attribute a
very great thickness to the great southern glacier, and
consequently he considers, that the alterations of sea-level
which would result from the alternate preponderance of ice
in the Arctic and Antarctic regions, would account for the
various alterations in the distribution of land and water.
That there must, however, have been elevations and depres-
sions of the land itself is sufficiently evident from other
considerations, but it is impossible to deny that the cause
pointed out by M. Adhémar may have produced the relative
elevation of the sea, as proved by the various raised beaches
which fringe our shores, and the depression on the other
hand indicated by the submerged forests, observed at so
many points.
   The former would indicate the periods of cold, the latter
those of heat. The present condition of our rivers will-also
thus be simply explained. There can, I think, be no doubt
that many of them have excavated their own valleys. At
present, however, they are all fillmg up the lower parts of
the excavation, as, for instance, we have seen to be the case
with the Somme.
   Moreover, the bottom of these valleys is in most cases lower
than the present sea-level, which cannot have been the case
at the time when they were excavated. It is evident, then,
that the excavation must have been finished at the time
when the sea was at a lower relative level than at present.
  Again, it will be remembered that side by side with the
remains of Arctic animals have been found others indicating
a warm climate, such for instance as the hippopotamus.
This fact, which has always hitherto been felt as a difficulty,
is at once explained by Mr. Croll’s suggestion, for, when
the excentricity was at a high value, we should have a
416                     GEOLOGICAL    CHANGES

change every ten or twelve thousand years from a high to a
low temperature, and vice versé. But a period of ten thou-
sand years, long as it may appear to us, is very little from a
geological point of view; and we can thus understand how
the remains of the hippopotamus and the musk ox come to
be found together in England and France. The very same
astronomical conditions which fitted our valleys for the one,
would at an interval of ten thousand years render them suit-
able for the other.
   Sir C. Lyell has also* attempted to form an estimate of
the duration of the glacial epoch, on the assumption that
the different movements of elevation and depression pro-
ceeded at an average rate of 24 feet ina century. As the
 simplest “series of changes in physical geography which can
 possibly account for the phenomena of the glacial period,”
 he gives the following :—
      “First, a continental   period, towards the close of which
the forest of Cromer flourished: when the land was at least
500 feet above its present level, perhaps much higher, and
its extent probably greater than that given in the map,
fig. 41.”    In this map the British Isles, including the
Hebrides, Orkneys, and Shetlands, are connected with one
another and with the continent, the whole German Ocean
being laid dry.
   “ Secondly, a period of submergence, by which the land
north of the Thames and Bristol Channel, and that of
Ireland, was gradually reduced to such an archipelago as
is pictured in map, fig. 40; and finally to such a general
prevalence of sea as is seen in map, fig. 39, only the tops of
the mountains being left above water. This was the period
of great submergence and of floating ice, when the Scandi-
navian flora, which overspread the lower grounds during
the first continental period, may have obtained         exclusive
                    * Antiquity of Man, pp. 282, 285.
                 IN THE     QUATERNARY   PERIOD.             417

possession of the only lands not covered with perpetual
snow.
   “Thirdly, a second continental period, when the bed of
the glacial sea, with its marine shells and erratic blocks, was
laid dry, and when the quantity of land equalled that of the
first period.”
   It is evident that such changes as these would require
a great lapse of time. Sir Charles Lyell admits that the
average change of 23 feet in a century is a purely arbitrary
and conjectural rate, and that there are cases        in which     a
change of as much as six feet in a century appears to have
taken place: still itis in his opinion probable that the rate
assumed in a century is, if any thing, above the average; and
in this I believe most geologists would be disposed to agree
with him. On this hypothesis the submergence of Wales,
to the extent of 1400 feet, would require 56,000 years; but
“taking Prof. Ramsay’s estimate of 800 feet more, that
elevation being required for the deposition of some of the
stratified drift, we must demand an additional period of
32,000   years, amounting     in all to 88,000;    and the same
time would be required for re-elevation of the tract to its
present height. But if the land rose in the second con-
tinental period no more than 600 feet above the present
NOVO SbIS bre a) ails would have taken another 24,000 years;
the whole of the grand oscillation, comprising the sub-
mergence and re-emergence, having taken, in round num-
bers, 224,000 years for its completion; and this, even if
there were no pause or stationary period, when the downward
movement ceased, and before it was converted into an up-
ward one.”
   To the geologist, however, these figures, large as they
are, will have no appearance of improbability. All the facts
of geology tend to indicate an antiquity of which we are
but beginning to form a dim idea.        Take, for instance, one
                                                    Ee
418                   GEOLOGICAL   TIME.

single formation—our well-known chalk.        This consists
entirely of shells and fragments of shells deposited at tho
bottom of an ancient sea, far away from any continent.
Such a progress as this must be very slow: probably we
should be much above the mark if we were to assume a rate
of deposition of ten inches in a century. Now the chalk
is more   than a thousand feet in thickness, and would have
required therefore more than 120,000 years for its forma-
tion. The fossiliferous beds of Great Britain, as a whole,
are more than 70,000 feet in thickness, and many which
with us measure only a few inches, on the continent expand
into strata of immense depth; while others of great im-
portance elsewhere are wholly wanting with us, for it is
evident that during all the different periods in which Great
Britain has been dry land, strata have been forming (as is,
for example, the case now) elsewhere, and not with us.
Moreover, we must remember that many of the strata now
existing have been formed at the expense of older ones;
thus all the flint gravels in the south-east of England have
been produced by the destruction of chalk. This again is
a very slow process. It has been estimated that a cliff 500
feet high will be worn away at the rate of an inch in a
century. This may seem a low rate, but we must bear in
mind that along any line of coast there are comparatively
few points which are suffering at one time, and that even on
those, when a fall of cliff has taken place, the fragments
serve as a protection to the coast until they have been
gradually removed by the waves. The Wealden Valley is
twenty-two miles in breadth, and on these data it has been
calculated that the denudation of the Weald must have
required more than 150,000,000 of years.
   There can be no doubt about the interest of these calcu-
lations, and they have also the great merit of giving some
definiteness to our ideas. We must not, however, attribute
                        GEOLOGICAL   TIME.                    419

to them a value which has been distinctly disclaimed eyen
by their authors. ‘Dans tous les cas,” says M. Morlot,
“il doit étre bien entendu que l’auteur n’expose le présent
calcul que comme une premiére imparfaite et hasardeuse
tentative, sans valeur absolue en elle-méme, tant qu'elle
maura pas été verifiée au moyen d’autres essais du méme
genre.”   Moreover, we must remember that these estimates
are brought forward not as a proof, but as a measure, of
antiquity. Our belief in the antiquity of man rests not on
any isolated calculations, but on the changes which have
taken place since his appearance ; changes in the geography,
in the fauna, and in the climate of Europe. Valleys have
been deepened, widened, and partially filled up again; caves
through which subterranean rivers once ran are now left
dry; even the configuration of land has been materially
altered, and Africa finally separated from Europe.
   Our climate has greatly changed for the better, and with
it the fauna has materially altered. In some cases, for
instance, in that of the hippopotamus and of the African
elephant, we may probably look to the diminution of food
and the presence of man as the main cause of their dis-
appearance ; the extinction of the mammoth, the Hlephas
antiquus, and the Ithinoceros tichorhinus, may possibly be
due to the same   influences;   but the retreat   of the reindeer
and the musk ox are probably in great measure          owing to
the change   of climate.    These and similar facts, though
they afford us no means of measurement, impress us with
a vague and overpowering sense of antiquity. All geolo-
gists, indeed, are now prepared to admit that man has
existed on our earth for a much longer period than was until
recently supposed to have been the case.
   But it may be doubted whether even geologists yet realize
the great antiquity of our race.
   «‘When speculations on the long series of events which
                            Bea
420                REPORTED     EVIDENCE     OF MAN

occurred in the glacial and post-glacial periods are indulged
in,” says Sir C. Lyell*, “the imagination is apt to take
alarm at the immensity of the time required to interpret the
monuments of these ages, all referable to the era of existing
species. In order to abridge the number of centuries which
would otherwise be indispensable, a disposition is shown by
many to magnify the rate of change in pre-historic times, by
investing the causes which have modified the animate and
the inanimate world with extraordinary and excessive energy.
    Bo RE? We of the living generation, when called upon
to make grants of thousands of centuries, in order to explain
the events of what is called the modern period, shrink
naturally at first from making what seems so lavish an ex-
penditure of past time.”
    That man existed in Western Europe during the period
 of the Mammoth and the Rhinoceros tichorhinus, no longer,
I think, admits of a doubt; but when we come to Pliocene,
and still more to Miocene, times, the evidence is less conclusive.
  M. Desnoyers+ has called attention to some marks noticed
by him on bones found in the upper pliocene beds of St.
Prest, and belonging to the Elephas meridionalis, Rhinoceros
leptorhinus, Hippopotamus major, several species of deer
(including the gigantic Megaceros carnutorum, Laugel), and
two species of Bos. M.Desnoyers has examined a consider-
able number    of these bones, and he comes              to the conclu-
sion “que les traces d’incisions, . . . . en un mot, que des
traces tout a fait analogues 4 celles que produiraient les
outils de silex tranchants 4 point plus ou moins aigué, &
bords plus ou moins dentelés, se voyaient sur la plupart de
ces ossements.”
   Among the bones of the deer were several crania, all of
which have been broken in one way, namely, by a violent
              * Address to the Brit. Ass. 1864, p. 21, Bath.
              + Comptes Rendus.     June 8, 1863.
                      IN THE      PLIOCENE   PERIOD.                42)

blow given on the skull between, and at the base of, the
horns. M. Steenstrup has noticed fractures of this kind in
other less ancient skulls of ruminants, and at the present
day some of the northern tribes treat the skulls of ruminants
in the same manner. Through the courtesy of M. Desnoyers,
I have had the opportunity of examining some of the
scratched bones from Saint Prest. The markings fully bear
out the description given by him, and some of them at least
appear to me to be probably of human origin; at the same
time, and in the present state of our knowledge, I am not
prepared to say that there is no other manner in which they
might have been produced. At the same place that indefa-
tigable archeologist, M. Abbé Bourgeois, has more recently
discovered worked flints, including flakes, awls, and scrapers,
but unfortunately there is some doubt as to the stratigraphical
relations of the bed in which they occurred*.
  At the meeting in Spezzia, of the “ Societé Italienne des
Sciences   Naturelles,’        Prof.   G. Ramorino     exhibited   some
bones cf Pliocene Age, said to bear marks of knives. These
specimens are in the museum at Genoa, but I have not
myself seen themt.
   Some archeologists even consider that we have proof of the
presence of man in miocene times. Thus M. Bourgeois has
found in the calcaire de Beauce, near Pontlevoy, many flints
which have been subjected to the action of heat, and others
which he considers to show undoubted marks of human work-
manship.    On the former point there is still some diffe-
rence of opinion, and the action of fire, though it points
strongly to, does not absolutely prove, the presence of man.
These interesting specimens were found in a stratum, which
contains the remains of Acerotherium, an extinct animal allied
to the Rhinoceros, and beneath a bed which contains the

            * Mat. pour l’Histoire de I'Homme, 1867, p. 17.
            + 1. c. vol. ii. p. 41.
422                           MIOCENE    MAN.

Mastodon, Dinotherium, and Rhinoceros.                  M. Bourgeois gives
the following section * :—
       Vegetable.carth: sien            Grey    rien         a USD
                ”       », mixed with quaternary
                pebbles     . . .            ee                   20
          Faluns, with shells and ated bones
                of Rhinoceros,      Mastodon,          and
            Dinotherianic, se atat us         :      60
        Compact calcaire de Beauce inte
             rated by. Pholas..   mesqus “ale ps     30
        Marly calcaire de Beauce . . . . 6
        Layer containing worked flints . .           60
   In the Matériaux pour |’ Histoire de ’Homme for 1870 +,
is a figure of a flint flake found by M. Tardy in the miocene
beds of Aurillac (Auvergne), together with the remains of
Dinotherium giganteum, and Machairodus latidens. Not
having visited the locality, I cannot, of course, express any
opinion as to the age of the bed in which this interesting
specimen was        discovered,    but from the figure given there
can be no reasonable doubt that it is of human workmanship.
M. Delaunay also has called attention to a rib, found by him
at Pouancé (Maine et Loire) and belonging to a well-known
miocene species, the Halitherium fossilet ; this bears certain
marks which closely resemble those which might have been
made by flint implements. M. Harny gives a good figure
of this interesting specimen. Whether, however, we have con-
clusive evidence of the existence of man in miocene times is
a question on which           archeologists       are still of different
opinions.
   Sir Charles Lyell himself thinks that we may expect to
find the remains of man in the pliocene strata, but there he
draws the line, and says that in miocene time, “had some
      * Mat. pour l’Histoire de Homme, 1869, p. 297.          too. p. Ge.
      { Précis de Paléontologie Humaine, p. 58,
                         MIOCENE MAN.                        423

other rational being, representing man, then flourished, some
signs of his existence could hardly have escaped unnoticed,
i the shape of implements of stone or metal, more frequent
and more durable than the osseous remains of any of the
mammalia.””
   Without expressing any opinion as to the mental condition
of our ancestors in the miocene period, it seems to me evident
that the argument derived from the absence of human
remains, whatever may be its value, is as applicable to
pliocene as to miocene times. But those who have learnt
geology at the feet of Sir Charles Lyell, and look up to him
as their master in the science, will be the least able to agree
with him on this point, for the imperfection of the geological
record has hitherto been urged upon us almost as strongly by
Sir C. Lyell as by Mr. Darwin. It is true that few of our
existing species, or even genera, have as yet been found in
miocene strata; but if man constitutes a separate family of
mammalia, as he does in the opinion of the highest authori-
ties, then, according to all paleontological analogies, he must
have had representatives in miocene times. We need not,
however, expect to find the proofs in Hurope; our nearest
relatives in the animal kingdom are confined to hot, almost
to tropical climates, and it is in such countries that we are
most likely to find the earliest traces of the human race.
                                 424




                        CHAPTER            XIII.

                          MODERN SAVAGES.

     LTHOUGH our knowledge of ancient times has of late
       years greatly increased, it is still very imperfect, and
we cannot afford to neglect any possible source of informa-
tion. It igs evident that history cannot throw much lght
on the early condition of man, because the discovery—or, to
speak more correctly, the use—of metal has in all cases pre-
ceded that of writing.       Hven as regards the Age of Bronze
 we derive little information from History, and although,
 as we have seen, the Age of Stone is vaguely alluded to in
 the earliest European writers, their statements have gene-
-rally been looked upon as imaginative rather than historical ;
and contain, indeed, little more than the bare statement that
there was a time when metal was unknown.
   Nor will tradition supply the place of history. At best
it 1s untrustworthy and short-lived.  Thus in 1770 the New
Zealanders had no recollection of Tasman’s visit*. Yet this
took place in 1643, less than 130 years before, and must
have been to them an event of the greatest possible impor-
tance and interest. In the same way the North American
Indians soon lost all tradition of De Soto’s expedition,
although “by its striking incidents it was so well suited to
impress the Indian mind +.”
   Even as regards events which are contemporary, or nearly
so, we    find that the accounts           given by savages become
  * Cook’s First Voyage round the World.    Hawkesworth’s Voyages, vol. il.
p. 388.                      + Schoolcraft’s Indian Tribes, vol. ii. p. 12.
                THE     UNTRUSTWORTHINESS        OF TRADITION.                 425

 rapidly distorted.           Thus Nilsson* quotes the account given
 by Mackenzie, that the Esquimaux described the English
 to him as being giants, with wings, who could kill with a
 glance of their eye, and swallow a whole beaver at a mouth-
 fal.    So also Colonel Dalton tells us that “ though the Kols
 have known the English for little more than half a cen-
 tury, they assign to them a most honourable place in their
 genesis. The Assam Abors and Garrows do the samet.”
    The Bungogees and Pankhos (Hill tribes of Chittagong)
 believe that their ancestors came out of a cave in the earth,
 under the guidance of a chief named Tlandrokpah, who was
 so powerful that he married the daughter of the Deity, to
 whom he presented his gun.       “You can still hear the
 gun, the thunder is the sound of itt.”               In this case the men-
 tion of the gun shows that the tradition must be of modern
 origin. Again, Speke says, “I found that the Waganda
 have the same absurd notion here as the Wanyambo have in
 Karagté, of Kamrasi’s supernatural power in being able to
 divide the waters of the Nile in the same manner as Moses
 did the Red Sea§.”
    Mansfield Parkyns relates how it was firmly believed in
the remote parts of Abyssinia, that the German missionaries
had, “in the course of only a few days, perforated a tunnel
all the way (from Adowa) to Massowa, on the coast of the
Red Sea, a distance of above a hundred and fifty miles,
whence they were to obtain large supplies of arms, ammu-
nition, ete. ||.”
   Baker        also,in his Nile Tributaries, says: “ The conver-
   * The Stone Age. English edition,         { Capt. Lewin, The Hill Tribes of
p. 209.                                    Chittagong.  Calcutta, 1869, p. 95.
  + Trang. Eth. Soc.       New Ser. vol.   See also Lichtenstein’s Travels, vol. i.
vi. p. 38.    See also Juichtenstein’s     p. 290.
Travels, vol. i. p. 290; James’ Expe-         § Speke, p. 438. See also p. 504.
dition to the Rocky Mountains, vol.           || Life in Abyssinia, p. 151.
iii. p. 247;   and    Campbell,   Trars.     q Le. p. 129, 130,
Ethn. Soc. 1870, p. 335.
426        THE UNTRUSTWORTHINESS      OF TRADITION.

sation of the Arabs is in the exact style of the Old Testa-
ment. The name of God is coupled with every trifling
incident in life, and they believe in the continual        action
of Divine special interference. Should a famine afflict the
country, it is expressed in the stern language of the Bible,
‘The Lord has sent a grievous famine upon the land ;’ or,
‘The Lord called for a famine, and it came upon the land.’
Should their cattle fall sick, it is considered to be an afflic-
tion by Divine command; or should the flocks prosper and
multiply particularly during one season, the prosperity is
attributed to special interference. Nothing can happen in
the usual routine of daily life, without a direct connexion
with the hand of God, in the Arab’s belief.
    “This striking similarity to the description of the Old
 Testament is exceedingly interesting to a traveller when
 residing among these curious and original people. With
the Bible in one hand, and these unchanged tribes before
the eyes, there is a thrilling illustration of the sacred record :
the past becomes the present, the veil of three thousand
years is raised, and the living picture is a witness to the
exactness of the historical description. At the same time,
there is a light thrown upon many obscure passages in the
Old Testament by the experience of the present customs and
figures of speech of the Arabs, which are precisely those
that were practised at the periods described. I do not
attempt to enter upon a theological treatise, therefore it
is unnecessary to allude specially to these particular points.
The sudden and desolating arrival of a flight of locusts, the
plague, or any other unforeseen calamity, is attributed to
the anger of God, and is believed to be an infliction of
punishment upon the people thus visited, precisely as the
plagues of Egypt were specially inflicted upon Pharaoh and
the Egyptians.  Should the present history of the country
be written by an Arab scribe, the style of the description
                 TENDENCY   TO   THE   MARVELLOUS.             427

would be purely that of the Old Testament, and the various
calamities or the good fortunes that have in the course of
nature befallen both the tribes and individuals, would be
recounted either as special visitations of Divine wrath, or
blessings for good deeds performed.          If in a dream a par-
ticular course of action is suggested, the Arab believes that
God has spoken and directed him. The Arab scribe, or
historian would describe the event as the ‘voice of the Lord’
(Kallam el Allah) having spoken unto the person; or, that
God appeared to him in a dream and ‘said’ Thus much
allowance would be necessary on the part of a European
reader for the figurative ideas and expressions of the people.’
   Although, then, traditions and myths are of great im-
portance, and indirectly throw much light on the condition
of man in ancient times, we must not expect to learn
much directly from them. At any rate, as regards the
Stone Age in Europe both history and tradition are silent,
and here, as in all long civilized countries, stone weapons
and arrow-heads are regarded as thunderbolts or “ Elfin”
arrows.
   Deprived, therefore, as regards this period, of any assistance
from history, but relieved at the same time from the em-
barrassing interference of tradition, the archeologist is free
to follow the methods which have been so successfully pursued
in geology—the rude bone and stone implements of bygone
ages being to the one what the remains of extinct animals
are to the other. The analogy may be pursued even farther
than this. Many mammalia which are extinct in Europe
have representatives still living in other countries. Much
light is thrown on our fossil pachyderms, for instance,
by the species which        still inhabit some       parts of Asia
and Africa; the secondary marsupials are illustrated by
their existing representatives in Australia and South
America; and in the same manner, if we wish clearly to
428             NO EVIDENCE   OF DEGRADATION.

understand the antiquities of Hurope, we must compare them
with the rude implements and weapons still, or until lately,
used by the savage races in other parts of the world. In
fact, the Van   Diemaner   and   South American    are   to the
antiquary what the opossum and the sloth are to the geo-
logist.
   A certain space, therefore, devoted to the consideration of
the modern savages will not be out of place in this work ;
and though it would require volumes to do justice to the
subject, still it may be possible to bring together a certain
number of facts which will throw light on the ancient re-
mains found in Hurope, and on the condition of the early
races which inhabited our continent.      In order, however,
to limit the subject as much as possible, I propose, with one
 exception, to describe only the “ non-metallic savages” (if
 such an expression may. be permitted) and even of these,
 only some of the most instructive, or of those which have
been most carefully observed by travellers.
   It is a common opinion, that savages are, as a general
rule, only the miserable remnants of nations once more
civilized; but although there are some well-established cases
of national decay, there is no scientific evidence which would
justify us in asserting that this applies to savages in general.
No doubt there are instances in which nations, once pro-
gressive, have not only ceased to advance in civilization, but
have even fallen back. Still, if we compare the accounts of
early travellers with the state of things now existing, we
shall find no evidence of any general degradation. The
Australians, Bushmen, and Fuegians lived when first observed
almost exactly as they do now.      In some savage tribes we
even find traces of improvement ; the Bachapins, when visited
by Burchell, had just introduced the art of working in iron;
the largest erection in Tahiti was constructed by the genera-
tion living at the time of Captain Cook’s visit, and the prac-
                       PROGRESS AMONG SAVAGES.                              42.9
                                                                              “a



tice   of cannibalism       had    been      recently       abandoned* ; the
largest Mexican temple was built only six years before the
discovery of America; in the north of Australia, McGillivray
tells us that the rude bark canoes which were formerly in
general use, have been quite superseded by those dug out of
the trunk of a tree; again, outriggers are said to have been
recently adopted by the Andaman Islanders; and if certain
races, as for instance some of the American tribes, have
fallen back, this has, I think, been due, less to any inherent
tendency than to the injurious effect of European influence.
Moreover,     if the Cape of Good Hope, Australia, New Zea-
land, etc., had ever been inhabited by a race of men more
advanced than those whom we are in the habit of regarding
as the aborigines, some evidence of this would surely have
remained ; and this not being the case, none of our travellers
having observed any ruins, or other traces of a more advanced
civilization, there does not appear to be any sufficient reason
for supposing that these miserable beings are at all inferior
to the ancestors from whom they are descended.

                              The Hottentots.

   Speaking generally, we may say that the use of metal
has been long known throughout Hurope, Asia, and Africa,
while in America, in Australia, and in the Oceanic Islands,
all implements and weapons were, until within the last three
hundred years, made of wood, bone, stone, or other similar
materials.
   The    semi-civilized nations          of Central America          formed,
indeed, a striking exception to the rule, since they were
acquainted with the use of bronze. The North American
Indians also had copper hatchets, but these were simply

  * Forster, Observations made dur-       Seealso Hillis, Polynesian Researches,
ing a Voyage round the World, p. 327.     vol. ii. p. 29.
430                       YHE   HOTTENTOTS.

hammered into shape, without the assistance of heat.                Here,
therefore, we seem to get a glimpse of the manner in which
our ancestors may have acquired the knowledge of metal.
No doubt the possession of iron generally marks a great
advance in civilization; still the process is very gradual,
and there are some nations which, though provided with
metal implements, are nevertheless but little removed from a
state of barbarism.
  Thus the Hottentots, who were not only acquainted with
the use, but even with the manufacture,             of iron, and who
possessed large numbers of sheep and cattle, were yet in
many respects among the most disgusting of savages.         Even
 Kolben, who generally takes a favourable view of them,
 admits that they are, in his opinion, the filthiest people in
 the world*. We might go farther, and say the filthiest
 animals; I think no species of mammal could be fairly
 compared with them in this respect. Their bodies were
 covered with grease, their clothes were never washed, and
 their hair was loaded “from day to day with such a quantity
of soot and fat, and it gathers so much dust and other filth,
which they leave to clot and harden in it, for they never
cleanse it, that it looks like a crust or cap.of black mortar+.”
They wore a skin over the back, fastened in front. They
carried this as long as they lived, and were buried in it
when they died. Their only other garment was a square
piece of skin, tied round the waist by a string, and left to
hang down in front. In winter, however, they sometimes
used acap. For ornaments they wore rings of iron, copper,
ivory, or leather. The latter had the advantage of serving
for food m bad times.
   Their huts were generally oval, about fourteen feet by
ten in diameter, and seldom more than four or five in

      * Kolben’s History of the Cape of Good Hope, vol. i. p. 47.
                         + Kolben, l.c. p. 188.
                        DRESS.        FOOD.      WEAPONS.                        431

height. They were made of sticks and mats. The sticks
were fastened into the ground at both ends, or, if not long
enough, two were placed opposite to one another, and secured
together at the top. One end of the hut was left open to
form the door. The mats were made of bulrushes and flags
dried in the sun, and so.closely fitted together that only the
heaviest rain could penetrate them*.        “ With respect to
household furniture,” says Thunberg?+, “they have little or
none. The same dress that covers a part of their body by
day, serves them also for bedding at night.”                       Their victuals
are boiled in leathern sacs and water, by means of heated
stones, but sometimes in earthen potst. Milk is kept in
leathern     sacs, bladders         of animals, and baskets               made     of
platted rushes, perfectly watertight. These, a tobacco pouch
of skin, a tobacco pipe of stone or wood, and their weapons,
constitute the whole catalogue of their effects. According
to Kolben,       they sometimes             broiled their meat, sometimes
boiled it in blood, to which they often added milk; “ this
they look on as a glorious dish.” They were, however,
both filthy and careless about their cookery, and the meat
was often eaten half putrid, and more than half ray.
   Their weapons consisted of bows and poisoned arrows,
spears, javelins       or assagais,         stones, and       darting-sticks       or
“kirris,””? about three feet long and an inch thick. With
these weapons they were very skilful, and feared not to
attack the elephant, the rhinoceros, or even the lion. Large
animals were also sometimes killed in pitfalls, from six to
eight feet deep, and about four feet in diameter.       They
fixed a strong pointed stake in the middle. “Into this hole
an elephant falling with his fore-feet (it is not of dimensions
to receive his whole body), he is pierced in the neck and
  * Thunberg,    Pinkerton’s Travels,           t This, however,   they appear     to
vol. xvi., p. 38; Kolben,    l.c. p. 221;     have learnt from the Huropeans.
Sparrman, vol. i., p. 196.                               p.
                                                § Thunberg,         141;Kolben,p.203;
  + Page 141.                                 Harris, Wild Sports of Africa, p. 142.
432                       METALLURGY.

breast with the stake and there held securely *,” for the
more he struggled the farther it penetrated. They caught
fish both with hooks and in nets.   They also ate wild fruits
and roots of various kinds, which, however, they did not
take the trouble to cultivate.
   For domestic animals the Hottentots had oxen, sheep, and
dogs. It might have naturally been supposed that oxen
were used in the same manner all over the world. They
seem evidently adapted either for draught or for food.
With the dog the case is different; we ourselves use him
in various ways, aud one feels therefore the less surprise at
the different services which he performs for different races
of savages. But even with regard to cattle the same was
the case; besides what we may call their normal uses, the
Veddahs, or wild inhabitants of Ceylon, used oxen in hunt-
ing; and the Hottentots trained some to serve as what we
may call sheep-oxen, or cow-oxen,—that is to say, to guard
and manage the flocks and herds,—and others as war-oxen,
a function which might have been considered as opposed to
the whole character of the beast, but in which, heverthe-
less, they appear to have been very useful.
   The Hottentots of late years not only used iron weapons,
but even made such for themselves. The ore was smelted
in the following mannert: “They make a hole in a raised
ground, large enough to contain a good quantity of iron-
stones, which are found here and there in plenty in the
Hottentot countries. In this hole they melt out the iron
from the ore. About a foot and a half from this hole, upon
the descent, they make another, something less. This is the
receiver of the melted iron, which runs into it by a narrow
channel they cut from one hole to the other. Before they
put the ironstones into the hole where the iron is to be
smelted out of them, they make a fire in the hole, quite up
      * Kolben, p. 250.                 t+ Kolben, l.c. p. 239.
                          CUSTOMS.        CHARACTER.                             433

to the mouth of it, in order to make the earth about it
thoroughly hot. When they suppose the earth about it ig
well heated, they fill the hole almost up with ironstones,
They then make a large fire over the stones, which they
supply from time to time with fuel, till the iron is melted and
all of it is ran into the receiver. As soon as the iron in the
receiver is cold, they take it out, and break it to pieces with
stones. These pieces the Hottentots, as they have occasion,
heat in other fires, and with stones beat ’em out and shape
’em to weapons.          ‘They rarely make any thing else of iron.”
   The Hottentot          customs, some            of which        are extremely
curious, are fully described by Thunberg*, Kolben+, Corkt,
Sparrman§, and other travellers.                    Whether the Hottentots
can be said to have had any religion||, depends upon the
exact meaning we attach to the word. Though they seem to
have had some notion of a Deity, even Kolben admits that they
had not “any institution of worship.” The older writers,
indeed, consider certain dances as being religious ceremonies.
This was stoutly denied by the natives themselves, in spite
of which Kolben assures us that they were “acts of religion,”
adding candidly, “let the Hottentots say what they will.”
They are very fond of smoking, and are great drunkards.
It is only fair to say that Kolben gives them a good character
for integrity, chastity, fidelity, and liberality, assurmg                        us
that they “are certainly the most friendly, the most liberal,
and the most benevolent people to one another that ever
appeared      upon    earth**.”          Other      travellers     also speak of
them in very high terms}+.                At the same time it is difficult
  * |. c. pp. 141, 142.                     ton’s Voyages, vol. ii. p.153 so also,
  + Pp. 118, 115, 118, 121, 153, 252.       Harris, Wild Sports of Africa, p. 160;
  { Hawkesworth’s Voyages, vol.             Sparrman, vol. i. p. 207.
ale, Peo Le                                    { Sparrman, vol. i. p. 212; Kol-
  § Vol. i. p. 357.                         ben, 1. c.
  || Thunberg, 1. c. p.141, etc.; Kol-           #* Lo. p. 834.
ben, pp. 37, 93, etc. Beeckman thought           ++ See, for instance, Philips’ South
they had no religion at all.   Pinker-      Africa, pp. 4, 5, 6.
                                                                    et
434                           THE BUSHMEN.

to see how these statements can be reconciled with the ad-
mitted fact that, as soon as any man or woman is so enfeebled
by old age that he or she is unable to work, and can “no
longer ”—-I am quoting from Kolben himself—“ be of any
manner of service in any thing, they are thrust out of the
society and confined to a solitary hut at a considerable
distance from         the kraal, there, with a small stock          of pro-
visions placed within their reach, but without any one to
comfort or assist ’em, to die either of age or hunger, or be
devoured by some wild beast*.”’ This, it must be remem-
bered, was         no exceptional atrocity, but a general custom,
and applied to the rich as well as the poor, for if an old
man had property it was taken away from him. (Infanticide,
 again, was very common among them, and was not regarded
 as a crime. Gurls were generally the victims, and if a
 woman had twins, the ugliest of them was almost always
 exposed or buried alive. This was done with the consent of
 “the whole kraal, which generally allows it without taking
 much pains to look into itt.’ The poverty and the hard-
 ships which they had to undergo may perhaps plead as some
excuse for these two unnatural customs.
    The Bushmen resembled the Hottentots in many things,
but were even more uncivilized. They had no knowledge
of metallurgy, no domestic animals, and no canoes. They
frequently stole the cattle of their more advanced neigh-
bours, but always killed and ate them as quickly as possible.
Their principal weapons were bows and poisoned arrows.
Lichtenstein asserts that they had no namest, but this was
probably an error. Bleek regards them as the lowest of
human races, and Haeckel even goes so far as to assert that
they seem “to the unprejudiced comparative student of


 * 1c. p. 321.                          t Lichtenstein’s Travels in South-
 t+ lic. p. 144.                      ern Africa, vol. i. p. 192.
                              THE VEDDAHS.                              435
nature, to manifest a closer connexion with the gorilla and
chimpanzee than with a Kant or a Goéthe*.”’

                              The Veddahs.

   The Veddahs, or wild tribes who inhabit the interior of
Ceylon, have been described by Knox+, Tennantt, and
Bailey§. They live in huts very rudely formed of boughs
and bark, and cultivate small patches of chena, but subsist
principally on honey and the produce of the chase. Their
weapons consist of axes and bows and arrows. With the
latter they are not very skilful, as they pursue only the
larger game, and the art of hunting consists in creeping
close up to their prey and taking it unawares.    They are
very good deer-stalkers, and, besides excellent dogs, have
also hunting buffaloes.        These are so trained that they are
easily guided by a string tied round the horn, and are used
at night. The buffalo feeds, the man crouches behind him,
and thus, unseen and unsuspected, steals upon his prey.
   They have no pottery, and their cooking is very primitive.
They wear scarcely any clothes, nothing in fact but a scrap
of dirty rag, supported in front by a string tied round the
waist. Perhaps the women’s cloth is a trifle larger than the
men’s, but that appears to be the only difference. They are
very dirty, and very small; the ordinary height of the men
being from four feet six to five feet one, and of the women
from four feet four to four feet eight.             Mr. Bailey thinks
that it would be impossible to conceive more barbarous
specimens of the human race. Davy even asserts that they
have no names, and do not bury the dead.

  * On the Origin of Language, by         t Ceylon.
W. H. J. Bleek. Edited by Dr. H.          § Transactions of the Ethnological
Haeckel, pp. 4, 5.                     Society. New Ser. Vol. ii. p. 278.
  + An Historical Relationof Ceylon.   See also Davy’s Ceylon.
1681,
                                   rfi2
A36                    THE ANDAMAN          ISLANDERS.

   They have, however, one remarkable peculiarity which it
would be unfair to omit.                They are kind, affectionate, and
constant to their wives; abhor polygamy, and have a proverb
that “ Death alone can separate husband and wife.” In this
they are very unlike their more civilized neighbours*. An
intelligent Kandyan chief, with whom Mr. Bailey visited
these Veddahs, was “ perfectly scandalized at the utter bar-
barism of living with only one wife, and never parting until
separated by death.” It was, he said, “just like the wan-
deroos”’ (monkeys).          Even in their marriage relations, how-
ever, the Veddahs cannot altogether be commended, as it is
—or was until lately—very usual with them for a man to
marry his younger sister. This is the more remarkable, as
marriage with an elder sister seemed to them as horrible as
it does to us.


                      The Andaman          Islanders.

   The Mincopies, or inhabitants of the Andaman                        Islands,
have been described         by Dr. Mouatt+, Sir H. Belchert, and
Prof. Owen||, who considers that they “are, perhaps, the
most primitive, or lowest          in the scale of civilization, of the
human race.” Their huts consist of four posts, the two
front ones six to eight feet high, the back ones only one or
two feet. They are open at the sides, and covered with a
roof of bamboo, or a few palm-leaves bound tightly together.
The Mincopies live chiefly on fruit, mangroves, and shell-
fish.   Sometimes, however, they kill the small pigs, which
run wild in the jungle.
   They have single-tree canoes, hollowed out with a p-shaped
  * It ig only fair to add that the          t Belcher, Trans. Ethn. Soc. New
Kandyans are said to have much im- __ Ser. vol. v. p. 40.
proved in this respect of late years.         || Transactions of the Hthnological
  t Adventures     and    Researches       Society. New Ser. vol. ii. p. 34.
among the Andaman Islanders,
                        THE ANDAMAN     ISLANDERS.                    437

axe, assisted probably by the action of fire. They are ac-
quainted with the use of outriggers, which, however, appear
to have been of recent introduction, as they are not alluded
to by the earlier writers*.        Their arrows and spears are now
generally tipped with iron and glass, which they obtain from
wrecks, and which have replaced bone. Their harpoons, like
those of so many other savages, have a movable head, and
a long cord by which this may be held when fixed in the
vietimt.   They are very skilful with the bow, and “make
practice at forty or fifty yards with unerring certainty
                                                      t,”
though their arrows have no feathers. Their nets are made
with great ingenuity and neatness. They have no pottery,
but use either shells or pieces of bamboo to hold water.
They kill fish by harpoons, or with small hand-nets they take
any that are left by the tide, and it is even said that they are
able to dive and catch them with their hands§.
   They cover themselves with mud, and also tattoo, but wear
no clothes. Indeed they appear to be entirely without any
sense of shame, and many of their habits are like those of
beasts. They are stated to have no idea of a Supreme Being,
no religion, nor any belief ina future state of existence. After
death, the corpse is buried in a sitting posture. When it is
supposed to be entirely decayed, the skeleton is dug up, and
each of the relations appropriates a bone. In the case of a
married man, the widow takes the skull and wears it sus-
pended by a cord round her neck||. It forms a very con-
venient box for small articles.        Marriage, however, only lasts
until the child is born and weaned, when, according to Lieut.
St. John, as quoted by Sir EH. Belcher, the man and woman
generally separate, each seeking a new partner 4.

  * Monatt, 1. c. p. 317.                § M ouatt, 1. c. pp. 310, 333.
  + Mouatt, I. c. p. 326.                || Mouatt, 1. c. p. 327. Beleher,
  t Belcher, Trans. Ethn. Soc.   New   l.c. p.
Ser. vol. v. p. 49.                       q 1.
438                             THE AUSTRALIANS.

  They have no dogs, nor any domestic animals,                               unless,
indeed, their poultry may be regarded as such.


                                 The Australians.

   Throughout the whole continent of Australia the aborigines
were remarkably similar in physical appearance, im character,
and in general habits. They were, in some respects, scarcely,
if at all, farther advanced than those of the Andaman Islands.
The “houses” observed by Captain Cook “at Botany Bay,
where they were best, were just high enough for a man to sit
upright in; but not large enough for him to extend himself
in his whole length in any direction; they were built with
pliable rods about as thick as a man’s finger, in the form of |
an oven, by sticking the two ends into the ground, and then
covering them with palm leaves and broad pieces of bark ; the
door is nothing but a large hole at one end.” Eyre also gives
a very similar description of those observed by him*. Further
north, where the climate was warmer, the dwellings were
even less substantial, and being comparatively open on one
side, scarcely deserve even the name of huts, and were little
more than a protection against the wind. Finally, the natives
observed by Dampier near C. Levéque, on the north-west
coast,       seem   to have had no houses               at all.     Round        their
dwelling-places Captain Cook observed “ vast heaps of shells,
the fish of which we suppose had been their food+.” Captain
Grey also describes similar shell moundst, some of which
covered quite half an acre, and were as much as ten feet
high. They seem, however, to have been first noticed by
Dampier§.

   * Discoveries
         in Central Australia,                  tlc.    vol. i. p. 110.      See also
 vol. ii. p. 800.                             King’s Australia, vol. i. p. 87.
   + First     Voyage,   vol.     ii.   Dp.     § Pinkerton’s     Voyages,    vol.   i
 598.                                         p. 478.
                             HOUSES.     FOOD.                          439

   The food of the Australian savages differs much in dif-
ferent parts of the continent. Speaking generally, it may be
said to consist of various roots, fruits, fungi, shell-fish, frogs,
snakes, honey, grubs, moths, birds, birds’ eggs, fish, turtles,
dog, kangaroo, and sometimes of seal and whale*.               The
kangaroo, however, forms.only an occasional luxury, nor are
the natives, so far as lam aware, able to kill whales for them-
selves, but when one is washed on shore it is a real godsend
to them.    Fires are immediately lit to give notice of the joyful
event.     Then they rub themselves all over with blubber, and
anoint their favourite wives in the same way; after which
they cut down through the blubber to the beef, which they
sometimes eat raw and sometimes broil on pointed sticks.
As other natives arrive they “fairly eat their way into the
whale, and you see them climbing in and about the stinking
carcase, choosing titbits.” For days “they remain by the
carcase, rubbed from head to foot with stinking blubber,
gorged to repletion with putrid meat—out of temper from
indigestion, and therefore engaged in constant frays—suffer-
ing from a cutaneous disorder by high feeding—and alto-
gether a disgusting spectacle. There is no sight in the
world,” Captain Grey adds, “‘ more revolting than to see a
young and gracefully-formed native girl stepping out of the
carcase of a putrid whale.” The Australians also mash up
bones and suck out the fat contained in them. Like other
savages, they are excessively fond of fatty substances.
   In a cave on the north-eastern coast, Mr. Cunningham
observed certain “tolerable. figures of sharks, porpoises,
turtles, lizards, trepang, starfish, clubs, canoes, water-gourds,
and some quadrupeds which were probably intended to
represent kangaroos and dogs.”            The natives round Sydney

  * Grey’s Explorations in North-      Voyage of H.M.S. Rattlesnake, vol. i.
West and Western Australia, p. 263;    p. 148.
Eyre, vol. ii. p. 251; McGillivray’s
440                     ROCK ENGRAVINGS.           CANOES.

also frequently drew upon the rocks                    “various figures of
fish, clubs, swords, animals, and branches of trees, not con-
temptibly represented*.”             Other tribes are very deficient in
art, and according to Mr. Oldfield are “quite unable to
realize the most vivid artistic representations. On bemg
shown a large coloured engraving of an aboriginal New
Hollander, one declared it to be a ship, another a kangaroo,
and so on; not one of a dozen identifying the portrait as
having any connexion with himself+.”                    It is not, however,
quite clear to me that they were not poking fun at Mr.
Oldfield.
   On the north-eastern coasts they use canoes made from the
trunks of trees, each canoe being formed from a single trunk,
probably hollowed by fire. “They are about fourteen feet
long, and being very narrow, are fitted with an outriggert.”
Farther south the canoes were nothing but a piece of bark,
tied together at the ends and kept open in the middle by
small bows of wood.            The western tribes had no canoes$,
owing, according to King'||, to the absence of large timber].
Instead ofa boat they used a log of wood, on which they sat
astride, with a bit of bark in each hand, which served as a
paddle. Some tribes fasten four or five mangrove stems
together so as to make a small float or raft. The natives
observed by Dampier were even worse off in this respect;
they had “no boats, canoes, or bark logs.” Yet they
dwelt on the shore, lived principally on fish, and swam about
from island to island. The Western Australians, according
to Jukes, had neither boats nor rafts, “and the islands close
  * King, vol. ii. p. 26; Grey, vol.i.     § Cook’s     First   Voyage,   vol. iii.
p. 259; Collings, p. 381.                p. 643.
  + Oldfield   on the Aborigines    of     | 1. c. vol. i. pp. 38. 48. 49; vol. ii.
Australia. Transactions of the Hth-      pp. 66. 69.
nological Society. New Ser. vol. iti.       4 In his view, however, of Careen-
   } Freycinet, Voyage autour du         ing Bay, the country appears to be
Monde, vol. ii. p. 705; Jukes, Voy-      well wooded.
age of H.M.S. Fly, ii. 243.
                              IMPLEMENTS.                                4A]

to the mainland had never been visited by them previously
to the founding of our colonies.”           So also the natives near
Sydney are said to have been unable to swim*. The absence
of canoes is very remarkable in a people whose habits were
so littoral, and whose food was derived almost entirely from
the sea.                       :
   The impiements of the Australians are very simple. They
have no knowledge of pottery, and carry water in skins or in
vessels made of bark. They are quite ignorant of warm
water, which strikes them with great amazement}.                        Some
of them carry “a small bag, about the size of a moderate
cabbage-net, which is made by laying threads loop within
loop, somewhat in the manner of knitting used by our ladies
to make purses. This bag the man carries loose upon his
back by a small string, which passes over his head; it gene-
rally contains a lump or two of paint and resin, some fish-
hooks and lines, a shell or two, out of which their hooks
are made, a few points of darts, and their usual ornaments,
which includes the whole worldly treasure of the richest
man among them.”
   A very similar inventory is given by Capt. Grey, who
adds, however, a flat stone to pound roots witht. They
have also stone hatchets, hammers, knives, pieces of flint,
and sticks to dig up roots.           The hammer is used for killing
seals or other animals, and for breaking open shell-fish.
The handle is from twelve to fifteen inches long, pomted at
one end, and having on each side at the other a hard stone
attached to the handle by a mass of gum. The knives (fig.
205, which represents a specimen presented to me by A. W.
Franks, Esq.) have a similar handle, and at the end a few
splinters of quartz or flint, arranged in a row and fastened
into a slit with gum in the same manner.
  * Voyage of the Novara.   English      + D’Urville, vol. i. p. 461.
Trans. vol. iii. p. 36.                  tlc. p. 266.
442,                            CLUBS.       SPEARS.

 Fic. 205.   Fie. 266.   Fic. 207,
                                       The natives of Botany Bay had
                                     fish-hooks, but no nets; on the con-
                                     trary, Capt.           Grey,   in   describing
                                     those of Western Australia, men-
                                     tions nets, but not hooks; Hyre also
                                     states that hooks were unknown in
                                     South     Australia,       while    nets   were
                                     used in hunting and as bags; lastly,
                                     the natives of the north-west, accord-
                                     ing to Dampier, had “no instru-
                                     ments to catch great fish.’ Those
                                     seen by King were also without
                                     hooks or nets*. Throughout the
                                     continent they were ignorant both
                                     of slings and bows and arrows. On
                                     the other hand they had spears,
                                     clubs (fig. 206), shields, and two
                                     very peculiar instruments, namely,
                                     the throwing-stick (fig. 207), and the
                                     boomerang (fig. 208). The spear,
                                     however, is their national weapon.
                                     These are about ten feet long, and
                                     very slender, made of cane or wood,
                                     tapering to a point, which is barbed.
                                     They are light, and one would scarcely
                                     be inclined to believe that they could
                                     be darted with any force: this, how-
                                     ever, is effected by the aid of the
                                     wummera, a straight flat stick, three
                                     feet in length, terminating                in a
  3             .                    socket of bone or hide, into which
 eirmaarie ie                        the end of the spear is fixed. The
                                     wummera is grasped in the right
                                 * 1. c. vol. ii. p. 187.
                             THROWING-STICKS.                             443
hand by three fingers (fig. 207), the spear lying between the
fore-finger and thumb.          Previous to throwing it, a tremulous
or vibratory motion is given to it,
                                                             Ere. 208,
which is supposed to add to the accu-
racy of the aim:            in projecting the
spear, the wummera is retained in the
hand, and the use of this simple con-
trivance adds greatly to the projectile
force given to the spear. They are
well practised in the use of these
weapons*.     Indeed, Capt. Grey tells
us that he has often seen them killa
pigeon with a spear at a distance of
thirty yards, and Captain Cook says
that “at a distance of fifty yards these
Indians were more sure of their mark
than we could be with asingle bullet+.”
The very long Australian spears are
not thrown with the wummera, but by
the strength of the arm alone. They
are of several kinds; those          used for
striking     turtle    or    dugong, have     a
movable,      barbed blade, which is at-
tached by a string to the butt-end of
the spear; when the turtle is struck,                        Boomerang.
the shaft becomes detached from the
point, which remains fixed in the body, while the shaft serves
partly to impede the motions, and partly as a float to indicate
the position of the turtlet.’ A similar weapon is used by
the Esquimaux, the Mincopies, the Fuegians, the Brazilian
Indians, and other savages. But the most extraordinary wea-

  * United States Explor. Exped.         + Hawkesworth’s Voyages, vol. iil,
volun p: 191:                         p. 636. See also Eyre, vol. il. p. 805.
  t Cook, 1. c. 642.                  McGillivray, vol. i. p. 147.
AAA                     THE   BOOMBRANG.

pon, and one quite peculiar to Australia, is the boomerang.
This is a curved stick, generally rounded on one side, flatter
on the other, about three feet long and two inches wide, by
three-quarters of an inch thick. At first sight it looks some-
thing like a very rude wooden sword. It was used both in
the chase and in war. “It is grasped at one end in the
right hand, and is thrown sickle-wise, either upwards into
the air, or downwards so as to strike the ground at some
distance from the thrower. In the first case it flies with a
rotatory motion, as its shape would indicate; after ascending
to a great height in the air, it suddenly returns in an ellipti-
cal orbit to a spot near its starting-point.           On throwing it
downwards on the ground, it rebounds in a straight line,
pursuing a ricochet motion untilit strikes the object at which
it is thrown.   Birds and small animals are killed with it, and
it is also used in killing ducks. The most singular curve
described by it is when thrown into the air, above the angle
of 45°; its flight is always then backwards, and the native
who throws it stands with his back, instead of his face, to
the object he is desirous of hitting*.” Mr. Merry, a gentle-
man who resided for some time in Australia, informs me that
on one occasion, m order to test the skill with which the
boomerang could be thrown, he offered a reward of sixpence
for every time the boomerang was made to return to the spot
from which it was thrown. He drew a circle of five or six
feet on the sand, and although the boomerang was thrown
with much force, the native succeeded in making it fall
within the circle five times out of twelve. Hyre also says
that this weapon is particularly useful in war, “as it is
almost impossible, even when it is seen in the air, to tell
which way it will go, or where descend. I once nearly had
my arm broken by a wangno, whilst standing within a yard
of the native who threw it, and looking out purposely for
                * United States Explor. Exped. 1. c.
                                         FIRE.                              445


 it*.”    Mr.    Oldfield+,     on   the         contrary,   speaks much    less
 favourably of the boomerang.     It is, he says, but little used
 in war, nor do the natives “ever attempt to kill a solitary
 bird or beast by means of” it. On the other hand, in
 swampy localities, where waterfowl “ congregate largely, the
 boomerang is of essential use; for a great number of them
 being simultaneously hurled into a large flock of waterfowl,
 ensures the capture of considerable numbers.”
    The Australians obtain fire by rubbing together two pieces’
 of wood. ‘The process, however, beg one of considerable
 labour, particularly in damp weather, great care is taken to
 prevent the fire, when once lighted, from becoming extin-
 guished. For this reason they often carry with them a cone
 of banksia, which burns slowly like amadou t.
   Mr. Stuart informs me that some of the northern tribes
had no means of relighting their fires, but if they ever be-
came simultaneously extinguished, used to go to a neigh-
bouring tribe for a fresh light. So also, according to M.
Angas, some of the western tribes “ have no means of kind-
ling fire. They say that it formerly came down from the
north,” and if it happens to go out they procure it again
from some neighbouring encampment §.
  According to Captain Cook, the Australians had “no idea
of traffic, nor,” he says,           “could        we    communicate   any to
them: they received the things which we gave them, but
never appeared to understand our signs when we required a
return. The same indifference which prevented them from
buying what we had; prevented them also from attempting
to steal: if they had         coveted       more,       they would have    been
less honest ||.”      In other parts, however, they are more ad-

   * 1. c. vol. ii. p. 308.                    § Savage Life and Scenes, vol. i.
   + Trans. Ethn. Soc. N. S. vol. iti,      p. 112.
p. 264.                                        || 1. c. p. 635.
   £ D’Urville, vol. i. p. 194,
446                  CLOTHES.     ORNAMENTS.      TATTOOING.

vanced in this respect. Various kinds of pigments, feathers,
shells, implements, and especially flints, are the principal
articles of barter.
   The Australians observed by Cook, Dampier, and Flinders
were entirely destitute of clothing, and their principal orna-
ment consisted of a bone, five or six inches long, and half an
inch thick, thrust through the cartilage of the nose. They
did not tattoo.     On the north-west coast, King observed
some of the natives with a very peculiar decoration. At
every three inches between the upper part of the chest and
the navel, the body was             scarified in horizontal bands, the
cicatrices of which were            at least an inch in diameter, and
raised half an inch from the body*.                Some of them fastened
to their hair, by means            of gum, teeth of kangaroos             or of
men, dogs’ tails, fish-bones, bits of wood, and other objects
which they regarded as ornamental. Frequently they wore
pieces of opossum, or kangaroo-skin—not for decency, how-
ever, but for warmth, and while hunting, as a protection from
thorns.         According       to D’Urville, however,        the natives        of
New South Wales did not think it decent that young chil-
dren should go quite naked +. McGillivray also mentions a
very similar idea at Moreton Bay. In many parts of Aus-
tralia the natives also paint themselves, red and white being
the favourite, or at least the commonest colours.                     The red
is laid on in broad patches, the white generally in stripes or
spots, a circle often being drawn round                   each eye.       Some
tribes, but not all, tattoo themselves            on the back and breast
In rows, rings, and semicircles. Among the females on the
Murray, the only ceremony of importance with which Eyre
was acquainted was that of scarring the back. Hyre indeed
calls it tattooing, but “ crimping” would, I think, be a more
correct expression. It takes place at the age of puberty, and
is extremely painful. The young woman kneels down and
  oP 1, © tah, 2D,                    + Voyage de l’Astralabe, vol. i. p. 471.
                    INITIATION    CEREMONIES.       GAMES.                447

places her head between the knees of a strong old woman,
and the operator, who is always a man, cuts the back with a
piece of shell or flint in rows of long, deep gashes from left
to right quite across the back, and completely up to the
shoulders.    The whole scene is most revolting, the blood
gushes out in torrents, and saturates the ground, while the
cries of the poor victim gradually rise into screams of agony.
Still the girls submit voluntarily, as a well-carved back is
much admired. The lads also generally have to undergo a
ceremony of initiation before they are permitted to rank as
men.   This sometimes consists in circumcision *, sometimes
in another almost incredible ceremonial+, or frequently in
punching out one of the front teeth.                   Other tribes have
peculiar and        distinctive    incisions, such as scars running
across the chest, circles on the shoulders, or various com-
binations of small dots.
   In the Adelaide district, according to Mr. Moorhouse,
there are five distinct stages of initiation, before the native
is admitted to all the privileges of aman. Yet the Austra-
lians cannot be said to have any form of government, nor
have any distinctions of rank, or recognized chiefs, ever been
found amongst them.
   The children have a game with string something like our
cat’s-cradle, but their principal amusements consist in learn-
ing to hunt, fish, etc. The elder people are fond of dances,
which may be divided into war-dances, hunting-dances, and
love-dances,—the two latter being most common. These gene-
rally take place when tribes meet, andare heldatnight. Their
songs are rude, with simple and generally extempore words.
   They have no systematized religion, nor any worship or
prayer ; but most of them believe in evil spirits, and all have
a great dread of the dark, and of witchcraft. In fact, they
believe that no one ever dies a natural death.
* Eyre, vol. ii. p. 332.   + Funditur usque ad urethram 4 parte infera penis.
4.4.8      SUPERSTITION.       MODES     OF BURIAL.      LANGUAGE.

   Captain Wilkes * describes an Australian funeral as fol-
lows. Almost immediately after death the corpse was ar-
ranged in a sitting posture, the knees bent up close to the
body, the head pressed forwards, and the whole body closely
tied up in a blanket. An oval grave was then dug, about six
feet long, three wide, and five deep. At the bottom was a
bed of leaves, covered with an opossum-skin cloak, and with
a stuffed bag of kangaroo-skin for a pillow ; on this the body
was laid with its implements and weapons.        Above the
corpse were strewn leaves and branches, and the hole was
then filled up with stones.   Finally, the earth which had
been removed was put over the whole, making a mound
eight or nine feet high. According to D’Urville the natives
of New South Wales bury the young, and burn the oldt.
Other tribes dispose of their dead in other ways; but none
of them were addicted to cannibalism as a matter of habit or
choice, although they were not unfrequently driven to it by
the scarcity of other food.
   No single fact, perhaps, gives us a more vivid idea of the
mental condition of these miserable savages, than the obser-
vation that they cannot count their own fingers—not even
those of one hand. Mr. Orawfurd + has examined the nume-
rals of thirty Australian languages, “and in no instance do
they appear to go beyond the number four.”        Mr. Scott
Nind, indeed, has given an account of the Australians of
King George’s Sound, to which a vocabulary is annexed,
containing the numerals, which are made to reach the num-
ber five. The term for this last unit, however, turns out to
be only the word “many.                In fact, the word “ five” con-
veys to them the idea of a great number, as a “hundred”
or a “thousand” does to us.
   Their language, moreover, contains “no generic terms as
* l.c. vol. ii. p. 195. Fitzroy, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 628.        + Vol. i. p. 472.
            t Transactions of Ethn. Soc. New Series, vol. ii. p. 84.
                              MARRIAGE.                         4.49

tree, fish, bird, etc., but only specific ones, as applied to each
particular variety *.’
   Polygamy is permitted; but a man who takes more than
two wives is generally looked upon as a selfish and unreason-
able person, nor is any man allowed to marry a woman of
his own name.    If a married man dies, his brother inherits
the wife, who “ goes to her second husband’s hut three days
after the death of her first.”
   Though they are apparently fond of their children, even
Eyre admits that there is little affection between husband
and wife. “After a long absence,” he says, ‘I have seen
natives upon their return, go to their camp, exhibiting the
most stoical indifference, never take the least notice of their
wives, but sit down, and act and look as if they had never
been out of the encampment +.”            Women, in fact, are re-
garded as mere property. There is no ceremony of mar-
riage, and chastity is entirely disregarded, wives being valued
principally for their services as slaves, and terribly ill-treated.
“No one,” says Eyre, “ever attempts to take the part
of a femalet.” Beauty only makes matters worse. “The
early life,” says Captain Grey, “of a young woman at all
celebrated for beauty is generally one continued series of
captivity to different masters, of ghastly wounds, rapid flights,
and bad treatment from other females§$,” jealous of her supe-
rior attractions.    Few women     in Australia, it is said, live to
thirty. Yet with all this lawlessness, and tyranny, marriage
is regulated by certain very curious prohibitions. Thus a man
may steal another man’s wife if he can, but, as already men-
tioned, he may not under any circumstances marry a woman of
the same family name, even though not related in the remotest
degree. There are certain great families, such as the Ballaroke,
Tdondarup, Ngotak, Nagarnook, Nogonyuk, Mongalmy, and
 * Hyre, vol. ii. p. 392.             t lc. vol. ii. p. 387.
 + lic. pp. 2.215. See also 320.      § lc. vol. ii. p. 249.
                                                         Gs
450                           THE    TASMANIANS.

Narrangur, which occur over a great portion of the Conti-
nent, and within which marriage is not permitted *. There
are many other cases of prohibitions; “indeed,” says Mr.
Lang +, “instead of enjoying perfect personal freedom, as it
would at first appear, they are governed by a code of rules
and a set of customs which form one of the most cruel tyran-
nies that has ever, perhaps, existed on the face of the earth,
subjecting not only the will, but the property and life of the
weak to the dominion of the strong. The whole tendency of
the system is to give every thing to the strong and old, to
the prejudice of the weak and young, and more particularly
to the detriment of the women.    They have rules by which
the best food, the best pieces, the best animals, etc., are pro-
hibited to the women and young men, and reserved for the
old. The women are generally appropriated to the old and
powerful, some of whom possess from four to seven wives ;
while wives are altogether denied to young men, unless
they have sisters to give in exchange, and are strong and
courageous enough to prevent their sisters from being
taken without exchange.”

                              The Tasmanians.

   The inhabitants of Van Dieman’s Land belonged to quite
a different race, but were just as wretched as those of
Australia. According to Captain Cook’s account they had
no houses, no clothes, no canoes, no instrument to catch
large fish, no nets, no hooks; they lived on mussels, cockles,
and periwinkles, and their only weapon was a straight pole,
sharpened at one end{. Mr. Dove informs us that they are
entirely without any ‘‘moral views and impressions.’ In-
deed; he scarcely appears to regard them as rational beings§.
  * Kyre, vol. ii. p. 329.                   { Third Voyage, vol. i. p. 100.
  + The Aborigines of        Australia.      § Tasmanian Jour. of Nat. Sci.
G. S. Lang, p. 7.                         vol. i. p. 249.
                         FEEGEE     ISLANDERS.                451

Like the Australians, they have no means of expressing
abstract ideas; they have not even a word for a “tree.”
Although fire was well known to them, some tribes, at least,
appear to have been ignorant whence it was originally ob-
tained, or how, if extinguished, it could be re-lighted. “In
all their wanderings,” says Mr. Dove, “ they were particu-
larly careful to bear in their hands the materials for kindling
a fire. Their memory supplies them with no instances of
a period in which they were obliged to draw on their in-
ventive powers for the means of resuscitating an element so
essential to their health and comfort as flame. How it came
originally into their possession is unknown. Whether it
may be viewed as a gift of nature, or the product of art
                               Fic. 209.




                         Tasmanian Firesticks,


and sagacity, they cannot recollect a period when it was
a desideratum.     . . . It was the part of the females
especially to carry a firebrand in their hands, which was
studiously refreshed from time to time as it became dull
and evanescent*.”     Fig. 209 represents a pair of Tasmanian
firesticks, presented to me by Mr. Robinson.


                        Feegee Islanders.

   The islands of the Pacific contain two very distinct races
of men—the Negrito and the Polynesian. My space does
not permit me to enter into the interesting question of their
relationships and affinities.
           * Tasmanian Journal of Nat. Sci. vol. i. p. 250.
                               ég 2
452                      FOOD.     WEAPONS.

  The Feegeeans belong to the former category, and in
many respects resemble negroes. They are darker than the
Polynesians. The jaws are larger, and the hair, though not
exactly woolly, is frizzled. They are a powerful race, but
not so graceful as the Polynesians.              Their language is,
however, more Polynesian than Negrito. ‘Their institutions,
customs, and manners, were partly Polynesian, partly Ne-
grito*, It is remarkable that they did not use the con-
sonants “bj? “dor “o./* withont. plac sy“ mor “ny
before them, as for instance Mbau, Nduandua, Ngata.               It is
well known how frequent these sounds are in Negro names,
   The food of the Feegee Islanders consisted of fish, turtle,
shell-fish, crabs, human flesh whenever it could be obtained,
taro, yams, mandrai, bananas, and cocoa-nuts, in addition to
which the higher classes occasionally indulged in pigs and
fowls. They drank ava habitually, and at all their cere~
monies.
  Their weapons consisted of spears, slings, clubs, bows and
arrows.   ‘The spears were from ten to fifteen feet long, and
were generally made of cocoa-nut wood ; the end was pointed
and charred ; sometimes, though not often, a sharp bone was
used for the point. They had several kinds of clubs, all
made of iron wood. That most esteemed was about three
feet long with a heavy knob at the end. Another kind
was somewhat shovel-shaped, and might rather be called
a short sword.     The   wla was     a short     heavy   elub,   about
eighteen inches long, with a large and heavy knob. It was
used as a missile, and the natives threw it with great ac-
curacy and force. These were their principal weapons,.the
bows and arrows being weak and light. They were, how-
ever, used in war, as well as in killing fish. The fortified
towns of the Feegeeans had an earthen “rampart, about six
feet thick, faced with large stones, surmounted by a reed
                 * Latham.   Varieties of Man, p. 226.
                   HOUSES.     TEMPLES.     RELIGION.                  453

fence of cocoa-nut       trunks, and surrounded            by a muddy
moat*.”
  Their houses were oblong, from twenty to thirty feet long,
and fifteen feet high. They were made of cocoa-nut wood
and tree fern, and were sometimes very well built.                    They
had two doorways on opposite sides, from three to four feet
high and four feet wide.              The sides were made of posts
about three feet apart, and filled in with wickerwork. The
roof had a steep pitch; the rafters were generally of palm
wood, thatched with wild sugar cane, under which they
placed fern leaves.       A mat       served as a door, and a few flat
stones near the middle of the house served as the fireplace.
The houses were seldom divided by partitions, but the two
ends were raised about a foot, and were covered with layers
of mats on which the natives slept.
   Their temples were pyramidal in form and were often
erected on terraced mounds, like those of Central Americat.
They also venerated certain upright stones}, resembling
those which we call Druidical.      ‘The Feegeeans,” says
Mr. Hazlewood, “‘ consider the gods as beings of like passions
with themselves. They love and hate; they are proud and
revengeful,   and make       war,     and kill and eat each other ;
and are, in fact, savages             and canibals like themselves.”
“Cruelty,”     says   Captain Erskine§, “a craving for blood,
and especially for human flesh as food, are characteristic of
the gods.” Yet the Feegeeans looked upon the Samoans
with horror, regarding them as having no religion, because
they had no belief in any such deities, nor any of the san-
guinary rites which prevailed in other islands.
   The Feegee canoes were very well constructed. They

  * Williams, Figi and the Figians,       t Figi and    the Figians, vol. i.
vol. i. p. 48.                          p. 220.                  ee
   + B. Seemann, in the Vacation           § Jounal of a Cruise in      the
Tourist for 1861, p. 269.               Western Pacific, p. 247.
454,             CANOES.    POTTERY.   GAMES.

were generally double, of unequal size, the smaller         one
serving as an outrigger.     The larger ones were sometimes
more than a hundred feet in length. The two canoes were
connected by a platform, generally about fifteen feet wide
and projecting two or three feet beyond the sides.        The
bottom of each consisted of a single plank; the sides were
fitted by dovetailing, and closely united by lashings passed
through flanges left on each of the pieces. The joints were
closed by the gum of the bread-fruit tree. The sails were
large and made of mats. The mast was generally about
half the length of the canoe, and the yard and boom usually
twice as long as the mast. Their principal tool was an adze,
formerly of stone, but now generally of iron. For boring
holes they used the long spines of the echina, pointed bones,
and, when they could get them, nails.     Small teeth, such
as those of rats and mice, were used for carving; and their
knives were made of the outside of a piece of bamboo, shaped
into form while green. After being dried it was charred,
and thus became very hard and sharp, so that it might even
be used in surgical operations. They differed from the Poly-
nesians in using earthenware pots for cooking. These were
graceful and well made, though the potter’s wheel was un-
known.     The pottery was all made by women.      ‘Their tools
were very simple, consisting of a small round flat stone
to fashion the inside, and a flat mallet or spatula for the
surface, which they made almost as round as if it had been
turned in a lathe. Forks appear to have been long in use
among the Feegeeans; a remarkable fact, if we remember
that they were unknown in Northern Europe until the seven-
teenth century.
   The Feegeeans have several kinds of games.        They are
fond of swinging, and of throwing stones or fruits at a mark.
They have also a game resembling skittles. Their dances,
like those of so many other nations, are any thing but
                     AGRICULTURE.        WOMEN.                       455

decorous.   Their musical       instruments       are     the conch-shell,
the nose-flute, pipes, a Jew’s-harp made of a strip of bamboo,
and several sorts of drums.     They are also fond of poetry.
   Their agricultural implements have been described by
Mr. Wiliams.      The digging-sticks are made of a young
mangrove-tree.     They are about the size of an ordinary hay-
fork, and the lower end ‘‘is tapered off on one side, after the
shape of a quill toothpick. In digging, this flattened side is
kept downwards.      When preparing a piece of ground for
yams, a number of men are employed, divided into groups of
three or four. Hach man being furnished with a digging-
stick, they drive them into the ground so as-to enclose a
circle of about two feet in diameter. When, by repeated
strokes, the sticks reach the depth of eighteen inches, they
are used as levers, and the mass of soil between them is thus
loosened and raised*.”       The clods are then broken up by
boys with short sticks. Weeding “is accomplished by means
of a tool used like a Dutch hoe, the workmen squatting so as
to bring the handle nearly level with the ground. The blade
used formerly to be made of a bone from the back of a turtle,
or a plate of tortoise-shell, or the valve of a large oyster, or
large kind of pimna. In the Windward Islands they use a
large dibble, eight feet long, about eighteen inches in cir-
cumference, and tapering to a point. They had also pruning
knives of ” tortoise-shell lashed to the end of a rod ten feet
long. They are skilful in basket-making, and have good
strong nets made of creepers or of sinnet.
   The women are kept in great subjection. “The men
frequently tie them up and flog them. Like other property,
wives might be sold at pleasure, and the usual price is a
musket.   Those who purchase them may do with them as
they please, even to knocking them on the head.” Erskine,
however, gives a more satisfactory account of the position
                 * Figi and the Figians, vol. i. p. 63.
456                       DRESS.     TATTOOING.

held by the women;             and it appears that they are on the
whole more chaste than is the case in some of the other
Pacific Islands, which is saying something for them, but
certainly not much. Although so lax in some things, they
were very strict in others, and it was thought improper in
some of these islands for husband and wife to spend the night
under the same roof.                  ;
   Although but scantily clothed, the Feegeeans were very
particular about       their    garments     and    their paint.        They
were specially proud of their hair, and if it was short
they wore a wig as a substitute.    Some of these wigs
were      most elaborate.       The men wore        “ tapa,” which is a
kind of cloth obtained from the inner bark of the paper-
mulberry, and made into a sash, from three to one hundred
yards in length. Six or ten yards is, however, the usual
quantity, and it is passed between the legs and round the
waist*. The women are not permitted to use “‘tapa,” and
their dress is more scanty than that of the men, consisting,
indeed, only of the “liku,” a kind of band, made of the bark
of hibiscus, and fastened round the waist.      It ends in a
fringe, which is worn short by the girls, but longer after
marriage.       Nevertheless, though almost naked, the Feegeeans
are said to have been very modest, and if any one were found
entirely without clothes, Captain Wilkes thinks that the
offender would be immediately put to death.
   Tattooing is confined to the women, who are ornamented
in this manner on the fingers, the corners of the mouth, and,
oddly enough, on those parts of the body which are covered
by the “liku.” The process is very painful, but submission
to it is regarded as a religious duty+, any neglect of which
will assuredly be punished after deatht.
   The graves of the common people are only marked by a
  * FWigi and    the Figians, vol. i.      t+ Ibid. p.160; Wilkes, l.c. p. 355.
p. 156.                                    t A Mission to Viti, p. 112.
                                   BURIAL.                             457

few stones, but over those of chiefs they build small houses,
from two to six feet high, or in some cases erect large cairns
of stone; these also are sometimes “ set up to mark the spot
where a man has died*.”      The body is buried in a sitting
posture.     The usual sign of mourning is to crop the hair or
beard, or both.        Very often, also, they burn the skin into
blisters, and cut off the end-joints of the small toe and little
finger.                     :
   Among the Feegeeans, parricide is not a crime, but a cus-
tom. Parents are generally killed by their children. Some-
times the aged people make up their minds that it is time
to die; sometimes it is the children who give notice to their
parents that they are a burden to them. In either case, the
friends and relatives are summoned, a consultation takes
place, and a day is fixed for the ceremony, which commences
with a great feast. The missionaries have often witnessed
these horrible tragedies.     On one occasion, a young man
invited Mr. Hunt        to attend his mother’s funeral, which was
just going to take place. Mr. Hunt accepted the invitation,
but when the funeral procession started, he was surprised
to see no corpse, and accordingly made inquiries, when the
young savage “pointed out his mother+, who was walking
along with them, as gay and lively as any of them present,
and apparently as much pleased. . . . He added that it
was from love for his mother that he had done so; that in
consequence of the same love, they were now going to bury
her, and that none but themselves could or ought to do so
sacred an office. . . . . She was their mother, and they
were her children, and they ought to put her to death.”                 In
such cases the grave is dug about four feet deep, the relatives
and friends begin their lamentations,           take an affectionate
parting, and bury the poor victim alive.             It is surprising
after this to hear that Mr. Hunt             regarded the Feegeeans
  * Figi and the Figians, vol. i. p. 192.          t Wilkes, 1. c. p. 95.
458                         CUSTOMS.              PARRICIDE.

as being kind and affectionate to their parents; but in fact
“they consider this custom so great a proof of affection,
that none but children could be found to perform it.”” The
fact is that they not only believe in a future state, but are
persuaded that as they leave this life so they will rise again*,
They have, therefore, a powerful motive for quitting this
world before they are weakened by old age; and so general
was this belief, so powerful the influence which it had upon
them, that in one town, containing several hundred inha-
tants, Capt. Wilkes did not see one man over forty years
of age; and, on asking for the old people, he was informed
that they were all buried. Again, during the first year of
Mr. Hunt’s residence at Somo-somo, there was only one
instance of natural death; all the aged and diseased having
been strangled or buried alive.
   When a chief died it was usual to “send with him” some
of his women and some slaves. At the death of Ngavindi,
Mr. Calvert went to Mbau, hoping “ to prevent the strangling
of women,         but was        too      late.     Three had been             murdered.
Thakombau         proposed to strangle his sister, the chief wife
of the deceased, as was            the usual custom;               but the Lasakau
people begged that she might be spared, and that her child
might become their chief. Ngavindi’s mother offered herself
as a substitute, and was strangled. The dead chief lay in
state, with a dead wife by his side, on a raised platform; the
corpse of his mother on a bier at his feet, and a murdered
servant on a mat in the midst of the house. A large grave
was dug in the foundation of a house near by, in which the
servant was laid first, and upon her the other three corpses,
wrapped and wound up together+.” In these cases the
wives generally die voluntarily, believing that thus only can
they hope to go to heaven.    Horrible as are these facts, they

   * Wigi   and   the Figians,     vol.    i.       } Ibid. vol. ii. p. 301.
p. 183.
                          HORRIBLE     RITES.                           459

at least show how strong must be the belief felt in a future
state of existence.
   Still, though we may allow the goodness of the motive to
extenuate some of these atrocities, it must be allowed that
human life was but little regarded in Feegee. Not only
infanticide, but also human sacrifices, were very common,
and, in fact, scarcely any thing was undertaken without the
latter. When the king launched a canoe, ten or more men
were slaughtered on the deck, in order that it might be
washed with human blood. But there is even worse to be
told. The Feegeeans were most inveterate cannibals, and
so fond were they of human flesh, that “the greatest praise
they can bestow on any delicacy is to say that it is as tender
as a dead man.”      Nay, they were even so fastidious as to
dislike the taste of white men*, to prefer the flesh of women
to that of men, and to consider the arm above the elbow,
and the thigh as the best jomts; and so greedy, that human
flesh was reserved for the men, being considered too good to
be wasted upon the women.       When the king gave a feast
human flesh always formed one of the dishes, and though
the bodies of enemies slain in battle were always eaten, they
did not afford a sufficient supply, but slaves were fattened
up for the market.   Sometimes they roasted them alive and
ate them at once, while at others they kept bodies until they
were far gone in decay. Ra Undre-undre, Chief of Rakiraki,
was said to have eaten nine hundred persons himself, permit-
ting no one to share them with him.
   It was not from any want of food that the Feegeeans were
cannibals. On one occasion they offered to the God of War
“ten thousand yams (weighing from six to twelve pounds
each), thirty turtles, forty roots of yaquona (some very large),
many hundreds of native puddings (two tons), one hundred
  * So also did the Australians, the Tongans, and the New Zealanders.
  + Figi and the Figians, vol. i. p. 213.
                                                &
460                             CANNIBALISM.

and fifty giant oysters, fifteen water-melons, cocoa-nuts, a
large number of violet land-crabs, taro, and ripe bananas*.”
At a public feast Mr. Williams once saw “two hundred men
employed for nearly six hours in collecting and piling cooked
food.    There were six mounds of yams, taro, vakalolo, pigs,
and turtles: these contained about fifty tons of cooked yams
and taro, fifteen tons of sweet pudding, seventy turtles, five
cartloads of yaquona, and about two hundred tons of un-
cooked yams. One pudding, at a Lakemba feast, measured
twenty-one feet in circumference.”                  Yet        so habitual      has
cannibalism become, that they have no word for a corpse
which does not include the idea of something edible.
Human flesh is known as “puaka balava,” or “long
pigt.” “On contemplating the character of this extraor-
dinary people,” says Erskine}, “the mind is struck with
wonder and awe at the mixture of a complicated and
carefully-conducted political system, highly finished man-
ners, and ceremonious politeness, with a ferocity and prac-
tice of savage vices which is probably unparalleled in any
other part of the world.’     “ Murder,” says Mr. Williams,
“is not an occasional thing in Figi, but habitual, systematic,
and classed among ordinary transactions§.”” Hlsewhere he
tells us that no Feegeean ever feels safe with a stranger
at his heels||, and that to be “an acknowledged murderer
is the object of the Figian’s restless ambition].”?    On the
island of Vanua Levu, even among the women, there were
“few who had not in some way been murderers**.”             To
this they are trained up from infancy. “One of the first
  * Wigi andthe Figians, vol.ip.44.      “hog with teeth on its forehead”
  t+ Erskine, 1. c. p. 260.   Other      (Forster, 1. ¢. p. 384).
mammalia, when introduced into the          ft Erskine, 1. c. p. 272.
South Sea Islands, received names           § Figi and the Figians,          vol.   1.
indicative of their similarity to this   op. 134.
their principal quadruped: thus the          I} ts @s tas Sy
horse was called the “man-carrying           Sle. ple
pig” in Tahiti, the sheep was the           uit Noh 58), ASO)
                    CHARACTER     OF    THE    FEEGERANS.                     461

lessons taught the infant is to strike its mother.”                   At Somo-
somo, Mr. Williams saw mothers leading their children “to
kick and tread upon the dead bodies of enemies*.         No
wonder that under these circumstances “a happy and united
household is most rare.” Indeed it is nearly impossible, for
by an arrangement, which seems almost incredible, “ brothers
and sisters, first cousins, fathers and sons-in-law, mothers
and daughters-in-law, and brothers and sisters-in-law, are
severally forbidden to speak to each other, or to eat from
the same disht.” Yet amid so much that is horrible,
there is still something in the Feegeean which redeems his
character from utter atrocity. If he hates deeply, he also
loves truly ; if his revenge never dies, his fidelity and loyalty
are strong and enduring.        Thakombau was a thorough
Feegeean. Almost to the last he opposed the missionaries.
He was not only heathen, but anti-Christian.                         At length
bemg converted, he called his people together, and, says
Mr. Calvert, “What          a congregation he had!— husbands
whose wives he had dishonoured! widows whose husbands
he had slain! sisters whose relatives had been strangled by
his orders! relatives whose friends he had eaten! and
children, the       descendants    of those he had murdered,                  and
who had vowed to avenge the wrongs inflicted on their
fatherst!’? Yet even this man—an adulterer, a parricide,
and a cannibal, whose       hands       were      stained with a hundred
murders—had still something noble and lovable about him;
so much so indeed that, in spite of his crimes, he secured the
affection, the friendship, even the respect, of a man so
excellent as Mr. Calvert.

                             The       Maories.

  The New Zealanders are the southernmost representatives
   Flac mp ely fs                            t Figi and the Figians, l. c. vol. ti.
   f lc. p. 186.                          p. 357.
462                           THE      MAORIES.

of the great Polynesian family.               Their principal food con-
sisted of fern roots, which they scorched over the fire, and
then beat with a stick, till the bark and dry outside fell off ;
the remainder being a soft substance, rather clammy and
sweet, not unpleasant to the taste, but mixed with numerous
stringy fibres which are very disagreeable*.          In the
northern districts were large plantations of yams and sweet
potatoes. They also cultivated gourds, which were used for
vessels, as they had no pottery. Their only instrument for
tillage was “a long narrow stake sharpened to an edge at
one end, with a short piece fastened transversely at a little
distance above it, for the convenience of pressing it down
with the foot.” Their animal food consisted principally of
 fish and shell-fish, and Captain Cook observed large shell-
 mounds near their houses. They sometimes, also, though
rarely, killed rails, penguins, shags, and other birds.                    They
 obtain fire from two pieces of wood, in the usval mannerf.
 A New Zealand stone adze is represented in figs. 111-113,
 ere.
   The only quadrupeds in the islands were dogs and rats.
 They had no hogs, and the dogs were kept entirely for food.
They were skilful in fishing, having excellent lines, hooks
made of bone and shell, and very large nets, which were
made of the leaves of a kind of flax, split into strips of the
proper breadth and tied together.     In making the lines the
leaves are “scraped by a shell, which removes the upper
or green part, and leaves the strong white fibres, that run
longitudinally along the under side{.” This kind of cordage
has even been preferred to that made of Huropean hemp.
   Of these leaves also they made most of their clothes, for
though acquainted         with the manufacture of bark-cloth, it

   * Dieffenbach’s New Zealand, vol.        t Fitzroy’s Voyage of the “Advyen-
ae oy ditt                                ture” and “ Beagle,’’ vol. ii. p. 599.
   + D’Urville, vol. ii. p. 479.
              ORNAMENTS.      TATTOOING.        HOUSES.          463

was very scarce, and worn only as an ornament.            The leaves
were split into three or four slips, which were interwoven
into a kind of stuff, something between netting and cloth.
Dog’s wool was also used for the same purpose*. The dress
was alike in both sexes, and consisted of two parts; one
piece of their rude cloth (if so it may be called) was tied
over the shoulders and reached to the knees, being fastened
in front by a piece of string or a bone bodkin; the other
piece was wrapped round the waist, and reached nearly to
the ground. This garment, however, was worn by the men
only on particular occasions
   For ornament they wors combs of wood or bone, feathers,
necklaces, bracelets, and anklets of bones and shells, and
ear-rings of jade or albatross-down.  Many of them had also
small grotesque figures of jade, which were suspended from
the neck and were regarded as very precious. The New
Zealanders were also tattooed with great dexterity and ele-
gance; not only on the body, but even on the face, the gene-
ral effect of which was in many cases far from unpleasant.
The process, however, was extremely painful, so much so, in-
deed, that it could not be supported all at once, but was some-
times spread over several months, or even years. The lips and
the corners of the eyes were the part that hurt most. To have
shrunk from it would, however, have been a great disgrace.
   Their houses were about eighteen or twenty feet long,
eight or ten broad, and five or six high. The sides sloped
quite down to the ground, differing in this respect from those
of Tahiti, which are left open at the sides.          This was done,
however, not for the sake of privacy, but to keep out the
wind and rain. The sides were made of sticks, closely
thatched with grass and hay, and the door was at one end,
just high enough to admit a man on all fours. Another hole
served both for window and chimney. The roof was often
                     * D’Urville, vol. ii. p. 500.
464                   FORTIFICATIONS.   WEAPONS.

carved, and they frequently attached to the end of the ridge
pole a monstrous representation of the proprietor*.
   Their villages were all fortified. They chose the strongest
natural situations, and surrounded the houses with a palisade
about ten feet high. The weaker sides were also defended
“by a double ditch, the innermost of which has a bank, and
an additional palisade.” The stakes were driven obliquely
into the ground, so that they projected over the ditch,
which “from the bottom to the top or crown of the bank
is four-and-twenty feet.        Close within the innermost pali-
sade is a stage, twenty feet high, forty feet long, and six
broad; it is supported by strong posts, and is intended as
a station for those who defend the place, from which they
may annoy the assailants by darts and stones, heaps of
which lay ready for use. Another stage of
                                                           Fie. 210.
the same kind commands the steep avenue
from the back, and stands also within the
palisadet+.”” Within the palisades they had
reduced the ground ‘not to one level, but
to several, rising in stages one above the
other, ike an amphitheatre, each of which is
enclosed within its separate palisade.” These
different platforms communicated only by
narrow passages, so that each one was
capable of separate defence ; and they were
provided with large stores of dried fish,
fern-roots, etc. As the natives, when first
discovered, had no bows and arrows, nor
even slings, in fact no “missile weapon
except the lance, which was thrown by
hand,’’ such positions as these must have
                                                Patoo Patoo,
been almost impregnable. Their principal
patoo patoo (fig. 210) which was fastened to the wrist by a
 * Dieffenbach, 1. c. p. 69.            + Cook’s First Voyage, p. 343.
                         CANOES.       BURIAL.     MUSIC.                      465

strong strap, lest it should be wrenched from them. They
had no defensive armour, but besides their weapons the
chiefs carried a “‘ staff of distinction.’’
   Their canoes were well built, and resemble those of the
other islands.  Many of them, however, were broad enough
to sail without an outrigger.                The two ends were often in-
geniously carved*.                ;
  The dead were wrapped in native cloth, and either buried
in a contracted posture, or exposed for a while on small
square     platforms;      when       the   flesh had     decayed      away,   the
bones were washed, and finally deposited in a small covered
box, which was generally elevated on a column in or near
the villaget+. In some districts, however, they were usually
thrown into the sea, except indeed those that were killed in
battle. These were generally eaten by their enemies. None
of the objects used by the dead during his last illness were
ever employed againt; they were generally broken or buried
with the deceased. In one case a moa’s egg has been found
in the hands of a dead Maori, who was buried in the usual
sitting posture. The egg was perfect§, and may have been
intended to serve as food for the dead.
   In the Taranaki district, according to Taylor, the natives
were buried in their houses, the door was tied up and painted
with ochre to show that it was “taboo.” In most of the
Pahs or fortified villages half the houses belonged to the
dead, and these being never repaired gave the village a
very neglected appearance ||.
  ‘Their principal musical instrament was the flute, of which
they had three or four varieties. D’Urville{ also observed
among them a kind of lyre, with three or four strings. They
   * Forster’s   Observations, 1. c.           § Zoologist, February, 1865, p.
p. 326.                                     9454.
   t Dieffenbach, 1. c. p. 63; Fitzroy,        || New Zealand and its Inhabitants.
1c. p. 579.                                 Taylor. p. 101.
  { D’Urville, vol. ii. p. 536.               G 1c. vol. ii. p. 501.
                                                                Hh
466                     CHARACTER.      RELIGION.

used large shells, too, as a kind of trumpet.         They were very
fond of singing, of poetry, and of dances.            The latter were
of two kinds, warlike and amorous.
  In character the New              Zealanders were   proud, jealous,
irritable, cruel, and implacable; but at the same time sen-
sible, generous, sincere, hospitable, and affectionate. Like
other Polynesians the Maories were much given to infanti-
cide*.   The girls before marriage were allowed great
freedom.    When       once married, however, the women              were
faithful and affectionate to their husbands, by whom, on the
other hand, they were generally treated with both kindness
and respect. On the whole, it must be admitted that the
position of the women among the New Zealanders was far
from unsatisfactory. The Maories were perpetually at war
during life, and hoped to continue so after death. Heaven
they regarded as a place where there would be continual
feasts of fish and sweet potatoes; where they would be
always fighting, and always victorious.      Whether they can
be said to have had a religion, or not, depends upon the
meaning we attach to the word.       They believe in the sur-
vival of the soul, but not in the resurrection of the body, an
article of faith which, as Mr. Marsden tells us, the mission-
aries could not induce them to accept. They had no idca of an
Almighty Deity. Speaking to Mr. Taylor, Te Heuheu, chief
of Taupo, ridiculed the idea.           “Is there,” he asked, “ one
maker of all thmgs amongst             you Europeans?      Is not one
a carpenter, another a blacksmith,           another a ship-builder,
and another      a house-builder?         So it was     in the begin-
ning; one God made this, another that: Tane made trees,
Ru mountains, Tangaroa fish, and so forth.    Your re-
ligion is of to-day, ours from remote antiquity. Do not
think then to destroy our ancient faith with your freshborn
religion+.”
      * Dieffenbach, l. c. p. 16.                     TlaCa peels:
                    RELIGION.        CANNIBALISM.         467

   Their principal deity was known as the Atoua, who was
a cruel cannibal like themselves. When any one was ill,
Atoua was supposed to be devouring his inside, and they
endeavoured to frighten him away by curses and threats*.
This we may regard as a kind of negative worship; but
on other occasions they certainly offered human and other
sacrifices, in the vain hope of appeasing his wrath. They
did not worship idols, but many of the priests seem to have
really thought that they had been in actual communication
with the Atoua; and some of the early missionaries were
inclined to believe that Satan might have been permitted to
practise a deception upon them in order to strengthen his
power! However extraordinary this may appear, the same
was the case in Tahiti. “In addition,” says Mr. Ellis, “to
the firm belief which many who were sorcerers, or agents of
the infernal powers, and others who were the victims of
incantation, still maintain, some of the early missionaries
are disposed to think this was the fact+.” Even Mr. Ellis
himself was of the same opinion. With such low ideas of the
Divinity, it is perhaps not surprising that some of the chiefs
were looked upon as gods even during life. Watches and
white men also were at first regarded as deities; the latter
not, perhaps, unnaturally, their firearms being regarded as
thunder and lightning.
   The New Zealanders had but little regard for human life.
Karle relates that a young chief named Atoi, who is described
as having “a handsome open countenance,’’ on one occasion
recognized a pretty girl of about 16, who had been working
for Mr. Earle, and claiming her as a runaway slave, took her
back with him ‘to his village, where he killed and ate her.
The next day he showed Mr. Harle “the post to which she
had been tied, and laughed to think how he had cheated her.”
              * Missionary Register, Nov. 1819.
              t+ Polynesian Researches, vol. i. p. 226.
                                wh     2
468                          CANNIBALISM.

“For,” said he, “I told her I only intended             to give her a
flogging; but I fired, and shot her through the heart.”
“Yet,”    adds Mr. Harle, “I again affirm, that he was                 not
only a handsome young man, but mild and genteel in his
demeanour, and a general favourite with us all*.’’
   Although the New Zealanders were addicted to cannibalism,
it was with them a very different habit from that of the
Feegeean. No doubt the Maori enjoyed his meals of human
flesh; all people appear to have done so, who have once
overcome the natural horror which must, one would suppose,
have been at first experienced. But the cannibalism of a
New Zealander, though often a mere meal, was also some-
times a ceremony; in these cases the object was something
very different from mere sensual gratification; it must be
regarded as a part of his religion, as a sort of unholy sacra-
ment. This is proved by the fact that, after a battle, the
bodies which they preferred were not those of plump young
men, or tender damsels, but of the most            celebrated      chiefs,
however old and dry they might bet. In fact, they believed
that it was not only the material substance which they thus
appropriated, but also the spirit, the ability, and the glory of
him whom they devoured. The greater the number of corpses
they had eaten, the higher they thought would be their
position in the world to come. Under sucha creed there is a
certain diabolical nobility about the habit, which is, at any
rate, far removed from the sensuality of ordinary cannibalism.
To be eaten was, on the other hand, the greatest misfortune
that could happen to a New Zealander ; since he believed that
the soul was thus destroyed as well as the body.              The chief
who could both kill and devour his enemy had nothing more
to fear from him either in this world or the next; on the con-
trary, the strength, ability, ahd prestige against which


  * Residences in New Zealand, p. 117.      + D'Urville, vol. ii. p. 547.
                                 TAHITI.                             469


he had had to contend, were         not only conquered, but, by
this dreadful     process, incorporated with, and added to his
own.
  In other cases slaves were killed and eaten in honour of
the gods. The New Zealanders declared that criminals alone
were thus treated. Even if this was the case, the custom was
horrible enough; but religious persecutions have scarcely
ceased in Europe even now, nor is it so very long since the
fire and the stake were regarded as necessary for the pre-
servation of Christianity itself. F’hongui evidently con-
sidered that the whole analogy of nature was in favour of
cannibalism.   He was surprised at the horror of it felt by
D’Urville.   Big fish, he said, eat little fish; insects devour
insects; large birds feed upon small ones; it is in accord-
ance with the whole analogy of nature that men should eat
their enemies*,

                                 Tahiti.

   Tahiti, the Queen of Islands, has excited the wonder and
admiration of almost all those by whom it has been visited.
In some respects the Tahitians were surpassed by other
South Sea Islanders; the Feegeeans,              for instance, being, as
we have seen, acquainted with pottery,—but on the whole
they may be taken as representing the highest stage in
civilization to which man has in any country raised himself
before the discovery or introduction of metallic implements.
It is not, indeed, at all probable that any inhabitants of the
great continents were so far advanced in civilization during
their Stone Age.       Doubtless, the Society Islanders would
not have remained without metal, if the country had afforded
them the means       of obtaining it.         On the other hand, the
ancient inhabitants of Europe were confined to the use of
                       * D’Urville, vol. ii. p. 548.
470                            IMPLEMENTS.

stone weapons only until they became acquainted with the
superiority of, and acquired the art of working in, copper,
bronze, or iron; and it is evident that a nation would in all
probability discover the use of metal before attaining the
highest pitch of civilization which, without such aid, it would
be possible for it to attain.
                Bra, 211.
                                         The tools of the Ta-
                                      hitians when first dis-
                                      covered were made of
                                             stone,     bone,         shell,     or
                                             wood.    Of metal they
                                             had no idea. When they
                                             first obtained nails, they
                                             mistook them               for the
                                             young shoots              of some
                                             very     hard        wood,        and,
                                             hoping that life might
                                             not be quite extinct,
                                             planted a number of them
                                             carefully in their gar-
                                             dens*.
                                                In a very short time,
                                             however,           the     earlier
                                             weapons      were          entirely
                                             replaced        by       those      of
                                             iron; and in his last voy-
                                             age Captain Cook tells
                                             ust that      “a stone hat-
                                             chet is, at present, as rare
                                             a thing amongst them as
      Stone Axe with Wooden Handle.
                                             an iron one was eight
years ago; and a chisel of bone or stone is not to be seen.”
              * Ellis, Polynesian Researches, p. 298.
              t Voyage to the Pacific Ocean, vol. ii. p. 137.
                            FISH-HOOKS.                              471


The stone axes, or rather adzes, were of various sizes; those
intended for cutting down trees weigh six or seven pounds,
the little ones, which were used for carving, only a few
ounces.     All of them   required     continual   sharpening, and a
stone was always kept in readiness for this purpose. The
natives were very skilful in the use of their adzes; neverthe-
less, to fell a tree was a work of several days.           Some of the
South Sea axes have beautifully carved handles, as in fig.
212, representing a specimen in my collection. These were
axes of state. The chisels, or gouges, were of bone, gene-
rally that of a man’s arm between the wrist and elbow.
Pieces    of coral were used as rasps, and splinters of bamboo
for knives. For cultivating the ground they had instruments
of hard wood, about five feet long, narrow, with sharp
edges and pointed. These they used as spades or hoes*.
They had fish-hooks made of mother-of-pearl, and every
fisherman made them for himself.             They generally served
for the double purpose of hook and bait. “The shell is
first cut into square pieces, by the edge of another shell, and
wrought into a form corresponding with the outline of the
hook by pieces of coral, which are sufficiently rough to per-
form the office of a file; a hole is then bored in the
middle, the drill being no other than the first stone they
pick up that has a sharp corner; this they fix into the end
of a piece of bamboo, and turn it between the hands like a
chocolate mill; when the shell is perforated and the hole
sufficiently wide, a small file of coral is introduced, by the
application of which the hook is in a short time completed,
few costing the artificer more time than a quarter of an
hour. From the bark of the Poerou, a species of Hibis-
cus, they made ropes and lines, from the thickness of
an inch to the size of a small packthread; with these they

   * Wilson, Missionary Voyage   to      + Cook’s Voyage round the World:
the South Pacific, p. 245.            vol. i. p. 483; vol. ii. p. 218.
é2
bord
                              MODES    OF FISHING.

                           Fie. 212.
                                                     make nets for
                                                     fishing.” They
                                                     hadalsoakindof
                                                     seine net, made
                                                     “of a coarse
                                                     broad grass, the
                                                     blades of which
                                                     are like flags:
                                                     these they twist
                                                     and tie together
                                                     in a loose man-
                                                     ner, till the net,
                                                     which is about
                                                     aS wide as a
                                                     large sack, is
                                                     from sixty to
                                                     eighty fathoms
                                                     long; this they
                                                     haul in shoal-
                                                     smooth     water,
                                                     and    its   own
                                                     weight keeps it
                                                     so close to the
                                                     ground that
                                                     scarcelya single
                                                     fish can escape.”
                                                     They also used
                                                     certain    leaves
                                                     and fruit which,
                                                     when     thrown
                                                     into the water,
                                                     inebriated the
                                                     fish to such a
                                                     degree,     that
       South Sea Axe of Ceremony,
                                                     they might be
                     BASKETS.     MATS.   BARK-CLOTH.               478

caught by the hands*.              Their fishing-lines were made of
the bark of the Hrowa, a kind of nettle which grows in
the mountains, and were described as “ the best fishing-lines
in the world,” better even than our strongest silk lines.
They also used the fibres of the cocoa-nut for making threads,
with which they fastened together the various parts of their
canoes.   They were very dexterous in            Fie. 213.
making basket and wicker-work, “of a                 (
thousand different patterns, many of them            ;
exceedingly neat; they also made many                 ‘
sorts of mats from rushes, grass, and
bark, which were woven with great neat-
ness and regularity, although entirely by
hand and without any loom or machinery +.
But their principal manufacture was a
kind of cloth, made from bark, and of
which there were three varieties, obtained
respectively     from     the     paper-mulberry,
which was the best, the bread-fruit tree,
and a kind of fig.       This last, though less
ornamental,    was    more      useful than either
of the others, because          it resisted water,
which they did not.          All three kinds of
cloth were made in the same way, the
difference between them being only in the
material. When the trees were of aproper          ‘uth Sea Fish-hook.
size, that is to say, about six or eight feet high, and somewhat
thicker than a man’s thumb, they were pulled up and the roots
and branches were cut off. The bark being slit up longitudi-
nally, it peeled off readily, and was then soaked for some time
in running water. After this the green outside bark was care-
fully scraped off with a shell, and the strips were laid out in the
   * Forster, Observations made during a Voyage round the World, p. 443;
Ellis, vol. ii. p. 288.               + Ellis, vol. ii. pp. 179, 180.-
A474                        DRESS.

evening to dry, being placed one by the side of another “ till
they are about a foot broad, and two or three layers are also
laid one upon the other.” By the morning a great part of
the water had drained off or evaporated, and “ the several
fibres adhere together, so as that the whole may be raised
from the ground in one piece.” It was then placed on the
smooth side of a long piece of wood, and beaten by the
women-servants with a wooden instrument, shaped lke a
square razor-strap, and about a foot long. The four sides of
this instrument were “‘ marked lengthways, with small grooves
or furrows, of different degrees of fineness; those on one
side being of a width and depth sufficient to receive a small
packthread, and the others finer in a regular gradation, so
that the last are not more than equal to sewing silk.”
 They beat the cloth first with the coarsest side and after-
 wards with the others, ending with the finest: under this
 treatment it expanded greatly, and might be made almost as
thin as a muslin. The different pieces of bark by this treat-
ment were so closely fastened together, that the cloth might
be washed and wrung out without any fear of tearing ; but
even if it were accidentally broken, it was repaired without
difficulty, by pasting on a patch with a gluten prepared from
the root of the pea: this was done so nicely that it could
not be discovered. This cloth was cool and agreeable to
the touch, being even softer than our broadcloth.        It is
hardly necessary to say that the fineness was regulated
according to the purpose for which it was intended. The two
first kinds were easily bleached, and then dyed of various
colours, generally red and yellow. Both of these were
vegetable colours, and not very fast.
   They had various strange and complicated dresses for great
occasions, but their ordinary clothes were very simple, and
consisted of two parts. One of them was a piece of cloth
with a hole “in the middle to put the head through,” and
                                    DRESS.                              AT

long enough to reach from the shoulder to the knee.                     The
other was wrapped round the waist so as to hang down like
a petticoat as low as the knee; this was called the Parou.
Frequently also they wore a piece of cloth tied round the
head like a turban. The dress of the Queen is thus described
by Hllis*: “She was attired in a light, loose, and flowing
dress of beautifully white native cloth, tastefully fastened on
the left shoulder, and reaching to the ankle; her hair was
rather lighter than       that of the natives in general; and on
her head she wore a light and elegant native bonnet, of
green and yellow cocoa-nut leaves; each ear was perforated,
and in the perforation            two    or three flowers of the fragrant
Cape jessamine were inserted.”                 The dress of the men was
very similar, but instead of the petticoat, they brought the
cloth between the legs; this was called the Maro. In hot
weather+, and at noon, both sexes went almost naked, wear-
ing only the cloth round the waist. Besides the turbans
and head-dresses of leaves, they sometimes wore long plaits
of human hair, which they wound about the head in such
a manner as to produce a very pretty effect. They were
very clean both in their persons and their clothes; constantly
washing three times a day. Ornaments were worn by the
men as much as by the women, and consisted of feathers,
flowers, pieces of shells, and pearls. Tattooing also was
almost universal; and a person not properly tattooed would
“be as much reproached and shunned, as if with us he
should go about the streets nakedt.” They anointed their
heads frequently with perfumed cocoa-nut oil, but had no
combs, which in so hot a country must have been much
wanted.      Notwithstanding this, the hair of the grown-up
people was very neatly dressed.

  * J.c. p. 148.                           work, with handles of the same or
  + The    Sandwich   Islanders    had     of wood.
small square fans of mat or wicker-          { Wilson, l.c. p. 350.
4.76                     CANOES.   MUSIC.

   Their houses were used principally as dormitories. They
were made of wood, and were generally about twenty-four
feet long, eleven wide, and nine feet high. They had no
side walls, but the roof       reached       to within      about      three
feet and a half of the ground. Palm leaves took the place
of thatch, and the floor was generally covered with soft
hay.
   The canoes resembled those of the Feegeeans, but are said
to have been scarcely so well built. To prepare the planks
was no easy task, but the great difficulty was to fasten them
together. This was effected by “strong thongs of plaiting,
which are passed several times through holes that are bored
with a gouge or auger of bone*.”         The length of the canoes
varied from ten up to ninety feet, “ but the breadth is by no
means in proportion; for those of ten feet are about a foot
wide, and those of more than seventy are scarcely twot.”
These larger ones were not, however, used singly, but were
fastened together side by side, in the manner already de-
scribed. A canoe without an outrigger seemed to them an
impossibilityt. The labour of constructing these canoes must
have been very great; nevertheless, the South Sea Islanders
possessed large numbers of them.     On one occasion Captain
Cook saw more than three hundred in one place; and,
without counting the smaller vessels, he estimated the whole
naval force of the Society Islands at one thousand seven
hundred war canoes, manned by sixty-eight thousand men§.
   Their principal musical instrument was the drum; it was
made from a piece of solid wood, hollowed out, and covered
over with shark’s skin. They had also a kind of trumpet
made of a large shell, with a hole at the small end into
which they fastened a bamboo cane about three feet long.
Their flutes were of bamboo, and were blown with the nose.
  * Cook’s First Voyage, p. 225;     ft Ellis, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 55.
Forster, l.c. p. 459.                § Cook’s Second Voyage,           vol. i.
  + Cook’s First Voyage, p. 221.   p. 849.
                     GAMES.        FURNITURE.          WEAPONS.                        477

They had various kinds of games, some of which appear to
have resembled our hockey and football. They were also
very fond of dancing.
   They were quite ignorant of pottery, but had large dishes
made of polished wood.    The shells of cocoa-nuts were used
as water-bottles and cups. They were scraped thin, polished,
often very ingeniously carved, and kept extremely clean.
Generally the natives of Tahiti sat cross-legged on mats
spread on the floor; but the chiefs had often four-legged
stools.     Chairs and tables were unknown.                         They slept also
on mats and used a wooden pillow, very much resembling
a small stool. The upper side was curved like the seat
of the stool, to admit the neck.                   Each house also contained
a light post, planted in the floor, and with several pro-
jections, from which the various dishes, calabashes of water,
baskets of food, etc., were hung *.
   Their weapons were formidable, though simple. They
consisted of slings, pikes headed with stone, and long clubs
made of hard, heavy wood. With the former they were
very skilful. Their slingstones were of two kinds, “either
smooth, being polished by friction in the bed of ariver, or
sharp, angular and rugged ; these were called ofai ara—faced
or edged stonest+.” We have already mentioned (p. 101)
that two sorts of slingstones, closely corresponding to these,
were used by the ancient inhabitants of Europe. It would
be interesting to know the relative advantage of the two
classes, which surely cannot have been used for exactly the
same purposes.  They had also bows and arrows, which,
however, were not sufficiently strong to be used in warfare.
The bow-strings were made of Roava bark}.                               The Society
Islanders are said to have been cruel in war, but according
to Captain Cook             “they are seldom disturbed by either
    * Hilis, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 184.            |      + Hillis, l.c. vol. ii. p. 49.
                                { Wilson, 1. c. p. 368.
478                          FOOD.      FIRE.

foreign or domestic troubles.’ Though not cowards, they
regard it as “much less disgraceful to run away from an
enemy with whole bones, than to fight and be wounded*.”
   “ Of tame animals they had only hogs, dogs, and poultryf;
neither was there a wild animal in the island, except ducks,
pigeons, parroquets, with a few other birds, and rats, there
being no other quadruped, nor any serpent}.” The dogs
were kept entirely for food, and Captain Cook assures us
that “a South Sea dog was little inferior to an English
lamb ; their excellence is probably owing to their being kept
up, and fed wholly on vegetables.”      The natives preferred
dog to pork. From the sea they obtained excellent fish and
shell-fish. They had also bread-fruit, bananas, plantains,
yams, cocoa-nuts, potatoes, the sugar cane, a fruit not unlike
an apple, and several other plants which served for fruit, and
required very little culture. The bread-fruit tree supplied
them with abundance           of fresh fruit for eight months, and
during the other four they used “mahie,” which is a kind
of sour paste, prepared from the fermented ripe fruit. It is
probable that nine-tenths of their diet consisted of vegetable
food; and the common people scarcely ever tasted either
pork or dog, although the hogs appear to have been very
abundant.
   They obtained fire by friction. When the wood was quite
dry the process did not take longer than two minutes, but in
wet weather it was very tedious.     Having no pottery, they
did not boil their food. “It is impossible,” says Wallis, “ to
describe the astonishment they expressed when they saw the
gunner,    who, while he kept the market,                used to dine on
shore, dress his pork and poultry by boiling them in a pot ;
haying, as I have before observed, no vessel that would bear

  * Wilson, I. ¢. p. 363.                     ft Cook’s Voyage round the World,
  + Wallis’ Voyage roundtheWorld;         pp. 187,
Hawkesworth’s Voyages, vol. i.p. 482.
                                 COOKERY.                                4:79

the fire, they had no idea of hot water *.”’ Captain Cook
also expressly states that “they have but two ways of apply-
ing fire to dress their food, broiling and baking+.’       Mr.
Tylor, however, has pointed out} that they were acquainted
with the use of boiling-stones, and that they could not there-
fore have been entirely ignorant of hot water.     In order to
bake a hog, they made a small pit in the ground, which they
payed with large stones, over which they then lighted a fire.
When the stones were hot enough, they took out the embers,
raked away the ashes, and covered the stones with green
cocoa-nut    leaves.     The    animal     which was     to be dressed,
haying been cleaned and prepared, was wrapped up in plan-
tain leaves, and covered with the hot embers, on which again
they placed bread-fruit and yams, which also were wrapped
up in plantain leaves.   Over these they spread the rest of
the embers, and some hot stones, finally covermg the whole
with earth. The meat thus cooked is described as being
tender and full of gravy; in fact, both Wallis and Cook
considered that it was “better i every respect than when it
is dressed in any other way.’ For sauce they used salt
water,   without which no meal was ever eaten, and a kind
of thick paste made from the kernels of cocoa-nuts.                       At
their meals they drank either water or cocoa-nut juice. The
Sandwich Islanders were very fond of salt meat, and had
regular salt-pans on the sea-shore§.
   The only intoxicating liquor was the ava, an infusion made
from the root, stalks, and leaves of a kind of pepper, which,
however, fortunately for them, was entirely forbidden to the
women, and seldom permitted to the lower classes.                   In some
of the other islands this liquid is prepared in a very disgusting
way. The roots were broken in pieces, cleaned, chewed, and

 * lc. vol. i. p. 484.                     § Cook’s Third Voyage,    vol. iii.
 + Second Voyage, vol. ii. p. 197.       p- 151.
 { Harly History of Mankind, p. 266.
480                    AVA.     <A CHIEF'S DINNER.

then placed in a wooden bowl, mixed with a certain quantity
of water, and stirred up with the hands.                  In Tahiti, how-
ever, the chewing was dispensed with.                  The wooden bowls
out of which      the chiefs drank         their ava     were    often very
fair specimens of carving. In the Sandwich Islands they
are described as having been “usually about eight or ten
inches in diameter, perfectly round, and beautifully polished.
They are supported by three, and sometimes four, small
human figures, in various             attitudes.   Some      of them       rest
on the hands of their supporters, extended over tke head ;
others   on the head and hands; and some               on the shoulders.”
These figures are said to have been “accurately propor-
tioned and neatly finished, and even the anatomy of the
muscles, in supporting the weight, well expressed*.””
    Captain Cook+ gives an interesting description of the
manner in which the chiefs dined. They had no table, and
each person ate alone and in silence.        Some leaves were
spread on the ground to serve as a table-cloth, and a basket
was set by the chief containing his provision, which, if fish
or flesh, was ready dressed and wrapped in leaves. Two
cocoa-nut shells were put by the side, one containing salt
water and the other fresh. He first washed his hands and
mouth thoroughly with the fresh water, and this he repeated
almost continually through the meal. He then took part of
his provision out of the basket, which generally consisted
of a small fish or two, two or three bread-fruits, fourteen or
fifteen ripe bananas, or six or seven apples. He began by
eating some bread-fruit, at the same time breaking one of
the fishes into the salt water. He then took up the bits of
fish in his fingers, in such a manner as to get with it as much
salt water as possible, and very frequently he took a mouth-
ful of the salt water, either out of the cocoa-nut or in his
hand. Sometimes, also, he drank the juice of a cocoa-nut.
  * Third Voyage, vol. iii. p. 148.          t First Voyage, vol. ii. p. 200.
                          SOLITARY   MEALS.                          48]

When he had done his bread-fruit and fish, he began his
plantains or apples, after which he ate some more bread-
fruit, beaten into a sort of paste, and generally flavoured with
banana or some other fruit. For a knife he used either a
shell or a piece of split bamboo,     and in conclusion he again
washed his hands and mouth. They were quite unacquainted
with forks, and Captain Wallis* tells us that, during his
visit, one of the natives who “tried to feed himself with
that instrument, could not guide it, but by the mere force of
habit his hand came to his mouth and the victuals at the end
of the fork went away to his ear.” Nor did they use plates.
Poulaho, Chief of the Friendly Islands, dining one day on
board the ship, was so much struck by the pewter plates
that Captain Cook gave him one. He did not, however,
intend to employ it in the usual manner, but said that “ when-
ever he should have occasion to visit any of the other islands,
he would leave this plate behind him at Tongataboo, as a
sort of representative in his absencet.”
   Captain Cook was much surprised to find that a people
who were so sociable, and who enjoyed so much the society
of women, never made their meals together.              Even brothers
and sisters had each their own basket, and when they wished
to eat would go out, “sit down upon the ground, at two or
three yards’ distance from each other, and turning their faces
different ways, take their repast without interchanging a
single word.”    They ate alone, they said, “because it was
right,” but why it was right they were unable to explain.
We   must, however,      remember     that    these    islanders   were
together much     more    than we     are.    We      enjoy a sociable
meal, because the nature of our       occupations keeps us apart
so much at other times; but among a people whose wants
were supplied with so little exertion on their part, who were
all day long together, and had no rooms into which they
 * Voyage round the World, p. 482.      + Third Voyage, vol. i. p. 326.
                                                          yo)
4.82                                  SURGERY.

could retire and be alone, it must have been a great thing to
have some way of escaping from their friends and being
quiet, without giving offence. As there were no stated times
for meals, a man who wished to be alone need only to take
out his basket of provisions, and he might be sure that he
would not be disturbed.                This custom, therefore, seems            to
have been both ingenious and conyenient*.
   Although they usually went to bed soon after dark, still
the natives of Tahiti were not entirely without candles; for
which they used the “kernels of a kind of oily nut, which
they stick one over another upon a skewer that is thrust
through the middle of them.”    These candles burned a con-
siderable time, and are said to have given a pretty good
light. The Society Islanders had no knowledge of medicine
as distinct from witchcraft; but some wonderful stories are
told of their skill in surgery. Iwill give perhaps the most
extraordinary. “Tt is related,” says Mr. Ellis, “although,”
he adds, with perfect gravity, “I                   confess I can scarcely
believe it, that on some occasions, when the brain has been
injured as well as the bone, they have opened the skull,
taken out the injured portion of the brain, and, having a pig
ready, have killed it, taken out the pig’s brains, put them in
the man’s head, and covered them upt+.”
   The nostrils of the female infants were often pressed or
spread out during infancy, because they looked on a flat
nose as a mark of beauty. In the same way the boys some-
times had their forehead and the back of their head pressed
upwards, so that the upper part of the skull appeared in the

  * Since the above was written, I          moment my dinner or breakfast was
haye met with the following passage         brought tome,   This gave me a few
in Burchell: “I had sufficient reason       moments’ relief from the fatigue of
for admiring one of the customs of          incessant conversation.’    Travels in
the Bachapins; that, notwithstand-          Southern Africa, vol. u. p. 408.
ing they never at any other time left         Tolcy Ola wa py 277s
me     alone, they   always retired   the
                 MODES     OF BURIAL.      OBEREA’S      MORAT.                483
shape of awedge. This was supposed to make them look
more formidable in war*.
  The dead were not buried at once, but were placed on a
platform raised several feet above the ground, and neatly
railed in with bamboo.  The body was covered with a cloth,
and sheltered by a roof, By the side were deposited the
weapons of the deceased, and a supply of food and water.
When the body had entirely decayed, the bones were col-
lected, carefully cleaned and buried, according to the rank
of the deceased, either within or without a “morait.” The
largest morai seen by Captain Cook was the one prepared
for Oamo and Oberea, who were the then reigning sovereigns.
This was indeed the “principal piece of architecture in the
island. It was a pile of stonework, raised pyramidically,
upon an oblong base, or square, two hundred and sixty-seven
feet long, and eighty-seven wide. It was built like the small
pyramidal mounts upon which we sometimes fix the pillar
of a sun-dial, where             each side is a flight of steps; the
steps, however, at the sides, were broader than those at the
ends, so that it terminated not in a square of the same figure
with the base, but in a ridge, like the roof of a house: there
were eleven of these steps, each of which was four feet high,
so that the height of the pile was forty-four feet; each step
was formed of one course               of white coral stone, which was
neatly squared and polished; the rest of the mass, for there
was no hollow within, consisted of round pebbles, which,
from the regularity of their figure, seemed to have been
wrought}.” A very similar account of this structure has
  * Bll, 1. c. vol. i. p. 343.            vol. iii. p. 6). In the Friendly Islands,
  + In some   cases   the head is not     D’Urville saw a similar mausoleum
buried with the other bones, but is       built with blocks of stone, some       of
deposited in a kind of box.               which were twenty feet long, six or
  t Cook’s Voyage round the World,        eight broad, and two in height. They
vol. ii. p.166. Similar but somewhat      were neatly squared. 1. c. vol. iv.
smaller morais were observed in the       p. 106.
Sandwich   Islands    (Third Voyage,
                                    ri 2
4.84                          RELIGION.

been more recently given by Wilson*, who makes the size
and height a little greater; and when it is considered that
this was raised without the assistance of iron tools to shape
the stones, or of mortar to fasten them together, it is im-
possible not to be struck with admiration at the magnitude
of the enterprise, and the skill with which it appears to
have been carried out. It is, perhaps, the most important
monument which is positively known to have been con-
structed with stone tools only, and renders it the less
unlikely that some of the large tumuli and other ancient
monuments of Europe may belong to the Stone Age. When
a chief died, his relations and attendants cut and mangled
themselves in a dreadful manner. They ran spears through
their thighs, arms, and cheeks, and beat themselves about
the head with clubs “till the blood ran down in streams.”
They also frequently cut off the little finger on these
occasions; a curious custom, which is common                 also in the
Friendly Islands.
   In Tiarrabou, Captain Cook saw a rude figure of a man,
made of basket-work and about seven feet high. This was
intended as a representation of one of the inferior gods, but
was said to be the only one on the island; for the natives,
when first discovered,     though they worshipped numerous
deities, to whom also human sacrifices were sometimes offered,
yet were not idolaters.  Atalater period, however, Ellis saw
among them many rude idolst. Captain Cook found their
religion, “like that of most other countries, involved in
mystery, and perplexed with apparent inconsistencies       +t.”
They believed in the survival of the soul, and in “ two
situations of different degrees of happiness, somewhat analo-
gous to our heaven and hell;”’ but, far from regarding them
as places of reward and punishment, thought that the hap-
  *    caps 207.       + Ellis, l.c. vol. i. p. 526; Wilson, l.c. p. 242.
                   } See also Forster, l.c. p. 539.
                                   GOVERNMENT.                                 485


piest lot was of course intended for the chiefs and superior
classes, the other for the people of inferior rank*.                   Indeed,
they did not suppose that their actions here in the least
influenced their future state; so that their religion did
not act upon them by promises or threats, and “their ex-
pressions of adoration and reverence, whether by words or
actions, arise only from a humble sense of their own infe-
riority, and the ineffable excellence of divine perfection.”
However       mistaken        they may have       been        on many points,
however wrong many of their customs doubtless appear to
us, surely under such a creed as this, good actions become
doubly virtuous, and virtue itself shines the brighter.
  They had no laws, nor courts of justice. Personal security
and the rights of private property were but little regarded
among them. The chiefs and priests exercised an authority
founded on fear and superstition. They were, in fact, governed
by custom rather than by law, for which, indeed, they had no
word in the languaget.              It is only fair to the chiefs to add
that they were above being idle, and thought it a disgrace if
they did not excel in all departments of labourt. In charac-
ter the inhabitants of Tahiti, according to Captain Cook,
“were liberal, brave, open, and candid, without either suspi-
cion or treachery, cruelty or revenge§.”                      They were very
anxious for education. The women were affectionate, tender,
and obedient; the men mild, generous, slow to take offence,
and easily satisfied. Both sexes were very healthy. “I
never saw any one,” says Forster||, “of a morose, peevish,
discontented disposition in the whole nation; they all join
to their cheerful temper a politeness and elegance which is
happily blended with the most innocent simplicity of man-
ners.’ Murders were very rare among them ; and though

   * Cook’s First Voyage, vol. ii.p.289;    { Ellis, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 178.
Ellis, vol. i. p. 518.                      § First Voyage, vol. ii. p. 188.
  t Ellis, l.c. vol. ii. p. 427.            || lee. p. 582.
486              IDEAS OF RIGHT AND WRONG.

much licence was permitted to the young women before
marriage, the married women, according to Captain Cook*,
were as well behaved “as in any other country whatever.”
They were very thievish; but we must consider the immense
temptations to which they were subjected, and the, to them,
inestimable value of the articles which             they stole.   Like
other savages, they resembled children in many respects,
their sorrows were transient, their passions suddenly and
strongly expressed. On one occasion, Oberea, the queen,
who was then about forty years old, took a particular fancy
to a large doll, which was accordingly presented to her.
Shortly afterwards they met Tootahah, one of the principal
chiefs, who became so jealous of Oberea’s doll, that they
were obliged to give him one also.
   There are scarcely any nations, whether barbarous or
civilized, in which the relations of the two sexes are on the
whole satisfactory.   Savages, almost without exception, treat
their women as slaves, and civilized nations too often avoid
this error only to fall into others.
   The inhabitants of Tahiti are said to have been absolutely
without any ideas of decency, or rather as Captain Cook puts
it, perhaps more correctly, “of indecency.” This no doubt
arose in part from their large open houses, which were not
divided into separate rooms. However this may be, where
there was no sin, they saw no shame, and it must be con-
fessed that in many points their idea of sin was very different
from ours. Before, however, we condemn them, let us re-
member that a dinner-party would have seemed as wrong
to them as many of their customs do to us. If the freedom,
both in language and in action, which they permitted to
themselves, seems to us in many respects objectionable, we
must not forget that our ideas of delicacy shut out from
general conversation numerous subjects of great interest and
              * Voyage to the South Pole, vol. i. p. 187.
                       THE   ARREOY     SOCIETY.                    487

importance, and throw round many matters of the utmost
importance an air of mystery which is not without serious
disadvantages.
   A considerable number of the principal people of both
sexes in Tahiti were formed into an association called the
“Arreoy,” all the members of which were regarded as being
married to one another. If any of the women of the society
had a child, it was     almost invariably killed: but if it was
allowed to live, the father and mother were regarded as
haying definitively engaged themselves to one another, and
were ejected from the association; the woman being known
from that time as a “bearer of children,’ which was among
this extraordinary people a term of reproach. The existence
of such a society shows how fundamentally the idea of virtue
may differ in different countries. Yet the married women
were faithful to their husbands, and beautifully modest. It
is impossible, indeed, to acquit even them of the charge of
infanticide, for which we may find a cause, though not an
excuse.    I do not allude to the curious custom, that a child,
as soon as it was     born, inherited the titles, rank, and pro-
perty of its father, so that a man who was yesterday a chief
might be thus at once reduced to the condition of a private
person; nor to the fact that any Arreoy who spared her
infant was at once excluded from that society. We cannot
suppose that such customs were without their effect; but a
more powerful reason may perhaps be found in the fact, that
their numbers were already large, the means of subsistence
limited, and that, as but few were carried off either by
disease or in war, the population would soon have outgrown
their supplies, if some means were not taken to check the
natural increase of numbers*.         However this may be, infan-
ticide appears to have been dreadfully prevalent amongst
them. It has been estimated that two-thirds of the children
      * See, for instance, Kotzebue’s New Voyage, vol. 1. p. 308.
488                           GENERAL   CHARACTER.

were destroyed by their own parents*, and both Mr. Nott
and Mr. Ellis agree that, during the whole of their residence
in the island, until the adoption of Christianity, they did
not know a single case of a mother who had not been guilty
of this crime.
   According to Wilson+, their language contained no word
for “thanks,” and even Cook admits that they had no respect
for old age. Fitzroy goes still farther, and assures us that
“ they scrupled not to destroy their aged or sick—yes, even
their parents, if disabled by age or sicknesst.” No such
accusation is, however, brought against them by earlier
writers, so that such actions are probably very rare, and
the result, as among the Feegeeans, of misdirected affection
rather than of deliberate cruelty.
   They had no money; and though it was easy to obtain
the necessaries of life, to accumulate property was almost
impossible.    Again, the absence of spirituous liquors, and
the relations between the sexes (however unsatisfactory in
other respects), took away from them some of the principal
incentives to crime. On the whole, then, if we judge them
by a South Sea standard, the natives of the Society Islands
appear to have been very free from crime.
   In spite of the differences which sometimes arose in con-
sequence of their thievish disposition, and also perhaps in
great measure from their not being able perfectly to under-
stand each other, Captain Cook and his officers lived with the
natives “in the most cordial friendship,” and took leave of
them with great regret.             Mr. Ellis, on the contrary, assures
us that “no portion of the human race was ever perhaps
sunk lower in brutal licentiousness and moral degradation
than this isolated people§.” Such a statement is surely quite
inconsistent with the account he gives of their anxiety to
  * Hilis, vol. i. pp. 3384. 336,           Pterroleu pyool:
  mf ES 595 Ghiby                           § Ellis, lc. vol. ii. p. 25.
                                   THE TONGANS.                               489

possess copies of the Bible when it was translated into their
language. ‘They were,” he says, “deemed by them more
precious than gold—yea, than much fine gold,” and “ became
at once the constant companion of their possessors, and the
source of their highest enjoyment*.”’
   The inhabitants of the Friendly, or Tonga, and of the
Sandwich Islands, are also very well described by Captain
Cook, but they belonged to the same race as those of Tahiti
and New Zealand, and resembled them in religion, language,
canoes, houses, weapons,                 food, habits, etc.      It is somewhat
remarkable that the Sandwich Islanders, in many respects,
as     for instance       in their        dances,   houses,      tattooing,   etc.,
resembled the New Zealanders even more than their nearer
neighbours in the Society and Friendly Islands.         In the
Friendly Islands Captain Cook observed a very singular
luxury in which the chiefs indulged themselves. When one
of them wished to go to sleep, two women came and sat
by him, “beating briskly on his body and legs with both
fists, as on a drum, till he fell asleep, and continuing it the
whole      night, with some            short intervals.”         When   the chief
is sound asleep they sometimes rest themselves a little,
“but resume it if they observe any appearance of his
waking+.” A similar statement is made by Wilson in his
Missionary Voyage}. In all the islands the chiefs appear
to have been treated with respect, none the less profound
because shown in ways which seem to us peculiar. One
of them was to uncover the body from the waist, and
it seems to have been a matter of indifference, or rather
of convenience, whether this was done upwards or down-
wards§.    In the Friendly Islands it was accounted a
striking mark of rudeness to speak to the king while
standing up.
     * Bilis,1.c. vol. i. pp. 393-408.           {l.c. p. 287.
     + Third Voyage, vol. i. p. 323.             § Cook’s First Voyage,vol.
                                                                         ii.p.12.
490                   THE TONGANS.

   There was also a certain amount of commerce between
the different islands.  Bora-bora and Otahaw produced
abundance of cocoa-nut oil, which was exchanged at Tahiti
for cloth. The Low Islands, again, could not successfully
grow the paper-mulberry; but they had a breed of dogs
with long silky hair, which was much prized in the other
islands.
                                 49]




                        CHAPTER         XIV.

                 MODERN     SAVAGES—continued.

                           Esquimauz.

    HE Esquimaux, and the Esquimaux alone among savage
       races, occupy both the Old and the New World.
They inhabit the shores of the Arctic Ocean from Siberia
to Greenland; and throughout this great extent of country
the language, appearance, habits, occupations, and weapons
of the natives are very similar, and it must be added that
the latter are most ingenious. The language of the Innuit,
or Esquimaux, is akin to that of the North American Indians
in structure, while their appearance has a decided likeness,
particularly about the eyes, to the Chinese and Tartars.
  Their dwellings are of two kinds.         The summer they pass
in tents or wigwams, with the entrance to the south or
south-east. In those observed by Captain Parry, the tent-
poles were, in the absence of wood, formed of stags’ horns,
or bones lashed together. The lower borders of the skins
were held down by large stones. These were sometimes
built up into regular circles, eight or nine feet in diameter
and four or five feet high*. These circles were at first sup-
posed to be the remains of winter-houses ; but it was sub-
sequently ascertained that they were exclusively used for
extending the skins of the summer-tents.     Near these “hut
circles” long rows of standing stones were several times
               * Parry’s Voyage, 1821-23, pp. 17. 51.
4,92                         TENTS.    HOUSES.

observed*, The winter-houses in the southern districts are
constructed of earth or drift-timber, which is very abundant
in some places. In the north, however, wood becomes
extremely rare. The Hsquimaux at the northern end of
Baffin’s Bay+, who had no wood, excepting twigs of a
dwarfish heath, were so little acquainted with the nature of
timber that several of them successively seized on the spare
top-mast of the “Isabella,” evidently with the intention of
stealing it, and quite unconscious of its weight. In the
absence    of wood      their houses    were     built of ice and snow;
those of ice are beautiful, and almost transparent, so that
even at some little distance itis possible to see every thing
that takes place in them.       ‘They are, however, much colder
than those of snow, which therefore are generally preferred.
West of the Rocky Mountains, the winter houses were usually
underground. A Kamskatchadale “yourt” is thus described
by Captain Cookt: “An oblong square, of dimensions pro-
portionate to the number of persons for whom it is intended
 (for it is proper to observe that several families live together
in the same jourt), is dug into the earth to the depth of about
six feet. Within this space strong posts, or wooden pillars,
are fastened in the ground, at proper distances from each
other, on which are extended the beams for the support of
the roof, which is formed by joists resting on the ground
with one end, and on the beams with the other.                     The in-
terstices between the joists are filled up with a strong wicker-
work, and the whole covered with turf; so that a jourt has
externally the appearance of a low round hillock. A hole is
lefé in the centre, which serves for chimney, window, and
entrance, and the inhabitants pass in and out by means of a
strong pole (instead of a ladder) notched               deep enough to

  * lc. pp. 62, 285, 363.              Ocean, vol. iii. p. 3874.   See   also
  + Ross, Baffin’s Bay, p. 122.        vol. iii. p. 450.
  t+ Cook’s Voyages   to the Pacific
              INTERIOR    OF AN ESQUIMAUX        HOUSE.          493

afford a little holding for the toe, as in fig. 141 (p. 182).”
More often, however, the entrance consisted of a sunken
passage, as in fig. 141* (p. 133) or fig. 143 (p. 158).
   As a general rule we may say that the western yourts are
subterranean, while those of the tribes who live east of the
Rocky Mountains are generally above ground. The manner
in which the Esquimaux construct their snow igloos has
been well described by Captain Parry.  They choose* a
drift of hard and compact snow, and from this they cut
oblong slabs, six or seven inches thick and about two feet in
length.   With   these    they build a circular wall, inclining
inwards   so as to form a dome, which is sometimes as much
as nine or ten feet high and from eight to fifteen feet in
diameter. A small door is then cut on the south side. It is
about three feet high, two and a half wide at the bottom, and
leads into a passage about ten feet long, and with a step in
the middle, the half next the hut being lower than either
the floor of the hut or the outer passage. For the admission
of light a round hole is cut on one side of the roof and a
circular plate of ice, three or four inches thick and two feet
in diameter, is let into it.      If several families intend to live
together, other chambers are constructed which open into the
first, and then after a quantity of snow has been shovelled
up on the outside, the shell of the building is regarded as
finished. The next thing is to raise a bank of snow two and
a half feet high all round the interior of the building, except
on the side next the door. This bank forms the bed. Over
it is laid some gravel, upon that again paddles, tent-poles,
pieces of whalebone, twigs of birch and of andromeda, etc.,
and finally a number of deer-skins, which form a soft and
Juxurious couch. They have no fireplace, properly so called,
that is to say, no hearth, but each family has a separate lamp

                         * Parry, l.c. p. 500.
494,            LAMPS.   ABSENCE   OF CLEANLINESS.

or shallow vessel generally made of lapis ollaris, in which
they burn seal’s-oil, with a wick made of dry moss.
   Although they had no knowledge of pottery, Captain Cook
saw at Unalashka vessels “ ofa flat stone, with sides of clay,
not unlike a standing pye*.” We here obtain an idea of
the manner in which the knowledge of pottery may have
been developed. After using clay to raise the sides of their
stone vessels, it would naturally occur to them that the same
substance   would serve for the bottom also, and thus the use
of stone might be replaced by a more convenient material.
   The natives of the Lower Murray cook their food in a
hollow in the ground, which they line with clay, and in
other cases gourds and wooden vessels are coated with clay
in order to enable them to stand heat. ‘Thus we see three
ways in which pottery may have been invented.
   The snow-houses melt away every spring; but in some
places the Hsquimaux construct their dwellings on a similar
plan, but with the bones of whales and walruses on a founda-
tion of stones, and with a covering        of earth.     The    snow-
houses are of course pretty clean at first, but they gradually
become very filthy. The bone-huts are even dirtier, because
more durable. “In every direction round the huts,” says
Captain Parry, “were lying innumerable bones of walruses
and seals, together with skulls of dogs, bears, and foxes, on
many   of which a part of the putrid flesh still remaining
sent forth the most offensive effuviat.”       He even      observed
a number of human bones lying about among the restt.
The inside of the huts, “from their extreme closeness and
accumulated filth, emitted an almost insupportable stench,
to which an abundant supply of raw and half-putrid walrus
flesh in no small degree contributed
                                  §.”

  * Cook’s Voyage to the Pacific    +t See also Lyon’s Journal, p. 236.
Ocean, vol. ii. p. 510.             § Parry, l. c. p. 358.
  + Parry, 1. c. p. 280,
                            STORES       OF FOOD.                           495

   On the north-western coast of America the natives find
plenty of drift-wood, and the floors of their yourts are, ac-
cording to Belcher, made of split timber, nicely smoothed
and carefully caulked with moss. Underneath is often a
large store-room,  for in summer they kill many reindeer,
whales, walrus, seals, swans, ducks, etc., the greater part of
which are laid by for winter use. One of these winter stores
is thus expressively, though somewhat hastily, described by
Sir E. Belcher*: “It was frozen into a solid mass beneath,
but loose from those on the surface, and seemed to be in-
corporated, by some unexplained process, into a gelatinous
snow, which they scraped up easily with the hand and ate
with satisfaction—fish oil predominating.    It was not offen-
sive nor putrid. How many years the lower mass may have
remained there I could not determine; but estimating the
supply im one yourt as proportioned for ten people—the
allowance of inhabitants for each yourt—the daily propor-
tion for the complete store would allow for three hundred
days, or about twenty-four pounds per soul.” He estimates
the quantity of solid meat in this storehouse alone at 71,424
pounds.    Captain Ross also mentionst+ the large stores of
food laid up by the Esquimaux of Boothia Felix during the
summer for winter use.          The habit does not, however, appear
to be general among the Esquimaux, though they all of
them make “ caches ” of meat under stone cairns.
   Charlevoix derives the name Esquimaux from the Indian
word Fskimantsik, which means “eaters of raw food ;’? many
of these northern tribes being in the habit of eating their
meat uncooked. We must in justice to them remember
that several of our Arctic Expeditions have adopted                         the

   * Trans. Hthn.   Soc., New    Ser.,    aiso Hall’s Life with the Esquimaux,
vol. i. p. 132.                           vol. ii. p. 8311; Kane’s Arctic Explo-
  + Narrative of a Second Voyage,         rations, vol. ii. p. 133.
p. 251; and Appendix,  p. 21. See
4.96                        COOKERY.        FOOD.

same   custom, which seems             indeed in those latitudes highly
conducive to health *.
  Their food if cooked at all is broiled or boiled.                        Their
vessels being of stone or wood cannot, indeed, be put on the
fire; but heated stones are thrown in until the water becomes
hot enough, and the food is cooked.                 Of course, the result is
a mess of soot, dirt, and ashes, which would, according to
our ideas, be almost intolerable; but if the stench of their
houses does not take away a man’sappetite, nothing else would
be likely to do so.        They never wash their pots or kettles ;
the dogs save them this trouble. Those who have arrived at
a dim consciousness of their dirtiness, do generally but make
matters worse, for if they wish to treat a guest “ genteelly,
they first lick the piece of meat he is to eat clean from the
blood and scum it has contracted in the kettle, with their
tongue; and should any one not kindly accept it, he would
be looked upon as an unmannerly man for despising their
civilityt.” The Hsquimaux observed by Dr. Rae at Repulse
Bay were, however, much cleaner in their habits.
   Their food consists principally of reindeer, musk ox, walrus,
seals, birds, and salmon. They will, however, eat any kind
of animal food. They are very fond of fat and marrow,
to get at which they pound the bones with a stone.     The
southern tribes get a few berries in summer, but those who
live in the north have scarcely any vegetable food except
that which they obtain in a half-digested form from the
stomach of the reindeer, and this they regard as a great
delicacy {; the northernmost of all, bemg unable to kill
reindeer, are entirely deprived of vegetable food.
   “IT was once present§,’”’ says Captain Cook, “when the
chief of Oonalashka made his dinner of the raw head of a
  * See, for instance, Kane’s Arctic        t Ross,   Narrative   of   a   Second
Explorations, vol. ii. p. 14.             Voyage, p. 352.
  + Crantz, p. 168; Parry, Second             § Cook’s Third   Voyage,     vol. ii.
Voyage, p.293; Lyon’s Journal,p.142.      ip. S11.
                                  FOOD.                            497

large halibut, just caught.          Before any was given to the
chief, two of his servants eat the gills, without any other
dressing besides squeezing out the slime. This done, one of
them cut off the head of the fish, took it to the sea and
washed it, then came with it and sat down by the chief:
first pulling up some grass, upon a part of which the head
was laid, and the rest was strewed before the chief. He
then cut large pieces off the cheeks, and laid these within
the reach of the great man, who swallowed them with as
much satisfaction as we should do raw oysters. When he
had done, the remains of the head were cut in pieces, and
given to the attendants, who tore off the meat with their
teeth, and gnawed the bones like so many dogs.”
    Captain Lyon gives an even more disgusting account
of an EKsquimaux meal.       “ From Kooilittuck*,” he says, “I
learnt a new Esquimaux luxury: he had eaten till he was
drunk, and every moment fell asleep, with a flushed and
burning face, and his mouth open: by his side sat Arnalooa
 (bis wife), who was attending her cooking-pot, and at short
intervals awakened her spouse, in order to cram as much as
was possible of a large piece of half-boiled flesh into his
mouth with the assistance of her forefinger, and having
filled it quite full, cut off the morsel close to his lips. This
he slowly chewed, and as soon as a syall vacancy became
perceptible, this was filled again by a lump of raw blubber.
During this operation the happy man moved no part of him
but his jaws, not even opening his eyes; but his extreme
satisfaction was occasionally shown by a most expressive
grunt, whenever he enjoyed sufficient room for the passage
of sound. The drippings of the savory repast had so plen-
tifully covered ‘his face and neck, that I had no hesitation
in determining that a man may look more like a beast by
over-eating than by drinking to excess. The women having
          * Lyon’s Journal, p. 181; see also Ross, 1. c. p. 448.
                                                            Kk
498               DIFFICULTY     OF OBTAINING      WATER.

fed all their better halves to sleep, and not having neglected
themselves, had now nothing to do but to talk and beg as
usual.
   A feast among some of the more civilized Esquimaux of
Greenland is thus described by Crantz*. “A factor being
invited to a great entertainment with several topping Green-
landers, counted the following dishes: 1. Dried herrings.
2. Dried seal’s flesh. 3. Boiled ditto. 4. Half raw and
rotten ditto, called Mikiak. 5. Boiled willocks. 6. A piece
of a half rotten whale’s tail: this was the dainty dish
or haunch of venison to which the guests were properly
invited. 7%. Dried salmon. 8. Dried remdeer venison.
9. A dessert of crowberries mixed with the chyle out of
the maw     of a reindeer.           10. The same, enriched with train
onl.”
   Their drink consists of blood or water: during the greater
part of the year they have considerable difficulty in obtaining
sufficient water to satisfy their thirst, and it is much too pre-
cious to be used for washing. It may seem surprising that
people who are surrounded by snow and ice should suffer
from want of water, but the amount of heat required to melt
snow is so great, that a man without the means of obtaining
fire might die of thirst in these arctic regions as easily as in
the sandy deserts of Africa. Any direct “resort to snow,”
says Kane, “ for the purpose of allaying thirst, was followed
by bloody lips and tongue; it burnt like caustic+.”        When
the Hsquimaux visited Captain Parry, they were always
anxious for water, which they drank in such quantities “that
it was impossible to furnish them with half as much as they
desired}.”” In the extreme north one of the principal duties
of the women in the winter is to thaw snow over their lamps,
feeding the wick with oil, if it does not rise well of its own
   * History of   Greenland,   vol    i.   + Arctic Explorations, vol.i.p. 190.
p. 172.                                    tl. p. 188.
                                     FIRE,                                    499

accord*; the natural heat of the room                    is not sufficient to
melt snow, as the temperature of the huts is always kept, if
possible, below the freezing-point. In South Greenland,
however, the huts are built of turf, etc., and are very warmt.
But we must remember that coolness, rather than heat, is
required by the Hsquimaux who live in snow dwellings,
because if the temperature rises to thirty-two degrees, the
continual dripping from the roof produces extreme incon-
venience, and, in fact, the most unhealthy season is the
spring, when the weather is too warm for snow huts, and too
cold for tents.  Thus, therefore, the Esquimaux, though
living in a climate so extremely rigorous, would be debarred
from the use of fires by the very nature of their dwellings,
even if they were able to obtain the necessary materials.
They never, says Simpson, “seem to think of fire as a means
of imparting warmth {;” their lamps are used for cooking,
for light, and for melting snow and drying clothes, rather
than to warm       the air §, and as, nevertheless, the body tem-
perature of the Esquimaux is almost the same as ours, it is
evident that they must require a large amount of animal food.
The quantity of meat which they consume is astonishing;
and it is worthy of remark that, from the scarcity of wood
in the far north, they use the same substance for food and
fuel; the calorific material being the same—namely, blubber
—whether the heat is to be obtained by digestion or com-
bustion ; whether the material is to be placed in a lamp and
burnt, or to be eaten and digested.                  In summer, however,
when it is less necessary to keep down the general tempera-
ture, they sometimes burn bones well saturated with oil.
For obtaining fire the Esquimaux generally use lumps of
iron pyrites and quartz, from which they strike sparks on to

 * Osborn’s Arctic Journal, p. 17.       p. 346.
 + HEgede, 1. c. p. 116.                     § Kane, }. c. vol. ii. p. 202.
 % Discoveries in North America,
                               Kok 2
500                   IMPLEMENTS        AND     WEAPONS.

moss which has been well dried and rubbed between the
hands*. They are also acquainted with the method of
obtaining it by friction+, which is a slower and more labo-
rious process. It appears, however, to be the one generally
pursued by the Greenland Esquimanxft.
   Tt has been generally assumed that man could scarcely
live in temperate climates, and certainly not in the arctic
regions, without the advantage of fire. From the above
facts, however, as well as from others which will presently
be recorded, it may be doubted whether this is really the
case. Hsquimaux do not use fire to warm their dwellings,
and cookery is with them a refinement. In fact, those Hsqui-
maux who live on reideer, more than on seal, having little
blubber, make hardly any use of fire.
   In the South the men have bows and arrows, harpoons,
spears, lines, fish-hooks, knives, snow-knives, ice-chisels,
snow-shovels, groovers, drill-bows, drills, etc. The women
have lamps and stone-kettles, lamp moss, pieces of iron-
pyrites, bone-needles, pieces of sinew, scrapers (figs. 105-107),
horn spoons, sealskin vessels, pointed bones, marrow-spoons,
and knives (figs. 214-216).      They have generally also, ac-
cording to Dr. Rae, a small piece of stone, bone, or ivory,
about six inches long and half an inch thick; this is used
for arranging the wicks of the lamps.
   Kane gives the following inventory of an Esquimaux hut
visited by him; a sealskin cup, for gathering and holding
water; the shoulder-blade of a walrus, to serve as a lamp; a
large flat stone to support it; another large, thin, fat stone
to support the melting snow; a lance-head, with a long coil
of walrus lme; a stand for clothes; and the clothes them-
selves completed the whole worldly goods of this poor family§.

  * Kane, l.c. vol. i. p. 379; Parry,           {t Egede, 1. c. p. 188.
lec. p. 504; Ross, lc. p. 518.                  § Kane’s Arctic Explorations, vo].
  + Liyon’s Journal, p. 290.                  i. p. 381.
                     IMPLEMENTS     AND WEAPONS.                          501

On their travelling expeditions eyen            less than this is neceg-
sary; raw meat and a fur bag are all that they require.

              Fig, 214,




                                        Fie. 215.           Fre. 216.




                                               Esquimaux Knife.




        Esquimaux Knife.

   The implements of the Esquimaux are very ingenious.
Besides knives resembling those figured above, the women
use others of a semicircular form, and very similar to the
curious semilunar knives (pl. 1., fig. 3) which are so com-
mon in Denmark.            They are, however, now made              of metal,
which the Southern Esquimaux have been enabled to obtain,
though in small quantities, from the Europeans.     Some
few of them     also      break   off bits of meteoric            iron, which
502                              HUNTING.

they hammer to an edge, and then fix in a handle of
horn or bone. The arrow-heads are of several kinds and
shapes.    Those of stone        (fig. 217) are made, not by blows,
but by pressure, for which purpose                 they use the point
of reindeer’s    horn,     set in bone;- bone          itself would      not
be tough enough. Other arrow-heads are of horn; these
often bear ‘‘owners’ marks” as may be seen by fig. 2
(p. 10). The shafts of the arrows are short,     Fra, 217,
straightened by steam, and provided with             .
feathers at the butt end. These are fastened
on by deer sinews. The bows are generally
of wood, either made of one piece steamed
into the right form, or of three parts most in-
geniously fastened together, and strengthened
by pieces of bone or sinew. When wood can-
not be obtained, they use bone or horn.
                                                       ie

They do not appear to be particularly good ners
shots: but Captain Parry* thinks that they would generally
hit a deer from forty to forty-five yards, if the animal
stood stillt. Moreover against large game they are, after
all, not very effective.        Sir J. C. Ross gives an interesting
account of a musk-sheep hunt which he witnessed. At
length becoming impatient, as the Esquimaux “ continued
to shoot without apparent effect, finding his opportunities
for an aim with much difficulty, and losing much time after-
wards in recovering his arrows, Sir James fired, and broke
the animal’s shoulder-blade, to the immense astonishment of
his companion  f.”
   The spears are made like the arrows, but are larger; the
heads also are frequently barbed, and in many cases fit loosely
  ENG feb jah Bulle                     their ancient habits have been modi-
  + The Esquimaux     of Greenland      fied, and their condition greatly im-
have long abandoned   ths bow    and _ proved, by this intercourse.
arrow, using guns obtained from the       t Sir J. Ross’ Arctic Expedition.
Danes. In many other respects also      1829-33, p. 350.
                   MODES    OF HUNTING        AND FISHING.                  5038

into the shaft, but are securely fastened to a long leathern
thong, which is tied to the butt end of the       Fe Bs
spear. For throwing the harpoon they use a
short handle or throwing stick, about two feet
long, narrow below, four inches wide above,
and with a notch on each side for the thumb
and forefinger. With these weapons they
attack not only seals and walruses, but even
whales. They strike the whale, if possible,
at the same time with many harpoons, “ to
which bladders are hung, made of great seal-
skins, several of which so encumber and stop
the whale, that it cannot sink deep. When
he is tired out, they despatch him guite with
their little lances.” Kane gives the figure of
a lance, the blade of which closely resembles
one of the longer “axes” from the Danish-
shell-mounds*.
   The Esquimaux have three principal ways
of killing seals. The commonest is with the
harpoon and bladder. When an Esquimaux
in his kayak “spies a seal, he tries to sur-
prise it unawares with the wind and sun in
his back, that he may not be heard or seen
by it. He tries to conceal himself behind                       beipa
a   wave, and      makes      hastily    but softly up to it till he
comes   within     four,    five, or six fathoms of it; meanwhile
he takes the utmost care that the harpoon, line, and bladder
lie in proper ordert.” As soon as the seal is struck the
point of the spear detaches             itself from the shatt,       and at
the same      moment       the Esquimaux          throws     the large air
bladder on to the water. This is often dragged under
water a little way, but it is so great an impediment, that
    * Arctic Explorations, vol. il. p. 129.             + Crantz, p. 154.
504                MODES     OF HUNTING       AND    FISHING.

the seal is soon obliged to come up. “The Greenlander
hastens to the spot where he sees the bladder rise up, and
smites the seal as soon as it appears” with the great lance,
or “angovigak.” This is not barbed, and does not there-
fore remain in the seal’s body, but can be used again and
                                       Eire, 219,




                                     Bone Harpoon,

again until the animal is exhausted.                 The second way is the
“clapper-hunt.” If the Esquimaux find, or can drive any
seals into the creeks or inlets, they frighten them by shout-
ing, clapping, and throwing stones every time they come up
to breathe, until at last they are exhausted and easily killed.
In winter, when the sea is frozen, the seals, which are obliged
to come up from time to time for the sake of air, keep open
certain breathing-holes for this purpose, and the Esquimaux,
when hehas found one of these, waits patiently till the seal makes
its appearance, when he kills it instantly with his harpoon.
      The Esquimaux        are   excellent     deerstalkers, and are much
assisted by the skill with which they can imitate the cry of
the remdeer.    Fish are caught sometimes with the hook and
line, sometimes by means of small nets when they come
to the shore in shoals to spawn, or finally with the spear.
The nets are made of “small hoops or rings of whalebone,
firmly lashed together with rings of the same material*.”
The fishing-lines also are made of whalebone+.   Salmon are
sometimes so abundant, that in Boothia Felix, Captain Ross
bought a ton weight for a single knife. For killing birds
they use an instrument in some respects like the “ bolas” of
South America:           a number     of stones or walrus teeth being
fastened to short pieces of string, and all the strings then
        * Parry, I. ¢, p. 100;                        + Egede, 1. c. p. 107.
                                  SLEDGES.                                 505

tied together at the other end*.              The spears, which are in-
tended    to be thrown at birds or other small animals, have a
double fork at the extremity, and three other barbed points
near the middle.    These diverge in different directions, so
that if the end pair should miss, one of the central trio might
strike the victim. Aquatic birds are also caught in whale-
bone nooses; but “the moulting season is the great bird-
harvest, as a few persons wading into the shallow lakes, can
soon tire out and catch the birds by handt.’’
   The so-called “ Arctic Highlanders,” however, are said to
have no means of killing the reindeer, though it abounds in
their country ; nor have they the art of fishing, although,
curiously enough, they catch large numbers of birds in small
hand-nets.       Seals, bears, walrus, and birds constitute almost
the whole of their diet{. Neither the American nor Green-
land Hsquimaux have succeeded in taming the reindeer.
Dogs are their only domestic animals, and are sometimes
used in hunting, but principally to draw the sledges.
   The sledges vary much both in materials and form: ac-
cording to Captain Lyon the best are made of the jaw-bones
of the whale, sawn to about two inches in thickness, and
from six inches to a foot in depth. These are the runners,
and are shod with a thin plank of the same material. The
sides are connected by pieces of bone, horn, or wood, firmly
lashed together. In Boothia, Captain Ross saw sledges in
which the runners were made of salmon, packed into a
cylinder, rolled up in skins, and frozen together. In spring
the skins are made into bags, and the fish are eaten§.
Altogether these sledges are well constructed, when it is
considered with what simple tools they are made.
  The dogs by which these sledges are drawn are by no
  = Simpson, l. c. p. 156.               Arctic Expedition,
                                                         vol. ii. p.25 ;Simp-
  7 Lyon’s Journal, p. 338.              son’s Discoveries   in North America,
   t Kane,Arctic Explorations,vol. ii.   p. 847; Ross, 1. c. p. 585.
pp. 208, 210.  See also Richardson’s        § 1. c. Appendix, p. 24.
506                                BOATS.

means easy to manage. Lach has a separate trace attached
to the front of the sledge, passing between the legs, and
fastened in front to a collar. The dogs therefore are nearly
abreast, and the traces are very liable to become entangled.
The team is guided by throwing the lash of the whip on one
side or the other, and repeating certain words. ‘“‘ Wooa,”
as among our carters, means “ Stop*.”
   Their boats also are very ingeniously built, and are of two
kinds, the kajak or men’s boat, and the umiak or women’s
boat. The kajak is from eighteen to twenty feet long,
eighteen inches broad in the middle, tapering to both ends,
and scarcely a foot deep. It has no outriggers, and is there-
fore very difficult to sit. It is quite covered over at the top,
with the exception of a hole in the middle, into which the
Hsquimaux puts his legs. The boat therefore cannot fill
with water, and even if it upsets, they can right it again by
a sudden jerk of the oar, or rather paddle.               Indeed, a skilful
 Esquimaux will turn somersaults in the water, in his boat
with great ease.     In spite of this they are frequently
drowned; and indeed so dangerous is the navigation that
they generally go in pairs, so as to assist one another on an
emergency, for the skin sides of the kajak are very thin, and,
if they come in contact with any of the floating ice or drift-
timber which abound in the Greenland seas, are liable to be
torn open, in which case the unfortunate Hsquimaux has
little chance of saving himself. The umiak is much larger,
and has a flat bottom.          It is made of slender laths, fastened
together with whalebone, and covered over with sealskins.
The Esquimaux observed by Ross, at the northern end of
Baffin’s Bay, were entirely without canoes, and were “ igno-
rant, even     traditionally,    of the existence        of a boatt+.”       It
is, aS he justly observes, an extraordinary thing to find “a

  * Parry’s Three Voyages for the Discovery of a N.W. Passage, vol. iv. p. 310.
  + Ross, Baffin’s Bay, p. 170.
                           SCRAPERS.      CLOTHES.                         507

maritime and a fishing tribe unacquainted with any means
of floating on the water ;” but we must remember that they
had no wood, and that there were only a few weeks in the
year when the sea was unfrozen. No wonder that Ross’s
ships were mistaken for living creatures*, and that his boats
excited the most unbounded astonishment and admiration.
Kane also+ confirms the absence of boats, but he adds “ that
the kayack was known to them traditionally.”
   In the preparation of skins the Esquimaux use certain
stone instruments (figs. 105-107), which have frequently
been overlooked on account of their simplicity, but which
yet are interesting because they are exactly similar to cer-
tain ancient implements which are very common in various
parts of Europe, and have been already described in page 92.
The collection made by my lamented friend, Mr. Christy,
contains four of these skin-scrapers, three of which were
obtained from the Esquimaux north of Behring’s Straits.
These are set in fossil ivory. The fourth was found in a
Greenland grave, probably not older than the fifteenth cen-
tury, and belonging to the Stone period which supervened.
when the intercourse with Norway was suspended. Some
archeologists had considered that the “scrapers” were
“probably knives, the prolonged thick ends of which were
intended for handles, to be held between the finger and
thumb, or possibly for attachment to a short wooden shaft t.”
The true nature and use of the ancient skin-scrapers has,
however, been entirely explained by these modern specimens,
with which they are absolutely identical. The method of
preparing skins is curious and ingenious, but very disgusting.
   The clothesof the HEsquimaux are made from the skins
of reindeer,       seals, and birds, sewn         together     with   sinews.
For needles they use bones either of birds or fishes; yet

  * 1.0. p: 118.          + Kane, Arctic Explorations, vol. ii. pp. 135, 210.
                    t See Archzeologia, vol. xxxviii. p. 415.
508                    ORNAMENTS.        CHEEK-STUDS.

with these simple instruments they sew very strongly and
well. The outer dress of the men resembles a short great-
coat, with a hood that can be pulled over the head if neces-
sary, and which serves as a substitute for a hat or cap.
Their under-garments or shirts are made of bird-skins, with
the feathers inwards, or of skins with the hair inside; some-
times, however, they wear in addition another shirt made of
seal’s entrails. Their breeches, “of which in winter they
also wear two pair, and similarly disposed as to the fur*,”
are either of seal-skin or reindeer-skin, and their stockings
of skins from very young animals. The boots are of smooth
black    dressed     seal’s   leather, and      sometimes      when         at sea
they wear a great overcoat of the same material. Their
clothes are generally very greasy and dirty, and swarm with
lice. The dress of the women does not differ much from
that of the men.
    Their principal ornaments are cheek-studs (fig. 220), or
pieces of polished stone or bone, which are worn in the lower
lip or cheeks. The hole is made in early                       Fie, 220.
infancy, and gradually enlarged by a
series of “onidest.” These “ labrets,”’
however, are not worn by the Hastern
tribes. According to Richardson they &:
are in use from Behring’s Straits to the Psivimarx Cheek-stud.
Mackenzie Rivert. The other ornaments consist of strips
of variously coloured fur, and fringes of pierced teeth, gene-
rally those of the fox or wolf. Among the Esquimaux
visited by Captain Lyon, the ornaments were all appropriated -
by the men§. Some of the families are in the habit of
tattooing themselves.

  * Parry, 1. c. p. 495.                    f Arctic   Expedition,   vol.    i. p.
  + Vancouver’s Voyage, vol. li. p.      355.
280; see also p.408; Belcher, l. c. p.     § Lyon’s Journal, p. 314.
141.
                             MUSIC.      DRAWINGS.                              509

   The men hunt and fish. They make the weapons and
implements, and prepare the woodwork of the boats.
The women* are the cooks, prepare the skins, and make
the clothes. They also repair the houses, tents, and boats,
the men doing only carpenter’s work. Though they do
not appear to be very harshly treated, still the women
have certainly “a hard and almost slavish life of it,”
although perhaps after all not more so than the men.
   The Esquimaux are not altogether without music. They
have a kind of drum, and sing both alone and in chorus.
They are acquainted with several kinds of gamest, both of
strength and skill, and are fond of dances, which are often
very indecent.     One of their games resembled our cat’s
cradle t, and Kane saw the children in Smith’s Sound play-
ing hockey on the ice. The Esquimaux have also a great
natural ability for drawing. In many cases they have made
rude maps for our officers, which have turned out to be
substantially correct. Many of their bone implements are
covered with sketches. Figs. 221 to 223 represent three
bone drill-bows presented to the Ashmolean Museum by
Captain Beechey, and which I presume to be some of those
which he obtained in Hotham Inlet, Kotzebue Sound, and
described in his voyage to the Pacific.                   In fig. 223 we see
yourts, or winter-houses, in two cases, with dogs standing on
them.      Men      armed     with     bows      and     arrows,     and    others
dragging seals home over the ice, and one man about to
spear a reindeer with a movable-headed harpoon. In fig.
222 are reindeer, geese, a baidar, or flat-bottomed boat, a
tent, round which various articles of clothing are hung up
to dry, a woman, apparently engaged in the preparation of
food, and a hunting-scene.   A decoy, roughly representing
the head and antlers of a reindeer, has been put up, and a

        * Crantz, p. 164.                              + Egede, l. c. p. 162.
                            ih Hall lve: vols nu. p. S16-
510   DRAWINGS.

            Fie, 222.   Fig. 223.
                        RELIGION.        MODES     OF   BURIAL.                      511

real reindeer, while unsuspiciously browsing close by, is
about to be shot by an Esquimaux hunter.     In fig. 221 are
represented two animals, apparently intended for crocodiles ;
the draughtsman must, I think, have seen drawings of this
animal in some European vessel.
   According to Crantz, the Greenland Esquimaux “have
neither a religious nor idolatrous worship, nor so much as
any ceremonies to be perceived tending towards it*.” This
statement has been confirmed by many other observers +.
Their burial ceremonies have, however, been supposed to
indicate a belief in the resurrection. They generally bend
the body into a sitting posture, bringing the knees up under
the chin, and then wrap the corpse in one of their best skins.
For the grave they choose some high place, and over the
corpse they make a heap of stones. Near the body some
of them place the implements of the deceased, and even
sometimes, if he was a man, his kajak; believing, as it has
been said, that they will be of use to him in the new world.
Egedet, however, expressly denies that it is done with any
such idea.        This view is also confirmed by Hall, according
to whom the Hsquimaux have a superstitious objection to
use, or even touch, any thing which has been in a house
containing a dead body§. It is, perhaps, the same idea which
induces them to remove a corpse, not through the ordi-
nary entrance, but by way of the window||. In other
cases, when a person is evidently dying, they place by him
every thing which can soothe and comfort his last moments,
and then leave the igloo, or house, which they close up, thus
converting it into a tomb.                    Crantz tells us that they “lay

  * I. cp. 197.                                Egede, 1. c. p. 183.
  + Graah’s Voyage           to Greenland,       Sel (op fee alll,
p. 128;   Ross,   Baffin’s     Bay, vol. i.      § 1. c. vol. i. p. 201; vol. ii. p. 221.
p. 175; Voyage of Discovery, p. 128;              || Graah, 1. c. p. 128; Ross, Arctic
Parry, 1. c. p. 551; Richardson’s              Expedition, 1829-33, p. 290.
Arctic Expedition, vol. ii. p. 44;               “ Graah, l. c. p. 126.
512                THINGS    BURIED    WITH    THE    DEAD.

a dog’s head by the grave of a child, for the soul of a dog
can find its way every where, and will show the ignorant babe
the way to the land of souls,” and this is admitted by Egede.
Moreover, the custom of occasionally burying models of im-
plements, instead of the implements themselves, tends to the
same conclusion.
   Captain Cook saw burial mounds of earth or stone at
Oonalashka.    One of the latter was near the village, and
he observed that, in accordance with a custom which                      seems
to prevail all over the world, every one who passed threw a
stone on it*. Infants, if unfortunate enough to lose their
mothers, are always buried with them; and sickly aged peo-
ple are sometimes buried alive, as it is considered a kindness
to spare them the pain of a lingering death. The Hsqui-
maux observed by Captain Parry had a superstitious idea
that any weight pressing upon the corpse would give pain to
the deceased +. Such a belief would naturally give rise, in
a more     favoured      country,     to vaulted      tumuli;    but    in the
extreme north, the only result is that the dead bodtes are
but shghtly covered up, in consequence cf which the foxes
and dogs frequently dig them up and eat them. This the
natives regard with the utmost indifference; they leave the
human bones lying about near the huts, among those of
animals    which     have    served     for   food;    another    reason     for
doubting whether their burial customs can be regarded as
satisfactory evidence of any very definite and general belief
in a resurrection, or whether the objects which they bury
with their friends are really supposed to be of actual ‘use
to them.    On the whole, the burial customs of the Hsqui-
maux are curiously like those of which we find evidence in
the ancient tumuli of northern and western Europe.
   In character the Esquimaux are a quiet, peaceable people.
Those observed by Ross in Baffin’s Bay, “could not be made
 * Voyage to the Pacific Ocean, vol. ii. p. 519.       + lc. pp. 395, 417, 550.
                              CHARACTER.                              513
to understand what was meant by war, nor had they any
warlike weapons*,”   Like other savages they resemble
children in a great many respects. They are such bad
arithmeticians    that the    ‘enumeration        of ten is a labour,
and of fifteen an impossibility with many of them+.”                  Dr.
Rae, whose partiality for the HEsquimaux is well known,
assures us that if a man is asked the number of his children,
he is generally much puzzled. After counting some time
on his fingers, he will probably consult his wife, and the two
often differ, even though they may not have more than four
or five f.
  Amongst      the Esquimaux both polygamy and polyandry
appear to occur.  A strong or skilful man has often more
than one wife, a beautiful or clever woman in some cases
more than one husband§.            Again, the temporary loan of a
wife is considered a mark of peculiar friendship; in which,
however, the advantage is not all on one side, as a large
family, far from being any incumbrance, is among the Hsqui-
maux a great adyantage||. Apart, moreover, from these
recognized customs, it does not appear that the Esquimaux
set any very high value on the virtue of chastity.
   They are excessively dirty. Considering the difficulty in
obtaining enough water even to drink during the greater
part of the year, we cannot, perhaps, wonder that they never
dream of washing. Their word for dirt, eberk, conveys no
idea of any thing disagreeable or offensive; but, in justice
to them, we must remember that the extreme cold, by pre-
venting putrefaction, removes one of our principal induce-
ments to cleanliness, and at the same time induces so great
a scarcity of liquid water, as to render washing almost an
impossibility.
   * J. c. p. 186,                      § Ross, l. c. p. 2738.
   + Parry, l. c, p. 251.                || Ross, l. c. p. 515.
   t See for a curious instance   of    "| Kane, Arctic Explorations, vol.
this, Graah, 1. c. p. 131.             1D yaliG.
                                                           in,
514:                     CHARACTER,

    As a general rule it is impossible to put any dependence
on their promises, not-so much that they are intentionally
deceitful, as on account of the wavering and inconstant dis-
position which they possess in common with so many other
savages. Among themselves a successful huntsman or fisher-
man is always ready to share his seal or walrus with his less
fortunate neighbours; but he expects, as a matter of course,
that a sufficient return will be made to him when an oppor-
tunity occurs. They give away nothing themselves without
expecting to receive as much again, and, being unable to
imagine any other line of conduct, are naturally very de-
ficient in gratitude. Captain Ross, however, and Dr. Rae
 consider that the Hsquimaux encountered by them were
 neither ungrateful nor particularly selfish. In other respects
 also these appear to have been very favourable specimens of
 the race. Though not cruel, the Esquimaux seem to be a
 somewhat heartless people. They do not, indeed, feel any
 actual pleasure in the infliction of pain, but they will take
 little trouble to remove or relieve suffering. They are also
great thieves, but, as   Captain   Parry truly observes *, we
must “make due allowance for the degree of temptation
to which they were daily exposed, amidst the boundless
stores of wealth which our ships appeared to them to
furnish.” According to Hall+, moreover, they are strictly
honest among themselves, kind, generous, and trustworthy.
   Parry thus describes them: “In the few opportunities we
had of putting their hospitality to the test we had every
reason to be pleased with them. Both as to food and:ac-
commodation the best they had were always at our service;
and their attention, both in kind and degree, was every thing
that hospitality and even good breeding could dictate. The
kindly offices of drying and mending our clothes, cooking
our provisions, and thawing snow for our drink, were per-
       ¥ lo p. 522,                   le ConVOlertin ps alka.
                        NORTH    AMERICAN     INDIANS.                  DID

formed by the women          with an obliging cheerfulness which
we shall not easily forget, and which commanded its due
share of our admiration and esteem. While thus their guest,
I have passed an evening not only with comfort, but with
extreme gratification; for, with the women working and
singing, their husbands quietly mending their lines, the
children playing before the door, and the pot boiling over
the blaze of a cheerful lamp, one might well forget for the
time that an Esquimaux hut was the scene of this domestic
comfort and tranquillity ; and I can safely affirm with Cart-
wright that, while thus lodged beneath their roof, I know
no people whom I would more confidently trust, as respects
either my person or my property, than the Esquimaux*.”
   Dr. Rae also has a very high opinion of them, and they
seem from all accounts to present the remarkable pheno-
menon of a really high state of morality, without any thing
which can be called religion.

                      The North American         Indians.

   The aboriginal, or at least the Pre-Columbian inhabitants
of North America, fall naturally into three divisions,                 The
Esquimaux in the extreme north, the Indian tribes in the
centre, and the comparatively             civilized Mexicans        in the
south. The central tribes, which occupied by far the greater
extent of the continent, were again divided by the Rocky
Mountains into two great groups; that on the western side
being in much the most abject condition. Though no doubt
there was and is an immense difference between different
tribes—and particularly between the semi-agricultural na-
tions of the west, and the filthy barbarians of Northern
California—still as Mr. Schoolcraft, to whom we are indebted

  * Parry’s Three Voyages for the Discovery of a North-west Passage, vol. v.
p. 18.
                                   u12
516                      DRESS.         ORNAMENTS.

for an excellent work on the “History, Condition, and
Prospects of the Indian Tribes*,” truly says, “their manners
and customs, their opinions and mental habits, had, wherever
they were inquired into, at the earliest dates, much in com-
mon.   Their modes of war and worship, hunting and amuse-
ments, were very similar. In the sacrifice of prisoners taken
in war;     in the laws of retaliation; in the sacred character
attached to public transactions solemnized by smoking the
pipe; in the adoption of persons taken in war, in families;
in the exhibition of dances on almost every occasion that can
enlist human sympathy; in the meagre and imartificial style
of music; in the totemic tie that binds relationships toge-
ther, and in the system of symbols and figures cut and
marked      on   their grave-posts,           on trees, and sometimes              on
rocks, there is a perfect identity of principles, arts, and
opinions. The mere act of wandering and petty warfare
kept them ina savage state, though they had the element
of civilization with them in the Maize t+.”
   As regards dress many of the Indian chiefs had magni-
ficent dresses of skins and feathers. Some of the tribes,
indeed, wore no clothes; but this was rarely the case with
the women, and even the men had generally at least a loin
cloth. The amount of clothing, however, depended very
much on the temperature. In the plains and forests of the
tropical and southern Jatitudes, “the Indian wears little or
no clothing during a large part of the year ;” but it is very
different   on   the   mountains          and in the north, where                 the
common      dress was the breech-cloth and mocassins, with a
buffalo-skin thrown over the shoulders.                         The inhabitants of
Vancouver’s Island had mats, made either of dog’s-wool
alone, of dog’s-wool and goose-down together, or of threads
obtained from cedar-bark.               They often wore “necklaces or
       * Published by authority of Congress.                Philadelphia, 1853,
                           ap enh Akedle atte 40}, eAt7/.
                       ORNAMENTS.     LABRETS,                         ay

shells, claws, or wampum; feathers on the head, and armlets,
as well as ear and nose jewels*.”        Many of the Indian
tribes are clean in their persons, and frequently use both the
sweat-house and cold bath ; others are described as repulsive
in countenance and filthy both in person and habit.
   The eastern tribes do not generally disfigure themselves
artificially, except indeed by the use of paint; but it is very
different in the west. The Sachet Indians of De Fuca’s
Straits wear pieces of bone or wood passed through the
cartilage of the nose; the Classet Indians cut their noses
when they capture a whale; among the Babines, who live
north of Columbia River, the size of the under-lip is the
standard of female beauty+. A hole is made in the under-lip
of the infant, in which      a small bone is inserted;        from time
to time the bone is replaced by a larger one, until at last a
piece of wood three inches long and an inch and a half
wide, is inserted in the orifice, which makes the lip protrude
to a frightful extent.        The process appears          to be very
painful.
   Owing to the almost universal custom of fastening babies
to a cradle-board, the American skulls are characterized by a
flattened occiput. This peculiarity does not now occur in
European heads, but it is found in many ancient skulls from
various parts of the old continents, and indicates, as pointed
out by Vesalius,     Gosse, and Wilson,      that the cradle-board,
though long abandoned, was at one time used in Western
Europe, as it is even now among the Indians of North
America.   The extraordinary practice of moulding the form
of the head was common to several of the Indian tribes.
Tt prevailed in Mexico and Peru, in the Carib Islands, and
among the savage tribes of Oregon. Among the Natchez
the deformity is described by the historian of De Soto’s

  * Schoolcraft, vol. iii. p. 65.   rica, p. 242; Vancouver, l. c. vol. ii.
  + Kane’s Indians of North Ame.    pp. 280, 408.
518               THE   PRACTICE   OF HEAD-MOULDING.

expedition as consisting of an upward elongation of the
cranium, until it terminated in a point or edge. The Choc-
taws, though enemies of the Natchez, “improved” their
heads in the same way. Their children were placed upon
a board, and a bag of sand was laid upon the forehead,
“which, by continual gentle compressure, gives the forehead
somewhat the form of a brick from the temples upwards,
and by these means they have high and lofty foreheads
sloping off backwards*.”   The Waxsaws, Muscogees or
Creehs, Catawhas, and Altacapas are described as having
had a similar        custom.     It was,    however,      only the male
infants which were treated in this manner. Among the
Nootka-Columbians the practice of flattening the head was
universal. The child was placed in a box or cradle lined
with moss. The occiput rested on a board at the upper
part of the box, and another board was brought over the
forehead, and tied firmly down on the head of the infant.
The process continued until the child was able to walk, at
which time it is described as presenting a most hideous
appearance.    The eyes “stand a prodigious way asunder,”
the eyeballs project very much, and are directed upwards,
the head is very wide, and has almost the form of a wedge.
The Newatees, a tribe residing on the north end of Van-
couver’s Island, forced the head into a conical shape, by
means of a cord of deer-skin padded with the inner bark
of the cedar tree.        This cord, which is about as thick as a
man’s thumb, is wound round the infant’s head and gradually
forces it to take the shape of a tapering cone+. Among the
Peruvians the forehead was pressed downwards and back-
wards by tight bandages, of which there seem to have been
generally two, leaving a space between them, and thus pro-
ducing a well-marked ridge running transversely across the
      * Schoolcraft, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 324.
      + Wilson on Physical Ethnology, Smithsonian   Report, 1852, p. 288.
              RELIGION.        SOCIAL   POSITION    OF WOMEN.             519

skull. Thus, while the forehead was prevented from rising,
and the sides of the head from expanding, the occipital
region was allowed full freedom of growth, and the develop-
ment of the brain was forced to take an unnatural direction.
So great was the change produced, so extraordinary is the
shape of these abnormal skulls, that many ethnologists have
been disposed to regard them as belonging to a peculiar race.
This theory, however, has been clearly proved to be erroneous,
and is now universally abandoned.       It is very remarkable
that this unnatural process does not appear to have any
prejudicial effect on the minds of the sufferers*,
   Hearne states that the Northern Indians had no religion;
even the celebrated “five nations’’ of Canada, according to
Colden, had no religion, nor any word for God. Burnet+
never found any semblance of worship among the Coman-
ches. In the central parts of North America, however,
the Indian tribes generally believed in the existence of a
Great Spirit, and the survival of the soul, but they seem
to have had scarcely any religious observances, still less any
edifices for sacred purposes. The Dacotahs never pray to
the Creator; if they wish for fine weather, they pray to
the weather itself. They believe that the Great Spirit made
all things except thunder and rice, but we are not told the
reason for these two curious exceptions.
   The social position of the women seems to have been very
degraded among the aboriginal tribes of North America.
“Their wives, or dogs, as some of the Indians term them,”
are indeed well treated as long as they do all the work, and
there is plenty to eat; but throughout the continent, as
indeed among all savages, the domestic drudgery falls to their
lot, while the men hunt and make war; though in justice to

  * Beecher’s Woyage round the              + Schoolcraft, vol. i. p. 237. See
World, vol. i. p. 808; Wilson, Smith.    also Richardson’s Arctic Expedition,
sonian Report, 1862, p. 287.             vol. ii, p. 21.
520                            CHARACTER.

them we must remember that the former at least of these two
occupations was of the greatest possible importance, and that
upon it depended their principal means of subsistence.
Polygamy generally prevailed; the husband had absolute
power over his wives, and the marriage lasted only as long
as he pleased. Among some of the North Californian
Indians it is not thought right to beat the wives, but the
men “allow themselves the privilege of shooting such as
they tired of *.’ Among the Dogribs and other northern
tribes, the women are the property of the strongest. Hvery
one is considered to have both a legal and moral right to
take the wife of any man weaker than heis. In fact, the
men fight for the possession of the women, just like stags and
the males of other wild beasts+. Lending wives is a frequent
customf.
  “ Imperturbability§,        im all situations, is one of the most
striking and general traits of the Indian character. To still
his muscles to resist the expression of all emotion, seems to
be the point of attainment; and this is particularly observed
on public occasions. Neither fear nor joy are permitted to
break this trained equanimity.”     Even among relations “ it
is not customary to indulge in warm greetings.      The pride
and stoicism of the hunter and warrior forbid it. The pride
of the wife, who has been made the creature of rough
endurance, also forbids it.”
   But perhaps the most remarkable evidence of this is the
fact that the Algonquin language, although one of the
richest, contained no word for “to love,” and when Elliott
translated the Bible for them in 1661, he was obliged to
coin one. He introduced the word “ womon” to supply the

   * Col. M‘Kee in Schoolcraft’s In.      t Hearne, 1, c. p. 128; Carver's
dian Tribes, vol. iii. p. 127.         Travels, p. 131; James’ Expedition
  + See Hearne’s Journey to the        tothe Rocky Mountains, vol. i. p. 212.
Copper-Mine River, p. 104.               § Schoolcraft, vol. iii. p. 58.
                        CRUELTY.       INFANTICIDE.                  52t

want. Again, the Tinné language* contains no word to
express “dear” or “beloved.” It is only fair to add that
Kane found the Cree Indians swearing in French, having no
oaths in their own languaget. Mr. Schoolcraft records, as
an indication that they are in reality of affectionate dis-
position, that he “once saw a Fox Indian on the banks of
the Mississippi, near whose wigwam IJ had, unnoticed to him,
wandered, take up his male infant in his arms, and several
times kiss itt.’ The special mention of this fact conveys a
different impression from that which was intended. Never-
theless, among the better tribes many no doubt are capable
of feeling strong affection, and there are even cases on record
in which the father has redeemed his son from the stake, and
actually been burnt in his stead.
   Partly no doubt from the hatred produced by almost in-
cessant wars, partly perhaps encouraged by the stoical dis-
regard of pain which it was their pride to affect, the North
American Indians were very cruel to captives taken in war.
Scalping seems to have been an universal practice, and it is
even said that the Sioux sometimes ate the hearts of their
enemies, every one of the war-party getting a mouthful, if
possible.
  Infanticide     was    common      in the north, but does not seem
to have prevailed among the southern tribes to any great
extent; and until the advent of Europeans they do not
appear to have had any fermented liquors. The Sioux,
Assiniboines,     and other tribes on the Missouri        are said to
have habitually abandoned those who from age or infirmities
were unable to follow the hunting-camps. The same was
frequently the case among the northern tribes.
   Copper is found native in the northern districts, and even
before the advent of the Huropeans was used for hatchets,
  * Richardson’s Arctic Expedition, vol. il. p. 24.     + 1. c, p. 339.
                           t lo. vol. iii, p. 64.
oa                        IMPLEMENTS.        WHAPONS.

bracelets, etc. Nevertheless, it was used rather as a stone
than as a metal; that is to say, the Indians did not heat it
and run it into moulds, or work it when hot, but simply took
advantage of its malleability and hammered it into form,
without the assistance of heat. Metallic vessels were quite
unknown to the aborigines of North America.
     The implements of the Shoshonees, or Snake Indians, are
described by Wyeth.               Their possessions were confined tc
“the pot, bow and arrow, knives, graining tools, awls, root-
digger, fish-spears, nets, a kind of boat or raft, the pipe,
mats for shelter, and implements to produce fire *.”
   The pot was made of “long tough roots, wound in plies
around a centre, shortening the circumference of the outer
plies so as to form a vessel in the shape of an inverted bee-
hive.”      They were       so well made as to be quite water-tight,
and though of course they could not be put on the fire,
still they were used for boiling, in the manner already
described as practised by other savages.     The Dacotahs
are said to have sometimes boiled animals in their own
skins, taking the skin off whole, suspending it at the four
corners, and making use of boiling stones as usual. They
had also stone vessels, but these were rare, and probably
used only as mortars.
   Their bows are very skilfully made of the horns of the
mountain sheep and elk, or sometimes of wood. ‘ The string
is of twisted sinew,           and is used loose, and those using this
bow require a guard to protect the hand which holds it.”
The arrow is driven with such force that it will pass right
through the body of a horse or buffalo+, and in the account
of De Soto’s expedition, it is stated that on one occasion an
arrow went through the saddle and housings of a horse and
penetrated one-third of its length into the body.                  Although
  * Schoolcraft, vol. i. p. 212.            p. 14% Cathn, 1c. yolk. 1. pa 3h
   + Schooleraft, 1. c. vol. iii, pp. 35,   vol. ii. p. 212; McKean and Hall’s
46; Kane’s North American Indians,          Indian Tribes, vol. ii. p. 4,
                      KNIVES.     SPEARS.     BOATS.              520

on the whole far inferior to the rifle, still in hunting, the bow
has the one great advantage of silence. Among several of
the tribes, arrow-making was a distinct profession.           The
arrow-heads     are of obsidian, about three-fourths of an inch
long and half an inch wide, and quite thin. The base is
expanded and is inserted into the split end of the shaft, being
kept in its place by sinews. The shaft is about two feet and
a half long ; when intended for hunting it is expanded at the
end, so that when it is drawn out of the wound the arrow-
head is extracted also; but the shafts of war-arrows taper to
the end, so that when they are drawn out the head remains
behind. The sling does not appear to have been much used.
   The knives are rudely made of obsidian, and are sometimes
fastened in handles of wood or horn. The graining tools
for preparing skins are sometimes of bone, sometimes of
obsidian. Mr. Wyeth does not describe their form. Awls
were made of bone; large thorns also being sometimes used
for the purpose. Root-diggers are either made of horns, or
of crooked sticks pointed and hardened by fire. ‘ The fish-
spear is a very simple and ingenious implement.     The head
is of bone, to which a small strong line is attached near
the middle, connecting it with the shaft about two feet from
the point. Near the forward end of this head there is a
small hole, which enters it ranging acutely towards the point
of the head; it is quite shallow. In this hole the front end
of the shaft is placed.’ The shaft is of light willow, and
about ten feet long. When the fish is struck, the shaft is
withdrawn,     and the string at once pulls the bone end into a
transverse position.        The fish-nets are made of bark, which
gives a very strong line, and are of two kinds, the scoop and
the seine. They are, however, unknown among the northern
tribes west of the Mackenzie*. The boats of the Shoshonees
hardly deserve the name, and seem to be used only for cross-
              * Richardson’s Arctic Expedition, vol. il. p. 25.
524                                  FIRE.

ing rivers. They are about eight feet long, and made of
reeds, but there is no attempt to make them water-tight.
Other tribes, however, have much better canoes, made either
of bark or of a log hollowed out. The pipes are large, and
the bowl is generally of fuller’s earth, or of soap-stone.
The mats are about four feet long, are made of rushes, and
are used either as beds, or in the construction of wigwams.
   They obtain fire by rubbing a piece of wood in a hole.
The Chippeways and Natchez tribes had an institution for
keeping up a perpetual fire, certain persons being set aside
and devoted to this occupation.
   The Dacotahs used a drill bow (fig. 224) for the purpose
of obtaining fire. This instrument, as shown in the accom-
panying figure, is a small stiff bow, the string of which
 forms a loop round the upright stick, and thus, when the
bow is moved backwards and forwards, gives it a rotatory
movement.      The Iroquois had effected a still further im-
provement, and worked with an instrument (fig. 225) closely
resembling that used in Western Europe, and also in Cey-
lon*, to drill holes in earthenware and metal.

                Lia, 224,




           Dacotah Fire Drill Bow,
                                                  Troquois Fire Pump Drill.

                             * Davy’s Ceylon, p. 263.
                                DWELLINGS.                               525

   The huts or wigwams of the North American Indians are
of two kinds, one for summer,             and the other        for winter.
The winter wigwam of the Dacotahs is thus described by
Schoolcraft: “To erect one of them it is only necessary to cut
a few saplings about fifteen feet in length, place the large
ends on the ground in a circle, letting the tops meet, thus
forming a cone. The buffalo-skins, sewed together in the
form of a cap, are then thrown over them and fastened toge-
ther with a few splints. The fire is made on the ground in
the centre of the wigwam, and the smoke escapes through
an aperture at the top. These wigwams are warm and com-
fortable.  The other kind of hut is made of bark, usually
that of the elm*.”  The huts of the Mandans +, Minatarees,
etc., were    circular   in form, and from forty to sixty feet in
diameter. The earth was removed to a depth of about two
feet. The framework was of timber, covered with willow
boughs, but leaving a space in the middle to serve both as
chimney and window. Over the woodwork was placed a
thick layer of earth, and at the top of all some tough clay,
which was impervious          to water, and in time became             quite
hard, as in fine weather the tops of the huts were the com-
mon lounging place for the whole tribe. Though these
dwellings were sometimes kept very clean and tidy t, this
was not always the case.     Speaking of the Nootka Sound
Indians, Captain Cook§ says: “The nastiness and stench of
their houses are, however, at least equal to the confusion.
For, as they dry their fish within doors, they also gut them
there, which, with their bones and fragments thrown down
at meals, and the addition of other sorts of filth, lie every
where in heaps, and are, I believe, never carried away till it

   * I. c. vol. ii. p. 191.               t+ Catlin’s American Indians, vol.i.
   + This tribe, one of the most in- _ p. 82.
teresting, has been entirely swept        § Third Voyage, vol. ii. p. 316.
away by the small-pox.
526                     DWELLINGS.       AGRICULTURE.

becomes troublesome,           from their size, to walk over them.
In a word, their houses are as filthy as hog-sties: every
thing in and about them stinking of fish, train-oil, and
smoke.”
   The Wallawalla Indians* of Columbia dig a circular hole
in the ground about ten or twelve feet deep, and from forty
to fifty feet in circumference, and cover it over with drift-
wood and mud.           A hole is left on one side for a door, and a
notched pole serves as a ladder (see fig. 141, p. 1382). Here
twelve or fifteen persons burrow through the winter, requir-
ing very litle fire, as they generally eat their salmon raw,
and the place is warm from the numbers collected together
and the absence of ventilation. In summer they use lodges
made of rushes or mats spread on poles. This tribe lives
principally on salmon, preferring it putrid.
   South of the Gulf of St. Lawrence and west of the Rocky
Mountains almost all the tribes seem to have grown more or
less maize, In the Carolinas and Virginia the Indians raised
large quantities, and “all relied on it as one of their fixed
means of subsistence +.’”? The Delawares had extensive maize
fields at the time of the discovery of America.   In 1527,
De Vaca saw it in small quantities m Florida, and De Soto,
twelve years later, found it abundant among the Muscogees,
Choctaws, Chickasaws, and Cherokees.                    On one occasion his
army marched through fields of it for a distance of two
leagues. It 1s known to have been cultivated by the Iroquois
in 1610, and, though only in small quantities, ‘‘ by the hunter
communities        of the Ohio, the Wabagh, the Miami, and the
Illinois,” as well as by the natives along both banks of the
Mississippi.       The evidences of ancient agriculture have been
already alluded to in the chapter on North American Arche-

  * Kane’s North American Indians,          } Schoolcraft, l.c. vol.i.p.6.   See
p- 272; United State     Exploring Ex-    also Richardson’s Arctic Expedition,
pedition, vol. iv. p. 452,                vol. ii. p. 51.
                  MAIZE.     RICE.   ANIMAL FOOD.              527

ology ; the maize appears to have been the only plant actually
under cultivation; but some of the tribes depended for their
subsistence very much on roots, etc. The principal imple-
ment of agriculture seems to have been the hoe, for which
they often used the shoulder-blade of the bison fixed into a
handle of wood.       Wild rice also grew       abundantly   in the
shallow lakes and streams of Michigan, Wisconsin, Iowa,
Minnesota, as well as in the upper valleys of the Mississippi
and Missouri. It was gathered by the women, and formed
one of their principal articles of food. They went into the
rice-fields in canoes, and bending the stalks in handfuls over
the sides of the canoe, beat out the grain with paddles.
   The North American Indians, however, depended mainly
on the animal kingdom for their subsistence.         They are
essentially hunters    and   fishermen;   the   buffalo, the deer,
and the salmon supplying them with their principal articles
of food. The buffaloes were sometimes driven into pounds,
sometimes shot on the open prairie with bows and arrows.
Fish were speared, caught in weirs, etc., or shot with the
bow. The Macaws and Clallums on the Pacific coast some-
times even killed whales. For this purpose they use large
barbed harpoons of bone, with a string, and a strong seal-
skin bag filled with air. This apparatus was used in the
same manner as among the Hsquimaux (ante, p. 503). Like
all carnivorous animals, the Indians      alternate between    sea-
sons   of great plenty and extreme want.          Usually game is
abundant, and Noka, one of their most celebrated hunters,
is said to have killed in one day sixteen elks, four buffaloes,
five deer, three bears, one porcupine, and one lynx. This
of course was a very exceptional case. Still there is gene-
rally some season of the year when they kill more game than
is required for immediate consumption. In this case the
surplus is dried and made into pemmican.       In winter, how-
ever, they are often very short of provisions. Back gives a
528                          BURIAL.     ART.

terrible picture of their sufferimgs in famine times*; and
Wyeth tells us that the Shoshonees “nearly starve to death
annually, and in winter and spring are emaciated to the last
degree; the trappers used to think they all eventually died
from starvation, as they became old and feeble +.”
  As might naturally be expected, the mode of burial varies
much in different parts of North America. In Columbia
and among many of the Prairie tribes, the dead are generally
sewn up in a skin or blanket and placed either on the
boughs of a tree or on a scaffold, the personal property of
each deceased individual being placed near the body ft.” In
some cases the bodies were placed in canoes, and deposited
among the branches of trees. Many of the Eastern races,
as already mentioned (ante, p. 1380), buried their dead under
tumuli.   Among the Clear Lake Indians, the Carriers, etc.,
it was usual to burn them, while in Florida they were in-
terred in a sitting posture. Among other tribes the bones
of the dead were collected every eight or ten years, and laid
in one common burial place.
   The Redskins are not altogether deficient in art, being
able to make rude carvings, and to trace equally rude draw-
ings on their wigwams, robes, etc.; but about portraits they
have some curious ideas. They think that an artist acquires
some mysterious power over any one whose likeness he may
have taken; and on one occasion, when annoyed by some
Indians, Mr. Kane got rid of them at once by threatening to
draw any one who remained.      Not one ventured to do so.
If the likeness is good, so much the worse—it is, they fancy,
half alive,—at the expense of the sitter. So much life, they
argue, could only be put in the picture by taking it away
from the original.      Again, they fancy that ifthe picture were

   * Arctic Land Expedition, p. 194      + Schoolcraft, vol. i. p. 216.
to 226. See also Richardson’s Arc-        t United States’ Exploring Expe-
tic Expedition, vol. ii. p. 96.        dition, vol. iy. p. 389.
                             ART.                              529

injured, by some    mysterious   connexion      the original would
suffer also. But perhaps the oddest notion of allis recorded
by Catlin. He excited great commotion among the Sioux
by drawing one of their great chiefs in profile. “Why was
half his face left out,’’ they asked; “ Mahtocheega was never
ashamed to look a white man in the face.” Mahtocheega
himself does not seem to have taken any offence, but Shonka,
The Dog, took advantage of the idea to taunthim.          “The
Englishman knows,” he said, “that you are but half a man;
he has painted but one half of your face, and knows that
the rest is good for nothing.”      This view of the case led to
a fight, in which   poor Mahtocheega      was    shot; and as ill-
luck would have it, the bullet by which he was killed tore
away just that part of the face which had been omitted in
the drawing.   This was very unfortunate for Mr. Catlin,
who had great difficulty in making his escape, and lived
some   months   after in fear for his life; nor was the matter
settled until both Shonka and his brother had been killed in
revenge for the death of Mahtocheega.
   Like so many other savage races the North Americans are
rapidly disappearing. Left to themselves they would perhaps
have developed an indigenous civilization, but for ours they
are unfit. Unable to compete with Europeans as equals,
and too proud to work     as inferiors,   they have profited by
intercourse with the superior race only where the paternal
government of the Hudson’s Bay Company has protected them
both from the settlers and from themselves, has encouraged
hunting, put an end to war, prevented the sale of spirits,
and, in times of scarcity, provided food. LHre long the only
remains of the Indian blood will, perhaps, be found in the
territories of the Hudson’s Bay Company.
530                     THE    PARAGUAY     INDIANS.



                        The Paraguay Indians.

   The Indians of Paraguay have been described by Dobritz-
hoffer* and by Don Félix de Azarat, who lived a long time
among them. He found them divided into several different
nations or tribes, with at least forty distinct languages, and
with different customs.   Some of them lied by fishing, but
the greater number depended for their subsistence on the
wild horses and cattle, and must therefore have had different
habits before the discovery of America by the Europeans.
Their principal arms were long spears, clubs, and bows and
arrows.   Some tribes, however, as, for instance, those of the
Pampas, do not use bows and arrows, but prefer the bolas.
In war, the Indians of Paraguay gave no quarter to men,
but spared only the women and children.
      Their houses, if we can call them so, were of the simplest
character; they cut three or four boughs, stuck the two ends
into the ground, and threw over them a cow-skin.         Their
bed consisted of another skin; they had no chairs or tables,
or any kind of furniture.  The men seldom wore any clothes;
the dress of the women consisted usually of a poncho,
although among some of the tribes, as the Nalicuégas, even
this was dispensed with. The art of washing seems to have
been entirely unknown, though Azara admits that in very
hot weather they used sometimes to bathe, rather, however,
as it would appear, for coolness, than for cleanliness.   It is
unnecessary therefore to say that they were excessively filthy,
They had no domestic animals, nor any idea of agriculture.
Their doctors had but one remedy, which they applied in all
cases, and which had at least the great merit of being harm-

  * Dobritzhoffer,   History   of   the     t+ Voyages dans Amérique Méri-
Abipones.                                 dionale, 1809.
                          THE    PATAGONIANS.                            531

less—since     it consisted     “A sucer avec beaucoup             de force
Yestomac du patient, pour en tirer le mal*.”
    Many of the tribes painted their bodies in various ways,
and it was usual to pierce the under-lip and insert a piece
of wood, about four or five inches long, which they never
removed.
    They had no established form of government, nor, accord-
ing to Azara, any ideas of religion. He makes this latter
statement generally for all the Indians, and repeats it parti-
cularly for the following tribes—namely, the Charruas, Min-
uanas, Aucas, Guaranys, Guayanas, Nalicuégas, Guasarapos,
Guatos, Ninaquiguilas, Guanas, Lenguas, Aguilots, Mocobys,
Abipones, and Paraguas ;yet it appears from other passages
that some at least of these tribes were believers in witch-
craft and in mysterious evil beings.
    Azara describes the language of the Guaranys as being
the most copious, and yet it was in many respects very de-
ficient ; for instance, they could only count up to four, and
had no words for the higher numbers, not even for five or
six. It is quite unnecessary to say that the marriage tie was
little regarded among them; they married when they liked,
and separated again when they pleased.
  Infanticide was, in several of the tribes, the rule, rather
than the exception; the women brought up but one child
each, and as they spared only the one which they thought
likely to be the last, it often happened that they were left
without any at all.

                          The Patagonians.

  The inhabitants of the southern parts of South America,
although they are divided into numerous different tribes,

* Azara,l.c.p. 25.   Dobritzhoffer’s History of the Abipones, vol. i. p. 251.
                                 Mm      2
532                           STATURE.

may be considered as falling into two great groups:             the
Patagonians, or Horse Indians on the Hast, who have horses
but no canoes; and the Chonos and Fuegians, or Canoe
Indians, who have canoes, but no horses, and who inhabit
the tempestuous islands on the south and west.
   The Yacana-kunny who inhabit the north eastern part of
Tierra del Fuego, are, properly speaking, not Fuegians,
but Patagonians, and resemble them in colour, stature, and
clothing, except the peculiar boots. They hve now pretty
much as the main-landers probably did before the introduc-
tion of horses, and feed principally on guanacoes, ostriches,
birds, and seals, which they kill with dogs, bows and arrows,
bolas, slings, lances and clubs*.          The habits of the Pata-
gonians must have been much altered by the introduction of
the horse, but we can only deal with them as they now are.
   The Horse and Canoe Indians offer a great contrast in
point of size; while the latter are short, ill-looking, and
badly proportioned, the former are considerably above the
average height, and are described by early travellers as
being truly gigantic. They were first visited in 1519 by
Magellan, who assures us that many of them were above
seven feet (french) in height. In 1525 they were seen by
Garcia de Loaisa, who mentions their great stature, but does
not seem to have measured them.      Similar statements were
made by Cavendish, Knevett, Sibald de Veert, Van Noort,
Spilbergen, and Lemaire; in fact, out of the fifteen first
voyagers who passed through the Magellanic Straits, not
fewer than nine attest the fact of the gigantic size of the
Patagonians; in which they are confirmed by the testimony
of several subsequent travellers, and especially of Falkner,
who assures us that he saw many men who were over seven
feet in height.
  It is difficult altogether to reject these statements, and as
                   * Fitzroy, l. c. vol. ii. p. 187.
                              HUTS.      DRESS.                           533

they are certainly not applicable to the present race, it is
possible that there may have been a change of size owing to
the introduction and general use of the horse.
   The huts, or “toldos,” of the Patagonians, are “ rectan-
gular in form, about ten or twelve feet long, ten deep, seven
feet high in front, and six feet in the rear.                 The frame of
the building is formed by poles stuck in the ground, having
forked tops to hold cross pieces, on which are laid poles for
rafters, to support the covering, which is made of skins of
animals sewn        together, so as to be almost impervious to
rain or wind.        The posts and rafters, which are not easily
procured, are carried from place to place in all their travel-
ling excursions.       Having reached their bivouac, and marked
out a place with due regard to shelter from the wind, they
dig holes with a piece of pointed hard wood, to receive the
posts: and all the frame and cover being ready it takes but
a short time to erect a dwelling *.”
   They have no pottery, and for carrymg water the only
vessels they use are bladders.     Their dress consists princi-
pally of skins, sewn together with ostrich sinews, and often
curiously painted on one side; but, according to Falknert,
some of the tribes “ make or weave fine mantles of woollen
yarn, beautifully dyed with many colours.      They have also
a small triangular apron, two corners of which are tied round
the waist, while the third passes between the legs and is
fastened behind. When on horseback they use a kind of
poncho or mantle, with a slit in the middle, through which
they put their head. For boots they wear the “skin of
the thighs and legs of mares and colts;’’ they clean the
skins, and then, after drying, soften with grease, and so put
them on without either shaping or sewing}. They make
   * Fitzroy, l.c. vol. 1. p. 93.        and it was on account of these shoes
   + Falkner’s Patagonia, p. 128.        that Magellan called them “ Patago-
   + When first visited they used the   =nians.”
skin of the guanaco for this purpose,
534                               WEAPONS.

brushes of grass, twigs, and rushes, and use the jaw of a
porpoise for a comb*. The women wear a mantle, fastened
across the breast by a wooden skewer, or pin, and tied round
the waist. They have also a kind of apron which reaches
down to their knees, but which only covers them in front.
Their boots are made in the same way as those of the men.
Like other savages, they are fond of beads, feathers, and
other ornaments. They also paint themselves with red,
black, and white, which, however, to European eyes is any
thing but an improvement. Their defensive armour consists
of a helmet and a shield, both made of thick hide, and strong
enough to resist either arrows or lances.
  Their bows       are small, and the arrows, which are pointed
with stone or bone, are said to be sometimes poisoned. They
have also clubs and long cane lances, most of which are now
tipped with iron. But the weapons which are most charac-
teristic of the Patagonians, and which are indeed almost
peculiar to them, are the bolas+, of which there are two or
 three sorts. That used in war is a single rounded stone or
ball of hardened clay, weighing about a pound, and fastened
to a short rope or sinew of skin. This they sometimes throw
at their adversary, rope and all, but generally they prefer to
strike at his head with it. For hunting they use two similar
stones fastened together by a rope, which is generally three
or four yards long. One of the stones they take in their
hand, and then whirling the other round their head, throw
both at the object they wish to entangle. Sometimes several
balls are used, but two appear to be the usual number.
They do not try to strike their victim with the balls them-
selves, but with the rope, “and then of course the balls
swing round in different directions and the thongs become so
‘laid up,’ or twisted, that struggling only makes the captive

      * Fitzroy, vol. i. p. 75.              + Faikner, 1. c. p. 180.
                                 FOOD.   BURIAL.                           535

more secure*,” It is said that a man on horseback can use
the “bolas ” effectually at a distance of eighty yardst. They
also use the lasso.
   On the coast their food consists principally of fish, which
they kill either by diving or striking them with their darts.
Guanacoes and ostriches they catch with the bolas, and they
also eat mare’s flesh, as well as various sorts of small game,
and at least two kinds of wild roots. They have no fer-
mented liquor, and the only prepared drink which they use
is a decoction of chaliis, and the juice of berberries mixed
with water.
   The death of a native is attended with peculiar ceremonies.
The bones having been as much as possible freed from the
flesh, are hung “on high, upon canes or twigs woven
together, to dry and whiten with the sun and rain.” One of
the most distinguished women is chosen to perform the dis-
gusting office of making the skeleton, and, during the process,
“the Indians, covered with long mantles of skins, and their
faces blackened by soot, walk round the tent with long
poles or lances in their hands, smging in a mournful tone of
voice and striking the ground, to frighten away the Valichus
or evil beings,...... - The horses of the dead are killed that
he may have wherewithal to ride upon in the Alhue Mapu,
or Country of the Dead.”       In about a year the bones are
“packed together in a hide, and placed upon one of the
deceased’s favourite horses, kept alive for that purpose,” and
in this manner        the natives bear the relics, sometimes to a
very great distance, until they arrive at the proper burial
place, where the ancestors of the dead man are lying. The
bones are arranged in their proper positions, and fastened by
string. The skeleton is then placed, with others, in a square
pit, clothed in the best robes, and adorned with beads, fea-
thers, etc. The arms of the deceased are buried with him,
    * Fitzroy, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 148.        + Darwin’s Journal, p. 129.
536                             THE FUEGIANS.

and round the grave are ranged several dead horses, raised
on their feet, and supported with sticks*. Sometimes a cairn
of stones is raised over the gravet.
   Falkner regarded the Patagonians as Polytheists, but we
do not know much about their religion. According to the
missionaries, neither the Patagonians nor the Araucanians
had any ideas of prayer, or “any vestige of religious
worship f.”

                                The Fuegians.

   The inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego are even more de-
graded than those of the main-land: in fact, they have been
regarded by many travellers as being the lowest of mankind §.
Adolph Decker, who visited Polynesia and Australasia under
Jaques le Hermite in 1624, describes them as “ rather beasts
than men; for they tear human bodies to pieces, and eat the
flesh raw and bloody as itis. There is not the least spark
of religion or policy to be observed among them: on the
contrary, they are in every respect brutal”—of which he
proceeds to give evidence so convincing, that I refrain from
quoting it||. The men go altogether naked, and the women
have only a bit of skin about their middles;.........
Their huts are made of trees, in the shape of tents with a
hole at the top to let out the smoke. Within they are sunk
two or three feet under the earth; and the mould is thrown
upon the outside. Their fishing-tackle is very curious, and
their stone hooks very nearly the same shape as ours. They
are differently armed, some having bows, and arrows headed
with stone ; others have long javelins, pomted with bone;
some again have great wooden clubs; and some have slings,
  * Falkner’s Patagonia, pp.118,119.      World, p.80; Wallis’s Voyage round
  + Fitzroy, vol. ii. p. 158,             the World, p. 392; Cook’s     Voyage
  { The Voice of Pity, vol. ii. pp.       to the   South Pole, vol. ii. p. 187;
87, 95.                                   Darwin’s Journal, p. 235.
  § Byron’s     Voyage      round   the     ||Callander’s
                                                  Voyages, vol. ii.p.307.
                    HUTS.       IMPLEMENTS.    WEAPONS.                    5387

with stone-knives, which are very sharp.”               Their arrows are
of hard wood, straight and well polished.                 They are about
two feet long, and are tipped with a piece of agate, obsidian,
or glass; the head not being fixed to the shaft, remains in
the wound,       even    when    the arrow is drawn out.          The bows
are from three to four feet long, and quite plain. The string
is made of twisted sinews.
   Forster* found them “remarkably stupid, being incapable
of understanding any of our signs, which, however, were
very intelligible to the nations of the South Sea.” Wallis,
in his “Voyage round the World+,” describes them as
follows:   “They        were   covered with seal-skins, which            stunk
abominably, and some of them were eating the rotten flesh
and blubber raw, with a keen appetite and great seeming
satisfaction.’   And again he says, “Some of our people,
who were fishing with a hook and line, gave one of them a
fish, somewhat bigger than a herring, alive, just as it came
out of the water. The Indian took it hastily, as a dog would
take a bone, and instantly killed it, by giving it a bite near
the gills: he then proceeded to eat it, beginning with the
head, and going on to the tail, without rejecting either the
bones, fins, scales, or entrailst.”       Their cookery is, if possible,
still more disgusting.    Fitzroy tells us that it was “ too
offensive” for description; and the account given by Byron§$
entirely confirms this statement.
    The men, says Fitzroy ||, ‘are low in stature, ill-luoking,
and badly proportioned.      Their colour is that of very old
mahogany—or rather between dark copper and bronze. The
trunk of the body is large, in proportion to their cramped
and rather crooked limbs. Their rough, coarse, and extremely

  = Wh Gh sks, Psi                         § Byron’s Loss of the ‘‘ Wager,”
  ‘++ Hawkesworth’s Voyages, 1l.c.p.    p. 182.
A03.                                     || Voyages   of the    ‘‘Adventure”
  tle. p. 403.                         and “ Beagle,” vol. ii. p. 137.
538                      FOOD.   HABITS.

dirty black hair half hides, yet heightens, a villanous ex-
pression of the worst description of savage features. The
hair of the women is longer, less coarse, and certainly cleaner
than that of the men. It is combed with the jaw of a por-
poise, but neither plaited nor tied; and none is cut away,
excepting from over theireyes. They are short, with bodies
largely out of proportion to their height; their features,
especially those of the old, are scarcely less disagreeable than
the repulsive ones of the men. About four feet and some
inches is the stature of these she-Fuegians—by courtesy called
women.     They never walk upright; a stooping posture, and
awkward movement is their natural gait. They may be fit
mates for such uncouth men, but to civilized people their
 appearance is disgusting.              :           ot       Sa
The smoke        of wood fires, nae in cae wigwams, hurts
their eyes so much, that they are red and watery: the effects
of their oiling or greasing themselves, and then rubbing
ochre, clay, or charcoal    over their bodies; of their           often
feeding upon the most offensive substances, sometimes in a
state of putridity ; and of other vile habits, may readily be
imagined*.” Their incisors are worn flat+, like those of the
Esquimaux and of many ancient races.
   “The men procure food of the larger kind, such as seal,
otter, porpoise, etc.; they break or cut wood and bark for
fuel, as well as for building the wigwams or canoes. They
go out at night to get birds; they train the dogs, and of
course undertake all hunting or warlike excursions.       The
women nurse their children, attend the fire (feeding it with
dead wood rather than green, on account of the smoke),
make baskets and water-buckets, fishing-lines and necklaces,
go out to catch small fish in their canoes, gather shell-fish,
dive for sea-eggs, take care of their canoes, upon ordinary

      a MG ©, Ye UBER              + Fitzroy, Appendix, p. 144.
                             MODE   OF FISHING.                         539

occasions paddle their masters about while they sit idle, and
do any other drudgery*.”
   “Swimming is a favourite amusement of the Fuegians
during summer; but the unfortunate women are obliged to
go out into rather deep water, and dive for sea-eggs in the
depth of winter as often asin summer.                Men, women, and
children are excellent swimmers,            but they all swim           like
dogs.”
   “When      there is time, the natives roast their shell-fish,
and half-roast any other food that is of a solid nature; but
when in haste, they eat fish, as well as meat, in a raw state.
Panes,  45            Both seal and porpoises are speared
by them from their canoes. When struck, the fish usually
run into the kelp, with the spear floating on the water, being
attached by a short line to a movable barb: and then the
men follow with their canoe, seize the spear, and tow by it
till the fish is dead. To them the taking of a seal or a
porpoise is a matter of as much consequence as the capture
of a whale is to our countrymen.         On moonlight nights,
birds are caught when roosting, not only by the men, but by
their dogs, which are sent out to seize them while asleep upon
the rocks or beach: and so well are these dogs trained that
they bring all they catch safely to their masters, without
making any noise, and then return for another mouthful.
Birds are also frequently killed with arrows or by stones
slung at them with unerring aim. Eggs are largely sought
for by the natives ; indeed I may say that they eat any thing
and every thing that is eatable, without being particular
as to its state of freshness, or as to its having been near the
firey.’
  According to Byron the dogs of the Chonos Indians assist
in killing fish as well as birds.       They are, he says, “ cur-like
looking animals, but very sagacious, and easily trained to
      * Fitzroy, l. c. p. 185.                + Fitzroy, l.o. p. 184.
540                         FOOD.     HABITS.

this business. . . . . . The net is held by two Indians, who
get into the water; then the dogs, taking a large compass,
 Fic. 226,
             dive after the fish, and drive them into the net; but
             it is only in particular places that the fish are taken
             in this manner.” He adds that the dogs, “‘ enjoy it
             much, and express their eagerness by barking every
             time they raise their heads above the water to
             breathe*.”
                “In the winter, when the snow lies deep, the Te-
             keenica people assemble to hunt the guanaco, which
             then comes down from the high lands to seek for
             pasture near the sea. The long legs of the animal
             stick deeply into the snow and soft boggy ground,
             disabling him from escape, while the Fuegians and
             their dogs hem him in on every side, and quickly
             make him their prey; ¢ 2:                     GO ae     ae
             A+ other times of the year they sometimes get them
             by lying in wait, and shooting them with arrows,
             or by getting into a tree near their track, and
             spearing them as they pass beneath the branches,
             An arrow was shown to Low, which was marked
             with blood two-thirds of its length in wounding a
             guanaco, afterwards caught by dogs. Low held out
             his jacket, making signs that the arrow would not
             penetrate 16; upon which the native pointed to his
             eyet.” Fig. 226 represents the head of a Fuegian
             harpoon, which closely resembles the ancient Danish
             specimen figured in p. 105.
                Of vegetable food they have very little: a few
             berries, cranberries, those which grow on the arbu-
   Bone      tus, and a kind of fungus which is found on the
 Harpoon.
             beech, being the only sorts used. The wretched
  * Byron’s Loss of the ‘Wager.’      xvii. pp. 339, 368, 463.
In Kerr’s Voyages and Travels, vol.      t Fitzroy, 1. c. p. 187.
                  CANNIBALISM.       ABSENCE      OF RELIGION.                  541

Fuegians often suffer greatly from famine. On one occasion
when the Chonos were in great distress on this account, a
small party went away, and the natives said that in four
sleeps they would return with food. On the fifth day they
came back almost dead with fatigue, and “ each man having
two or three great pieces of whale-blubber, shaped like a
poncho with a hole in the middle, on his shoulders. The
blubber was half putrid, and looked as if it had been buried
underground.”    Notwithstanding this, it was cut into slices,
broiled, and eaten.   On another occasion masses of blubber
were found in sand, doubtless laid in store for a season of
want.    Their principal food, however, consists                      of limpets,
mussels, and other shell-fish.
   Admiral Fitzroy entertains no doubt that the Fuegians are
cannibals.  ‘ Almost* always at war with adjoining tribes,
they seldom meet but a hostile encounter is the result; and
then those who are vanquished and taken, if not already
dead, are killed and eaten by the conquerors.                    The arms and
breast are eaten by the women;               the men eat the legs, and
the trunk is thrown into the sea.”                Again, in severe winters,
when they can obtain no other food, they take “the oldest
woman of their party, hold her head over a thick smoke,
made by burning green wood, and pinching her throat,
choke her. They then devour every particle of the flesh,
not excepting the trunk, as in the former case.” When
asked why they did not rather kil their dogs, they said,
“Dog catch iappo,” i. e. otters.
   Like Decker, Admiral Fitzroy “never witnessed or heard
of any act of a decidedly religious naturet.”  Still some of
the natives suppose that there is a powerful and mysterious
being who resides in the woods. When a person dies, they


 * Le. p. 188.                            South    Pole, p. 179;      The   Voice of
 + See   also    Weddell,   Voyage   to   Pity, vol. vi. p. 92, &e.
542                        CANOES.    DRESS.

carry the body far into the woods*, “place it upon some
broken boughs, or pieces of solid wood, and then pile a great
quantity of branches over the corpse.”
  Their canoes are large pieces of bark sewn together.                In
the bottom they make a fireplace of clay, for they always
keep fires alight, though with the help of iron pyrites they
soon obtain sparks if any accident happens. The Chonos
Indians, who in most respects resemble the Fuegians, have
much better canoes. These are formed of planks, which are
generally five in number, two on each side and one at the
bottom. Along the edges of each are small holes about an
inch apart. The planks are sewn together with woodbine,
the holes being filled with a kind of bark beaten up until it
resembles oakum. Byron truly observes that in the absence
of metal, ‘the labour must be great of hacking a single
plank out of a large tree with shells and flints, even though
with the help of fire.”
   The Fuegians have no pottery, but like the North Ameri-
can Indians     use vessels made of birch, or rather of beech-
bark.    On the east coast many of the natives possess
guanaco-skins, and on the west some of them wear seal-
skins. ‘“ Amongst the central tribes the men generally
possess an otter-skin, or some small scrap about as large as
a pocket-handkerchief, which is barely sufficient to cover
their backs as low down as their loins. It is laced across
the breast by strings, and according as the wind blows, it is
shifted from side to side+.”         Many, however,        even   of the
women, go absolutely without clothes. Yet,as Captain Cook
quaintly expresses it, “ although they are content to be naked,
they are very ambitious to be fine;” for which purpose they
adorn themselves with streaks of red, black, and white, and
the men as well as the women wear bracelets and anklets of

      * lc. p. 181.
      + Darwin’s Researches in Geology and Natural History, p. 234.
                              FIRE.                         543

shell and bone. Dr. Hooker informs us that at the extreme
south of Tierra del Fuego, and in mid-winter, he has often
seen the men lying asleep in their wigwams, without a scrap
of clothing, and the women standing naked, and some with
children at their breasts, in the water up to their middles,
gathermg limpets and other shell-fish, while the snow fell
thickly on them and on their equally naked babies. In fact,
fire does not appear to be necessary with them, nor do they
use it to warm the air of their huts as we do, though some-
times as a luxury they take advantage of it to toast their
hands or feet.   Doubtless, however, if deprived of this source
of warmth, they would die of starvation rather oftener than is
now the case.
   If not the lowest, the Fuegians certainly appear to be
among the most miserable specimens of the human race, and
the habits of this people are of especial mterest from their
probable similarity to those of the ancient Danish shell-
mound builders, who, however, were in some respects rather
more   advanced, being acquainted with the art of making
pottery.
                                      544




                          CHAPTER            XV.

                   MODERN     savacges—concluded.

  N reading almost any account of savages, it is impossible
    not to admire the skill with which they use their
weapons and implements, their ingenuity in hunting and
fishing, their close and accurate powers of observation.
Some savages even recognize individuals by their footsteps.
Thus Mr. Laing mentions * that one day while travelling
near Moreton Bay in Australia, he pointed to a footstep, and
asked whose it was.     The guide “glanced at it, without
stopping his horse, and at once answered, ‘ Whitefellow call
him Tiger”?    This turned out to be correct, which was the
more remarkable as the two men belonged to different tribes,
and had not met for two years. Among the Arabs, Burck-
hardt asserts+ that some men know every individual in the
tribe by his footstep. “Besides this, every Arab knows the
printed footsteps of his own camels, and of those belonging
to his immediate neighbours.      He knows by the depth or
slhightness of the impression whether a camel was pasturing,
and therefore not carrying any load, or mounted by one
person only, or heavily loaded.’?           The North American Indian
will send an arrow rigbt through a horse, or even a buffalo.
The African savage will kill the elephant, and the Chinook
fears not to attack even the whale. Captain Grey tells us
that he has often seen the Australians kill a pigeon with a
  * Aborigines of Australia, p. 24.         + Bedouins and Wahalys, p. 374,
                           SKILFULNESS   OF SAVAGES.                           545

Spear, at a distance of thirty paces*.   Speakime of the
Chamisso Island Esquimaux, Beechey says that one day a
Diver was swimming at a distance of thirty yards from the
beach, and a native was offered a reward if he could shoot it.
He immediately frightened it so that it dived, and directly it
reappeared, he transfixed both eyes with anarrow}. Speak-
ing of the Australians, Mr. Stanbridge asserts that “it is a
favourite feat on the Murray to dive into the river, spear in
hand, and come up with a fish upon it $.”” Woodes Rogers
says that the Californian Indians used to dive, and strike the
fish under water with wooden spears §, and Falkner] tells us
that some of the Patagonian tribes live chiefly on fish, “ which
they catch either by diving, or striking them with their darts.”
Tertre again says the same of the Caribs 4, and Wallace of
the Brazilian Indians **. The South Sea Islanders are par-
ticularly active in the water.     They dive after fish which
“takes refuge under the coval rock; thither the diver pur-
sues him, and brings him up with a finger in each eye t+.”
They are even more than a match for the shark, which they
attack fearlessly with a knife. If they are unarmed “they
all surround him and force him ashore, if they can but once
get him into the surf;” but even if he escapes they con-
tinue their bathing without the least feartt. Hillis more
cautiously says only, that “when armed they have some-
times been known to attack a shark in the water $$.” The
Andaman Islanders also are said to dive and catch fish under
water ||||; and Rutherford makes a similar statement as
regards the New Zealanders. Dobritzhoffer tells us that
   * Grey, l.c. vol. ii. p. 285.           q Hist. of the Carriby Is. p. 305.
   + Beechey’s Narrative, vol. ii. p.      ** Travels on the Amazon, p. 488.
574.                                       ++ Wilson, l.c. p. 385.
   t On the Aborigines of Victoria.         Seal WG Foy Bkelehs
Ethn. Trans. New Ser. vol.i. p. 293.        §§ Polynesian Researches,       vol. 1.
   § Callander’s Voyages, vol. iii. p.   p. 178.
331.                                       |||| _Mouat, 1c. pp. 310, 338.
   || Patagonia, p. 111.
                                                              Ne
546                    SKILFULNESS      OF SAVAGES.

the Payajuas and Vilelas            live principally on fish, using
a small net with which they dive, “and if they spy any
fish at the bottom, swim after it, catch it in the net,” and
so bring it to shore*.  The Esquimaux in his kayak will
actually turn somersaults in the water.   Skyring +tsaw a
Fuegian who “threw stones from each hand with astonish-
ing force and precision. His first stone struck the master
with much force, broke a powder-horn which hung round his
neck, and nearly knocked him backwards.” In his descrip-
tion of the Hottentots, Kolben says {, that their dexterity in
throwing the “hassagaye and rackum-stick, strikes every
witness of it with the highest admiration. .... If a Hot-
tentot, in the chase of a hare, deer, or wild goat, comes                  but
within thirty or forty yards of the creature, away flies the
rackum-stick and down falls the creature, generally pierced
quite through the body.” The death of Goliath is a well-
known instance of skill in the use of the sling; and we are
told also that in the tribe of Benjamin there was a corps of
“seven hundred chosen men lefthanded; every one could
sling stones at an hair-breadth, and not miss§.” The Bra-
zilian Indians kill turtles with bows and arrows; but if they
aimed direct at the animal, the arrow would glance off the
smooth hard shell, therefore they shoot up into the air, so
that the arrow falls nearly vertically on the shell, which it is
thus enabled to penetrate ||.
   What an amount of practice must be required to obtain
such skill as this! How true also must the weapons be!
Indeed, it is very evident that each distinct type of flint
implement must have been. designed for some distinct pur-
pose. Thus the different forms of arrowhead, of harpoon, or
of stone axe, cannot have been intended to be used in the

   * History of the Abipones, vol. i.     t Kolben, l.c. vol. i. p. 243.
p- 348.                                   § Judges xx. 16.
   t Fitzroy, 1. c. vol. i. p. 398,       || Wallace’s Amazon, p. 466.
                   VARIETIES OF IMPLEMENTS.                      547

same manner.    Among the North American Indians the
arrows used in hunting were so made that when the shaft
was drawn out of the wound the head came out also; while
in the war arrows the shaft tapered to the end, so that even
when it was withdrawn the head of the arrow remained in
the wound. Again, the different forms of harpoons are
illustrated by the barbed and unbarbed lances of the Esqui-
maux   (ante, p. 504).    Unfortunately, however, we have but
few details of this kind; travellers have generally thought it
unnecessary to observe or record these apparently unimpor-
tant details; and that our knowledge of flint implements is
most rudimentary, is well shown by the discussion between
Professors Steenstrup and Worsaae, whether the so-called
“axes”? of the shell-mounds were really axes, or whether
they were not rather used in fishing.
   We may hope, however, that in future those who have the
opportunity of observing stone implements among modern
savages will give us more detailed information both as to
the exact manner in which they are used, and also about
the way in which they are made; that they will collect not
only the well-made weapons, but also, and even more care-
fully, the humble implements of every-day life.
   Some archeologists have argued that the shell-mound
builders of Denmark must have possessed more formidable
weapons than any that have yet been found, because it was
considered   impossible   that they could have killed large
game, as, for instance, the bull and seal, with the simple
weapons of bone and stone, which alone have hitherto been
discovered.   Professor Worsaae*, even goes so far as to say,
“ Against birds and other small creatures these stone arrows
might prove effectual, but against larger animals, such as
the aurochs, the elk, the reindeer, the stag, and the wild
boar, they were     evidently    insufficient;   particularly   since
                            * Page 18.
                                Nn   2
548                           ART OF DRILLING.

these animals often become             furious as soon as they are
struck.” I can, however, by no means agree with Professor
Worsaae in this supposition; we know, on the contrary,
that modern savages are able to kill even the largest game
with arrows and spears tipped with stone. Knives, again,
of stone, are much more effective than might at first be ex-
pected, and many savage tribes readily cut flesh with pieces
of shell or of kard wood.
  The    neatness      with    which   the   Hottentots,     Hsquimaux,
North American Indians, etc., are able to sew is very re-
markable, although awls and sinews would in our hands be
but poor substitutes for needles and thread. As already
mentioned in p. 332, some cautious archeologists hesitated
to refer the reindeer caves of the Dordogne to the Stone
Age, on account of the bone needles and the works of art
which are found in them. The eyes of the needles especially,
 they thought, could only be made with metallic implements.
 Professor Lartet ingeniously removed these doubts by
making a similar needle for himself with the help of flint;
but he might have referred to the fact stated by Cook* in
his first voyage, that the New Zealanders succeeded in drill-
ing a hole through a piece of glass which he had given
them, using for this purpose, as he supposed, a piece of
jasper.
   The Brazilians also use ornaments of imperfectly crystal-
lized quartz, from four to eight inches long and about an
inch in diameter. Hard as it is, they contrive to drill a hole
at each end, using for that purpose the pointed leaf-shoot of
the large wild plantain, with sand and water.               The hole is
generally transverse, but the ornaments of the chiefs are
actually pierced       lengthways.      This, Mr.     Wallace     thinks,
must be a work of years +t.
  The works of art found in the Dordogne caves are little
      * Vol, il. p. 464.            + Travels on the Amazon, p. 278.
            IMPORTANT   WORKS      ERECTED        BY SAVAGES.        549

ruder than those of the Esquimaux or the North American
Indians. In fact, the appreciation of art is to be regarded
rather as an ethnological characteristic than as an indication
of any particular stage in civilization. We see, again, that
in many cases a certain knowledge of agriculture has pre-
ceded the use of metals; and the fortifications of New Zea-
land, as well as the large morais of the South Sea Islands,
are arguments in favour of the theory which ascribes some
of our camps, our great tumuli, and other Druidical remains,
to the later part of the Stone Age. The great morai of
Oberea, in Tahiti, has been already described (p. 483).
Again, the celebrated statues of Easter Island are really
colossal.   One   of them,    which has fallen down, measures
twenty-seven feet long, and others appear to be even larger.
The houses of the Ladrone Islanders, also, are very remark-
able. The larger ones were supported on strong pyramids
of stone. These were, according to Freycinet*, m one piece,
made of chalk, sand, or large stones, imbedded in a kind of
cement.    They were found in large numbers; in one case
they formed a stone row four hundred yards long. They
were first described by Anson, who saw many which were
thirteen feet in height; while one of those seen by Freycinet
measured as much as twenty feet.        They were square at
the base, and rested on the ground.                 On each pillar was a
hemisphere, with    the flat side upwards.              The South   Sea
Islanders afford, indeed, wonderful instances            of what can be
accomplished with stone implements.              Their houses are
large and often well built, and their canoes have excited the
wonder of all who have seen them.
    Although, then, the use of stone as the principal material
of implements and weapons may be regarded as charac-
terizing an early stage in the development of civilization,
still, it is evident that this stage is itself susceptible of much
                          FP Wollyea ion onltsy
550            DIFFERENCES   IN THE   STONE   AGE.

subdivision. The Mincopie or the Australian, for instance,
is not to be compared for an instant with the semi-civilized
native of the Society Islands. So also in the ancient Stone
Age of Europe, we find evidences of great difference. The
savage inhabitants of the South French caves had, according
to MM. Christy and Lartet, no domestic animals, and no
knowledge of pottery or agriculture.       The shell-mound
builders of Denmark had the dog; the Swiss Lake-dwellers
also possessed this animal, together with the ox, sheep, and
pig, perhaps even the horse; they had a certain knowledge
of agriculture, and were acquainted with the art of weaving.
Thus, then, even when we have satisfied ourselves that any
given remains belong to the Stone Age, we are still but on
the threshold of our inquiry.
   Travellers and naturalists have varied a good deal in
opinion as to the race of savages which is entitled to the
unenviable reputation of being the lowest im the scale of
civilization.  Cook, Darwin, Fitzroy, and Wallis were de-
cidedly in favour, if I may so say, of the Fuegian; Burchell
maintained that the Bushmen are the lowest; D’Urville
voted for the Australians and Tasmanians; Dampier thought
the Australians “the miserablest people in the world;’
Forster said that the people of Mallicollo “bordered the
nearest upon the tribe of monkeys;” Owen inclines to the
Andamaners; others have supported the North American
Root-diggers; and one French writer even insinuates that
monkeys are more human than Laplanders.
  The civilization, moreover, of the Stone Age differs not
only in degree, but also in kind, varying according to the
climate, vegetation, food, etc.; from which      it becomes   evi-
dent—at least to all those who believe in the unity of the
human race—that the present habits of savage races are not to
be regarded as representing exactly those which characterized
the first men, but as depending also on external conditions,
                 DIFFERENT    LINES   OF CIVILIZATION.                Bol

influenced indeed to a certain extent by national character,
which, however, is after all but the result of the external
conditions which have acted on previous generations.
   If we take a few of the things which are most generally
useful in savage life, and at the same time most easily ob-
tainable,   such, for instance, as      bows     and   arrows,    slings,
spear-casters, pottery, domestic animals, or a knowledge
of agriculture, we might perhaps have expected & priori that
the acquisition of them would have followed some regular
succession.    That this, however, was not the case is shown
by the annexed table, which will, I think, be found inte-
resting. It gives some idea of the progress made by various
savage tribes, at the time when they were first visited by
Kuropeans.
   Some of the differences exhibited in this table may indeed
be easily accounted for. The frozen soil and arctic climate
of the Esquimaux would not encourage, would not even
permit, any agriculture.   So, again, the absence of hogs in
New Zealand, of dogs in the Friendly Isles, and of all
mammalia in Easter Island, is probably due to the fact that
the original colonists did not possess these animals, and that
their isolated position prevented them afterwards from ob-
taining any. Moreover, we must remember that as a general
rule, the lowest savage can only use one or two weapons.
He is limited to those which he can carry about with him,
and naturally prefers those which are of most general utility *.
We cannot, however, in this manner, account for all the facts.
In Columbia, Australia, the Cape of Good Hope, and else-
where, agriculture was unknown before the advent of Euro-
peans.    Easter.Island, on the contrary, contained large
plantations   of sweet potatoes, yams, plantains, sugar-canes,
etc.   Yet the Chinooks of Columbia had bows and arrows,

  * Weapons of war depending very     probably more liable to change than
much on the caprice of chiefs, are    those used in hunting.
552                     DIFFERENT   LINES

fish-hooks, and nets; the Australians had throwing-sticks,
boomerang’, fish-hooks, and nets; the Hottentots had bows
and arrows, nets, fish-hooks, pottery, and at last even a
certain knowledge of iron; all of which seem to have been
unknown to the Easter Islanders, though they would have
been very useful, and, excepting the iron, might have been
invented and used by them.
  If the case of Haster Island stood alone, the absence of
bows and arrows might, perhaps, be plausibly accounted for
by the absence of game, the scarcity of birds, and the
isolation   of the little island, which rendered   war   almost
impossible. But such an argument cannot be applied to
other cases which are indicated in the table. Let us com-
pare, for instance, the Atlantic tribes of North American
Indians, the Australians, Caffres, Bushmen, New Zealanders,
and Society Islanders. All these were constantly at war,
and the two first lived very much on the produce of the
chase.   They at least had therefore similar wants. Yet
spears and perhaps clubs were the only weapons which they
had in common;     the North Americans had good bows and
arrows, the Society Islanders and Bushmen had bad ones—
in fact, those of the former were so weak as to be useless
in war—the Australians,    Caffres, and New   Zealanders, had
none.   On the other hand, the Australians had the throwing-
stick and the boomerang ; the Society Islanders used slings;
and the New Zealanders, besides very effective clubs, had
numerous and extensive fortifications. It is certainly most
remarkable that tribes so warlike,and in many respects so
advanced, as the New     Zealanders and Caffres, should have
been ignorant of bows and arrows, which were used by many
very low races, such as the Fuegians, the Chinooks, the
Andamaners, and Bushmen; particularly as it is impossible
to doubt that the New Zealanders at least would have found
bows of great use, and that any of their tribes, having in-
                                                                                 OF                   CIVILIZATION.                                                                                                                                        553
f
                                            yTOM                                                                                                  AIDS                                    (4S
               *SUAANVIS]T
               AIGNAlYY
                                                                                                                                                        poossax sox                                    805
                  se  40po
                                                aA,39
                                                                                                       :                         os      re
                                                                                                                                                    ipoosSX
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Toys
                                                                                                                                                                                        ouog osiey

                  |                                |                                                                                                     | |
                                                                                                                                                                                                 pur[peys


          ;       B   &
                                                   poo soq
                                                                                                                                 ce
                                                                                                                                         ae eypoos$0 sot ouog sox

                  |                                                                                    :
                                                                                                                                             i            |[joys|
                                                                                                                                                                                                 puv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       atmog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       suey

          °       gg  4                            *             os                                                                      wee OTe
                                                                                                                                               poo3sax    ouog ostery
                                                                                                                                                       Auryy


NVOMANY
                                                                                                                                                                                                 puv
                                                                                                                                                                   |                 |
                                                   poor sok                                                                              sot                       oziepy
                                                                                                                                                                                  on “A                 SOX

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          suyuny
                          ct

          ee
                  |                                                                                                                                     :

HLUON
          NIONT



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |'suyuny 2
                                                   poor)sot                                                                                                                              OX             80
                      : 4      |                                                                                                         :              -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘yqsnedp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           aoe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           eee




                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Moe 2

          *XAVWINDST
                  =                                .                                 d                 i:                        ;                      :          :                             sae
                  |


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 suyuny |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -Suyung |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                yy8nerp
                  §   S st n
                                                   poo 80K SOx
                                                                                                       Se                        sox sis poory                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                                  on aau
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Teumg

                                                                                                                                                    |                                                   |
          "'SNVITVUISAY                                                              LAS               so                                           peg                                  aN ywon
                      ‘ =< s                       Pe            =


                      7Nn                              es        = SPA                                 sox                                                                                       Ree
                          ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                =|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                LOT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                109]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                toy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                10.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                og
                                                                                                                                                                                                                aoe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                oom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HOT)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POCF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POOF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A)
                                    poor)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ‘Suyuny
          “SUATNVWVAINY
                                                                                                                                                                                                       poe)
                                    APIA
              *SLOLNALLOY

                                                                                                                                                                                                                suyuay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                        soy                                                            So       IO




                ‘NaEWHSAg            AL HEI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                saquny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                eee                                                                             10H




                                                                                                             Brsailechinecees
                                   AL U9


                                                                      sxng-Suraoay
                                                                       | *
               “SNVIOSOF                                                                                                                                                                                        LOT
                                                            SIX                                                                                                                         auvig

                                   | ISMOLIY
                                        “                                                                                                                                                                                                    (oysatmo0()
              “SUAONV IST
                                                                                                                                              srabtce       cree                      srocnoce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                eee
                UaALSVY


                                                                                         STuvtI sik
                                                                                                                                                                       SUOIFLOY

                                                                                                                                 Sano             “os
                                                                                                                                              gg9uR)    mMILay
                                                                                                                                                            ana                    -Ysty SOO
                                    saiog puv          SoUuL[S                                              svlog
                                                                                                                “ ae                                                                                                                       ssozy
                                                                                         MONG                                                                          TAO
                                                                      |
554                      ISOLATION OF SAVAGES.

vented them, would have had an immense advantage in the
“struggle for existence.” Other similar contrasts will strike
any one who examines the table; but perhaps it may be said
that some of these cases may be explained by the influence
of more civilized neighbours; that the comparison above-
made, for instance, might be regarded as unfair, because the
New Zealanders were an isolated race, while the Chinooks
might have derived their knowledge of bows and arrows
from the eastern tribes, and these again might have acquired
the art of making pottery from the semi-civilized nations of
the south. No one can deny that this may be true im some
instances, because we know that at the present day most
savages possess hatchets, knives, beads, etc., which they have
received from traders, and which they cannot yet manufac-
ture for themselves.
   It is certainly possible that the Chinooks may have derived
their knowledge of the bow from their northern neighbours ;
but we can hardly suppose that they did so from the Red
Indian tribes to the east, because in that case it is difficult to
understand why they should not also have learnt from these
the much simpler, and almost equally useful, art of making
pottery. Moreover there are some cases in which any such
idea is absolutely out of the question; thus, the spear-
caster is used by the Esquimaux,                 the Australians, the New
Caledonians,         and some Brazilian tribes, the bolas by the
Esquimaux and the Patagonians; the boomerang is peculiar
to the Anstralians*.     The “sumpitan” or blow-pipe of the
Malays occurs again in the valley of the Amazon.         Again,
different races of savages have but little peaceful intercourse
with one another. They are almost always at war. If their
habits are similar, they are deadly rivals, fighting for the

   * The negroes of Niam Niam have       But these do not appear to possess
iron crescents resembling boome-         the peculiar properties of the boome-
yangs, which   are    thrown   in war.   rang.
                     ISOLATION OF SAVAGES.                   555

best hunting-grounds or fisheries ; if their wants are different,
they fight for slaves, for women,     for ornaments;   or if they
do not care about any of these, for the mere love of fighting,
for scalps, heads, or some other recognized emblems of glory.
In this condition of society each tribe lives in a state either
of isolation from, or enmity with, its neighbours. Delenda
est Carthago is the universal motto, and savages can only
live in peace when they have a little world of their own.
Sometimes a broad sea, or a high range of mountains, at
others a wide “ march”’ or neutral territory supply the neces-
sary conditions, and keep them apart. They meet only to
fight, and are therefore not likely to learn much from one
another.  Moreover, there are cases in which some tribes
have weapons which are quite unknown to their neighbours.
Thus, among the Brazilian tribes we find the bow and arrow,
the blow-pipe, the lasso, and the throwing-stick. The first
is the most general, but the Barbados use only the blow-pipe,
the Moxos   have abandoned the bow and arrow for the lasso,
and the Purupurus are distinguished from all their neigh-
bours by using, not bows and arrows, but the “ palheta,”’ or
throwing-stick.     Again, the Caffres have not generally
adopted the bows and arrows of the Bushmen; the Esqui-
maux have not acquired the art of making pottery from the
North American Indians, nor the southern Columbian tribes
from the northern Mexicans.
   Many, again, of the ruder arts, as for instance the manu-
facture of pottery and of bows, are so useful, and at the same
time, however ingenious in idea, so simple in execution, as
to render it highly improbable that they would ever be lost,
when they had once been acquired. Yet we have seen that
the New Zealanders and Caffres had no bows, and that none
of the Polynesians bad any knowledge of pottery; though
it is evident from their skill in other manufactures, and their
general state of civilization, that they would have found no
556             DIFFERENCES    BETWEEN      SAVAGES.

difficulty in the matter, if the manner had once occurred to
them. Again, “bolas ” are a most effectual weapon, and there
is certainly no difficulty in making them, yet the knowledge
of them appears to be confined to the Patagonians and the
Esquimaux.      The art of pottery, on the contrary, sometimes
has been, I believe, communicated by one race to another.
Nevertheless, there are cases, even among existing races*, in
which we seem to find indications of an independent dis-
covery; at any rate, in which the art is in a rudimentary
stage.                                                 .
   On the whole, then, from a review of these, and other
similar facts which might have been mentioned, it seems to
me most probable that many of the simpler weapons, imple-
ments, etc., have been invented independently by various
savage tribes, although there are no doubt also cases in which
they have been borrowed by one tribe from another.
   The contrary opinion has been adopted by many writers
on account of the undeniable similarity existing between the
weapons used by savages in very different parts of the world.
But however paradoxical it may sound, though the imple-
ments and weapons of savages are remarkably similar, they
are at the same time curiously different. No doubt the
necessaries of life are simple and similar all over the world.
The materials also with which man has to deal are very much
alike; wood, bone, and to a certain extent stone, have every
where   the same   properties.      The obsidian       flakes   of the
Aztecs resemble the flint flakes of our ancestors, not so much
because the ancient Briton resembled the Aztec, as because
the fracture of flint is like that of obsidian. So also the
pointed bones used as awls are necessarily similar all over
the world.   Similarity exists, in fact, rather in the raw mate-
rial than in the manufactured article, and some even of the
simplest implements of stone are very different among dif-
                    * See, for instance, p. 494.
                      DIFFERENT     USES FOR THE DOG.                       557

ferent races.  The adze-like hatchets of the South Sea
Islanders are unlike those of the Australians or ancient
Britons ; the latter again differ very much from the type
which is characteristic of the Drift or Archeolithic period.
   Again, the habits and customs of savages while presenting
many remarkable similarities which, as it seems to me, go far
to prove the unity of the human race, still differ greatly, and
thus give strong evidence of independent development.
Many, indeed, of those differences which must have struck
any one in reading the preceding part of the chapter, follow
evidently and directly from the external conditions in which
different races are placed.   The habits of an Esquimaux and
a Hottentot could not possibly be similar. But let us take
some act which is common to many races, and is susceptible
of being accomplished in several ways. For instance, most
savages live in part on the flesh of birds; how is this
obtained?     Generally with bows and arrows ; but while the
Australians         catch birds     with   the hand, or kill them           with
the simple spear or the boomerang, the Fuegians have both
the sling and the bow, while the Esquimaux use a complex
spear with several points, or a projectile which consists of a
number of walrus teeth fastened together by short pieces of
string, and thus forming a kind of bolas. The northern
tribes visited by Kane practised a different method. They
caught large numbers of birds—especially little auks—in
small nets, resembling landing-nets, with long ivory handles.
Yet this very people were entirely ignorant of fishing*.
   Take, again, the use made of the dog. At first, probably,
the dog and the man hunted togethert- the cunning of the
one supplemented the speed of the other, and they shared
the produce of their joint exertions.     Gradually mind as-

  * Kane,    Arctic Explorations,   vol.   however,   used the dog rather   as a
ii. pp. 203. 243.                          watchdog than as a hound.
  + The low American
                  Wood Indians,
558               MODES     OF   OBTAINING     FIRE.

serted its pre-eminence over matter, and the man became
master. Then the dog was employed in other ways, less
congenial to his nature. The Esquimaux forced him to draw
the sledge; the Chinook kept him for the sake of his wool;
the South Sea Islanders, having no game, bred the dog for
food; the Chonos Indians taught him to fish; where tribes
became shepherds, their dogs became shepherds also ; finally,
it is recorded by Pliny that in ancient times troops of dogs
were trained to serve in war.      Hvyen the ox, though less
versatile than the dog, has been used for the first and the
two last of these purposes.
   Again, in obtaining fire, two totally different methods are
followed; some savages, as for instance the Fuegians, using
percussion, while others, as the South Sea Islanders, rub one
piece of wood against another.       Opinions are divided whether
we have any trustworthy record of a people without the
means of obtaining fire. It has been already mentioned
(pp. 445. 451) that some of the Australians and Tasmanians,
though acquainted with fire, did not know how to obtain it.
In his history of the Ladrone Islands, Father Gobien asserts
that fire, “an element of such universal use, was utterly un-
known to them, till Magellan, provoked by their repeated
thefts, burned one of their villages. When they saw their
wooden houses blazing, they first thought the fire a beast
which fed upon wood, and some of them who came too near,
being burnt, the rest stood afar off, lest they should be de-
voured, or poisoned, by the violent breathings of this terrible
animal.’ This fact is not mentioned in the original account
of Magellan’s Voyage. Freycinet believes that the assertion
of Father Gobien is entirely without foundation.      The lan-
guage, he says, of the inhabitants contains words for fire,
burning charcoal, oven, grilling, boiling, etc.; and even be-
fore the advent of the Europeans, pottery* was well known.
                       el   CavOluueromd oo:
                      MODES   OF   OBTAINING    FIRE.                  559

It is difficult, however,       to get over the distinct assertion
made by Gobien, which moreover derives some support from
similar statements made by other travellers.                Thus Alvaro
de Saavedra      states that the inhabitants            of certain    small
islands in the Pacific which he called “ Los Jardines,” but
which cannot now be satisfactorily determined, stood in
terror of fire because they had never seen it*. Again,
Wilkes    tells ust that on the island of Fakaafo, which he
calls “ Bowditch,” “ there was no sign of places for cooking,
nor any appearance of fire.” The natives also were very much
alarmed when they saw sparks struck from flint and steel.
Here, at least, we       might have thought, was a case beyond
question or suspicion; the presence of fire could hardly have
escaped observation; the marks it leaves are very con-
spicuous. If we cannot depend on such a statement as this,
made by an officer in the United States’ Navy, in the official
report of an expedition sent out especially for scientific
purposes, we may well be disheartened, and lose confidence
in Ethnological investigations. Yet the assertions of Wilkes
are questioned, and with much appearance of justice, by
Mr. Tylort. In the “ Ethnography of the United States’
Exploring Expedition,” Hale gives a list of Fakaafo words,
in which we find afi for “fire”      This is evidently the
same   word    as the New Zealand ahi; but as it denotes light
and heat, as well as fire, we might suppose that it thus found
its way into the Fakaafo vocabulary. I should not, there-
fore, attribute to this argument quite so much force as does
Mr. Tylor. It is, however, evident that Captain Wilkes did
not perceive the importance of the observation, or he would
certainly have taken steps to determine the question ; and as
Hale, in his special work on the Ethnology of the Expedition,
does not say a word on the subject, it is clear he had
* Hackluyt Soc. 1862, p.178.    + United States’ Expl. Exped. vol. v. p. 18.
                   { Harly History of Mankind, p. 230.
560                DIFFERENT    MODES    OF BURIAL.

no idea that the inhabitants of Fakaafo exhibited such an
interesting peculiarity. The fact, if established, would be
most important; but it cannot be said to be satisfactorily
proved that there is at present, or has been within historical
times, any race of men entirely ignorant of fire. It is at
least certain that as far back as the earliest Swiss lake-
villages, and Danish shell-mounds, the use of fire was well
known in Hnrope.
  On the other hand, as already mentioned,                 some   of the
Tasmanian and Australian tribes, though well acquainted
with the use of fire, knew no way of kindling it. Con-
sequently they take great pains to keep it always burn-
ing; and if by any mischance it should be extinguished, are
obliged to get a fresh light from some neighbouring tribe.
   There is, again, scarcely any conceivable way in which the
 dead could be disposed of, which has not been adopted in some
part of the world. Among some races the corpse is simply
buried; by others itis burned.    Some of the North American
Indians expose their dead on scaffolds in the branches of
trees. Some tribes deposit them in sacred rivers, others in
the sea. Among the Sea Dyaks the dead chief is placed in
his war canoe, with his favourite weapons and principal pro-
perty, and is thus turned adrift. Other tribes gave their
dead to be food for wild beasts; and others preferred to eat
them themselves.     Some Brazilian tribes drink the dead *.
The Tarianas    and Tucanos, and some          other tribes, about a
month after the funeral, disinter the corpse, which is then
much decomposed, and put it in a great pan or oven, over
the fire, till all the volatile parts are driven off with a most
horrible odour, leaving only a black carbonaceous mass,
which is pounded into a fine powder, and mixed in several
large conches of caxiri: this. is drunk by the assembled com-
pany, under the full belief that the virtues of the deceased
               * Wallace, Travels on the Amazon, p. 498.
                         DESCENT    OF PROPERTY.                        561

will thus be transmitted to the drinkers. The Cobeus also
drink the ashes of the dead in the same manner.
   Indeed, if there are two possible ways of doing a thing, we
may be sure that some tribes will prefer one, and some the
other.    It seems natural to us that descent should go in the
male line; but there are very many races in which it is
traced from the mother, not the father.    The husband or
father seems to us to be the natural head of the family ; in
Tahiti the reverse is the case, and the son enters at once
into the property and titles of his father, who then holds
them only as a guardian or trustee; so that among this extra-
ordinary people, not the father, but the son, is in reality the
head of the family.       So also in Australia, the father is called
after the son, not the son after the father. At Cape York
and in the neighbouring islands the youngest son has a
double share*.     Among the New Zealanders Mr. Brown
assures us that the youngest son succeeded to the property of
the fathert. Among the Wanyameuzi, property descends
not to the legitimate, but to the illegitimate childrenf.
There are many races in which those holding certain rela-
tionships are forbidden to talk to one another, an extraordi-
nary superstition which, as we have seen (p. 461), reaches
its climax among the Feegeeans.
  It seems     natural to us that after childbirth,           the woman
should keep her bed; and that as far as possible the husband
should relieve her for a time from the labours and cares of
life. In this, at least, one might have thought that all
nations would be alike. Yet it is not so. Among the
Caribs the father, on the birth of a child, took to his ham-
mock, and placed himself in the hands of the doctor, the
mother meanwhile going about her work as usual. A similar

         * McGillivray, Voyage of H.M.S. Rattlesnake, vol. ii. p. 28.
         + New Zealand and its Aborigines, p. 26.
         {~ Burton’s Lake Regions of Africa, p. 158.
562          DIFFERENCES      IN PREVALENT       SOUNDS.

custom has been observed on the mainland of South America,
among the Abipones, Mundrucus, Fuegians, etc.; among
the Arawaks of Surinam; in the Chinese province of West
Yunnan; among the Dyaks of Borneo, and the Esquimaux
of Greenland. It is mentioned by Xenophon as occurring in
Asia Minor, and by Strabo among the Iberians; is found
even in the present day among the Basques, among whom
we are told that in some of the valleys, the “women rise
immediately after childbirth, and attend to the duties of the
household, while the husband goes to bed, taking the baby
with him, and thus receives the neighbours’ compliments.”
The same habit has been noticed also in the South of France ;
according to Diodorus Siculus, it prevailed at his time in
 Corsica; and finally it ‘is said still to exist in some cantons
 of Bearn, where it is called faire la couvade.”
    Again, the love of life—the dread of death—are among
 the strongest of our feelings. “ Hvery thing that a man hath
he will give in exchange for his life.’ This is true, but by
no means universally so. According to Azara, the Indians
of Paraguay have a great mdifference to death; and we
have already seen that this is the case with the Feegeeans,
while Burton makes a similar statement as regards the
negroes of Dahomey.        Among the Chinese it is said that
a man condemned to death, if permitted to do so, may
always secure a substitute on payment of a moderate sum of
money, and a coffin is regarded as a most appropriate present
for an aged relative.
   Again, the sounds of which language is constituted differ
extremely in different parts of the world. The clicks of the
Hottentots are a striking illustration of this. The Hurons
did not use the labials; the Indians of Port au Francais in
Columbia, according to M. de Lamanon*, make no use of
the consonants b, f, z,j, d,p,orv.           The Peruvian language
               ** Voyage de la Perouse, vol. ii. p. 211.
                           DIFFERENCES      IN SIGNS.                            563

wanted the letters b, d, 7, g, s, and#*.                 The Australians did
not use the sound conveyed by our letter st. Many of the
negroes have no 7. The Feegeeans do not use the letter ¢,
the Somo-Somo           dialect has no k, that of Rakiraki and other
parts notj. The Society Islanders and Australians exclude
both sand c§. In representing the New Zealand language
the missionaries found themselves able to discard no less
than thirteen letters, namely, b, ¢, d, f, 9, j, 1, %, 8, v; % Y,
and z||.      Shotland asserts that whistling was unknown                         in
New Zealand¥.
   Even the symbols by which the feelings are expressed are
very different in different races. Kissing appears to us the
natural expression of affection.            “’Tis certain,” says Steele,
“nature was its author, and it began with the first courtship.”
On the contrary it was entirely unknown to the Tahitians,
the New Zealanders**, the Papouans +t, and the aborigines of
Australia, nor was it in use among the Somalstt, or the
Esquimaux §§. The Hill tribes of Chittagong do not say “Kiss
me,” but ‘Smell me||||.” The Malays (J, Feegeeans***,
Tongans, and many other Polynesians always sit down when
speaking to a superior; the inhabitants of Mallicollo testify
“ admiration by hissing like a goosettt,” the sound being per-
haps like our “hush,” a call for silence, and hence a mark of

  * Garcilasso de la Vega.        Mark-    age of the Novara, vol. iii. p.
ham’s Translation, Author’s Preface,       106.
p.=.                                          +t Freycinet, vol. ii. p. 56.
   + Freycinet, vol. ii. p. 757; D’Ur-        tt Burton’s    First   Footsteps    in
ville, vol. i. pp. 188. 199. 481.          Africa, p. 123.
   { Figi and the Figians, vol. i.p.v.       §§ Lyon’s Journal, p. 353.
257.                                          ||| Lewin, Hill Tribes of Chit-
    § Polynesian Researches, vol. i.       tagong, p. 46.
jon vile           .                         q 4 Memoirs ofa Malayan Family,
    || Brown, New Zealand and its          Marsden, p. 37.
Aborigines, p. 100.                           **k* Williams, Figi    and the Fi-
  { Traditions ofthe NewZealanders,        gians, vol. i. p. 88.
p. 134.                                       +++ Cook’s Second Voyage, vol. ii.
   ** TD)’Urville, vol. ii. p. 561; Voy-   p. 36.
                                       QO %
564                         IDEAS   OF DECENCY.

interest ; the mode of showing respect among the Todas of the
Neilgherry hills is by raising the open right hand to the face,
resting the thumb on the bridge of the nose; at Vatavulu*
it is respectful to turn one’s back on a superior, especially
in addressing him. The same custom occurs in Congot;
Denham found it in central Africa t; and Speke among the
Wahuma in the Hast §. According to Freycinet, tears were
regarded in the Sandwich Islands as a sign of happiness ||;
and some of the Esquimaux pull noses as a token of respect {.
Spix and Martius assure us that blushing was unknown
among the Brazilian Indians; and that only after long
intercourse with Europeans, does a change of colour become
in them any indication of mental emotion**,
   Again we find the most striking differences of feeling in
the matter of clothing. The Turk thinks it highly improper
for a woman to show her face. The sculptures on early
Indian temples show that a race may attain to a considerable
degree of civilization without perceiving any necessity what-
ever for clothing. This is the case with the women listening
to Buddha while preaching, and even Buddha’s wife and
Maya his mothert+ are habitually so represented; indeed Mr.
Fergusson does not hesitate to say that “before the Ma-
homedan conquest nudity in India conveyed no sense of
indecency.”
   The ideas of virtue also differ extremely. Neither faith,
hope, nor charity enters into the virtues of a savage.
The Sichuana language contaims no expression for thanks ;
the Algonquin had no word for love; the Tinné no word

   * Figi and the Figians, vol. i.       Nile, p. 206.
p. 154.                                     || le. vol. ii. pp. 542. 589.
   + Astley’s Voyage and Travels,           { Ross, Baffin’s Bay, p. 118.
vol. iii. p. 72.                           ** Vol. i. p. 376.
  { Travels and Discoveries in Africa,     +f See   for instance   Fergusson’s
vol. ii. p. 27; vol. iii. p. 15.         Tree and Serpent Worship.    Pl. Ixxiy.
   § Discovery of the Source of the      and passim,
                               IDEAS         OF VIRTUE.                        565

for beloved; mercy was with the North American Indians a
mistake, and peace an evil; theft, says Catlin, they “call
capturing ;” humility is an idea which they could not com-
prehend. Among the Koupouees the greatest misconduct,
says Major McCulloch, “is to forgive an enemy, the first
virtue is revenge *.”
   Among the ancient Greeks we see in Homer that the
deceitful cunning of Ulysses was looked upon with approval.
   “Ts a man to starve,” said an African, indignantly, to
Capt. Burton, “while his sister has children whom she might
sell?” This sentiment reads at first like the acme of selfish-
ness, but this impression would perhaps be unjust. Marsden
records a Sumatran Malay as saying, in admiration of an
European watch, “Is it not fitting that such as we should be
slaves to people who have the ingenuity to invent, and the
skill to construct, so wonderful a machine+?”
   Chastity before marriage was not reckoned as a virtue by
the New Zealanderst or Cree Indians§$; it was. disapproved
of, though for very different reasons, by some of the Bra-
zilian tribes, by the inhabitants of the Ladrones,.and by the
Andamaners.            On   the   other        hand, the Australians would
have been shocked at a man marrying a woman of his own
family name; the Abipones thought it a sin for a man to
pronounce his own name; the Tahitians thought it very
wrong to eat in company, and were horrified at an English
sailor, who carried some food in a basket on his head.                        ‘This
prejudice was also shared by the New Zealanders ||,while the
Feegeeans, who were habitual cannibals, who regarded mercy
as a weakness, and cruelty as a virtue, fully believed that a
woman who was not tattooed in an orthodox manner during

  * Selection   from    the Records    of      Aborigines, p. 35.
the Government of India.      By Major           § Franklin’s Journeys to the Polar
W. McCulloch, p. 75.                           Seas, vol. i. p. 182. Dunn’s Oregon
  + History of Sumatra, p. 205.                Territory, p. 92.
  + Brown, New Zealand and             its        || D’Urville, vol. ii. p. 533.
566                           IDEAS   OF VIRTUE.

life, could not possibly hope for happiness after death.                  This
curious idea is also found among the Esquimaux.   Hall tells
us that they tattoo “from principle, the theory being that
the lines thus made will be regarded in the next world as a
sign of goodness*.” It seems to the Veddahs the most
natural thing in the world that a man should marry his
younger sister, but marriage with an elder one is as repug-
nant to them as to us. Among the Friendly Islanders the
chief priest was considered too holy to be married; but he
had the right to take as many concubines as he pleased ; and
even the chiefs dared not refuse their daughters to him.
In Western Africa the women of the reigning families
might have as many lovers as they wished, but were for-
bidden to degrade themselves by marriage. Among the
natives of New South Wales, though the women wore no
clothes, it was         thought indecent       for young        girls to go
naked+.
   Many savage races think it wrong for a woman to have
twins; among the Ibos of Hastern Africa, for instance, in
such a case the children were exposed to wild beasts and the
mother was driven out of society t. There also it is thought
unlucky to cut the upper teeth before the lower ones, and
“You cut your top teeth first” is the bitterest of insults.
I cannot indeed but think that the differences observable in
savage tribes, are even more remarkable than the similarities.
  In endeavouring to estimate the moral character of savages,
we must remember not only that their standard of right and
wrong was, and is, in many cases, very different from ours,
but also that, according to the statements of travellers, some
of them can hardly be regarded as responsible beings, and

   * Life with the Esquimanx, vol. ii.      { Burton’s Lake Regions of Africa,
p. 315.                                  p. 90. See for other instances of this,
  + D’Urville, vol. i. p.471; Voyage     my Origin of Civilization, 2nd ed. p.
of the Rattlesnake, vol. i. p, 49.       2D.
                       DEIFICATION         OF WHITE   MEN.                     567

have not attaimed to any notions, however faulty and un-
defined, of moral rectitude*.                 But where       such notions do
exist they differ widely, as we have seen, from our own;
and it would open up too large a question to inquire
whether, in all cases, our standard is the correct one.
   In considering the character of women belonging to savage
or semi-savage races, we must also remember that savages
often regard the white men as beings of a superior order.
Thus M. du Chaillu tells us that some of the African
savages looked upon him as a superior being; and the South
Sea Islanders worshipped Captain Cook as a deity. Even
when they had killed him, and cut him into small pieces,
the inhabitants of Owhyhee fully expected him to re-appear,
and frequently asked ‘“‘what he would do to them on his
returnt.” However absurd and extravagant such a belief
may at first sight appear, it must be admitted that it is in
many respects very natural. Savages can only raise their
minds to the conception of a being a few degrees superior
to themselves, and Captain Cook was more powerful, wiser,
and, we may add, more virtuous, than most of their so-called
“ Deities.” Under these circumstances, although it must be
admitted that the chastity of the women is not, as a general
rule, much regarded among savages, we must not too severely
condemn them on this account. It is not surprising that
any connexion with white men is regarded rather as an
honour than asa disgrace: the Huropeans hold, in fact, almost
the same position in public estimation as did the amorous
deities of ancient mythology.
   Again, with savages, as with children, time appears longer
than it does to us, and a temporary marriage as natural and
honourable as one that is permanent. Hospitality, again, is

   * See, for instance, Burchell, vol.i.     Ocean.      By Capt. King, F.R.S. vol.
p. 461.                                      iii. p. 69.
   + Cook’s Voyage to the Pacific
568                     CURIOUS    CUSTOMS.

frequently carried so far that it is thought wrong to with-
hold from a guest any thing that might contribute to his
comfort, and unless therefore he was provided with a tem-
porary wife, hospitality would be regarded as incomplete.
This custom is found throughout North America and the
South Sea Islands, among the Abyssinians, Bedouins, Kaffirs,
Patagonians, and other races. Among the Hsquimaux it
is considered a great mark of friendship for two men to
exchange wives for a day or two. It has been already men-
tioned that a Kandyan chief, described by Mr. Bayley, was
quite scandalized at the idea of having only one wife. It
was, he said, “just like monkeys.”” When Captain Cook was
in New Zealand, his companions contracted many temporary
marriages with the Maori women; these were arranged in a
 formal and decent manner, and were regarded, by the New
 Zealanders at any rate, as perfectly regular and innocent*.
 Regnard+ assures us that the Lapps preferred to marry a
 girl that had had a child by a white man, thinking “that
 because a man whom they believe to be possessed of a better
taste than themselves has been anxious to give marks of his
love for a girl of their country, she must, therefore, be pos-
sessed of some secret merit.” Hvenat the present day, Lady
Duff Gordon tells us, in her paper on the Cape tf, that “ there
are no so-called ‘morals’ among the coloured people, and
how or why should there? It is an honour to one of these
girls to have a child by a white man.”               Taking all these
facts into consideration, the intercourse which has taken
place between Europeans and women of lower tribes must
not, I think, be too severely condemned, or rather the blame
ought to fall on us and not on them. But, even among
savages themselves, we must admit that female virtue is, in

           * Cook’s First Voyage, vol. iii. p. 450.
           + Pinkerton, Journey to Lapland, vol. i. p. 166.
           t Vacation Tourists, 1863, p. 178.
                     SOCIAL   POSITION     OF WOMEN.                     569

many cases, but slightly regarded; as, indeed, is but natural
when women themselves are looked upon as little better than
domestic animals. Among many tribes, for instance the
South Sea Islanders and the Esquimatix, indecent dances
are not only common, but are countenanced by women of the
highest rank, to whom it does not appear to occur that there
is any harm or impropriety in them. According to Ulloa*,
the Brazilians do not approve of chastity in an unmarried
woman, regarding it as a proof that she can have nothing
attractive   about    her.    The inhabitants         of the Ladrones +,
and of the Andaman Island}, come to the same conclusion ;
in the latter case, however, for a different reason, regarding
it asa proof of selfishness and pride. Judged by our stan-
dards these facts are very dreadful; but we must remember
they did not entail on savages the same fatal consequences
as with us; and before we condemn them too severely, let us
remember our own literature and our own morality, even in
the last century.
  The harsh, not to say cruel treatment of women, which is
almost universal among savages, is one of the deepest stains
upon their character. They regard the weaker sex as beings
of an inferior order, as mere domestic drudges.                Nor are the
labours and sufferings of the women sweetened by any great
affection on the part of those for whom they toil. We have
already seen that the Algongquins had no word for “ love”
in their language, and that the Tinné Indians had no equi-
valent for “ dear ” or “ beloved.”? Captain Lefroy§ says, “I
endeavoured to put this intelligibly to Nannette, by sup-
posing such an expression as ma chére femme; ma chére
fille. When at length she understood it, her reply was (with
great emphasis), ‘ I’ disent jamais ¢a ; 7’ disent ma femme, ma

 * Pinkerton, vol. xiv. p. 521.          vol. ii. p. 85.                 é
 + Freycinet, vol. ii. p. 370.              § Richardson’s Arctic Expedition,
 t Trans. Ethn. Soc.        New Ser.     vol. ii. p. 24.
570                     SAVAGES        AND CHILDREN.

fille’? Spix and Martius* tell us that among the Brazilian
tribes the father has scarcely any, the mother only an in-
stinctive affection for the child. There can be no doubt
that, as an almost universal rule, savages are cruel, but we
must remember that they are less sensitive to pain than those
who spend much of their time in-doors, and that in many cases
they inflict upon themselves also the most horrible tortures.
   Savages have often been likened to children, and the com-
parison is not only correct, but also highly instructive. Many
naturalists consider that the early condition of the individual
indicates that of the race,—that the best test of the affinities
of a species are the stages through which it passes.                  So also
it is in the case of man; the life of each individual is an
epitome of the history of the race, and the gradual develop-
ment of the child illustrates that of the species. Hence the
importance of the similarity between savages and children.
Savages, like children, have no steadiness of purpose. Speak-
ing of the Dogrib Indians, we found, says Richardson +, “ by
experience, that however high the reward they expected to
receive on reaching their destination, they could not be
depended on to carry letters. A slight difficulty, the prospect
of a banquet on venison, or a sudden impulse to visit some
friend, were     sufficient to turn them aside for an indefinite
length of time.” Hyen among the comparatively civilized
 South Sea Islanders this childishness was very apparent.
“Their tears indeed{, like those of children, were always
ready to express any passion that was strongly excited, and
like those of children they also appear to be forgotten as
soon as shed.” D’Urville also mentions that Tai-wanga, a
New   Zealand     chief, cried like a child, because the sailors
spoilt his favourite cloak by powdering it with flour$.                  It is

 * Reise, vol. i. p. 381.                    § D’Urville, vol. ii. p. 398. See
 + Arctic Expedition, vol. ii. p.23.      also Burton’s Lake Regions of Ccn-
 ft Cook’s First Voyage, p. 103.          tral Africa, p. 332.
                             SAVAGES AND CHILDREN.                       571

not, says Cook, “indeed strange that the sorrows of these
artless people should be transient, any more than that their
passions should be suddenly and strongly expressed ; what
they feel they have never been taught either to disguise or
suppress, and having no habits of thinking which perpetually
recall the past, and anticipate the future, they are affected by
all the changes of the passing hour, and reflect the colour of
the time, however frequently it may vary; they have no
project which is to be pursued from day to day, the subject
of unremitted anxiety and solicitude, that first rushes into
the mind when they awake in the morning, and is last dis-
missed when they sleep at night. Yet if we admit that they
are upon the whole happier than we, we must admit that the
child is happier than the man, and that we are losers by the
perfection of our nature, the increase of our knowledge, and
the enlargement of our views.”
  We know the difficulty which children find in pronouncing
certain sounds : 7 and J, for instance, they constantly confound.
This is the case also among the Sandwich Islanders and in
the Ladrones according to Freycinet*; in Vanikoro+; among
the Dammarast; and in the Tonga Islands§.    Mr. Darwin
observed that the Fuegians had great difficulty in com-
prehending an alternative: and every one must have noticed
the tendency among savages to form words by reduplication.
This also is characteristic of childhood among civilized
races.
   Again, some of the most brutal acts which have been
recorded against them are to be regarded less as instances of
deliberate cruelty, than of a childish thoughtlessness and im-
pulsiveness. A striking instance of this is recorded by Byron
in his narrative of the Loss of the Wager. A cacique of the

  * Vol. ii. pp. 260. 519.               p. 181.
  + Vol. v. p. 218.                         § Mariner’s Tonga Islands, vol. i.
  + Galton, Tropical South Africa,       p. 30.
572                MORAL    INFERIORITY     OF   SAVAGES.

Chonos, who was nominally a Christian, had been out with
his wife to fish for sea-egos, and having had little success,
returned in a bad humour. “A little boy of theirs, about
three years old, whom they appeared to be doatingly fond of,
watching for his father and mother’s return, ran into the
surf to meet them: the father handed a basket of eggs to
the child, which being too heavy for him to carry, he let it
fall, upon which the father jumped out of the canoe, and
catching the boy up in his arms, dashed him with the
utmost violence against the stones. The poor little creature
lay motionless and bleeding, and im that condition was
taken up by the mother, but died soon after*.”
   In fact, we may fairly sum up this part of the question in
a few words by saying, as the most general conclusion which
can be arrived at, that savages have the character of children
with the passions and strength of men. No doubt different
races of savages differ very much in character. An Hsqui-
maux     and a Feegeean, for instance, have little in common.
But after making every possible allowance for savages, it
must I think be admitted that they are inferior, morally as
well as in other respects, to the more civilized races. There
is indeed no atrocious crime, no vice recorded by any tra-
veller, which might not be paralleled in Europe. But that
which is with us the exception, is with them the rule; that
which with us is condemned by the general verdict of society,
and is confined to the uneducated and the vicious, is among
savages passed over almost without condemnation and treated
aS a mere matter         of course.       In Tahiti, for instance, the
Missionaries considered that “ not less than two-thirds of the
children were murdered by their parents.”
  If we now turn to the mental differences between civilized
and uncivilized       races,   we     shall find them        very    strongly

       * Byron’s Loss of the Wager.    Kerr’s Voyages, vol. xvii. p. 374,
                     INTELLECTUAL   INFERIORITY.                        573

marked.      Speaking of a Bushman tribe, Burchell observes
that “whether capable of reflection or not, these individuals
never exerted it*.” The Rey. T. Dove describes the Tas-
manians as distinguished “by the absence of all moral views
and impressions. Every idea bearing on our origin and
destination as rational beings seems to have been erased from
their breastst+.”” It would be easy to fill a volume with the
evidence of excessive stupidity recorded by different tra-
vellers. Jt may be perhaps thought that these were rather
instances of individual dulness, than any indication of a
national characteristic ;but in the nature and capacity of a
language we find atest and measure of the higher minds in a
nation.      Unfortunately,   however,    travellers    have found           it
difficult enough to obtain vocabularies of the words in use;
and it is far less easy to collect information as to those which
they do not possess. Yet there are not a few cases in which
this has been done. I have already mentioned the deficiency
of some North American languages in terms of endearment ;
this fact suggests a melancholy condition of the domestic
relations, but it may here be referred to again as an evidence
of a low mental, as well as moral, condition. What Spix
and Martius tell us about the Brazilian tribes{ appears also
to be true of many, if not of most, savage races. Their
vocabulary is rich, and they have separate names for the
different parts of the body, for all the different animals and
plants with which they are acquainted; for every thing, in
fact, which they can see and handle. Yet they are entirely
deficient in words for abstract ideas; they have no expres-
sions for colour, tone, sex, genus, spirit, etc.
  The Abipones have no such words as man, body, place,
time, never, ever, every where, etc.; nor such a verb as “to
be.”      They cannot say “I am an Abipon,” but only “I
  * |. c. vol. 1. p. 461.           Science, vol. i. p. 249.
  + Tasmanian Journal of Natural      { Reisein Brazilien, vol. i. p. 385.
574:                 POVERTY    OF SAVAGE     LANGUAGES.

Abipon*.”         The Malay language, also, according to Craw-
fard, is very deficient in abstract               terms.      It contains        a
word for each colour, but no term for colour itself.                        The
St. Petersburg Bible Society endeavoured some years ago
to translate the Lord’s Prayer and the Ten Command-
ments into the language of the T'schuktschi, but “ partly
from the language being entirely deficient in words to
express new and abstract ideas; and partly for want of
letters to convey the variety of strange and uncouth sounds
of which the language itself consists, the translation was
wholly unintelligible +.
   So, again, the Tasmanians had no word for a tree, though
they had a name for each species; nor could they express
“qualities, such as hard, soft, warm, cold, long, short, round,
etc.; for ‘hard’ they would say ‘like a stone;’ for ‘tall’
they would say ‘long legs, etc.; and for ‘round’ they said
‘like a ball,’ ‘like the moon,’ and so onf.”                   According to
 the missionaries $, Fuegians have “no abstract terms for ex-
 pressing the truths of our religion ;” and among the North
 American languages “a term sufficiently general to denote
an ‘oak tree’ is exceptional||.” Even the comparatively
civilized inhabitants of Tahiti had, according to Forster,
“no proper words for expressing abstract ideas J.”
   The names for numbers are, however, the best, or, at least,
the most easily applicable test of mental condition among
the lower races of man. We have seen that the Esquimaux
can only with difficulty count up to ten, and that some indi-
viduals cannot go beyond five. The Abipones** can only
express three numbers in proper words. The Dammaras
“in practice, whatever they may possess in their language,
   * Dobritzhoffer, vol. ii. p. 183.         § The Voice of Pity, vol. x. p. 152.
  t Wrangell’s Siberia and Polar             || Latham,    Varieties of Man,
Sea, p. 121.                              p. 375.
  t Miligan,    Proc.   Roy.   Society,     { 1. c. p. 408.
Tasmania, vol. iii. p. 281,                 ** Dobritzhoffer, vol, ii. p. 169,
                   DEFICIENCIES         IN NUMERATION.                        575

certainly use no numeral greater than three.                        When they
wish to express four, they take to their fingers, which are to
them as formidable instruments of calculation as a sliding
rule is to an English schoolboy. They puzzle very much
after five, because no spare hand remains to grasp and secure
the fingers that are required for units*.”’ Mr. Crawfurd,
to whom we are indebted for an interesting paper on this
subjectt, has examined no less than thirty Australian
languages,   and it appears that none of the tribes in that
vast continent can count beyond four. According to Mr.
Scott Nind, indeed, the numerals used by the natives of
King George’s Sound reach up to five; but the last is merely
the word “many.” The Brazilian Indians also count only up
to three; for any higher number they use the word “ many +.”
The Cape Yorkers          (Australia)           can hardly be said to go
beyond two; their numerals are as follows :—
     Grower       fie pees ifs   ace   Netot:
     ere         t ¥s8      > lies              Go         Ne!
     PVCOME      wan.       mie bes?       20   sors       WNaes=netat.
     icpre   se fo4 Aye    o h yakys     ve     SOs.       LN aesendes,
     ivewmksees       +    Wolo      See               0   Waesenaes-netat,
     Sree    were fouling, ti -al es     Naes-naes-naes.
  Again, in the state of their religious conceptions, still
more in the absence of religious conceptions, we get another
proof of extreme mental inferiority. The question has been
frequently discussed whether there is any race of men so
degraded as to be entirely without a religion—without some
idea of a deity. The conclusion to be arrived at depends, as
it seems to me, very much on the meaning which we ascribe
to the term “religion.”           Ifa mere fear of the unknown, if a
more or less vague belief in witchcraft is to be regarded as a
religion, it would, I think, be difficult to refute this assertion.

 % Galton’s Tropical Africa, p.183.         tions, New Series, vol. ii. p. 84.
 + Ethnological Society’s Transac-             t Spix and Martius, vol. i. p. 387.
576                        ABSENCE        OF RELIGION

But if a higher estimate of religion is adopted, then so far
from this being true, the very reverse is the case. Many,
we might almost say all, of the most savage races are,
according to the nearly universal testimony of travellers, in
this condition.
   According to Spix and Martius*, Bates, and Wallace, some
of the Brazilian Indians were entirely without religion.
Burmeister confirms this statement, and, in the list of the
principal tribes of the valley of the Amazons, published by
the Hakluyt Society, the Chunchos are stated “to have no
religion whatever,” and we are told that the Curetus “have
no idea of a Supreme Being.” The Toupinambas of Brazil
had no religion. The South American Indians of the Gran
 Chaco are said by the missionaries to have “no religious or
idolatrous belief or worship whatever; neither do they possess
 any idea of God, or of a Supreme Being. They make no
 distinction between right and wrong, and have, therefore,
 neither fear nor hope of any present or future punishment or
reward, nor any mysterious terror of some supernatural
power, whom they might seek to assuage by sacrifices cr
superstitious rites+.” Batest tells us “that none of the
tribes on the Upper Amazons have an idea of a Supreme
Being, and consequently have no word to express it in their
languages. 3) Azara also makes the same statement as regards
many of the South American tribes visited by him §.
   Father Baegert, who lived as a missionary among the
Indians of California for seventeen years, affirms that “idols,
temples, religious worship, or ceremonies, were                   unknown       to
them, and they neither believed in the true and only God,
nor adored false deities ||;” and M. de la Perouse also says
  * Reise in Brasilien, vol. i. p. 379.     vol. ii. pp. 8. 14, 33. 51. 60. 76. 80,
   + Voice of Pity, vol. ix. p. 220.        81. 84. 90. 138. 160. 164. 166.
   t Life in the Amazons, vol. ii.             ||See Mr. Rau’s translation. Smith-
p. 162,                                     sonian Contrib, 1863-64, p. 390,
   § Voyages dans lAmer. Mérid.
                    AMONG    VARIOUS    SAVAGE    RACES.                577

that they “had no knowledge of a God, or of a future state.”
Colden, who had ample means of judging, assures us that the
celebrated “five nations” of Canada “had no public worship
nor any word for God,” and Hearne, who lived amongst the
Northern American Indians for years, and was perfectly
acquainted with their habits and language, says the same of
some tribes on Hudson’s Bay.
   In the Voyage de l’Astrolabe, it is stated that the natives
of the Samoan and Solomon Islands, in the Pacific, had no
religion, and in the voyage of the Novara the same is said of
the Caroline Islanders.         The Samoans “have neither moraes,
nor temples, nor altars, nor offerings, and consequently none
of the sanguinary rites, observed at the other groups. In
consequence of this the Samoans were considered an impious
race; and their impiety became proverbial with the people of
Rarotonga, for, when upbraiding a person who neglected the
worship of the gods, they would call him “a godless Sa-
moan*.””      On Damood         Island, between     Australia and New
Guinea, Jukes could find no “ traces of any religious belief or
observance ¢.”” Duradawan, a sepoy who lived some time
with the Andaman Islanders, maintained that they had no
religion, and Dr. Mouatt believes his statements to be cor-
rect t. Some of the Australian tribes also are said to have
no religion §. In the Pellew Islands, Wilson found no reli-
gious buildings, nor any sign of religion.
   Mr. Wallace, who had excellent opportunities for judging,
and whose merits as an observer no one can question, tells
us that among the people of Wanumbai, in the Aru Islands,
he could find no trace of a religion ||; adding, however, that
he was but a short time among them,


   * Missionary Enterprises, p. 464.        § Collins’ English Colony in New
   + Jukes, Voyage of the “Fly,”        South Wales, p. 354.
vol. i. p. 164.                             || The Malayan Archipelago, vol.
   { Trans. Ethn. Soc. vol. i. p. 48.   ii. p. 280.
                                                            Pp
578                       ABSENCE        OF RELIGION

   The Yenadies and the Villees, according to Dr. Shortt, are
entirely without any belief in a future state *; and again,
Hooker tells us that the Lepchas of Northern India have no
religion. Captain Grant could find “no distinct form of
religion ” in some of the comparatively civilized tribes visited
by him+. According to Burchell, the Bachapins (Caffres)
had no form of worship or religiont. They thought “ that
every thing made itself, and that trees and herbage grew
by their own will.” They had no belief in a good deity, but
some vague idea of an evil being.                 Indeed the first idea of a
god is almost always as an evil spirit.
   Speaking of the Foulahs of Wassoulo, in Central Africa,
Caillié states, “I tried to discover whether they had any
religion of their own; whether they worshipped fetishes, or
the sun, moon,       or stars;      but        I could never       perceive any
religious ceremony amongst them §.” Again, he says of the
Bambaras that, “like the people of Wassoulo, they have no
religion ||,” adding, however, that they have great faith in
charms.
   Burton also states that some of the tribes in the Lake
districts of central Africa “admit neither God, nor angel,
nor devil§.”?       Speaking of Hottentots, Le Vaillant says **:
“Je n’y ai vu aucune trace de réligion, rien qui approche
méme de Vidée d’un étre vengeur et rémunérateur.      J’ai
vécu assez longtemps avec eux, chez eux aux sein de leurs
déserts   paisibles;     j’ai fait, avec          ces braves       humains,     des
voyages dans des régions fort eloignées; nulle part je n’ai
rencontré rien qui ressemble 4 la religion.” Livingstone
                                           x




  * Proceedings of Madras Govern-          pp. 303.
ment, Revenue Department.    May,              NIEcipts 70:
1864.                                           { Trans.   Ethn.   Soc.   New   Ser.
   + A Walk across Africa, p. 145.         vol. i. p. 323.
   t Travels in South Africa, vol. ii.        ** Voyages dans !’Afrique, vol, i-
p. 550.                                    Dadas
   § Travels to Timbuctoo, vol. i,
                  AMONG    VARIOUS    SAVAGE    RACES.               579

mentions that, on one occasion, after talking to a Bushman
for some time, as he supposed, about the Deity, he found that
the savage thought he was speaking about Sekomi, the
principal chief of the district.
   Speaking of the Esquimaux, Ross says: “ Ervick, being
the senior of the first party that came on board, was judged
to be the most proper person to question on the subject of
religion. I directed Sacheuse to ask him, if he had any
knowledge of a Supreme Being; bat after trying every word
used in his own language to express it, he could not make him
understand what he meant.       It was distinctly ascertained
that he did not worship the sun, moon, stars, or any image
or living creature. When asked what the sun or moon was
for, he said to give light.     He had no knowledge, or idea, how
he came into being, or of a future state; but said that when
he died he would be put into the ground. Having fully
ascertained that he had no idea of a beneficent Supreme Being,
I proceeded, through Sacheuse, to inquire if he believed in
an evil spirit; but he could not be made to understand what
it meant.             Eee FO re           Peay SA       alee,
He was positive that in this incantation he did not receive
assistance from any thing, nor could he be made to under-
stand what a good or an evil spirit meant *.”
   In some cases travellers have arrived at these views very
much to their own astonishment. Thus Father Dobritz-
hoffer says, “ Theologians agree in denying that any man in
possession of his reason can, without a crime, remain igno-
rant of God for any length of time. This opinion I warmly
defended in the University of Cordoba, where I finished the
four years’ course of theology begun at Gratz, in Styria. But
what was my astonishment, when, on removing from thence
toa colony of Abipones, I found that the whole language of
these savages does not contain a single word which expresses
        * Ross’ Voyage of Discovery to the Arctic Regions, p. 127.
                                 Pp 2
580                   RUDIMENTS       OF RELIGION.

God or a divinity. To instruct them in religion, it was
necessary to’ borrow the Spanish word for God, and insert
into the catechism ‘Dios ecnam caogerik,’ ‘God the creator
of things *,’ ”
   We have already observed a case of this kind in Kolben,
who, in spite of the assertions of the natives themselves, felt
quite sure that certain dances must be of a religious charac-
ter, “let the Hottentots         say what they will.”        Again, Mr.
Matthews, who went out to act as missionary among the
Fuegians, but was soon obliged to abandon the hopeless task,
observed only one act “which could be supposed devotional.”
He sometimes, we are told, “ heard a great howling or lamen-
tation, about sunrise in the morning; and upon asking
Jemmmy Button what occasioned the outcry, he could obtain
no satisfactory answer; the boy only saying, ‘ People very
sad, cry very much.’” This appears so natural and sufficient
an explanation, that why the outcry should be “supposed
devotional,” I must confess myself unable to sec. Once
more, Dr. Hooker states, that the Khasias, an Indian tribe,
had no religion. Col. Yule +, on the contrary, says that they
have, but he admits that breaking hen’s eggs is “ the prin-
cipal part of their religious practice.” But if most travellers
have expected to find a religion every where, and have been
convinced, almost against their will, that the reverse is the
case; itis quite possible that there may have been others
who have too hastily denied the existence of a religion among
the tribes they visited. However this may be, those who assert
that even the lowest savages believe in a Supreme Deity, affirm
that which is entirely contrary to the evidence. The direct
testimony of travellers on this point is indirectly corrobo-
rated by their other statements.               How,    for instance,   can
a people who are unable to count their own fingers, possibly
            * lic. vol. ii. p. 57.   See also p. G4.
            + Yule, On the Khasia Hills and People, p. 18.
                       LOW   IDEAS    OF THE DEITY.                      581

raise their mind so far as to admit even the rudiments of
a religion *? Fetich worship, which is so widely prevalent
in Africa, can hardly be called a religion; and even the
South      Sea Islanders, who were       in many respects         so highly
civilized, are said to have been seriously offended with their
deity if they thought that he treated them with undue
severity, or without proper consideration. According to
Kotzebue, the Kamtschatkans adored their deities “when
their wishes were fulfilled, and insulted them when their
affairs went amiss+.’?  When the missionaries introduced a
printing-press into Feegee “the heathen at once declared it
to be a god tf.”
    The natives of the Nicobar Islands put up scarecrows to
frighten away the deity §, and Burton once heard an old
Eesa woman, who was suffering from tooth-ache, offer up
the following prayer: “Oh Allah, may thy teeth ache like
mine; Oh Allah, may thy gums be as sore as mine are
now.”
    The savage is, however, almost universallya believer in
witchcraft.    Confusing together subjective and objective
relations, he is a prey to constant fears. Nor is the belief in
sorcery easily shaken off even by the most civilized nations.
James the First was under the impression that by melting
little images of wax “the persons that they bear the name
of may be continually melted or dried away by continual
sickness.”        As regards pictures, the most curious fancies
exist among savage races. They have a very general dishke
to be represented, thinking that the artist thereby acquires
some mysterious power over them. Kane on one occasion
freed himself from some importunate Indians, by threatening

  * See, for instance, Greg’s Creed       { Figi and the Figians, vol. ii.
of Christendom, p. 212.                 Pees.
  + New Voyage round the World,           § Voyage of the “ Novara,’’ vol. ii.
vol. ii. p. 18.                         p. 66.
582                       WITCHCRAFT.

to draw them if they did not go away. I have already men-
tioned (p. 529) the danger in which Catlin found himself
from sketching a chief in profile, and thereby, as it was sup-
posed, depriving him of half his face. So again a mysterious
connexion is supposed to exist between a cut lock of hair and
the person to whom it belonged. In various parts of the
world the-sorcerer gets clippings of the hair of his enemy,
parings of his nails, or leavings of his food, convinced that
whatever evil is done to these will react on their former
owner. Even a piece of clothing, or the ground on which a
person has trodden, will answer the purpose, and among
some tribes the mere knowledge of a person’s name is sup-
posed to give a mystcrious power. The Indians of British
Columbia have a great horror of telling theirnames. Among
the Aleonquins a person’s real name is communicated only
to his nearest relations and dearest friends: the outer world
address him by a kind of nickname.      Thus the true name of
La Beile Sauvage was not Pocahontas, but Matokes, which
they were afraid to communicate to the English. In some
tribes these name-fancies take a different form. According
to Ward, it is an unpardonable sin for a Hindoo woman to
mention the name of her husband.          The Kaffirs have a
similar custom, and so have some Hast African tribes. In
many parts of the world the names of the dead are avoided
with superstitious horror. ‘This is the case in great parts of
North and South America, in Siberia, among the Papuans
and Australians, and even _in Shetland, where it is said
that widows are very reluctant to mention their departed
husbands.
  Throughout Australia, among some of the Brazilian tribes,
in parts of Africa, and in various other countries, natural
death is regarded as an impossibility.   In the   New Hebrides
“ when a man fell ill, he knew that some sorcerer was burn-
ing his rubbish ; and shell-trumpets, which could be heard
               GENERAL WRETCHEDNESS        OF SAVAGES.                 583

for miles, were blown to signal to the sorcerers to stop, and
wait for the presents which would be sent next morning.
Night after night, Mr. Turner used to hear the melancholy
too-tooing of the shells, entreating the wizards to stop
plaguing their victims*.”  Savages never know but what
they may be placing themselves in the power of these terri-
ble enemies}, and it is not too much to say that the horrible
dread of unknown evil hangs like a thick cloud over savage
life, and embitters every pleasure.
    The mental sufferings which they thus undergo, the horri-
ble tortures which they sometimes inflict on themselves, and
the crimes which they are led to commit, are melancholy in
the extreme.      It must not be supposed that in the pre-
ceding chapter I have selected from various works all the
passages most unfavourable to savages, and that the picture
I have drawn of them is unfair. In reality the very reverse
is the case. Their real condition is even worse and more
abject than that which I have endeavoured to depict. I have
been careful to quote only from trustworthy authorities, but
there are many things stated by them which I have not
ventured to repeat; and there are other facts which the
travellers themselves were ashamed to publish.

  AID lor) loc. pa 1295. .urner’s      + See Brown, New      Zealand   and
Polynesia, pp. 18, 89. 424.         its Aborigines, p. 80.
                             084




                      CHAPTER XVI.

                  CONCLUDING       REMARKS.

    HAVE already expressed my belief that the simpler aris
     and implements have been independently invented by
various tribes, at different times, and in different parts of
the world. Even at the present day we may, I think,
obtain glimpses of the manner in which they were, or may
have been, invented. Elephants break off boughs and use
them   as fans.   Monkeys   use    clubs, and throw sticks   and
stones at those who intrude upon them. They also use
round stones for cracking nuts, and surely a very small step
would lead from that to the application of a sharp stone for
cutting. When the edge became blunt, it would be thrown
uway, and another chosen; but after a while, accident, if not
reflection, would show, that a round stone would crack other
stones, as well as nuts, and thus the savage would learn to
make sharp-edged stones for himself. At first, as we see in
the drift specimens, these would be coarse and rough, but
gradually the pieces chipped off would become smaller, the
blows would be more cautiously and thoughtfully given, and
at length it would be found that better work might be done
by pressure than by blows. From pressure to polishing
would again be but a small step. In making flint imple-
ments sparks would be produced; in polishing them it would
not fail ta be observed that they became hot, and in this
                          THE   HIGHER   ANIMALS.                        585

way it is easy to see how the two methods of obtaining fire
may have originated *.
  The chimpanzee builds himself a house or resting-place,
quite equal to that of some savages. Our earliest ancestors
therefore may have had this art; but even if not, when they
became hunters, and, as we find to be the case with all
hunting tribes, supplemented the inefficiency of their wea-
pons by an intimate acquaintance with the manners and
customs of the animals on which they preyed, they could not
fail to observe, and perhaps to copy, the houses which various
species of animals construct for themselves.
    The Esquimaux have no pottery; they use hollow stones
as a substitute, but we have seen how they sometimes im-
prove upon these bya rim of clay. To extend this rim,
diminish, and at last replace the stone, is an obvious process.
In hotter countries, vessels of wood, or the shells of fruit,
such as cocoa-nuts and gourds, are used for holding liquids.
These will not stand fire, but in some cases, by plastering
them on the outside with clay, they are enabled to do so.
There is some evidence that this obvious improvement has
been made by several separate tribes even in modern times.
Other similar cases might be mentioned, in which by a very
simple and apparently obvious process, an important im-
provement is secured. It seems very improbable that any
such advantage should ever be lost again. There is no
evidence, says Mr. Tylort, “of any tribe giving up the use
of the spindle to twist their thread by hand, or having been
in the habit of working the fire-drill with a thong, and going
back to the clumsier practice of working it without, and it is
even hard to fancy such a thing happening.” What follows
from this argument? Evidently that the lowest races of

   * The idea of using fire would        ning, and by the natural fires which
also have been suggested by vol-         occur in hot summers.
canoes, by trees set on fire by light-     t l.c. p. 364.
586            THE    PRIMITIVE   CONDITION   OF MAN.

existing savages must, always assuming the common origin
of the human race, be at least as far advanced as were our
ancestors when they spread over the earth’s surface.
   What, then, must have been their condition?    They were
ignorant of pottery, for the Esquimaux, the Polynesians, the
Australians, some North and South American tribes, and
many other savage races, have none even now, or at least
had none until quite lately. They had no bows and arrows,
for these weapons      were unknown       to the Australians        and
New Zealanders; their boats for the same         reason must have
been of the rudest possible character; they were naked, and
ignorant of the art of spinning; they had no knowledge of
agriculture, and probably no domestic animal but the dog,
though here the argument is weaker, inasmuch as experience
is more portable than property. It is, however, in my
opinion, most probable that the dog was long the only
domesticated animal. Of the more unusual weapons, such
as the boomerang, blowpipe, bolas, etc., they were certainly
ignorant. The sling and the throwing-stick were doubtless
unknown, and even the shield, as it is only used in war, had
probably not been invented. The spear, which is but a
development of the knife-point, and the club, which is but a
long hammer, are the only things left by this line of argu-
ment.   They   seem     to be the only natural          and   universal
weapons of man.
   We might be disposed to wonder how man was at first
able to kill game; but we must remember that if man was
unskilful, animals were unsuspicious. The tameness of the
birds on uninhabited islands is well known;         the wariness of
animals and the skill of man must have increased almost
Parr PUSS.
   The same argument may be applied to the mental con-
dition of savages.      That our earliest ancestors could have
counted to ten is very improbable, considering that so many
                      DIFFUSION   OF MAN.                  507

races now in existence    cannot get beyond four.       On the
other hand, it is very improbable that man can have existed
in a lower condition than that thus indicated.      So long,
indeed, as he was confined to the tropics, he may have found.
a succession of fruits, and have lived as the monkeys do now.
Indeed, according to Bates, this is still the case with some
of the Brazilian Indians,  ‘‘The monkeys,” he says, “lead
in fact a life similar to that of the Pardrauate Indians.”
Directly, however, our ancestors spread into temperate cli-
mates, this mode   of life would become impossible, and they
would be compelled to seek their nourishment, in part at
least, from the animal   kingdom.     Then, if not before, the
knife and the hammer would develope into the spear and
the club.
   It is too often supposed that the world was peopled by a
series of “migrations.” But migrations, properly so called,
are compatible only with a comparatively high state of
organization. Morcover, it has been observed that the geo-
graphical distribution of the various races of Man curiously
coincides with that of other races of animals: and there can
be no doubt that he originally crept over the earth’s sur-
face, little by little, year by year, just for instance as the
weeds of Europe are now gradually but surely creeping over
the surface of Australia.
   The preceding argument assumes, of course, the unity of
the human race. It would, however, be impossible for me
to end this volume without saying a few words on this great
question. It must be admitted that the principal varieties
of mankind are of great antiquity. We find on the earliest
Egyptian monuments, some of which are certainly as ancient
as 2400 B.c., “two   great distinct types, the Arab    on the
east and west of Egypt, the Negro on the south; and the
Egyptian type occupying a middle place between the two.
The representations of the monuments,       although   conven-
588                             EARLY   RACES    OF MAN,

tional, are so extremely characteristic that it is quite impos-
sible to mistake them.” These distinct types still predominate
in Egypt and the neighbouring countries. Thus, then, says
Mr. Poole, in this immense                 interval we do not find “the
least change in the Negro or the Arab; and even the type
which seems to be intermediate between them is virtually as
unaltered.  Those who consider that length of time can
change a type of man, will do well to consider the fact that
three thousand years give no ratio on which a calculation
could be founded *.” I am, however, not aware that it is
supposed by any school of Ethnologists that “time” alone,
without a change of external conditions, will produce an
alteration of type. Let us turn now to the instances relied
on by Mr. Orawfurd+.                    The millions, he says, “of African
Negroes that have during three centuries been transported
to the New World and its islands, are the same in colour as
the present inhabitants of the parent country of their fore-
fathers. The Creole Spaniards, who have for at least as loug
a time been settled in tropical America, are as fair as the
people of Arragon and Andalusia, with the same varicty of
colour in the hair and eye as their progenitors.   The pure
Dutch Creole colonists of the Cape of Good Hope, after
dwelling two centuries among black Caffres, and yellow Hot-
tentots, do not differ in colour from the people of Holland.”
Here, on the contrary, we have great change of circum-
stances, but a very insufficient lapse of time, and in fact
there is no well-authenticated case im which these two
requisites are united.              But Mr. Crawfurd went, I think, too
far when he denied altogether any change of type. In spite
of the comparatively short time which has clapsed, and of
the immense immigration which has been kept up, there is
already a marked difference between the English of Europe
  * Poole, Trans.       Ethn.   Soc. New        + Crawfurd, Trans. Ethn. Soc. New
Ser, vol. ii. p. 261.                       Ser. vol. ui. p. 262.
                TIE    PRIMITIVE     CONDITION     OF MAN.            589

and those of America, and it would be desirable to inquire
whether, in their own eyes, the Negroes of the New World
exactly resemble those of Africa.
  But there are some reasons which make it probable that
changes of external condition, or rather of country, produce
less effect   now     than   was    formerly the case.       At present,
when men migrate they carry with them the manners and
appliances of civilized life. They build houses more or less
like those to which they have been accustomed, carry with
them   flocks and herds, and introduce into their new country
the principal plants which served them for food in the old.
If their new abode is cold they increase their clothing, if
warm, they diminish it. In these and a hundred other ways
the effect which would otherwise be produced is greatly
diminished.
   But, as we have seen, this has not always been the case.
When man first spread over the earth, he had no domestic
animals, perhaps not even the dog; no knowledge of agricul-
ture: his weapons        were      of the rudest     character,   and his
houses scarccly worthy of the name. His food, habits, and
whole manner of life must then have varied as he passed
from one country to another; he must have been far more
subject to the influence of external circumstances, and in all
probability more susceptible of change. Moreover, his form,
which is now stereotyped by long ages of repetition, may
reasonably be supposed to have been itself more plastic than
is now the case.
  If there is any truth in this view of the subject, it will
necessarily follow that the principal varieties of man are of
great antiquity, and in fact go back almost to the very origin
of the human race. We may then cease to wonder that the
carliest paintings on Hgyptian tombs represent so accurately
several varictics     still existing in those regions, and that the
Engis skull, probably the most ancient yet found in Europe,
590                    NATURAL    SELECTION

so closely resembles many that may be seen even at the
present day.
   This argument has been carried still farther by Mr. Wal-
lace in an admirable memoir on “The Origin of Human
Races and the Antiquity of Man deduced from the Theory
of Natural Selection*.” He has attempted to reconcile the
two great schools of ethnologists who hold opinions “so
diametrically opposed to each other; the one party positively
maintaining that man is a species, and is essentially one—
that all differences are but local and temporary variations,
produced by the different physical and moral conditions by
which he is surrounded; the other party maintaining with
equal confidence that man is a genus of many species, each of
which is practically unchangeable, and has ever been as
distinct, or even more distinct, than we now behold them.”
Mr. Wallace    himself holds     the former     of these   theories,
although admitting that at present apparently “the best of
the argument is on the side of those who maintain the
primitive diversity of man,” and he shows that the true
solution of this difficulty lies in the theory of Natural Selec-
tion, which, with characteristic unselfishness, he ascribes un-
reservedly to Mr. Darwin, although, as is well known, he
struck   out the idea independently and published it, not
indeed with the same elaboration, at the same time.
  After explaining the true nature of the theory, which it
must be confessed, is even yet very much misunderstood,
he points out that as long as man led what may be called a
mere animal existence, he would be subject to the same laws,
and would vary in the same manner as the rest of his fellow-
creatures, but that at length “by the capacity of clothing
himself, and making weapons and tools (he) has taken away
from nature that power of changing the external form and
structure which she exercises over all other animals.
               * Anthropological Review, May, 1864.
                           APPLIED    TO MAN.                          591

From the time, then, when the social and sympathetic feel-
ings came into active operation, and the intellectual and
moral faculties became fairly developed, man would cease to
be influenced by natural selection in his physical form and
structure; as an animal he would remain almost stationary:
the changes of the surrounding universe would cease to have
upon him that powerful. modifying effect which it exercises
over other parts of the organic world. Butfrom the moment
that his body became stationary, his mind would become
subject to those very influences from which his body had
escaped; every slight variation in his mental and moral nature
which should enable him better to guard against adverse
circumstances, and combine for mutual comfort and protec-
tion, would be preserved and accumulated; the better and
higher specimens of our race would therefore increase and
spread, the lower and more brutal would give way and
successively die out, and that rapid advancement of mental
organization would occur, which has raised the very lowest
races of men so far above the brutes (although differing so
little from some of them in physical structure), and, in
conjunction with scarcely perceptible modifications of form,
has developed        the wonderful      intellect of the Germanic
races*.””
   Mr. Wallace appears to me, however, to press his argu-
ment a little too fur when he says that man is no longer
“influenced by natural selection,” and that his body has
“become stationary.”   Slow and gradual changes still take
place, although his “mere bodily structure” long ago be-
came of less importance to man than “that subtle force we
term mind.” ‘This, as Mr. Wallace eloquently says, “with
a naked and unprotected body, this gave him clothing against

  * M. Lartet hasattempted to show    compared with the rest of the body.
that even among animals there is a    Comptes Rendus, 1868, p. 1119.
gradual enlargement of the brain as
592                 THE   INFLUENCE   OF MIND.

the varying inclemencies of the seasons.         Though unable to
compete with the deer in swiftness, or with the wild bull
in strength, this gave him weapons wherewith to capture
or overcome both. Though less capable than most other
animals of living on the herbs and the fruits that unaided
nature supphes, this wonderful faculty taught him to govern
and direct nature to his own benefit, and make her produce
food for him when and where he pleased. From the mo-
ment when the first skin was used as a covering, when the
first rade spear was formed to assist in the chase, the first
seed sown or shoot planted, a grand revolution was effected
in nature, a revolution which in all the previous ages of the
 world’s history had had no parallel, for a being had arisen
 who was no longer necessarily subject to change with the
 changing universe,—a being who was in some degree
 superior to nature, inasmuch as he knew how to con-
 trol and regulate her action, and could keep himself in
 harmony with her, not by a change in body, but by an
 advance in nind.
    “Here, then, we see the true grandeur and dignity of
 man.    On this view of his special attributes, we may admit
 that even those who claim for him a position and an order, a
class, or a sub-kingdom by himself, have some reason on
their side. He is, indeed, a being apart, since he is not
influenced by the great laws which irresistibly modify all
other organic beings. Nay, more: this victory which he
has gained for himself gives him a directing influence over
other existences. Man has not only escaped ‘natural sclec-
tion’ himself, but he is actually able to take away some of
that power from nature which, before his appearance, she
universally exercised.    We can anticipate the time when the
earth will produce only cultivated plants and domestic ani-
mals; when man’s selection shall have        supplanted ‘ natural
selection ;? and when the ocean will be the only domain in
                          INCREASE    OF HAPPINESS.                           593

which that power can be exerted, which for countless cycles
of ages ruled supreme over the earth.”
   Thus, then, the great principle of Natural Selection, which
is to biology what the law of gravitation is for astronomy,
not only throws an unexpected light on the past, but
illuminates the future with hope; nor can I but feel sur-
prised that a theory which thus teaches us humility for the
past, faith im the present, and hope for the future, should
have been regarded as opposed to the principles of Chris-
tianity or the interests of true religion.
  But even if the theory of “natural selection” should
eventually prove to be untenable, and if those are right who
believe that neither our minds nor our bodies are susceptible
of any important change, any great improvement, still I
think we are justified in believing that the happiness of man
is greatly on the increase. It is generally admitted that if
any animal increases in numbers it must be because the con-
ditions are becoming more             favourable to it, in other words,
because it is happier and more comfortable. Now, how will
this test apply to man?    Schoolcraft estimates* that in a
population which lives on the produce of the chase, each
hunter requires on an average 50,000 acres, or 78 square
miles for his support.            Again, he tells us} that, excluding
Michigan      territory, west of Lake Michigan, and north of
Illinois, there were in the United States, in 1825, about
97,000 Indians, occupying 77,000,000 of acres, or 120,312
square miles.     This gives one inhabitant to every 1} square
miles.    In this case, however, the Indians lived partly on the
subsidies granted them by Government in exchange for
land, and the population was therefore greater than would
have been the case if they had lived entirely on the produce
of the chase. The same reason affects, though to a smaller
extent, the Indians in the Hudson’s Bay territory. These
  *: Indian Tribes, vol. i. p. 433.               t 1. ¢. vol. ili. p. 575.
                                                             Qq
594,                        SUFFERINGS    OF SAVAGES

tribes were estimated by Sir George Simpson, late Governor
of the territories belonging to the Hudson’s Bay Company,
in his evidence given before the Committee of the House
of Commons, in 1857, at 139,000, and the extent is supposed
to be more than 1,400,000 square miles, to which we must
add 18,000 more for Vancouver’s Island, making a total of
more than 900,000,000 of acres; about 6500 acres, or 10
square miles, to each individual. Again, the inhabitants of
Patagonia, south of 40°, and exclusive of Chiloe and Tierra
del Fuego, are estimated by Admiral Fitzroy at less than
4000, and the number of acres is 176,640,000, giving more
than 44,000 acres, or 68 square miles for each person.   A
writer in the “ Voice of Pity,’ however, thinks that their
numbers may, perhaps, amount to 14,000 or 15,000*. It
 would be difficult to form any census of the aborigines in
 Australia; Mr. Oldfield estimates that there is one native to
 every fifty square milest; and it is at least evident that,
since the introduction of civilization, the total population of
that continent has greatly increased.
   Indeed, population as a general rule increases with
civilization. Paraguay, with 100,000 square miles, has from
300,000 to 500,000 inhabitants, or about four to a square
mile. The uncivilized parts of Mexico contained 374,000
inhabitants Im 675,000 square miles; while Mexico proper,
with 833,600 square miles, had 6,691,000 inhabitants. Naples
had more than 183 inhabitants to each square mile; Venetia
more    than 200, Lombardy               280, England      280, Belgium          as
many as 3820.
   Finally, we cannot but observe that, under civilization,
the means of subsistence have increased, even more rapidly
than the population. Far from suffering for want of food,
the more densely peopled countries are exactly those in
which it is, not only absolutely, but even relatively most
  * 1, c. vol, ii. p. 93.       t Trans. Ethn. Soc. New Ser. vou. iii. p. 220.
               SHOWN     BY INCREASE      OF NUMBERS.                595

abundant.  It is said that any one who makes two blades of
grass grow where one grew before, is a benefactor to the
human race ; what, then, shall we say of that which enables
a thousand men to live in plenty, where one savage could
scarcely find a scanty and precarious subsistence?
  There are, indeed, many who doubt whether                    happiness
is increased by civilization, and who talk of the free and
noble savage.     But the true savage is neither free nor
noble; he is a slave to his own wants, his own passions;
imperfectly protected from the weather, he suffers from the
cold by night and the heat of the sun by day; ignorant of
agriculture, living by the chase, and improvident in success,
hunger always stares him in the face, and often drives him to
the dreadful alternative of cannibalism or death.
   Wild animals are always in danger. Mr. Galton, who is
so well qualified to form an opinion, believes that the life of
all beasts in their wild state is an exceedingly anxious one;
that “every antelope in South Africa has literally to run
for its life once in every one or two days upon an average,
and that he starts or gallops under the influence of a false
alarm many times in a day*.”       So it is with the savage ; he
is always suspicious, always in danger, always on the watch.
He can depend on no one, and no one can depend upon him.
He expects nothing from his neighbour, and does unto others
as ho believes that they would do unto him. Thus his life
is one prolonged scene of selfishness and fear. ven in his
religion, if he has any, he creates for himself a new source of
terror, and peoples the world with invisible enemies.       The
position of the female savage is even more wretched than
that of her master. She not only shares his sufferings, but
has to bear his ill-humour and ill-usage. She may truly be
said to be little better than his dog, little dearer than his
horse.   In Australia,    Mr.    Oldfield never       saw     a woman’s
             * Trans. Ethn. Soc. New Ser. vol. iii. p. 133.
                                Qq2
596            SUPERSTITIOUS     TERRORS   OF SAVAGES.

grave, and does not think that the natives took the trouble
to bury them. But, indeed, he believes that few of them
are so fortunate as to die a natural death, “they being
generally despatched ere they become old and emaciated,
that so much good food may not be lost. . . . . In fine, so
little importance is attached to them, either before or after
death, that it may be doubted whether the man does not
value his dog, when alive, quite as much as he does his
woman, and think of both quite as often and lovingly after
he has eaten them*.”
   Not content, moreover, with those incident to their mode
of life, savages appear to take a melancholy pleasure in self-
inflicted sufferings. Besides the very general practice of
tattooing, the most extraordinary methods of disfigurement
and self-torture are adopted; some cut off the little finger,
some make an immense hole in the under-lip, or pierce the
cartilage of the nose. The Haster Islanders enlarge their ears
till they come     down   to their shoulders ; the Chinooks, and
many other American tribes, alter the shape of their heads.
Some of the African tribes chip their teeth in various manners,
each community having a fashion of its own. The Nyambanas,
a division of the Caffres, are characterized by a row of artifi-
cial pimples or warts, about the size of a pea, and extending
from the upper part of the forehead to the tip of the nose.             Of
these they are very proud+.   Among the Bachapins, those
who have distinguished themselves in battle, are allowed the
privilege of marking “ their thigh with a long scar, which is
rendered indelible and of a bluish colour by means of wood
ashes rubbed into the fresh wound.’ In Australia Captain
King saw a native ornamented with horizontal scars which ex-
tended across the upper part of the chest. They were at least

   * Trans. Hthn. Soc. New Ser.      pedition, vol. i. p. 63.
vol. iii. p. 248.                       { Burchell, 1. o. vol. ii. pp. 478.
   y+ United States’ Exploring Hx-   £&85.
                       SELF-INFLICTED       SUFFERINGS.                      597

an inch in diameter, and protruded half an inch from the
body*. In some parts of Australia, and in Tasmania, all the
men have a tooth knocked out in a very clumsy and painful
mannert.       ‘‘The inhabitants           of Tanna have on their arms
and bellies elevated scars, representing plants, flowers, stars
and various other figures. They are made by first cutting the
skin with a sharp bamboo reed, and then applying a certain’
plant to the wound which raises the scar above the rest of
the skin. The inhabitants of Tazavan, or Formosa, by a very
painful operation, impress on their naked skins various figures
of trees, flowers, and animals. The great men in Guinea have
their skin flowered like damask; and in the Deccan the women
likewise have flowers cut into their flesh on the forehead, the
arms and the breast, and the elevated scars are painted in
colours, and exhibit the appearance of flowered damask t.”
The native women in New South Wales used to tie a string
tightly round the little finger and wear it until the finger
rotted off. Tew of them escaped the painful experience§.
The American Indians also inflicted the most horrible tor-
tures upon themselves||. These and many other curious prac-
tices are none the less painful because they are voluntary.
   If we turn to the bright side of the question, the whole
analogy of nature justifies us in concluding that the pleasures
of civilized man are greater than those of the savage. As
we descend in the scale of organization, we find that animals
become more and more vegetative in their characteristics;
with less susceptibility to pain, and consequently less eapa-
city for happiness. It may, indeed, be doubted whether
some of those beings, which from their anatomy we are com-
pelled to class.as animals, have much more consciousness of
   * Narrative of a Survey of the            { Forster, 1. ¢. p. 588.
Intertropical and Western Coasts of          § D’Urville, vol. i. p. 406.
Australia, p. 42.   Seo also      Hyre’s     || See, for instance, Catlin’s North
account, quoted in p. 435.                 American Indians, vol. i. p. 170,
  + Freycinet, vol. ii. p. 705.            Azara, vol. ii. p. 136.
598            THE BLESSINGS    OF CIVILIZATION.

enjoyment, or even of existence, than a tree or a seaweed.
But even to animals which possess a clearly defined nervous
system, we must ascribe very different degrees of sensibility.
The study of the sensory organs in the lower animals offers
great difficulties; but at least we know that they are, in
many cases, few in number, and capable of conveying only
general impressions. Every one will admit that the posses-
sion of a new sense, or the improvement of an old one, is a
fresh source of possible happiness ; but how, it may be asked,
does this affect the present question? There are no just
grounds for expecting man to be ever endued with a sixth
sense ; so far from being able to improve the organization of
the eye or the ear, we cannot make one hair black or white,
nor add one cubit to our stature. But on the other hand,
the invention of the telescope and microscope is equivalent
in its results to an immense improvement of the eye, and
opens up to us new worlds, fresh sources of interest and
happiness. Again we cannot alter the physical structure of
the ear, but we can train it, we can invent new musical instru-
ments, compose new melodies. The music of savages is rude
and melancholy in comparison with ours; and thus, though
the ear of man may not have appreciably altered, the pleasure
which we may derive from it has been immensely increased.
Moreover, the savage is like a child who sees and hears only
that which is brought directly before him, but the civilized
man questions nature, and by the various processes of chem-
istry, by electricity, and magnetism, by a thousand ingenious
contrivances, he forces nature to throw light upon herself,
discovers hidden uses and unsuspected beauties, almost as if
he were endowed with some entirely new organ of sense,
   The love of travel is deeply implanted in the human
breast ; it is an immense   pleasure to visit other countries,
and see new races of men.      Again, the discovery of printing
brings all who choose into communion         with the greatest
                   THE   DIMINUTION   OF    SUFFERING.            599

minds.    The thoughts of a Shakespeare or a Tennyson, the
discoveries     of a Newton     or    a Darwin,     become   thus the
common    property of mankind.             Already the results of this
all-important,    though simple, process have been equivalent
to an immense improvement of our mental faculties; and day
by day, as books become cheaper, schools are established, and
education is improved, a greater and greater effect will be
produced.
   The well-known proverb against looking a gift horse in
the mouth does not apply to the gifts of nature; they will
bear the closest inspection, and the more we examine, the
more we shall find to admire. Nor are these new sources of
happiness accompanied by any new lability to suffering; on
the contrary, while our pleasures are increased, our pains are
lessened ; in a thousand ways we can avoid or diminish evils
which to our ancestors were great and inevitable. How
much misery, for instance, has been spared to the human
race by the single discovery of chloroform? The capacity
for pain, so far as it can serve as a warning, remains in full
force, but the necessity for endurance has been greatly
diminished.   With increased knowledge of, and attention
to, the laws of health, disease will become less and less fre-
quent. Those tendencies thereto which we have derived
from our ancestors, will gradually die out; and if fresh seeds
are not sown,      our race may one day enjoy the inestimable
advantages of health.
  Thus, then, with the increasing influence of science, we
may confidently look to a great improvement in the condition
of man.       But it may be said that our present sufferings and
sorrows arise principally from sin, and that any moral im-
provement must be due to religion, not to science.    This
separation of the two mighty agents of improvement is the
great misfortune of humanity, and has done more than any
thing else to retard the progress of civilization.        But even if
600                THE   DIMINUTION   OF SIN.

for the moment we admit that science will not render us
more virtuous, it must certainly make us more innocent.
Out of 130,000 persons committed to prison in England and
Wales during the year 1867, only 4137 could read and write
well. In fact, our criminal population are mere savages, and
most of their crimes are but injudicious and desperate
attempts to live as a savage in the midst, and at the expense,
of a civilized community.
   Men do not sin for the sake of sinning; they yield to
temptation. Most of our sufferings arise from a mistaken
pursuit of pleasure; from a misapprehension of that which
 constitutes true happiness. Men do wrong either from igno-
 rance or in the hope, unexpressed perhaps even to themselves,
 that they may enjoy the pleasure, and yet avoid the penalty
 of sin. In this respect there can be no doubt that religious
 teaching 1s much misapprehended.      Repentance is too often
 regarded as a substitute for punishment.     Sin it is thought
 is followed ecther by the one or the other.  So far, however,
as our world is concerned,    this is not the case; repentance
may enable a man to avoid sim in future, but has no effect on
the consequences of the past.      The laws of nature are
just, and salutary, but they are also mexorable. All men
admit that “the wages of sin is death,’ but they seem to
think that this is a general rule to which there may be many
exceptions,—that some sins may possibly tend to happiness,
that some thorns may grow grapes, some thistles produce
figs. That suffering is the inevitable consequence of sin, as
surely as night follows day, is, however, the stern yet
salutary teaching of Science. And surely if this lesson were
thoroughly impressed upon our minds, if we really believed in
the certainty of punishment, and that sin could not conduce
to happiness; temptation, which is at the very root of crime,
would be cut away, and mankind must necessarily become
more innocent.
                   THE   ADVANTAGES      OF SCIENCE.               601

  May we not, however,           go cven farther than this, and say
that science will also render man more virtuous. “To pass
our time,” says Lord Brougham*, “in the study of the
sciences, in learning what others have discovered, and in
extending   the bounds       of human knowledge has, in all ages,
been reckoned the most dignified and happy of human oceu-
pations.   ..... No man until he has studied philosophy,
can have a just idea of the great things for which Providence
has fitted his understanding; the extraordinary dispropor-
tion which there is between his natural strength and the
powers   of lis mind, and the force he derives from them.”
Finally, he concludes that science would not only “make our
lives more agrecable, but better ; and that a rational being is
bound by every motive of interest and duty, to direct his
mind towards pursuits which are found to be the sure path
of virtue as well as of happiness.”
   We are in reality but on the threshold of civilization. Far
from showing any indication of having come to an end, the
tendency to improvement scems latterly to have proceeded
with auginented impetus and accelerated rapidity. Why,
then, should we suppose that it must now cease? Man has
surely not reached the limits of his intellectual development,
and it is certain that he has not exhausted the infinite capa-
bilities of nature. There are many things which are not as
yet dreamt of in our philosophy; many discoveries which
will immortalize those who make them, and confer upon the
human race advantages which as yet, perhaps, we are not
in a condition to appreciate.      We may still say with our
grcat countryman, Sir Isaac Newton, that we have beon
but liko children, playing on the sea-shore, and pickmg up
here and there a smoother pebble or aprettier shell than
ordinary, while the great ocean of truth lies all undiscovered
before us.
         * Objects, Advantages, and Pleasures of Science, p. 39.
602                               THE   FUTURE.

   Thus, then, the most sanguine hopes for the future are
justified by the whole experience of the past. It is surely
unreasonable to suppose that a process which has been going
on for so many thousand years, should have now suddenly
ceased; and he must be blind indeed who imagines that our
civilization is unsusceptible of improvement, or that we our-
selves are in the highest state attainable by man.
   If we turn from experience to theory, the same conclusion
forces itself upon us. The great principle of natural selection,
which in animals affects the body and seems to have little
influence on the mind, in man                affects the mind    and has
little influence on the body. In the first it tends mainly to
the preservation of life; in the second to the improvement of
the mind, and consequently to the increase of happiness. It
ensures, in the words of Mr. Herbert Spencer, “a constant
progress towards a higher degree of skill, intelligence, and
self-regulation—a better co-ordination of actions—a more
complete life*.’? Even            those,   however, who are dissatisfied
‘with the reasoning of Mr. Darwin, and believe that neither
our mental nor our material organization is susceptible of any
considerable change, may still look forward to the future with
hope. The tendency of recent improvements and discoveries
is less to effect any rapid change in man himself, than to
bring him into harmony with nature; less to confer upon
him new powers, than to teach him how to apply the old.
   It will, I think, be admitted that of the evils under which
we suffer, nearly all may be attributed either to ignorance or
sin. That ignorance will be diminished by the progress of
science is of course self-evident,—that the same will be the
case with sin, seems little less so.              Thus, then, both theory
and experience point to the same conclusion.    The future
happiness of our race, which poets hardly ventured to hope

  * Herbert Spencer, A Theory of Population deduced fiom the General
Law of Animal Fertility, p. 34.
                        THE   FUTURE.                      6038

for, science boldly predicts. Utopia, which we have long
looked upon as synonymous with an evident impossibility,
which we have ungratefully regarded as “ too good to be
true,” turns out on the contrary to be the necessary con-
sequence of natural laws, and once more      we find that the
simple truth excecds the most brilliant flights of the imagi-
nation.
   Even in our own time we may hope to see some improve-
ment; but the unselfish mind will find its highest gratifica-
tion in the bclicf that, whatever may be the case with
ourselves, our descendants will understand many things
which are hidden from us now, will better appreciate the
beautiful world in which we   live, avoid much of that suffer-
ing to which we are subject, enjoy many blessings of which
we are not yet worthy, and escape many of those temptations
which we deplore, but cannot wholly resist.
                                 604




                      AUP PEN           DDX:

                               Page \1.

We do not yet know at what time the use of Runes commenced.
The examples found at Thorsbjerg and Nydam carry them back
to the second or third century, but they may have begun much
earlier. They remained partially in use in out-of-the-way dis-
tricts of Scandinavia down to the close of the last century.
Runic monuments occur in Norway, Sweden, Denmark, England,
and, though rarely, in Ireland; but are more abundant in Sweden
than any where else. Prof. Stephens * states that there are
three times as many in Sweden as in all other northern countries
together, and he estimates the total number in Sweden at not less
than two thousand.
   The Runic Alphabet, or Futhore, is as follows :—
     PO N2p. ae Re Ve ee                  ler        Bake Vas
     EUS th-O RK          HN         AS      hee oe va
  There are, however, several varieties, thus #, sometimes stands
for 0, 4, for n, h, for s, #, for t, 4. for d, and }. for e.   There is
also a class of letters known as tree-runes, which are entirely un-
like the rest. The letters given above are those gencrally used
in the engravings on stones in the great tumulus known 4s
Maeshowe, near the Stones of Stennis, in the Orkneys f, and are
supposed to have been the work of a party of Northmen who
broke into the Howe in the ninth century.           The numerous
variations in the forms of the letters, and the fact that they are
sometimes read from left to right, sometimes from right to left,
make them at times somewhat difficult to decipher, but it fortu-
nately happens that we possess no less than 61 Runice Futhores,
so that any inscription which is at all perfect, and not too much
abbreviated, can be read with tolerable certainty.

      * The Old-Northern Runic Monuments of Scandinavia, p. 134.
                + Maeshowe.    By. J. Farrar, Esq., M.P.
                                    APPENDIX.                                                            605

                                     OGHANS.

   The origin of the Ogham alphabet is as uncertain as that of the
Runic. While, however, the Runes occur principally in Scandi-
navia, and but rarcly in Groat Britain, Oghams on the other hand,
have their head-quarters in Ireland, though some few have been
discovered in Scotland and even in Shetland.                           They are generally
                Fie. 227.                                        Fre, 228,




                                                                                     enna
                                                                                      PR
                                                                                      canmeneiennen
                                                                                      SSOtReAtonnnnnnnntfor

                                                                                     neRia




                                                                                     NARS
                                                                                     NAAN
                                                                                      NEARER
                                                                                      IES SNK

                                                                                        oeageasiis




                                                     rn
                                                     Cum
                                                     on
                                                     OOD
                                                     y
                                                     ;
                                                     BA
                                                      a
                                                      5
                                                      SEM
                                                       oye
                                                        es
                                                         %
                                                             e




                                                    RE
                                                    Ar
                                                     ceraanectenrnnanayiagrepeenpe
                                                    wg


                            ' Ogham Stones found in Kerry,



intended to be read from below upwards, and the letters consist
of mere   straight strokes, arranged in groups along a line.                                            This
line is very often the edge of the stone, but sometimes a line is
606                            APPENDIX.

cut.     In other cases an imaginary line is supposed to run through
the inscription.   Short lines, or notches, stand for the vowels,
a, 0, U, e, i; one notch denoting a, two o, three u, and so on.
Lines on the left of the base line stand for b, 1, f, s, and n, accord-
ing as they are 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 in number; lines on the right of
the base line stand in the same manner for h, d, t, c, and q; while
those crossing the line denote m, g, ng, st, or z,andr.   There are
some few other characters, which, however, seldom occur.
   Almost all the Ogham inscriptions which have yet been read are
mere patronymics, containing the name of the person in whose
honour the stone was erected. Thus the above figure (fig. 227)
of an Ogham stone found in Kerry reads thus : Nocati maqi maqi
ret(ti), i.e. (The Stone) of Nocat, the son of Macreith; the inscrip-
tion on fig. 228 is, Maqi Mucoi Uddami, i.e. (The Stone) of Uddam
Mae Mucoi.


                                Page 56.

       Staigue Fort, in the County of Kerry, is ‘an enclosure, nearly
circular,    114 feet in diameter,   88    feet from   east to west, and
87 from north to south.         The stones are put together without
any description of mortar or cement; the wall is 13 fect thick
at the bottom, and 5 feet 2 inches broad at top at the highest
part, where some of the old coping stones still remain, and
which is there 17 feet 6 inches high upon the inside.             It
has one square doorway in the s.s.w. side, 5 feet 9 inches
high, with sloping sides, 4 feet 2 inches wide at top, and 5 feet at
bottom. In’the substance of this massive wall, and opening in-
wards, are two small chambers; the one on the west side is 12 feet
long, 4 feet 7 inches wide, and 6 feet 6 inches high; the northern
chamber is 7 feet 4 inches long, 4 feet 9 inches wide,        and 7 fect
high. They formed a part of the original plan, and were not, like
other apertures in some similar structures, filled-up gateways.
Around the interior of the wall are arranged ten sets of stairs,....
the highest reaching very nearly to the full height of the wall, and
the secondary flights being about half that much; each step is
2 feet wide; and the lower flights project within the circle of the
higher. They lead to narrow platforms, from 8 to 48 fect in
length, on which its wardens or defenders stood.” (Catalogue of
the Royal Irish Academy, p. 120.)
                                APPENDIX.                                   607

                                    Page 57.
   On this subject Lappend three letters, one from Dr. Percy, F.R.S.,
ani the other two from Messrs, Jenkin and Lefeaux, the highly
experienced arsayers to Messrs. P. Grenfell and Sons :—

                                                          November 11, 1868.
  My pear Sir Joun Lussocg,
        I have paid considerable attention to the subject of ancient
bronze, and all the information I have gathered respecting it is
directly opposed to Mr. Wibel’s view.    The remarkable uniformity
in the composition of ancient bronze is in itself sufficient to refute
that view. When I speak of uniformity, I should add that there
is some variation in the composition according to the uses for which
bronze implements were intended.      Thus, where greater hardness
was necded more tin was added. It is impossible to conceive that
any thing approximating to uniformity in the composition of ancient
bronze could haye been produced from the smelting of accidental
mixtures of copper and tin ore. Moreover, in remains of ancient
bronze foundries, blocks of copper have been found which were,
doubtless, used in making the alloy by the direct fusion of the two
metals together. J could enter at greater length into the subject
if necessary.   Mr. W.’s views have, so far as my knowledge ex-
tends, nothing to stand upon.                  Yours very faithfully,

  Sir Johw Lubbock, Bart., F.R.S.                           JOHN PERCY.

                                                      London, 28rd December.
   DEAR Srr,
        In answer to Sir John Lubbock’s inquiry, I beg to say
that I do not think bronze can ever have been produced for com-
mercial purposes by fusing a mixture of copper ore and tin ore.
Thave not much doubt that this could be accomplished in the
laboratory, but not, I think, in the usual mode of smelting on a
large scale. Ores containing naturally both copper and tin are
extremely unusual.                         Yours truly,
  C. 8. Grenfell, Bsq.                                JoHN LEFEAUX.

                                           Redruth, 11th Month, 14, 1868.
   ReEspECTED FRIEND,
         I have received thy favour of the 12th inst., and in reply
I beg to inform thee that I do not think there are any Cornish
ores which can be so smelted as to produce a mixed metal consist-
608                             APPENDIX.

ing only of copper and tin, and in such proportions as to form
bronze ; and for this reason, that, although the ores may contain a
sufficient proportion of tin, yet, as they also contain other metallic
ingredients, it would, I think, be impossible to get rid of all such
ingredients without at the same time getting rid of the tin also.
I have, however, directed our assayer to make some experiments
with reference to this subject.
                                I am, respectfully, thy friend,
   C. Seymour Grenfelt,                            ALFRED    JENKIN.
      Copper Office,
27, Upper Thames Street, London, £.C.

  In a subsequent letter, Mr. Jenkin states that the experiments
made by the assayer confirmed him in the opinion above expressed.

                                Page 61.

   The passage from Avienus is as follows :—
            Que Himileo Poenus mensibus vix quatuor,
             Ut ipse semet re probasse retulit
             Enavigantem, posse transmitti adserit :
              Sic nulla late flabra propellunt ratem,
              Sic segnis humor equoris pigri stupet.
             Adjicit et illud, plurimum inter gurgites
             Extare fucum, et spe virgulti vice
             Retinere puppim dicit hic nihilominus
             Non in profundum terga demitti maris,
             Parvoque aquarum vix supertexti solum :
             Obire semper hue et hue ponti feras,
             Navigia lenta et languide repentia
             Internatare belluas.


                               Page 69.

   Rougemont, in the L’Age du Bronze, coneludes that, though
tin was in ancient times obtained from Spain, the quantity was
always inconsiderable. Don G. Schulz, the Director of the Spanish
School of Mines, has, on the contrary, in his Descripcion
Geognostica de Gallicia, expressed the opposite opinion. It is
much to be wished that we had more information with reference
to this interesting question.
                              APPENDIX.                                 609

                              Page 356.
   There are, indeed, one or two eases on record in which polished
axes are asserted to have been found in gravel-beds.    They rest,
however, on the authority of uneducated labourers, whose atten-
tion would not be at the time directed to this point, and who would
uot appreciate its importance.    Without then imputing to them
any want of honesty, we may, I think, safely conclude either that
these exceptional specimens were derived from interments, or that
they had fallen in from the surface. In one or other of these ways
I should account for the following case :—“In June, 1867, a
labourer named Mercer, in the employment of the Messrs. Slater,
of the Malton Nurscries, was digging gravel from the beds in
question.   Ata depth of 9 fect, and below a band of undisturbed
clay, he noticed a “ dark-coloured stone” in the gravel. This was
so firmly embedded (the gravel, though seemingly loose, is very
firmly set), that he could not get it out without using the pickaxe.
The shape and colour of the stone induced him to take care of it,
but he washed off most of its inerustation of lime in a pool of water
in a eart-rut.   Much   of the inerustation,   however,    still adheres
(1869). After carrying the axe in his pocket for some days, he,
at the end of the week, gave it to his masters for “a rockery orna-
ment.” Mr. M. B. Slater at once recognized it as being a small
stone axe, and after showing it to several friends, eventually gave
it to Mr. W. C. Copperthwaite, the Lodge, Malton, Earl Fitz-
william’s agent, in whose possession it now is (January, 1869).”
Mr. Monkman himself, from whose paper I quote the above ex-
tract, considered that the axe was not really contemporaneous with
the beds in which it was found*.


                              Page 581.

  Perhaps the lowest form of religion may be considered to be that
presented by the Australians, which consists of a mere unreasoning
belief in the existence of mysterious beings. The native who has
a nightmare, or a dream, does not doubt the reality of that which
passes, and as the beings by whom he is visited in his sleep are
unscen by his friends and relations, he regards them as invisible.

    * Monkman.   Yorkshire Archaol. and Topogr. Journal.   Jan. 1869.
                                                            Rr
610                               APPENDIX.

  In Fetichism this feeling is more methodized.              The Negro en-
deavours to make a slave of his deity. Thus Fetichism is almost
the opposite of Religion; it stands towards it in the same relation
as Alchemy to Chemistry, or Astrology to Astronomy.
   A further stage is that in which the superiority of the higher
deities is more fully recognized.    Every thing is worshipped in-
discriminately—animals, plants, and even inanimate objects. In
endeavouring to account for the worship of animals, we must
remember that names are very frequently taken from them.         The
children and followers of a man called the Bear or the Lion would
make that a tribal name.    Hence the animal itself would be first
respected, at last worshipped.
   “The Totem,” says Schooleraft, “is a symbol of the name of the
progenitor,—generally some quadruped, or bird, or other object in
the animal kingdom, which stands, if we may so express it, as the
surname of the family. Its significant importance is derived from
the fact that individuals unhesitatingly trace their lineage from it.”
Totemism,         however,   is by no   means    confined   to America,     but
occurs also in India, Africa, and in fact almost every where*, often
in connexion with marriage prohibitions.
   Mr. Fergusson has recently attempted to show the special pre-
valence of Tree and Serpent worship.              He might, I believe, have
made out as strong a case for many other objects.           It must
be remembered that the savage accounts for all action and
movement by life; inanimate objects, therefore, have spirits
as well as men; hence when the wives and slaves are slain, the
weapons also are broken in the grave, so that the spirits of the
latter, as well as of the former, may accompany their master to the
other world.
   The gradually increasing power of chiefs and priests led to
Anthropomorphism and idolatry, which must by no means be
regarded as the lowest stage of religion.   Solomonf, indeed, long
ago pointed out its connexion with Monarchical power.
   It is important to observe that cach stage of religion is super-
imposed on the preceding, and that bygone belicfs linger on among
the children and the ignorant. Thus witcheraft is still believed in
by the ignorant, and fairy tales flourish in the nursery.

  * Trans. Ethnol. Soc. N.S. vol. vi. p.36.     Lafitau, Moours des Sauy. Amér.
vol. i. p. 464.
   + Wisd. xiv. 17.
                                            APPENDIX,                                          611


                                            Page 600.
Degree of instruction of persons committed to the different County,
      Borough, and Liberty Prisons in England and Wales.
                   JUDICIAL                 STATISTICS—1870.
                                                                    Males.   Females.
Neither read nor write         .        .            .       .     87,254    16,011     151,747
Read or write andread imperfectly                                  74,240    24,242        ;
Read and write well.          .         .        .       .          4,286       661       5.198
Superior instruction .         .        .        .       .            3X33       13        d

                                                                 116,013     40,932     156,945
Instruction not ascertained.                     .       .           Pyeag        Bil       278

                 Oa      ce        Us        e           a LIE ZA0           40,983     157,223
                                    INDEX.

Aarhuus, coast-find at, 106.                    Alphabets, peculiarities of, 562.
Abbeville, primitive remains        at, 175,         is    alleged American, 2/79,
   342, ete.                                         A     Runie, 604.
Abbot’s Langley, flint from, 317.                    5     Ogham, 605.
Abipones have vo name for God, 579.             Altar Mounds, American, how formed,
Absalom, stone heap raised over him,               269.
   116.                                         Alyattes, tomb of, 116.
Abury, ancient monument at, 113,119,            Amazon Indians, funeral rites of, 133.
   124.                                         Amber found at Hallstadt, 24.
Abyssinian notions ofimissionary power,            »    found at Meilen, 191.
  425,                                             »    tound at Méen, 159, 160, 161.
Acerotherium, 421.                                 »»   found in the Treenhoie, 49.
Achan, stone heap raised over him, 115.            »    its source and value, 71. -
Acheul, St., autiquities at, 364.              America, supposed       traces of Phoeni-
Adams County animal mound, 277.                  clans in, 71.
    »        Dr., on Haginr Kem, 72.           American agriculture, periods of, 285.
    »         Mr., on mammoth, 294.                 ye    antiquities classified, 252.
Adhémar, M., on climate, 311, 404.             American    (North) Archwology,        250,
      35     on changes of sea level,                       286.
                414.                                      Bibliography of, 250.
Adze of New Zealanders, 97, 99.                           Indian funeral rites, 180,
Aeppli, M., his observations, 173.                        Indians, 329, 515, ete.
African axe, 27, 28, 92.                                  stone implements, 107, 348.
    »        Golmens, 111,131.                            Indians, their use of copper,
    »        ormunents, 42, 44.                              4,
Agassiz, opinion of, 287.                                pottery, 257.
Age of barrows, difficulty of deciding,             »    tribes, religious ideas of, 577.
   151.                                        Amiens, primitive remains at, 343.
Agriculture, carly American, 282.              Amravati, stone circles there, 126.
        >»      of Americun Indians, 526.      Andaman Islanders, notices of, 429,
        rs      Feegeeans, 455.                  436.
        “       of Lakemen, 212.               Andergon, Mr., 305.
Ai, ae of, buried under stone heap,            Andergon’s Sumatra, 188, note.
   116.                                        Angas, G. F., quoted, 445.
Albano, hut-urns found near, 51.               Anglesea, but circles in, 53.
Albertus Magnus refers to the elk, 207.        Anglo-Saxon interments, 156, 157.
Aldus MeGaldus, 94.                            Anholt, coast-find at, 105.
Algeria, tumuli and stone circlesin, 127.      Animal mounds of Wisconsin;          gigan-
    »,   stove implementsfound in,108,           tic representations   of various     ani-
Algonguins had no word for love, 520.            mals, 274,
614                                                        INDEX.

Animal remains at Lake villages, 194-                           Arts and objects peculiar to certain
                                        210.                      races, 554,
      a                  sy          in drift, 367, 368, 377.   Aschersleben, hut-urn found near, 52.
    2?                   35          in tumuli, 169.            Ass, 321.
Animals,                consumption          of, in savage          >> remains of, recent in Lake-dwell-
                          nations, 358.                                   ings, 199.
          Bs            of oldest England, 309.                 Assyria, stone implements found             in,
          ¥             of primeval France, 309.                   108, 348.
                        domestic, of lakemen, 201.              Atlantis, probable origin of the belief
          33
          wild and domestic, 202, 203.                              in, 63.
          ~ » sacrificed, 170.                                  Atwater, Mr., his researches, 250, 268.
          a5
          ingenuity of, 584.                                           s      on Grave-creek mound,
          wild, their perils, 595.                                                268.
Annals of the Four Masters, 177.                                Aubrey quoted, 119.
Anson, on buildings of Ladrone                            Is-   Audierne, M., 323, note.
  landers,                    549.                              Aurelius Ambrosius, 121.
Antiquity of American remains, 283.                             Aurignac, bone cave at, 319.
     .    of Man, 385, etc.                                     Aurillac, relics from, 422.
Apples found in Lake-dwellings, 212..                           Aurochs, 206,.209, 234, 289, 305, 321,
Arabia, stone monuments in, 113.                                  377.
Arab phrases and Old Testament style,                           Australia, stone circles in, 114.
                   425.                                         Australian flint flake, 89, 107.
   »»          Tace, early traces of, 587-                      Australians, notices of, 429, 438.
Arbor Low, pottery from, 166.                                   Auvernier, relics from, 43.
   nA               »          stone circle at, 113.            Ava, what, 481.
                    »           tumulus at, 150.                Avienus noticed, 61-68, 608.
Arcelin, M. A., his researches, 33, 107.                        Awls of flint, 99.
Archiac, M. a, quoted on Oise Valley,                             » of bone, 104; of bronze, 167.
             367, 368.                                          Axes, American, in stone, 252.
     »    on quaternary climate, 310.                              » stone, 91, 95, 608.
Archezolithic, or Paleolithic Period, 2,                            3»   Swiss, in stone, 189.
   75, 414.                                                         »    of ceremony, 472.
Archeological evidence, its nature, 12,                         Aymard, M., on sacred Jakes, 217.
   427.                                                         Azara on Indians of Paraguay, 530.
Archeology, pre-historic, its four ages                         Aztalan in Wisconsin, remains at, 264.
   —the Drift, or Paleolithic,                            the   Aztecs, 89.
   Newer Stone, or Neolithic,                             the
   Bronze, and the Iron, 2, 3.                                                          B.
Archeology and savage tribes, 428.
Architecture of Bronze Age, 50.                                 Baal, symbols of,.’71.
Ardoch, bronze sword said to have                                 », worship in Norway, 71.
    been found there, 18.                                                »    evidence of, 72.
 Aristotle, 63,                                                 Bachapins, 428, 482.
Arreoy, a society in Tahiti, 487.                               Badger, 207, 320.
Arrow-heads, American, 252, 253.                                Baegert on Californian Indians, 576.
               7               of five kinds—triangular,        Baer, Von, on the Aurochs, 306.
              indented, stemmed, barb-                          Bailey on Veddahs, 435.
              ed, and leaf-shaped, 102.                         Baillon,
                                                                       M., on          rhinoceros   remains at
      3      similarity of, in different                          Menchecourt, 361.
              countries, 102.                                   Baines, Mr., his sketch of Australians
Arrows, bronze, 31.                                               making flint flakes, 88.
   » __ Esquimaux, 10, 11.                                      Baker on Arab phraseology, 425.
   =     warks on, 8, note, 10, 11.                             Bakie’s voyage referred to, 360.
Arrow-makers among Snake Indians,                               Baldersbal, 72.
   5238.                                                        Bark cloth, 473.
Art, American Indian, 528.                                      Barley found in Lake-villages, 211.
Articles                buried       with   the   dead,   not   Barrow.       See Mound, Tumulus.
   always for actual use, 139-151, 153.                         Bate, Mr. Spence, researches of, 230.
                                                   INDEX.                                                615
Bateman, Mr., his labours, 247.                         Blandford, Mr., his opinion of Silbury
     a   statistics from, 77, 140-145,                     Hill, 121, note.
                         153, 154, 170.                 Bleek, Dr., on Bushmen, 43-4.
              ¥        his classification of pottery,   Blumenhach and fossil rhinoceros, 297.
                          165.                          Boar, the, 200, 234, 320.
              »        opinion of “ drinking cups,”     Bont, ancient, 8, 19, 181.
                          167.                          Boats of Esquimaus, etc., 506, 523,
                       on interments, 50,135,171.       Bohemia, forts in, 112.
Bayley on Kandyan opinion, 568.                         Boiling-stones, 4:79,
Bates on tribes of upper Amazons, 576.                  Bolas, 584.
Beaches, raised, examples of, 382.                      Bone implements in Copenhagen Mu-
Beads, 49, 159-161, 163, 164.                                       suem, 76.
Bear, 207, 209.                                             »    caves, evidence from, 78, 312.
   » the Cave, 289, 293, 317, 320, 377.                     a       >    in France and Belgium,
Beaumont, M. Elie de, 344.                                                        313.
Beaver, 207.                                                »      »         in Devon, 315.
Beccles, Mr., 236.                                          »      9         in Sicily, 318.
Beckhampton, 119.                                           ”      »         in Gibraltar, 319.
Beckwith, Licut.,               on   manufacture   of       ”      ”         in Spain, ibid.
  stone weapons by Indians, 91.                             i      s»        in France, 820, etc.
Bedford, relics froin, 348.                                 *f     »         near Wells, 323.
Becchey, on Esquimaux skill with the                        ”                in Italy, 340.
             arrow, 545.                                    aS   implements, 104, 163, 239.
     »    referred to, 294, 509.                            ”           ”>          sundry kinds of, 104.
Beech-trees in Denmark, 2:8, 389.                           »           »    of America like those
Bechive houses of Scotland, 54.                                                of other countries,
Belcher on manufacture of stone im-                                            252.
                       plements by the Esquimaux,           x          ny    from caves, 382.
                       91.                                  »    pits in North America, 268.
          »         on Esquimaux      winter   store,   Bones consumed by African tribes and
                      4Y5.                                      other peoples, 327.
    >»              on Andamaners,
                         436.                               »    from drift, 358.
Belgium, bone-caves in, 313.                                »    fossil, 236.
Beneden, M. Van, 315.                                       »    pounded by Australians, 439,
Benjamite slingers, 546.                                    »        >        Esquimaux, 496.
Bertrand, M., referred to, 119.                                  of animals in tumuli, 169.
     sf    on hnmanremains at Clichy,                            of wild and domestic animals
              360.                                                  differ, 202.
Beyer, Dr., discovers a hut-urn, 51.                             found in shell-mounds, etc., 232,
Bible references to flax, 214.                                      283, 284.
   ”       2”      to the ass, 199.                              around Msquimaux huts, 404,
   ”       ”       to the horse, 199.                   Bonstatten, M., referred to, 113.
   ”       3       to corn, etc., 214.                  Boomerang, 442, 444,
  =   ,           testimony to early use of bronze,     Borlase referred to, 6.
                    68.                                 Bornou, funerals in, 134.
  >»              for “brass”? in our version, we       Borreby tumulus, 139.
                     should read “ bronze,” 69.         Bos primigenius. See Urus.
Bienne, animal remains, 197.                            Boscawen, stone circles at, 113.
Bilidt, shell-mound at, 226, 230.                       Boucher de Perthes, M., his labours,
Birch, Mr., an opinion of his, 166.                                               206, 342, etc.
Birds caught by dogs, 507.                                                   a suggestion of, 345.
  9      »    in various ways, 557.                                          on     lake   habitations    in
   » in shell-mounds, 233, 235.                                                   Somme Valley, 378.
  » of Swiss Lake-dwellings, 198.                                            on    remains     in   Somme
Bison or aurochs, 305. See Aurochs.                                            Valley, 175.
Blackmore,               Dr.,   finds the lemming                            on cataclysms, 372.
  near Salisbury, 307.                                                       on Paleolithic stone axe,
Blackwood’s Magazine referred to, 352.                                         842.
616                                                   INDEX,          J

Bourgeois, Abbé, discoveries of, 421.                      Bronze         articles,             their differences of
Bourguignet, M., 340.                                                                            detail, 60.
Bourneville            in Ohio, fortification        at,       >              o>              cast      in   various
  259.                                                                                          countries, 60.
Bow] of wood from Jutland, 49.                                 is             a               inventory of, 43.
Bows, Indian, 528, 524.                                        »,    celt at Rome with inscription
Boyd-Dawkinson descent of oxen, 205.                                         not decipherable, 44.
                          account        of      Wokey         Ks       , found in Kent, 38.
                             Hole, 328, 331.                   »,    different composition of, 20.
                          on cave-bear in river                »     in Central America, 253, 429.
                   drift, 292.                                 »»    Opinions upon its original manu-
           %    on cave-lion, 293.                                        facture, 607.
           $3   on fossil rhinoceros,                          »     bracelets, 34, 49, 218.
                  297.                                         »     brooches, 35, 49, 50.
Boye, on a Danish tumulus, 157.                                BARLOW                     SsoLs
Bracelet of bronze, 49.                                        »     daggers, 32, 40.
Brandon, flint implements at, 81.                              »     javelins, 31.
Brandt on cave-bear, 292.                                      5,    sickles, 32.
    >»   on bison, 306.                                        »,    knives, 33, 49.
    »    fossil rhinoceros in Scandi-                          >     Celts, 25-29.
            navia, 298.                                        »,    swords, 29-31, 48, 49, 53.
     »,  on wild horse, 301, note.                             »>    spears, 31.
     >,   ouvreindeer, 308.                                    »     fish-hooks, 32.
Brantome, rock chapel at, 325.                                 »>    hammers, 37.
Brass       in English           Bible    should      be       a     joreck Geb albire
   bronze, 68.                                                 3)    ornaments, 33.
Bread found in Lake-villages, 211.                             5,    tweezers, 49.
Breunus, his soldiers had iron swords, 6.                      y>    weapons,     their   geographical
Briant, M., 82.                                                         distribution, 20.
Bridlington, flint finds, 107.                                  »    found in Denmark and Ireland,
Brighton, 364.                                                               20, 21.
British coinage, how early, 7.                                  ”         »             Norway, ‘71.
    >   Museum, New Zealand adze in, |                         33       » Italy, 20.
          98.                                                  »     ¢elts not found at Pompei, 20.
      »         tumuli, their general plan, 135.               3        ”        39  with Roman re-
      »         Association, its exploration of |                                      mains, 21.
                  Kent’s cavern, 316.                          »”»        > not of Roman times, 17,
      »         Museum contains stone wea-                                                ie
                 pon     found    with        elephant’s       is         »             but     earlier,     before     iron,
         tooth, 345.                                                                      22.
Brittany tumuli, 118, 125, 163.                                »     how introduced, 4, 60, 69.
Britons did not eat hare, 197.                                 »     probably   not                        discovered      in
Brixham cave, remains from, 291, 817.                                  Europe, 59.
Broch.          See Burgh.                                     »     moulds for casting, 60.
Bronze Age, 3, 74, 170, 249.                                   »     and stone implements                              found
            dwellings of, 62.                                             together, 77.
                       theories concerning, 57.                »     pin trom                  Scotch       shell-mound,
                       and Pheenician commerce,                        229.
                         60.                                   »»    probably                  imported        from      the
      2          »     metallurgy of, 37-41, 57.                       Vast, 60.
      35         >     burial in, 151.                         »»    remains at pileworks, 216.
      -          »     Clothing in, 45; pottery                »     Weapons,                 when     discontinued in
                         of, 217-219.                                                         the North, 12.
      nf         x      architecture, 50.                      55                  »,     Dot found with relies of
      »    and stone used at the same                                                          Roman         origin,     14%,
              time, 77.                                                                        ths al
      »    articles,    their general re-                      Ps                 »       not     found       with      iron,
              semblances, 59.                                                                  7-12,
                                                            INDEX.                                                          617
Bronze, alleged examples of, discussed,                          Caledonian wall, 123.
                                                                 Cahokia, gigantic mound at, 273, 281.
Brooch, ancieutly mended, 40.                                    Calvert, Mr., 458, 461.
Brooches of bronze, 35, 43.                                      Campagna, bronze celt found in the, 44.
Brooke referred to, 132.                                         Candolle, M. de, cited, 211.
Brougham, Lord, quoted, 601.                                     Cancto, M. de, 86.
Brown, Mr., on New Zealand inherit-                              Cannibalism of Feegeeans, 459.
                ance, 561.                                            ”     ”  Fuegians, 541.
   »         his discoveries, 287.                                    5     »     Maories, 467.
Buch,        L.        von, on            midsummer     night         os      in Tahiti, 429.
  fires of Norway, 72.                                           Canoe Indians, 532.
Buckland, Dr., remark of, 300.                                   Canoes, 429, 440, 453, 465, 476, 523,
Buddha’s wife and mother, 564.                                     532, 542.
Buffon on Reindeer in France, 303.                               Cape of Good Hope flint flake, 89.
Bunbury,   Sir C., on remains near                                                »  flint-finds at, 107,
                                                                                                be)
  Thetford, 17+.                                                                        108.
Bunsen on autiquity of man, 386.                                 Carnac, temple of, 124.
Buracts, custoin of, 271.                                                 »                tumulus at, 163.
Burchell               on      custom        of Bachapins,       Carthage, when built, 68.
             428, 482, note.                                                  *
                                                                            voyage from, to North-
     53   on Bushman tribe, 573.                                              western Europe, 61.
Burckhardt, 5-14.                                                Carpenter, Dr., 398.
Burdett Coutts, Baroness, 317.                                   Carvings on bones, 333, 509.
Burgh, dwellings so culled, 55, 305.                                  »   on stones, 118, 278, 439, 440.
Burial, ancient modes                       of, 130, e¢ seq.     Cat not found in Lake-dwellings, 199;
    >                   22          », during the Bronze                           nor in Danish shell-mounds, 199.
                                          Age, 49, 50.               5. wild, 207, 320.
    3                   +           », in Aimerica, 268.             », when brought into Europe, 234.
    »        forms of, umong savages, 457,                       Cataclysms                    would      not     account    for
               465, 483, 511, 528, 560.                             river drift, 372, ete.
Burnes, Travels quoted, 176.                                     Catlin, anecdote of, 529.
Burnet ou Comanches, 519.                                            »    on defence of Mandan Village,
Burning of Lake-villages, 220.                                                            261.
Burton on     Arab prejudice against                                      »            remark of, 191, 529.
                                    hare, 198.                   Cave-men, 312-341.
   %              »,         African opinion, 565.                   »                5,    their remains, 337.
Bushmen noticed, 434, 5738.                                          5,           bear, 289-293.
Busk, Dr., visits Denmark, 226.                                      »»           hyena, 289, 293,
     os    referred to, 139, 343.                                    »»           lion, 289, 2938.
     “p    on cave-bear, 291, 298.                               Celtic Lake-dwellers, supposed, 219.
     33    on Neanderthal skull, 338.                            Celts, 25, 189.
     5S    visit to Somme Valley, 316.                               ”?           of various           forms and materials
        Ss             on Hyena, 319.                                                ficured, 25-29.
        »               his flint-finds at the Cape of               »,           kinds of stone used for, 78.
                           Good Hope, 107.                           »,           felstone, 78.
Buttons or studs of bronze, 37, 49.                                  »,           basalt, 79.
     9       »   of tin, 49.                                         »            jade, 79, 163.
Byron on Fuegians, 537, 542.                                         »            hint, 80.
        3              their dogs, 539.                          Ceylon, 64.
        BS             anecdote of Indian             cruelty,   Chaillu, M. du, 567.
                             571.                                Chambered     tumuli,                      131;     rare    in
                                                                      England and France, 135.
                                     C.                              hamois, 326.
                                                                 Changes of human type, 588.
Cwsar referred to, 207, 306, 307.                                Charlemagne, a regulation of, 164.
Caillié, M., 578.                                                Charlevoix on                        etymology    of Hsqui-
Caithness “ burghs,” 55.                                           maux, 495.
Caledonian swords of iron, 7.                                    Chavannes, remains of ass at, 199.
618                                                     INDEX,

Cheney on ancient                     monuments,      282,    Codex Diplomaticus, 117.
  note.                                                       Codrington, Mr., finds flint implement
Chert, how fashioned by the Esqui-                               on Foreland Clift Sole
  maux, 91.                                                   Coffins of wood found in Jutland, 46.
Childbirth, curious customs at, 561.                              »   their contents, 46-49.
Children and savages compared, 570.                               »   at St, Acheul, 376.
Chillingham wild cattle, 307.                                     »   not used in Stone Age, 180.
Chimpanzee, dwellings of, 585.                                       »        of Stone, 94.
China, its pre-historic archeology not                               »
                                                                     given by the Chinese                       as pre-
                    yet known, 8.                                      sents, 562.
   >,           burial custom, 151.                           Coin found at Vimose, 11.
Chisels of flint, 98, 159, 160.                               Coins absent from bronze-finds, 11,16.
Chonos Indians, 539.                                             »,      found in Roman towns, 17.
Christo],          M.       de, on     rhinoceros    relic,      »       miscellaneous, 221.
                     297.                                        »       found at Pigquigny, 19.
    3     referred to, 313.                                      2?                 »?     Heilly, 18.
Christy, Mr., on ancient climate of                              -                  »         ‘inidre, 391.
          south of France, 336, 343.                             »,          not found in ages of stone and
      » his collection, 507.                                               bronze, 7.
      » & Lartet, MM., their researches                          »       found at Nydam, 8, 9.
                                   in the        Dordogne,       >?            >              Thorsbjerg, 10.
                                     323, etc.                   ss                           Tiefenau, 7, 221.
           os           )        on condition of cave-                         5              la Tene, 7.
                                   men     of   South         Coinage, early British and Gaulish, 7.
                    France, 550.                              Colden on Canadian Indians, 95, 519,
Chronological data, 281.                                         577.
      .      problems, 221, 248, 248,                         Comb from Jutland, 46, 48.
                            385, etc.                         Concise, relics trom, 92, 189, 197, 198.
Chronology of the Tiniére cone, 390.                              PA    hog found at, 201.
                            »,       Thiéle valley, 393.      Confolens, cromlech at, 126.
Chunk--yards described, 266.                                  Congreve, reference to, 126, note.
Cicero, 217.                                                  Conwell, his discoveries in Meath, 169.
Circleville, Ohio, remains at, 263.                           Cook, Capt., on Australian notions of
Circumcision in Australia, 447.                                                               trade, 445.
Civilization gradual in Lake-villages,                           >             2?        on      Ksquimaux        repast,
  220.                                                                                        496.
Civilization, its advantages, 594.                                                       on Nootka Sound Indians,
       a3     in its infancy, 551, 584.                                                       525.
Clarence, bone-pit at, 269.                                                              on Fuegians, 542.
Clark’s work, Obio, fortification at,                                                    on houses at Botany Bay,
   260.                                                                                    436.
Clemens, Dr. O. W., 279.                                                                 examples of New Zealand
Clichy, human remains at, 360.                                                             skill, 332, 548.
Climate and astronomical changes, 405.                                                   Kamskatchadale “yourt,”
       »         9» geographical features, 403.                                            492.
       »         Of quaternary period, various                                           on Tahitians, 428, 470,
                    opinions entertained, 310.                                             480, &e.
       »          of reindeer period, 336.                                               on asmanians, 450.,
       »»Of Western Europe, dates in-                            %             »,        on Maories, 462.
           dicated by, 401, 419.                                                         on temporary marriages
« Cloghauns,” 78.                                                                          in New Zealand, 568.
Cloth found in Lake-dwellings, 194.                                                      on winter-habitations in
  »,            found at Aztalan, 266.                                                     North-east Asia, 132.
  »             ‘Manufacture in Tahiti, 473.                                   »         worshipped, 567.
Clothing, ideas concerning, 564,                              Cookery ainong Esquimaux, 495.
     »    of Bronze Age, 46.                                  Copenhagen Museum, 223, 225-6.
Coast-finds in Denmark described, 105.                                   ?                    o>     stone implements
Cochet, the Abbé, quoted, 348,                                                                         in, 75, 95,
                                                       INDEX.                                          619
Copenhagen Museum,                     bronze     imple-     Customs of Savages, 433.
                           ments in, 27, 31, 32, 44.         Cuvier, M., names Rhinoceros lepto-
      ;    Academy of Sciences, 226.                                           rhinus, 297.
Copper Age in Ireland doubtful, 58.                              »         On reindeer, 3038.
Copper, its early use, 3, 60.
      »          Where procured by the Pho-
                   nicians, 69.                                                       D.
       »         implements, 28; rare in Enu-
                       rope, 57.                             Dacotahs boiling           animals   in skins,
       »         in North         America,     253, 429,       512,
                    521.                                     Daggers, bronze, 32.
       >»         mines, American, 254.                          »          of flint, 100.
Coppersmiths, American, 256.                                 Dale, Mr., his flint-finds at Cape of
Coral found at Concise, 191.                                    Good Hope, 107.
Corcelettes, 13, 15, 43.                                     Dale County, animal-mounds, 275.
Cork, Mr., 433.                                              Dalton, Col., on Kols, 425.
Corn not found in shell-mounds, 231.                         Dampier, reference to, 176, 438, 442.
   » of Lake-men, 211, 231.                                       »»   Shell-mounds, 280,
Corn-crushers, 190.                                          Damour, M., 79, note.
Cornet, M. 82.                                               Dana, Professor, 254.
Corn-hills, 282.                                             Dances, indecent, 569.
Cornwall, atin producing district in                         Danish coast-finds described, 105.
              carly times, 61, 69.                               »         flint implements, 237.
     op     shell-mounds, 230.                                   »         Museums, stone implements
                                                                                                   in,
Cortaillod, 13, 15, 43.                                                       223, 225.
Crannoges in Ircland, 176.                                       »         Sagas mention tumuli, 117.
Crantz            on      Esquimaux         repast,   195,      »    tumuli, 33, 223.
                        498.                                 D’Archiac, M., 298, note. See Archiac.
       -           on killing seals, 503.                    Dartmoor, remains on, 53.
       i           on    Esqnimaux          religious no-    Darwin’s theory referred to, 308.
                        tions, 511.                          Darwin, Mr., on descent of oxen, 205.
       oS          on the hare among Green-                     Pe   remark on glaciers, 310.
           landers, 198.                                         a          observations of, 230, 241, 571.
Crawfurd on Australian Minerals, 448,                            +5         on Fuegian dress, 542.
                        57-4.                                Dasent, G. W., 38, 304.
       y           on changes of type, 588.                  David, Lucas, refers to wild horse, 301.
       o           on Malay language, 573.                   Davis, Dr. B., on Neanderthal skull,
Cremation in the Bronze Age, 50, 156.                           340.
Crescents of earthenware, 218.                               Davy on Veddahs, 435.
Crofts, Professor, 256.                                      Dawkins         and Sandford,      opinions       of,
Croll, Mr., on trade-winds, 402.                                298.
   »   onexcentricity of carth’s orbit,                      Dawkins         and the Machairodus           lati-
         410,                                                                  dens, 307.
  »             on change of sea-level, 414.                          »,     on wild oxen, 205.
  >»            on change of climate, 311.                            o      on reindeer, 303.
Cromlech at Confolens, 126.                                  Dead, how interred in the Bronze Age,
            i          sense and etymology of the               49.
             word, 109, note.                                Death, indifference to, 562.
Cromlechs, 113.                                              Decency, ideas of, 564.
Cronkstone Hill, 150.                                        Decker, on Fuegians, 536.
Cruelty of Savages, 521, 571.                                Deerhorn picks, etc., 81, 82.                 ‘
Crustacen in shell-mounds, 232.                              Degradation of savage tribes denied,
Cumberland tumuli, contents of, 149.                            585.
Cunningham,                     Mr.,   on     Australian     Delacourt,        M., discovery at Précy,
  sketches, 439.                                               345.
Customs of mound-builders, 237, 240.                         Delaunay, M., 422.
       »          and habits apparently similar,             Denham, reference to African custom,
                        but yet different, 557.                564.
620                                                   INDEX.

Denmark, its place in history, 223.                        Dress in the Bronze Age, 45.
       ry            its antiquities, 8, 9, 223.               »          Of savages, 431, 435, 437, 446,
       -             its vegetation, 389.                                       456, 462,        516,   530,   538,
       i             not entered by the Ro-                                     536, 542,
                        mans, 20.                              3,         Of Tabitians, 474.
       op            See Kjokkenméddings,                      »          of Esquimaux, 507.
             shell-mounds, etc.                                3          of the Lake-men, 193.
Derbyshire tumuli, contents of, 142-                                      of Patagonians, 533.
  145, 154.                                                Drift Age, what, 2, 75, 342.
Dercennus, mound of, 116.                                      »,        beds characteristics of, 2638, etc.
Design of implements, 72.                                      >»         33        bow formed, 366.
Desnoyers, M., on bone-caves, 312.                             » scarcity of human remains in, 357.
       =       on marks upon bones,                            33              7)    vegetable remains in, 366.
                               420.                            nA              A     anivoal remains in, 366.
Desor, Prof., on bronze objects, 216.                         », implements considered, 352-357.
   »   true nature of lake-villages,                       Drilling, savage skill in, 524.
          216.                                             Drinking-cups, 167.
  >         on human remains not found in                  Druidical monuments, so-called, 119.
               the Stone Age, 215.                         Dublin Museum, bronze implement,
  »    on Swiss Lake-dwellings, 178,                         ete., in, 20, 27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 38,
          183, 221.                                          58, 76.
De Soto, 424, 522.                                         Dun of Dornadilla, 55.
Devil’s Dyke, 118.                                         Dupont, Dr., on Belgian caves, 314.
Devon, shell-mounds, 230.                                  Duty, curious ideas of, 564.
Dickeson, Dr., finds together bones of                     Dwellings of American Indians, 525.
  mastodon and man, 287.                                        5    of ancient Gauls, 179.
Differences           among       contemporary sa-                   “o             of the Lake-men, 173-180.
   vages, 551.                                                       si             of Bronze Age, 50.
Diffusion of the human race, 588.                                    x              of Esquimaux, 491.
Dighton Rock carvings, 278.                                          my             in Paraguay, 530.
Dille, Mr., on American tumuli, 268.                                 5              Patagonians, 533.
Dinotherium, 422.                                                    Puegi:ans, 536.
Diodorus Siculus cited, 116, 562.                          Dyaks, dwellings of, 176.
Dobritzhoffer             on     religious ideas      of   Dykes, 113.
                               Abipones, 579.
             a            skill of savages, 545.                                           BE.
Dog, first domestic animal, 586.
Dogs of shell-mounds, 235.                                 Earle, Mr., observation of, 230.
  »,        trained to help in fishing, 589.                     .    on New Zealand cruelty, 467.
  »         used for different            purposes,        Hartheuware spindle-whorls, 190.
               505, 557.                                   Earth’s axis, alteration of, 401.
Dolmen, sense and etymology of the                         Earthworks in North America, 25, note.
  word, 109, note, 126, 128.                               Kaster Island statues, 5-19.
Domestic             animals,      remains of not          Eccard referred to, 6
                                  found in French          Education and crime, 609.
                                  bone-caves, 326.         Edinburgh, bronze implements at, 27.
                 3             of Lake-men, 208.           egypt, early civilization of, 587.
                 a             nope    in earliest              >,        formation of, 39-4.
                                  times, 589.              Egyptian bronzes, 33.
                 »             of early     ages,     9-             »         tombs, 151.
                                  tera                               »          knowledge of the horse, 200.
Doorways in tumuli, 159.                                             »          barley, 211.
D’Orbigny, quotation from, 372.                            Ekkehard quoted, 301.
Dordogne, bone-caves in, 323, 548.                         Elephant, 289, 296, 377.
Dovler, Dy., human relics found by,                        Elephants use boughs us fans, 58L.
  287.                                                     Elfin arrows, 427.
Dove, Mr., on Tasmanians, 450, 573.                        Elk, 207.
Drawings of Esquimaus, 509.                                 » Lrish fossil, 289, 299, 321.
                                                       INDEX.                                                 621
Elk, Norway, 307.                                              Evans, Mr., reference to, 351, 358.
Ellis, on opinions in Tahiti, 470, 484.                        Excentricity of earth’s orbit, 410,
   », on dress of queen, 475.                                  Exploration of shell--nounds, 223,
  »            on Tahitian slingstones, 477.                    Eyre, on Australian dwellings                   and
  a                     on           surgery, 482.                customs, 438, 442, 449.
             *       morals, 488.
      on Maories, 4.67.
   »   on feats of Polynesians, 545.                                                       F.
Ellon, flint-finds near, 107.
Enclosures in America, 259.                                    Fables, or myths, widespread, 64.
Engelhardt, on discoveries in Slesvick,                         Pakaafo, whether its natives were ig-
   8, 118.                                                        norant of fire, 559.
Engis, skull from, 337.                                         Falconer, Dr., on bone cave in Sicily,
England, shell-mounds in, 230.                                                   318.
English Channel once narrower, 363.                           |
                                                                           +       Gibraltar, 319,
Engraving by Hsquimanx, 509.                                               a       on the mammoth           period,
          %            by cave-men,        333.                                      295.
Equinoxes, precession of, 405.                                             oy      on the species of rhinoceros,
Erman on “ Yurt,” 131.                                                               297.
      »             reference to, 271.                                             on Brixham cave, 317.
Erskine, Capt., on Peegcean gods, 453.                                     r       remarks of, 236.
    »”     on Feegeean character, 455,                                     5       visits Abbeville, 343.
                             460.                                          xD      finds lagomys among bones
Esquimaux funeral rite, 171.                                                 from Brixham cave, 307.
          2             burial places, 150.                                on cave-bear, 291.
          ”             sometimes cat foxes, 195.               Falkner on Patagonians, 532-536, 545.
          >             notions of Englishmen, 425.             Fancies of uncivilized peoples, 425.
          ay            notices of, 327, 329, 491, ete.         Fanunerup, shell-mound at, 226, 228,
          3             stone monuments among,                       i     flint-flake from, 86, 245.
                           aioe                                Fauna affected by change of climate,
          35            stone implements, 91, 97,                      415.
                              99,                                     »,        Of bone-caves, 311.
          >             without pottery, 49-4.                        »         of Lake-dwellings, 194-210.
          os            without religious ideas,       511.           »         of Stone Age, 195-210.
            engravings on bone, 509.                                  »         of drift period, 377.
Estavaycr, 12- 45; 33, 3-4, 43, 45.                                             of the shell-mounds, 231.
Uthnological problems, 387.                                    Feogeean funerals, 171.
Etiquette, Feegecan, 460.                                      Feegecans, notices of, 218, 451.
          5            Savayre, 561, 563, 566.                 Fellenberg, 79, note.
Etowah river mound, 280.                                       Felstone used for celts, 78.
Etruscan jewellery, 151.                                       Fergusson on Stonehenge and Abury,
Rurope, time of man’s first appearance                                     120.
                        in, unknown, 1.                                    Ps      Silbury Hill, 120.
          »          whether         truly described   by                          on Buddhist Topes, 125.
                        Pytheas, 63.                                               on ancient Indian notions
Furopeans anong savages, 567.                                                         of decency, 564.
Evans, Mr., on early British coinage, 7.                       Ferrum (iron) as synonym for sword,
               fe       on drift implements, 343.
               35       notes on flint implements,             Ferry, H. de, and A. Arcelin, on flint
                              345.                                implements, near Macon, 107.
               op       researches of, 230, 316.               Festival of the Dead, 269.
               5        visits Abbeville, 3-£3.                Vilhol, M., 340.
                        addresses the Academy of               Finns, skulls of, 188.
                           Sciences, 344.                      Fire, whether known to all races, 558.
               .        finds hatchet near Abbot’s               be
                                                                           used in felling and shaping tim-
               3           Langley, 347.                                     ber, 93.
                        on certain forms of flint                »
                                                                           how obtained in Tahiti, 478.
                             implements, 353.                    ”                  ”
                                                                                            in Australia, 445.
622                                                INDEX,

Fire, how obtained by Indians, 524.                     Floating dwellings, 188.
  "          i     by savages, 558.                     Flora of Lake-dwellings, 178, 211.
      among Tasmanians, 451.                                »,            of shell-mounds, 231.
  os          »,         Maories, 462.                  Florence, in Alabama,                earthwork      at,
            how    used      by the      Esquimaux,        280.
              498-500.                                  Florida Indians’ buildings, 273.
Fischer, M.,79, note.                                   Flourens, M., 235.
Fish in shell-mounds, 231, 233.                         Flower, Mr., 343, 353.
  », at Isthmus of Panama, 402.                             »   on drift gravels, 350.
Fish-hooks, bronze, 32.                                       »   on Grime’s Graves, 81.
Fish-spears, 523.                                       Fodisch, Dr., cited, 112.
Fishing, peculiar modes                  of, 73, 523,   Food of the mound-builders, 241.
   527, 539.                                               »» how taken in Tahiti, 480.
Fitzroy on Fuegians, 537,                                  ”»   of savages, 431, 439, 452, 4.62,
        »      on Patagonian huts, 533.                         478, 496, 535, 538.
        »      on Tahitian cruelty, 488.                   yy stores in Arctic regions, 495.
Fitz-Stephen refers to wild bulls, 307.                 Foote, Mr., on Indian stone imple-
Flax mentioned in the Pentateuch and                        ments, 348.
       Homer, 214.                                      Forchhammer, Prof. 225, 231.
  3» Known to Lake-men, 213.                            Forel, M., discoveries at Morges, 13.
Flaxdale Barrow, urn from, 165, 166.                    Forests in Wisconsin, 281, 284.
Flensborg, implements at, 33, 76.                       Forged flint implements, 354.
Flinders, 446.                                          Forks of Feegeeans, 454,
Flint implement manufactories, 80-83.                   Forskey,  M., 398.
   27              >>        how formed, 352.           Forster on Fuegians, 537.
   2?              22        antiquity, 354.                »   on Tahitians, 429, 473, 485.
  bod              39        characteristics, 355.      Fort-hill, Ohio, fortification at, 260.
   33              >     from drift, 356.               Fortifications of earth, 112, 259.
                 », from various sources, 357.                 i"      of Maories, 464.
   5,       used for Celts, 80.                         Forts, ancient, 112.
            how manufactured, 80, 84, 89.               Foster, Mr., 255
  »,        flake of large size, 86.                    Fowl, domestic, not found                     in Swiss
  ;,        flakes, North American, 88, 252.                and Danish ancient remains, 199.
  22          29        Australian, 89.                 Fox, 207, 320.
  »>          22        from Cape of Good Hope,           » eaten by Hsquimaux, and in the
                          89, 108.                             stone period, 195.
                        New Caledonian, 89,             France, bone-caves in, 312, 341.
                        Mexican, 89.                             »          primeval, 379.
                        Kertch, 153.                             »           Ssbell-mounds in, 230.
                        Long Barrow, 163,               Franks, on supposed Phanician relies
                        Moen, 160.                                            found in America, 71.
  3S               Swiss, 190.                                   »          On Etruscan jewellery, 151.
            implements of Denmark, 87, 91.                       »          Ona bronze pin from slicll-
  33            a2      Switzerland, 91, 189,                                 mound, 229.
                           190.                                  »          referred to, 441.
                        how used, 84.                   Frankland,              Prof,    on glacial     epoch,
                        of bone-caves, 327.                 400.
                        in shell-mounds, 227,           Franklin, opinion of fox as food,.195.
                          237-240.                      Frere, Mr., his finds at Hoxne, 3-45.
                            of tumuli      compared     Freshwater origin of gravels, 366.
                     with those of shell-               Freycinet, M., buildings of Ladrone
                     mounds, 243,                                                  Islanders, 549.                —

Flint-finds, 107, 342, ete.                                          Ke          opinion of, 558, 571,
      m     in England, 107, 342.                                                referred to, 5G4.
      5     in Scotland, 107.                           Friendly Islanders, 489.
      -     in France, 107, 342, etc.                   Froélund, coast- find at, 106.
      ep    in other countries, 107.                    Fruit of Lake-men, 212.
      .     questions at issue, 352.                    Fuegians, account of, 536.
                                                INDEX.                                                     623
Fuegians and Danish mound-builders,                  Geology, its principles, 2.
               513.                                      »    of Dordogne, 328.
    Bs    habits of, 2-L1.                           Gervais, M., and remains of urns, 306.
Funeral feasts, 170.                                 Gesner’s reference to the elk, 207.
    »    Yrites im Australia, 448.                   Giant’s Dance, what, 121.
   »           »       Feegee, 457.                  Gibraltar, relics from the Genista
   »      of American Indians, 528.                     cave, 319.
   »       Tites among savages, 560.                 Gigantic figures of animals, 274.
Funerals in Tabiti, 483.                                          »             earthworks, 280.
   =      of Esquimaus, 511.                         Gilgal, stones of, 115.
    58       of Maori, 465.                          Gilliéron, M., on                      lake-habitation    at
    5        of Patagonians, 535.                                                     Pont de Thiéle, 178, 193,
   See also Burial, Interment.                                                          393.
Parse, M., 72., note.                                                 .          pottery, found by, 193.
Future full of hope, 599.                            Gillingham, penpits at, 53.
                                                     Giraldus Cambrensis, his story about
                          G.                             Stonehenge, 121.
                                                     Gjershéi, shell-mounds at, 228.
Gades, when founded, 68.                             Glacial epoch, astronomically                            ac-
Galeed of Jacob aud Laban, 115, 130.                             ”                >          counted   for, 311,
Galena in American mounds, 253.                                                              404.
Galles, M., referred to, 163, 164.                               Py               %
                                                                        dates for, 412.
Galton, Mr., on African custo, 327.                              5                5
                                                                        its phenomena                         ex-
   He     ondanger of wild «animals,                                      plained, 416.
           SOD:                                      Glaciers and moraines, 388.
   3    referred to, 3-43.                           Glass found at Hallstadt, 24.
Gane obtained in various ways, 557.                          3              »      in America, 71.
Games of Australians, 41’7.                                  »            beads in Bronze Age, 37.
   »  Of Msqnimaux, 509.                             Glutton or wolverine, 289, 305.
   »  Of Feegeeuns, 154,                             Gobien                 on ignorance of fire in La-
   »  Of Maories, S66.                                 drones, 558.
   »  Of Tahitinns, 477.                             God, no name                   for, among Abipones,
Ganggraben, 131, 135, 163.                                                  579.
Garden-beds of Wisconsin, 282, 283.                      »                uatious who know not, 437.
Garrigou, M., 340.                                   Godalming, flint from, 346.
Gastaldi, M., on early Italian remains,              Godwin Austen, 315, 343,
   175.                                              Goguet, referred to, 6.
Gaston de Poix und reindeer in France,               Gold, probably first metal noticed by
   303.                                                                    man, 3.
Gaudry, M., his researches, 344.                         ”»ornaments at Kouloba, 153.
Ganlish coinage, how early, 7.                         a        Ps    from Ireland, 41, 42.
Gebelin, Count de, on Dighton Rock,                  Goldhaven tumulus, 131.
   278.                                              Gordon, Dr., on Scotch shell-mounds,
Geikie, Mr., on denudation in pro-                                               229.
  press, 412.                                                    ay
                                                                           Lady Duff, on African morals,
Geninus cited, 67.                                                               568.
“(Genesis of the Warth and of Man,”                  Gorm tumulus, 116.
  quoted, 386.                                       Gosse, M., discovery in valley of Seine,
Genista Cave, 319.                                       345.
Gentlemanw’s Magazine referred to, 8,                Gouges of bronze, 37.
  note.                        é                     Grant, Captain, 578.
Geographical distribution of weapons,                Granville animal-mound, 276.
  cle, 692.                                          Grave Creek mound, 259, 260, 268,
Geological         changes         in   quaternary      272, 278.
  period, 416.                                       Gravel. See Drift.
Geology and time, 418.                               Gray, Dr., referred to, 205.
        and zoology, parallel processes                  »                Mr., oncustom in Hebrides, 130.
               in, 420,                              Gray’s Thurrock, 292.
624                                              INDEX.

Greek and Roman writers refer to                      Hazlewood on Feegeean gods, 453.
  burials under mounds of stone or of                 Hearne’s  Journey to Coppermine
  earth, 116.                                                                     River, 254.
Greenlanders, skulls of, 138.                                      Hy        on      North American             In-
       3        object to eat hare, 198.                                          dians, 519, 577.
Greenstone axe, 95.                                   Hébert, M., 345.
Greenwell, Mr., referred to, 24'7.                    Heceataus referred to, 123.
     a      statistics of funeral rites,              Hector’s barrow, 116.
                     from, 50, 189, 146-150.          Heer, Prof., reference to, 214.
                 finds    traces     of wood     in     »   statistics from, 213.
                      tumuli, 130.                      5,  on ancient flora, 178.
       5        his      account of      Grime’s      Heilly,             alleged        example     of bronze
                      Graves, 80.                         Roman sword foand there, 18.
Gregory of Tours quoted, 117, 217.                    Hemp, 214.
Grenelle, discoveries at, 345.                        Henslow, Prof., 343, 353.
Grey, Capt., 544.                                     Herberstein on the urus, 206, 301, 307.
  »,   on Australian shell-mounds, etc.,                    $5    refers to wild horse, 301.
              438.                                    Herbst, K., 226.
  >,       on Australian customs, 438, 443,                =              on Jutland tumuli, 45.
              449.                                         e              his list of stone implements
  »,       on Australian        skill with   spear,                         in Copenhagen Museum, 75.
         545.                                         Hernandez, 89.
Grime’s Graves, 80, 93.                               Herne Bay, 347.
Guldhoi, what, 46.                                    Herodotus              on Psonian            custom,     174,
Gulf Stream, influence of, 101.                                                   186.
Gunn, Rey. J., on mammoth remains,                                  %        cited, 63, 66, 298.
   295.                                               Herschell,             Sir     J., on     change       of cli-
Gunther, Dr., observation of, 402.                        mate, 409.
                                                      Hesiod, date of, 68.
                          16.                              »              Says iron was discovered after
                                                                             copper and tin, 5.
Habits of Cave-dwellers, 335.                                  »          stecl known in his time, 5.
Haeckel on Bushmen, 434.                                  »    reference to, 199.
Hagiar Kem, 72.                                       Hibbert, Dr., 303.
Haigh on Runic inseription, 11.                       Hill Tribes, traditions of, 425.
Hains, Dr., and the cave-lion, 293.                   Himilco, voyage of, 61.
Hairpins, 36,                                            ne    criticism of Sir G. C. Lewis
Hale on Fakaafo language, 559.                                    upon, 61.
Haligenes, where found, 404,                          Hints to explorers, 171.
Halitherium, 422.                                     Hippopotamus, fossil, 289, 298, 377.
Hall on Esquimaux, 327, 514,                          His, Prof., on skull from Meilen, 215.
Hallstadt, cemetery at, 22.                           Hisely, M., 394.
     af    table of discoveries at, 23.               Hoare, Sir R. C., on position of ditch
Hammers of bronze, 37,                                           in earthworks, 261,
        as   flint, 104.                                 »,   tumuli examined by him, 123.
Handles of stone implements, 92, 104.                      »            on the blue stones           of     Stone-
Happiness on the increase, 593, 597.                                      henge, 124.
Harald, burial of, 117.                                  »               on incense enps, 166.
Hare seldom traceable, 197.                              >»              referred to, 6, 85, 151, 24:7.
  »        opinions concerning, 197, 198.                »               statistics from, 50, 139, 15-4.
Harny, M., 422.                 ;                     Hog,              domestic, 200, 209, 877; its
Harpoons of flint, 104.                                   origin, 201, 234.
Harrison, Pres., on growth of forests,                Homer, date of, 68.
  284.                                                   ie  refers to flax, 214.
Haughton, Rev. §., 78.                                    »              on decoration of shiclds, 73.
Havelse, shell-mound at, 226.                             ay             on use of iron, ctc., 5.
Haven on antiquities of the United                                       referred to,         109,   115,     118,
  States, 250, 251, 273.                                                    199, 565.
                                                        INDEX.                                            625
Hooker, Dr., hissketch of Carnac, 125.                       Hyena, the Cave-, 289, 293, 317, 320
        »           oufuneral rites of the Khasias,
                                                                                                                ?
                                                               377.
                           127.                              Hyer, Mr., discovers Aztalan, 264.
        re          on Fuegian hardiness, 543.
        en          on Indian dolimens, 128.
                    referred to, 126, note.
Hopkins               on       changes   of climate     in
    furope,399.                                              Ibex, 207, 326.
Horn from shell-mounds, 239.                                 Ice at the South Pole, 407.
Horner, Mr., Researches in Egypt, 394.                        »> boulders in, 871.
Horse fossil, 200, 289, 317, 320, 377.                           » Sludge, 64.
  »    wild, 300.                                            Icklingham, flint from, 347.
  »    found in Lake-dwellings, 200,                         Ignorance and crime, 599.
                    209.                                            -      misery, 600.
   >»             sacrificed, 170, 171.                      Iford, 292.
   »              Indians, 532.                              Imitative art, 548.
 Hospitality among savages, 567.                             Implements of Esquimaux, 500.
Hottentots, 429.                                                       53        made of flint, 87.
             i         prejudice against hare, 198.                    Pe,       of stone, various, 75, ete.
             Rs        skill, 5-16.                                    re        of bone and wood, 189.
             a         without religion, 578.                                    Indian, 521.
Houses of Feegcans, 453.                                               rs        of savages, 546.
   »    Of Maories, 463.                                                         in bone- beds, 349.
   »    of Tahitians, 476.                                   Incense cups, 166.
Houzeau, M., 82.                                             Independent inventions, 556.
Hoxne, relics from, 345, 366.                                India, Megalithic remains in, 125.
Hudson’s               Bay        Company,   skins    re-       aS   stone implements found in, 108,
                           ceived by, 359.                               348.
        oe            territory, population of, 359.            >»,   suttee, 171.
            593.                                             Indian corn-hills, 282.
Hughes, Mr., his finds in Kent, 38.                               »   customs in America, 269.
Human               bones not found in shell-                     »    dolmens, 127, 128, 129, 181.
                      mounds, 240.                           Indians, diminution of, 529.
        .           remains rare in pileworks,                     »    of North America, 515.
                                      214,                         »         of Paraguay,      some   account
        nD                 >       very rare in drift,                         of, 580.
                                      357, 300s              Infanticide in ancient Britain, 171.
       st                or        of Denmark, 240,                    3        among     Esquimaux,     171,
       5             sacrifices, 170, 459, 467.                                   512,
       9?                  »        of Feegeans, 457.                           of American Indians, 521.
                  of Muories, 467.                                     Ps       of Hottentots, 434.
Humphr cy and Abbott on Mississippi                                            in Paraguay, 531.
  drift, 398.                                                          .  of Maories, 466.
Hungary copper implements, 58.                                            Polynesian, 466.
Hunt, Mr., on F ecgecan custom, 457.                                      in Tahiti, 487.
Hunting among the KWsquimaux, 503.                           Inhabitants of Lake- villages, 218.
        a2          and fishing of Indians, 527,             Inheritance and succession, 561.
                       539.                                  Inscriptions, Runic, 8, note, 11.
        »           in primitive period, 586.                                    not found iin Bronze Age,
Hnut-urns, 51.                                                                     alae
     3     found in Italy, 51.                                         .         Roman, 11.
     ”»        39   Germany, 51, 52.                                   os       on celt at Rome, 45.
                                    Denmark, 52.                       -        doubtful, in America,
Hut- ‘circles, 78.                                             278.
Huxley, Prof., on geographical distri-                       Intellect in primitive period, 586.
                      bution of man, 387.                    Intellectual estimate of savages, 572.
   Fr              on Engis skull, 337, 340.                 Interment, modes of, 49, 268.
    BS             on N. eanderthal skull, 338.                 Sce also Burial, Funeral.
                                                                                          ss
626                                                         INDEX.

Inventions sometimes independent and                             Jobson, his map of 1591, 177.
   sometimes borrowed, 586.                                      Jones, R., 343.
Ireland, celts from, 25, 27.                                     Judicial statistics, 609.
       55                 copper implements in, 58.              Jukes, 440, 577.
       Bs not certain that Romans en-                            Justin, 217.
             tered it, 58.                                       Jutland, contents of coffins found in,
Trish elk, 299, 321.                                                                  45-49,
   » gold ornaments, 41.                                                 3          shell-mounds of, 228.
Tron Age, what, 3.
  s.                99        burials in, 157.
  », among the                        Gauls      and   Caledo-                                IK
                    nians, 6.
  »,            its early use, 4, 6, 7, 74.                      Kajak and Umiak, 506.
  »             epithets, applied to, by poets, 4.               Kamskatchadale yourt, 492.
  »,            use of, general, in Northern Bu-                 Kandyans, 436.
                    rope, before invasion of Julius              Kane on Cree Indian swearing, 521.
                    Cesar, 22.                                       » on Redskins and portraits, 528,
  5             use of, in Mexico, 77.                                   581.
  »»            weapons not found with bronze,                     »,  on Hsquimaux bird-catching,
                     12.                                           »»  quoted or referred to, 495, 498,
  »             unknown to early Americans, 252.                         500, 505, 557.
  »             how smelted by Hottentots, 432.                  Kattegat, tides of, 230.
                relics at Tiefenau, 7, 221.                      Kattinge            and     Kattinge Verk           shell-
Isolation of savages, 554.                                          mounds, 228.
Italy, bone-caves in,                                            Keller, Dr., on ancient pottery, 192.
Ivory found at Hallstadt, 24.                                            Pa        on primitive Swiss, 219.
       3                  a         Kouloba, 153.                        a         on human remains in Lake-
                                                                                     villages, 215.
                                                                         5         remarks of, 44, 180.
                                       J.                                33        discovery of Lake-dwellings,
                                                                                     173.
Jade used fot celts, '79, 163, 189.                                      r         Memoirs       on        Lake-dwellings,
  » uot found in Europe, 79.                                                         nly Bye asy
Jabn and Uhlmann on Swiss Lake-                                  Kemble, referred to, 117.
  dwellings, 178.                                                Kennet, 119.
Jahn on discoveries at Tiefenau, 7.                              Kent, flint implements from, 38, 3:7.
James,                    expedition to Rocky           Moun-    Kent’s Hole, a bone-cave, 315.
                              tains, 93.                         Kertch, tumulus near, 153.
           a              on American tumuli, 130.               Keston, its etymology, 122.
Jamieson, T. F., on flint-find in Scot-                          Keyserling, opinion of mammoth, 295.
  land, 107.                                                     Khasias, funeral rites of, 127.
Japan, stone implements found in,                                Kiel, stone implements at, 76.
           »,            burial custom, 151.                     Kimmerirge, shale bead, 163.
       »                 its pre-historic archeology not         King, M., on Mammoth,                        295.
                            yet known, 3.                                     Aa     referred to, 3-48, 440.
Javelins, bronze, 31.                                            ISingsley, Mr., 298.
Jefferson, Mr., on skeletons in a tumu-                          Kireudbrightshire, cairn in, 9-4.
   lus in Virginia, 269.                                         Kissing, not universal, 563.
Jeffreys, Mr., on mollusca of Somme                              Kistvacn, 136.
      Valley, 367.                                               Kit’s Coty House, view of, 112.
Jelalabad tumuli, 111.                                           Ijékkemmébddings                     or    shell-mounds,
Jellinge, 116.                                                     76, 78, 98, 223, ete.
Jenkin, A., letter to the author, 608.                           Knapp, Mr., 255.
Jensen, M.;-157.                                                 Knives, bronze, 33.
Jewellery in Etruscan tombs, 151.                                        »          tound at Thebes, 33.
                a
           at Kouloba, 153.                                              >         flint, 88) 523.
Jews refused to eat hare, 198.                                           »         stone, 189.
Joass, Mr., 304.                                                 Ixnox’s “Ceylon” quoted, 64, 435.
                                                 INDEX.                                                             627
Koeh, Dr., account of Mastodon, 286.                      Lake-men, their character, 219, 220.
KXohen, on stone circles in Arabia, 113.                  Lamanon, M. de, on Columbian Indian
Kolben, on Hottentots, 480, 4383, 546,                      Alphabet, 562.
   580.                                                   Land, level of, affected by rivers, 412.
Kols, modern tradition among, 425                         Lang, Mr., on Australian customs, 450.
Kongehoi, what, 46.                                       Language of Australians, etc., 448, 451,
      eS   contents of, 49.                                                           452.
Korsér, coast-find at, 105.                                             Gs        and sounds, 386, 562, 571,
Kotzebue, 294, 487, 581.                                                            573.
Kouloba tumulus, contents of, 1538.                       Lapham                discovers and describes ani-
                                                                                    mal-mounds, 274.
                     L.                                                 os       on  Wisconsin     antiquities,
                                                                                    250, 251, 255, 264.
Ladrone Islanders, whether once igno-                                  fe        on Wisconsin forests, 281,
   rant of fire, 558.                                                              285.
Tadrones, houses in, 519.                                               os       on corn-hills, 282.
Lafitan, M., cited, 114.                                                as       on Wisconsin            garden-beds,
Lagomys, or tailless hare, 307, 317.                                 285.
Laing, Mr., 305, 514,                                     Lapland “jamme,” 182.
Lains, cairn of, 116.                                              5            skulls, 138.
Lake-hamlet,     ancient      model      of,     at                Gs           customs, 327, 568.
          Munich, 52.                                     Laplanders                  retreating      from civiliza-
  »    habitations   of Switzerland,            12,           tion, 302.
                       173, 178-222.                      Lartet, M., on bone-cave at Aurignac,
                     mentioned by Hero-                                                 319-322.
                          dotus, 17-4.                        “5                   on     Paleontological          chro-
  as        3        in England, 17-4.                                                  nology, 289.
  “p        i        in      Mecklenburg,                     5;                   on     caves     in      Dordogne,
                        175.                                                            323, ete.
  i.        re       in Ireland, 167.                         ¥                    finds no traces of reindeer
  Py        Ps       in Scotland, 174.                                               in Spanish caves, 302.
  nf        rr       in Italy, 175.                           of                   opinion of, 805, 591, note.
  ee        "a       in France, 175.                          a                    discovery   among     bones
  a         A        none in Denmark,                                               from caye near Madrid,
                       106.                                                         319.
  35        *s       modern, 175.                             iy                  experiment made by, 332.
  e         Fe       ee         of,        174,               ”                    on drawings           in cave     of
                      175, 178.                                                         Savigné, 333.
  PF        i        their age, 179, 208,                     “                   on Rhinoceros leptorhinus,
                         220,                                                           297, 298.
  an        55        structure, 179,181,                     6                    on quaternary climate,310.
                         185.                                 of                   on    marked    rhinoceros
            a         fauna of, 194.                                                    bones, 362.
  e         iS        flora of, 211.                          y                   makes flint needle, 548.
  ip        33        statistics, 179.                                reference to, 345, 361.
  »         9         position, 181.                      Lastie, Vicomte de, his collection from’
  as        aa        indications, 182.                     Bruniquel, 327.
  *         2         relics of, 181, 183,                La Tene, metal implements found at, 7.
                         185.                             Lead not found in Bronze Age, 20, 37.
  ry        sg        at Wauwyl,         182.                 »              used in Iron Age, 16.
  A                  of Bronze Age, 215.                      »»             perhaps known to ancient Ame-
  op   Superior, antiquities near, 273.                           ricans, 253.
       villages, decreased gradually in                   Leech, Mr., finds flint implements near
          number, 220.                                        Herne Bay, 347.
   »» worshippers, 217.                                   Leems on custom of Danish Lapland-
TLake-men, their food, ete. 191, 193,                        ers, 327.
                     212, 214.                            Lee’s translation   of                      Dr.     IJeller’s
     »          By remains, 214,                             «‘Memoirs,” 178.
                                                      8   9
628                                            INDEX.

Lefeaux, Mr., letter to the author, 607.            Lyell on ancient site of Brighton, 364.
Lefebore, M., 164, note.                                »        00 chronological problems,            420.
Lefroy, M., quoted, 569.                                »        on antiquity of man, 422.
Leidy, Dr., and Felis atrow, 293.                       },       on changes of climate, 409.
Lemming, 307, 378.                                      ;,       table of excentricity       of earth’s
Leopard, fossil, where found, 294.                                 orbit, 411.
Lepsius, M., 395.                                       »,       on duration of glacial epoch, 416.
Leslie, Col., 129, note.                                »        quoted, 396.
Letourneaux, M., 127, note.                             ,        on age of Mississippi delta, 397.
Letters on American antiquities of                       »       mentioned, 316, 371.
   doubtful character, 2'78-280.                    Lyux, fossil, found in England, 294.
Le Vaillant on Hottentots, 578.                     Lyon, Capt., on Esquimaux, 497, 508.
Leveillé, Dr., on a flint-find at Pres-                 55              3            »     sledges, 505.
   signy, 83, 107.                                      »»       opinion of foxes as food, 195.
Lewis, Sir G. C., on the transport of                   »        oD formation of ice, 65.
                            tin to the East, 61.
           "           on     the   voyage     of
                         Himileo, 61.                                           M.
           rs          on the voyage           of
                         Pytheas, 63.               Maccagnone cave, 318.
           %           on ancient supply of         McEnery, Mr., 307.
                         tin, 61, 70.                        5        his     researches     in    Kent’s
Lichtenstein, 435.                                                          cavern, 315.
Liége, bone-caves near, 64.                         Machairodus latidens, 307.
Life, indifference to, 457, 562.                    Mackenzie on Esquimaux                        opinions
Linen used for dress in Bronze               Age,     about Englishmen, 425.
  45.                                               Macon, flint-finds near, 107.
Lion, the cave, 289, 293, 317, 320, 377.            Madrid, relies from, 362.
 Lipari, what Pytheas says of it, 63.               Magellan on stature                  of Patagonian
 Lisch, Dr., on hut-urns, 51, 52. -                                     tribes, 532.
      rs     on pile-dwellings in Meck-                      »       referred to, 558.
                    lenburg, 175.                   Madagascar, custom in, 125.
Literature, its uses, 598.                          Maize grown in North America, 526.
Livingstone, Dr., 111, note, 578.                   Malay language, 574.
‘¢ Livres de beurre,” 83.                           Mallet, Mr., his discovery of tin in a
Loch Resort, beehive houses near, 54.                  so-called copper celt, 58.
Loch Spynie, shell-mounds at, 229.                  Malta, ruin in, 72.
Locke, Prof., describes animal mounds,                 »    its ornaments, 169.
   274.                                             Malton, stone axe found there, 609.
Loess, 390,                                         Mammalia of drift, 377.
Liéhle, M., on piles used at Wangen,                      :      in shell-mounds, 233.
             186, 357.                                  a    in Lake-dwellings, 195.
     5     on find at Wangen, 13.                   Mammoth, 289, 294, 817, 320, 361,
London, flint weapon, found in, 345.                            377.
Long Barrow, tumulus at, 161.                                A         near Madrid, 362.
Long Island, remains at, 54.                        Man, his antiquity, 1, 287, 288, 361,
Longlow, 136.                                               379, 385, etc.
Los Jardines, islands mentioned, 559.                   »>       his primitive condition, 585.
Lovaine,        Lord, on     lake-dwelling    in        »        his diffusion, 587.
  south of Scotland, 174,                               »>       and his intellect, 591.
Lubbock, Sir J. W., on alteration of                Mandan wigwains, 280.
  earth’s axis, 401.                                Mauné-er-H’rock tumulus, 163.
Lucretius mentions the Stone, Bronze,               Maories, notices of, 461, 568,570.                Sce
   and Iron Ages, 6,                                    New Zealanders.
Lukis, on sepulchral tumuli, 16,                    Marco Polo, 151.
Lycus, mound of, 116.                               Mare di Sargasso, 63.
Lyell, Sir C., 287, 343,                            Marmots, 307, 326.
  »,   on change of river courses, 382.             Marriage umong Maories, 466,
                                                    INDEX.                                            629
Marriage          customs       of American In-           Meyer, EF. von, fossil ox found by, 204.
                                 dians, 520.              Michaelis, 385.
       22           2         other nations, 436,         Michel, Mont St., tumulus, 163.
                                437, 419, 455, 466,       Migration, facts connected with, 587.
                               518, 567.                  Millet found in Lake-villages, 211,
Marrow,          ancient      love    of, illustrated >   Milwaukie animal-mounds, 277.
  236, 241.                                               Mincopies, 436.
Marsden, Mr., 466, 565.                                   Mind and its influences, 591.
Marseilles, when founded, 68.                             Mineralogy of Drift, 361.
Masson quoted, 111.                                       Mines, ancient American, 254.
Mastodon in Missouri, 286.                                Mississippi, man and mastodon in, 287
       3          »» Mississippi, 287.                         33      delta, age of, 397.
       7A         » France, 422.                                  A        valley,   relics   from,    79,
Materials preterred for stone imple-                                    357, note.
  ments, 77.                                              Missouri, mastodon found in, 286.
Mather, Prof., quoted, 256.                               Moab, stone monuments in, 125.
Matthews, Mr., on Fuegians, 580.                          Model of Lake-hamlet at Munich, 52.
Maurice, Mr., alludes                to stone   monu-     Models buried with the dead, 150.
  ments in India, 125.                                    Modern earthworks in America, 268.
McGillivray on Australian canoes, 429,                    Moen, tumulus at, 157,
           re       referred to, 13-4.                       ss       spear-head from, 100.
Means of subsistence increasing, 594,                     Meerigen bronze relics, 43.
Meath, sculptured stones in, 169.                         Mollusca in drift, 308, 377.
Mecklenburg, 60.                                          Monaghan, stone axe from, 92.
             -          brooch, 10.                       Mongez, M., on sword found at Heilly,
Megalithic monuments                  called Druidi-
                                    eal, 119.             Monkeys crack nuts with stones, 584.
       Bs                 3      how constructed,         Monkman, Mr., extract from, 609.
                                   16.                    Mont St. Michel, tumulus, 183.
        ee                3      how     decorated,       Montperieux, reference to, 129.
                                     167.                 Monzie,inPerthshire, “ weem”’ at, 53.
        By                5      remains in India,        Moore, Mr., 410.
                         125, 129.                        Moosseedorf, 13, 14, 189,195, 197-199.
Meilen, remains at, 197,                                  Morai, 483, 549.
Meilgaard, shell-inound at, 224, 226-                     Moral estimate of savages, 567, 572.
  228.                                                    Morges, finds at, 13, 15, 32-34, 45,
Mela,Pomponius, on founders of Gades,                        180.
                                                          Morlot, M., work of, referred to, 24, 37.
Men, which most barbarous, 550.                               >?  on age of the cone of Tiniére,
  »  early varieties of, 240.                                            389.
Menchecourt, 342.                                                     on sbell-mounds, 226.
Mendip Hills, £elis spelea from, 293.                                 observations of, 24, 39, 419.
Menhirs, 109, 112, 128.                                       »        on glacial periods, 311.
Mental powers of savages, 572.                                         on lake-dwellings, 178.
Merlin, 122.                                                           on Phoenicians in America, 71.
Merry, Mr., on use of boomerang, 44:4.                                 on twofold character of glacial
Metal, where not used till recently,                                     epoch, 414.
                  4:29,                                       »     onchronological schemes, 414.
   »   unknown in Tahiti, 469,                            Mortillet, M. de, referred to, 119.
   »    uwnknown to cave-men, 3385.                           As      an opinion of, 314.
   »   not found in certain tumuli,                       Morton, Dr., 279.
          161, 163, 164.                                  Mouatt on Andamaners, 436, 577.
   >»  not found in shell-mounds, 241.                    Moulds for casting celts found at
Mexicans used both stone and metal,                         Morges, etc., 45, 60.
  77, 80, St.                                             Mound-builders of America, 280.
Mexican flint implements, 89-91.                             ”
                                                                 City, tumuli at, 270.
   a             paintings referred to, 253.                 2?
                                                                  burial, its early prevalence,
   BS            temple, 429,                                        116.
630                                           INDEX.

Mounds         among the Esquimaux, 512.           Nilsson, Prof., his services in Arch«o-
  See also Barrow, Tumulus.                                   logical science, 6.
Mourcin, M., collection of relics from                 »   his theory of the Bronze Age,
  Perigueux, 332.                                                    61.
Mouse not traced in Lake-dwellings,                            his     remarks on Voyage           of
   ASS):                                                             Pytheas, 65-67.
Moussa, Burgh of, 54, 55.                                     his arguments         for Phienician
Munich, model of Lake-hamlet in the                                  copnexions with Norway
  Museum there, 52.                                                  analyzed   and estimated,
Marchison, Sir R., 343, 375, note.                                   71-73.
       a       opinion of mammoth,                      >»    on descent of oxen, 205.
                        295.                            >»    on “Ganggraben,” 134.
Muscoda, animal-mound, 275.                                referred to, 50, 138, 271, 306,
Museum of Royal Irish Academy, 76.                            425,
Music, 455, 465, 476, 509, 598.                    Nind, Mr. §., 448, 575.
Musk         ox, or musk     sheep, fossil, 289,   Ninus buried           under mound      of earth,
       298, 377.                                      116.
Mylne, Mr., 343.                                   Nonville, M. de, 281.
Myths, their uses, 427.                            Nordmann on the Aurochs, 306.
                                                   Norman, Mr. H. J., Discovery of flint
                                                       implements in Kent, 348.
                        N.                         North American flint flake, 91.
                                                       ”             ”      archeology, 250.
Nagelflue, 79.                                         e             mA     antiquities      classed,
Nails of tin, 49.                                                             ASE


Natchez, Indian houses, 2738.                                aA   Indians, 424.
 Natural History Review referred to,               Northumberland tumuli, contents of,
             8, note,                                149.
     ss   selection anong men, 590.                Norway,       supposed traces          of Phuni-
Navigators, ancient, 61.                               cians in, 71.
Neanderthal skull, 337.                            Nott, Mr., 483.
Needles of bronze, 37.                                 »,    and Gliddon, 287, note.
Negro, aucient origin of, 386.                     Noville, remains of ass at, 199.
Neolithic Age, 3, 75.                              Nudity not always thought indecent,
   a>       22   burial in, 151, 156.                564.
    »?      >?   few interments       of,          Numbers and numerals, 57-4.
                    known, 165.                    Numeration of Anstraliaus, 48, 575.
New Caledonian flint flake, 89.                           7   of the Esquimaux, 513,
New Orleans, ancient relics from, 287.                             574.
New York State, archeology of, 250.                      %      of the Paraguayans, 531.
New Zealand adze, 97, 99.                          Nurhags, 56.
New Zealanders,332, 424. See Maorics.              Nydam, discoveries at, 8, 9.
  33           49      funeral     rites,   133,
                        465.
Newark         in America, earthworks        at,
                                                                            O.
   262, 280.                                       Oak-tree in Denmark, 248.
Newton, Mr., on remains near Thet-                 Oats known in Bronze Age, 211.
             ford, 174.                            Oberea’s mound in Tahiti, 164, 483.
     re    on zoology of ancient Eu-               Objects buried with the dead, 139, 161.
                    rope, 293, note.               Obsidian weapons and implements
         »    Sir Isaac, reference to, 601.                          of Snake Indians, 523,      See
Nia niam, iron crescent of, 554.                                Flint Flake.
Nicobar Islanders’ religion, 581.                        »   in Mexico, 89.
Nidau, 12-15, 32-35, 43.                           Offa’s Dyke, 113.
eee                 Lied, quoted, 206, 300,        Ogham Alphabet, 605.
  80                                               Ohio, ancient works in, 258, ote.
Niederwyl, pile-dwellings, 186.                    Old Testament style avd Arab speech,
Nile valley, elevation of, 394.                      425.
                                                       INDEX.                                        631
Oldfield, Mr., quoted, 440, 445.                             Paleontological Chronologyof Lartet,
      _                 yy On     native population of          20
                                Australia, 594.              Palestine, stone circles, etc., in, 115.
     a      » Deathsin Australia, 595.                            me    stone implements found in,
Oliver, Lieut., on Madagascar cus-                                        108.
   tom, 125.                                                 Palgrave on antiquity of man, 1.
Olsen, M., his care of the Meilgaard                         * Pulheta,” or throwing-stick, 555.
              shell-mound, 227.                              Pallas refers to reindeer in Eastern
   s     » Collections, 247,                                    Europe, 801.
“‘Ooloo” of Esquimaux, 99.                                   Paraguay Indians, account of, 530.
       »  Danish counterpart of, 98.                         Parchim, hut-urn found near, 51.
Orduance Map referred to, 120.                               Parkyns on Abyssinian notions, 425.
Orkney, stone circles in, 114,                               Parricide of Hottentots, 434.
      je                DErchs— In, 5d.                           »     of Feegeeans, 457.
Ormond, Mr., on stone circles in Aus-                             »     in Tahiti, 488.
  tralia, 114.                                               Parry, Capt., on Esquimaux dwellings,
Ornaniental devices on bronze, 41.
Ornameutation                    of bronze produced in          »     on Esquimaux habits, 494, 498.
                                 the custing, -10, 44.         » on Hsquimaux dress, 507.
                   rs           later by hammering,    41.      » On Esquimauxsuperstitions, 512.
Ornaments of ancient Americans, 258.                           5, On Hsquimaux character, 514.
     Af   of bronze, 33.                                     Passage graves. See Ganggraben.
              a          of Esquimaux, 508.                  Patagonians, notices of, 531.
              _          of savages, 446, 463, 4/75,         Paterculus, Vell., on founders of Gades,
                            516, 53-1.                          68.
Osborn, Capt., on Esquimaux lamps,                           Patroclus, his tomb, 116, 118.
  499.                                                       Pauilhaic, large flint flakes found at, 86.
Ossturies of American Indians, 267.                          Pausanias cited, 116.
Otahcite, mound in, 16-4,                                    Pease found in Lake-dwellings, 212.
Otter, 207.                                                  Peat-bogs, antiquities in, 224.
Oval tool-stones, 102.                                       Peat of Somme valley, 378.
Owen, Prof., finds the Zagomys among                         Peck,    Captain,   relics   found   by him
               bones from Kent’s Ca-                           near Ontonagon river, 284.
               vern, 307.                                    Pengelly, Mr., his researches, 230, 291,
              ‘i          on fossil horse, 200, 300.            316, 317.
              3           rhinoceros from Clacton,           Penn’s Treaty with Indians, 279.
                             PAShe                           Penpits, 53, 78.
              5           skull from Bruniquel, 340.         Pentatetich, its mention of bronze and
              PA           Trish elk, 299.                      iron, 5.
              3            on Andamaners, 436, 550.          Percy, Dr., letter to the author, 607.
Owl, snowy, 307.                                             Perils of wild animals and men, 695.
Ox used for different purposes, 558.                         Periods of American history, 285.
Oxen of the Lake-dwellings, 204.                             Perv, stone circles in, 114.
  »               Chillingham       and   Lyme      Park,    Petavius, 386.
                    204.                                     Petrie, Mr., on early references to
Oysters in Denmark, 231, 232.                                   Orkney circles, 114.
                                                             Pewankee animal-mounds, 276.
                                                             Pfahlbauten or Lake-villages, 14, ete.
                                   Iu                        Phillips, Prof., 316.
                                                             Pheenician art imperfectly represented
Paalstab or Paulstave, 29.                                                  in our museums, 72.
Pacific Islanders, religion of, 577.                                      colonies and commerce, 68.
Prvonians, their lake-dwellings, 174.                                     sources of copper and tin,
Pain, relief of, 587.
Palvolithie               or     Archmolithic     Age, 2,                 commerce and Bronze Age,
                            75, 414.                                         60.
          ”              Age,      its interments     un-                 trade with Britain and
                            known, 151.                                      Spain, 70.
6382                                       INDEX.

Pheenician       supposed   knowledge      of   Pottery of Feegeeans, 454.
                   America, 71, 278.                 ie          of the “Stone Age, 192.
        55       supposed knowledge        of        »            Yrudimental, 585.
                   Norway, 71                        on          hut-urns of, 51, 52.
Physical geography and ethnology,                    5           from Wauwy), 189.
   387.                                              »,        - substitute for, among Esqui-
Picts’ houses described, 58, 78, 135.                              maux, 494.
Picture-writing, 279.                                be         unknown to cave-men, 333,
Pigorini, Prof., 51.                                                          835, 550.
     »     on early Jtalian remains,                 ”            ”         theVeddahs,43d.
             175.                                    ”            ”         Andamaners,4:37.
Piles for lake-dwellings, 93.                        9             ”?                  Australians, 441.
Pileworks, chronological place of, 208.              »              &         Maories, 462.
Pillows of earthenware, 218.                         ”              o      in Tahiti, 477.
Pine-tree in Denmark, 233, 248.                      »           wnoused by Patagonians, 533.
Pins of bronze, 34-37, 229.                                             »         Fuegians, 542.
Pipes in American tumuli, 270.                  Pouchet, M., 345.
Piquigny, find at, 19; alleged example          Pourtales, Count, finds human bones in
   of bronze Roman sword found there,               calcareous conglomerate, 287.
   19.                                          Prado, M. de, discovery near Madrid,
Plants of Lake-men, 212,                          362.
Plato, 63.                                      Précy, discovery at, 345.
Pliny, on foundation of Utica, 68.              Precession of Equinoxes, 405.
   »   on bison, 305.                           Pre-historic races of men, 170.
   >»  mentions sacred lakes, 217.                    op     relics, 109, and passim.
 Pliocene period, man supposed to have                 a     times, Palgrave on, 1.
   lived in, 421.                               Pressigny le Grand, flint implements
 Polecat, 320.                                    made there, 83.
 Polybius on voyage of Pytheas, 63.             Prestwich, Mr., researches of, 230, 317,
 Polygainy of Australians, 449.                                             Soomoole
 Polynesian infanticide, 466.                                      visits Abbeville, 3.13.
 Pompei, no bronze    swords or celts                              on    geoloey    of Somme
   found at, 20.                                                      Valley, 363.
Pond-barrows, 135, note.                                  o        on action of ice, 371.
Pont de Thitle, find at, 14, 178, 393.                    5        table of mammualia                from
Pontlevoy, find at, 421.                                                    Bedford,       Abbeville,
Ponzi, and remains of reindeer from                                         Amiens, and Paris, 377.
   Campagna, 302.                                         Pr       on         relation      of   loéss     to
 Poole, Mr., quoted, 588.                                            gravel, 380.
Population of hunting countries, 358.                     "        on hippopotamus, 310.
     -p   increases with the ciyili-                      S        on         flint implement            seen
                 zation of peoples, 594.                                in situ, 353.
        3   scanty in primitive times,                    -        English river-heds, 369.
                     357;                                          on composition of marl, 375.
     ”»        9   barbarous countries,         Prichard, Dr., on common chronology
                     359.                         385.
Portraits, odd notions about, 528, 581,         Primitive condition of man, 589.
Pottery from shell-mounds, 229, 230,            Problems to be solved, 352.
                239, 240.                       Progress of happiness of men, 593.
   es        from Méen, 159, 160, 161.          Property, descent of, 561.
   3         from West Kennet, 162, 163.        Pyramidal           structures           in Wisconsin,
   .         sepulchral, 165.                       265, 281.
   5         in ancient times, 257.             Pyranids of Egypt, 111.
   +         general occurrence of, 257.        Pytheas, voyage of, 350 B.c., 63.
   ~         characteristics of, 257.                »    eriticism of Sir G. C. Lewis
   ny)       of Bronze Age, 198, 217.                       upon, 63.
   vr        of Americans, 257, 258.
   .         of different ages, 16,
                                                            INDEX.                                                 633
                                Q.                               Rhinoceros, fossil, 289, 296, 317, 320,
                                                                               377.
Quarterly Review, 120.                                           Ribe, tumuli near, 46.
Quaternary mammalia, 289.                                        Richardson, on peculiar form of ice, 66.
             OS            period, geological changes                         a»           on Dogrib Indians, 570.
                in, 416.                                                        i           cheek studs, 508.
Quatrefages, M. de, on descent of oxen,                          Richborough, coins found at, 17.
                                205.                             Riddle, Dr., his experiments, 397.
             ae             referred to, 345.                    Rigollot, M., his researches, 343.
                                                                 Rivers, action of, on land, 364, etc.
                                                                 River-courses changing, 381.
                                 R.                                »   rift gravel-beds, 342, etc.
                                                                   »   levels, alteration of, 365, etc.
Races of men, 587.                                               Robenhausen, tissue found at, 46.
Rae, Dr., on Esquimaux, 496, 513.                                      =       Animal remains,197-199.
     »,   Yeferred to, 360.                                      Robinson, Mr., 451.
Ramorino, Prof., on marked bones, 421.                           Rochebrune, M., on cromlech at Con-
Ramsauer,              cemetery discovered by, 22.                   folens, 127.
 Ramsay, Prof., referred to, 317, 343,                           Rock carvings, 167.
  352.                                                                                          in Australia.
                                                                     »               »          in England, Scotland,
                                                                     ”               >
Ransom, Dr., finds lynx in Derbyshire,
  294.                                                                                            Ireland,  Brittany,
Rat not found in Lake-dwellings, 199.                                                             167-169.
Razor knives of bronze, 33, 35, 48.                                       o     in Scandinavia, 169.
Reaping, peculiar mode of, 71.                                   Roe, 317, 321.
Red deer, 208, 305.                                              Roedeer, 208.
Regnard,              a notion among the Lapps,                  Rogers, Prof., 343.
  568.                                                                   »          W.,       on Californian    Indians’
Regnoli, M., 291, 302, 340.                                                               skill, 545.
Reigate, fluid finds at, 107.                                    Rollrich stones, 113.
Reindeer, 289, 301-305, 321, 377.                                Roman and other coins at Tiefenau,
     3     not found with Neolithic                                                      221.
              remains, 206.                                              »          inscriptions, 11.
Relics in American tumuli, 268,                                          %)         swords, 18.
   »”             in bone-caves, 312, 341.                       Ross, Sir J., on Esquimaux funeral
   »,             from sacrificial mounds, 270-272.                                  custom, 512.
Religion, absence of, among Paraguay-                                »          on musk-sheep hunt, 502.
                     aus, 531.                                       »           onsledge, 505.
                   anong Putagonians, 536.                                      on ignorance of boats, 506.
        ”             7         Fuegians, 541.                           on winter stores, 495.
        a3            Ss        Greenland Esquimaux,                 »   on religious ideas, 579.
                             611.                                  bP)
                                                                         on opinions and character, 492,
        ~            rey   Northern Indians, 519.                          512, 514.
        »          and science, 593, 600.                        Rougemont on date of round towers,
                   nations without, 575.                                              50.
                   none mnong the Andamaners,                          7           sources of tin, 608.
                                              437.               Royal Ivish Academy,                    stone imple-
        2                  2?        PED   Australians,            ments at, 76.
                                              447.               Runes, note on the invention, and the
        »          Of Feegeeans, 453, 457, 459.                      characters employed, 604.
        »          of Hottentots, 433.       ‘                   Runic inscriptions, 8; note, 11.
        »,         Of Lalemen, 217.                                 »     aphabet, 604.
        »          ot Maories; 466.                              Rutherford on feat of New Zealanders,
        »          Of Tahiti, 484.                                 545.
        »          lowest forms of, 581.                         Riitimeyer, his researches, 169, 178.
Religious ideas among savages,                       575.              3)
                                                                              on fauna of Lake-dwell-
Responsibility of savages, 566.                                                   ings, 194, 195-197, 199-
Rhinoceros at Abbeville, 361.                                                     205, 210, 358.
634                                                      INDEX.

Riitimeyer on connecting links be-                            Saws of bronze, 37.
                           tween        certain species,      Saxon weapons of iron, 21.
                           309.                               Scandinavian tumuli, 131.
          6           on human            remains     from                 opinions, 134.
                           Lake-dwellings, 215.               Schlegel on Chinese prejudice against
                      on    horse        and    reindeer          hare, 198.
                         bones from Dordogne                  Schmerling, Dr., finds hnman relics in
                         caves, 326.                                                 caves at Liege, 313.
          hs          summary of bones from                              $s       on Engis skull, 337.
                                                                                                                3)
                         Veyrier cave, 326.                                3      “ Ossements        fossiles
          ne          on the bison, 306.                                             quoted, 64.
          P           on Sus palustris, 200.                  Schoolcraft on American funerals, 129,
          ms          on fossil oxen, 204,                                                         130.
          A           bones       of wild      and    tame          3                   x5      Indians, 515,
                           animals, 200,                                                           519, 525.
                                                                       i         on Dighton Rock, 278.
                              S.                                       i on Sandstone relic, 278.
                                                                       Bistatistical calculations, 593.
Saadvedra, on ignorance of fire among                                  2 history of Indian tribes,
   inhabitants of “ Los Jardines,” 559.                                     250, 252, 254, 424.
Sacred enclosures of America, 262.                            Schulz, Don G., on sources of tin, 608.
Sacrifices at funerals, 170.                                  Schiitz, M., on Sus palustris, 261.
Sacrificial mounds deseribed, 269.                            Schwab, Col., his collection from
      29       2?    fheory concerning,                                           Nidan, 18.
                                       271.                        ”            finds pottery at Nidau, 218.
Sagas, tumulus mentioned in, 117.                                 op      on lake-villages burned, 220,
Sahara, 387, 404.                                                 ss      his collections, 215, 216
Salmon          abundant              in Boothia     Felix,   Science and virtue, 600.
  505.                                                        Scientific inventions, their utility, 599.
Salutations, diversity of, 563.                               Scioto river embaukment, 281.
Samoans, 453, 577                                             Scotland, shell-mounds in, 229.
Sanchee, monument at, 126.                                          dp         Lake-dwellings in, 174.
Sandstone in river-gravel, 370.                                                reindeer in, 303.
Sandwich Islanders, 483, note; 489.                           Scrapers, what, and where found, 95,
Sanford, Mr., 293,                                                           328.
Sarcens, 122.                                                      on    of modern Hsquimaux, 96,
Sardinian “‘ Nurhags,” 56.                                                  507.
Sargasso, Mare di, 61.                                        Sculptured stones, 167-169.
Sauley,        M. de, on Moabite                     monu-    Seylax, 63.
  ments,         125.                                         Sea-level in Denmark,2
Savage nations, comparative table of                               »    Change of, 382, ie
          implements, weapons, etc.,                          Secondary interments, 140, 164.
                 553.             :                           Seeds of Lake-:nen, 212.
      »        tribes, comparisons              between,      Selserstown mound, 281.
                              548.                            Semilunar implements, 98.
      »          Bs         their         exclusiveness       Semitic ornamentation, 72.
                              554.                            Seneca on ancient oxen, 305.
Savages and children compared, 570,                           Sepulchral mounds in America, 267.
   =           of modern times, 424.                                A.          pottery classified, 165. .
      »        knowledge of, important                  to          acs         urns of British tumuli, 165.
                  archeologists, 428.                               %           incense eupsof      ,,   166.
      »        not degenerate, 428, 585.                            “           food vases of       oy   Lowe
   >           their perils, 594.                                   5           drinking-cups of ,,      167.
   »           their self-inflicted sufferings,                                 feasts, 170, yals
                  596.                                        Sewing, savage skillj in, 648.
      »        their skill, 544,                              Shelley, Mr., his flint-finds near Rei-
      -        a        weapons, remarks upon,                    gate, 107.
                       2.                                     Shell-fish, 206, 308.
                                               INDEX.                                                    635
Shell-mound axes, 96.                               Society of Antiquaries, flintimplements
Shell-mounds in Australia, 488.                                possessed by, 315.
      Fe     in New Zealand, 462.                   Solar radiation, variation of, 399.
      a      of Denmark, 223-229.                   Soldering unknown in Bronze andearly
          as          of other countries, 229,        Tron Age, 41,
                           230.                     Solomon, 68.
                      how related to tumuli,        Somme                    river-bed    gradually formed,
                         2d.                             373, ete.
          °F          their antiquity, 229-230,     Somme valley alluvium,                      age of, 175,
                 218.                                                                  383.
Shetland isles,    burghs” in, 55.                           0               »      section of, 363.
Ship or boat found in Slesvick, 8.                                           »      visited, 343.
              its contents, 9.                      Sottais, 64, note.
Shirley quoted, 177.                                South Sea tumuli, 114.
Shortland quoted, 563.                              Spain, tin from, 69, 70.
Shortt, Dr., 578.                                      »   rock carvings in, 168.
Shrub Hill gravel, remains in, 350.                 Sparrman, M., 433.
Siberia, wxe used in, 26, 27.                       Spear- heads of flint, 100.
Siberian Yurts, 181.                                Spears, bronze, 31.
Sickles, bronze, 32.                                Species, succession of, in Hurope, 290.
Silbury Lill, 112, 118.                                      3,          transitions of, 308.
Silver abundant in Denmark, 11.                     Speke on East African custom, 56-1.
   y»  anongancient Americans, 253.                     sy              ON       opinions of African   tribes,
  »        not found in Bronze Age, 3, 20,                                   425.
              37.                                   Spencer, Herbert, on progress, 602.
  »     used in Tron Age, 16.                       Spiennes, flint works at, 82, 107.
        when. first noticwed, 3.                    Spindle whorl, 190.
Siinilaritie sand differences of weapons            Spix and Martius,                     reference to, 564,
  and other objects, 556.                             570, 573.
Shnupson,          Sir G., statistical   calcula-   Squier and Davis, on varied contents
  tions, 59-1.                                                   of Mississippi tumuli, 79.
Simpson, Sir J. Y., on rock carvings,                    »     on Mississippi valley monu-
             119, 167.                                                          ments, 250, 283.
     »     stone circles in Australia,                            ”           on early American art, 253,
                    LLL.                                                        258.
Simpson’s Discoveries quoted, 499.                                            Indian population, 281.
Sin, why committed, 600.                                          an          on Bourneville Enclosure,
Skin-scrapers, 95, 97, 191, 507.                                                259.
Skins of animals uscd for dress in                                an          on Fort Hill, 260.
   Bronze Age, 1d.                                                            opinion on earthworks, 261.
Skulls from Scandinavia, 136, 2:L0.                               rf          on animal-mounds, 274.
   6a     »    English tumuli, 136.                               Fy)         on sacrificial mounds, 268.
   »   Classified, 137.                                           *           on temple-mounds, 272.
   yy  various, 138, 337.                                         ")          on Scioto valley works, 270.
   »   moulded in ancient and modern                          ee           on Aztalan, 264.
            thnes, 517.                                       »,        Mr., on bone-pits, 268.
       from Switzerland,2                                                  on stonecireles in Peru, 114.
Skyrings on Tfuegian skill, 31a.                                           references to, 188, 250, 255,
Sledges of Bsquimaus, 505.                                        264.
Slesvick, finds in, of Iron Age, 8.                 Staffordshire tumuli, 155.
Slingstones, 189, 190, 477.                         Stag, 321, 377.
      on     of flint, LOO.                         Stanbridge, illustration of Australian
Smith, Dr., of Camborne, on the Cas-                    skill, 545.
        siterides, 67 ; ou tin mines, 70.           Stanley, Dr., on stone circle near Tyre,
   »           Rev. A. C., reference to, 121,                    113;
                 note.                                  fa    Hon. W. 0O., 53.
      »        J. A. on reindeer, 303, 304.         Stanton Drew, remains at, 82, 107.
Socicty Islands, 482,                               St. Acheul, 343, 364.
636                                                INDEX.

Staigue Fort, Kerry, 56, 606.                           Stoae Implements                      at Flensborg, Keil,
Statistics of archeological evidence, 15.                                                      and    Museum         of
       ”
                   interments, 142-149, 154-                                                   Royal Ivish Aca-
                     156.                                                                    demy, 76.
                   bronze objects, 43.                      )                      ”
                                                                                           in Stockholm, 76.
      AS    stone implements, 357.                          a                      .,      in Copenhagen mu-
Steel unknown to bronze workers, 40.                                                         seum classified, 75.
   ;, known to Greeks, 5.                                   Fi                     sp      similar     in different
Steele on kissing, 563.                                                                        countries, 59.
Steenstrup, Prof., his researches, 169,                     »,             used for implements very geuc-
                     225, 226, 389.                                          rally, 75.
       Ee)
                   Discoveries at Froélund,                 »,             where found, 105.
                     106.                                   »              Work of savages, 549.
       D           on bone     fragments         from   Stonehenge, 113, 119, 121-124.
                       shell-mounds, 232.                                  =       tumuli near, 123, 155.
       ss          his opinions on small flint          Strabo on ancient supply of tin, 70.
                      axes, 97.                             »                  on voyage of Pytheas, 63.
       ‘i          on slingstones, 101.                     s,                 on foundation of Utica, 68.
       of          on peculiar        fracture     of       »,                 on Lake near Toulouse, 217.
                       skulls, 421.                         »                  on Iberian custom, 562.
       »           opinions, 224.                       Strobel, M., on early Italian remains,
       os          on shell-mounds, 244.                   175.
Steinbergs, 181.                                        Stuart, Mr., monuments described                         by
Stennis, stone circle at, 118,122.                                     him, 112, 168.
St. John, Lieut., 487.                                                BS               on Australian knowledge
Stockholm, stone implements at, 76.                                    of fire, 445.
Stephens, Prof., on Runic alphabets,                    Studs or buttons of bronze, 37.
   604.                                                 Stukeley on Silbury Hill and Abury,
Stiles, Rev. Dr., on Dighton Rock, 278.                     UNG) PAL,
Stoliczka, Dr., observation of, 230.                    Suflerings, voluntary, 596.
Stone Age civilization considered, 550.                 “ Sumpitan,” or blow-pipe, 55 t.
        ms        finds belonging to, in Sles-          Superstition of savages, 581, 595.
                     vick, 8.                           Surgery, wonderful, in Tahiti, 482.
       as         sources of our knowledge              Suter, on the Lake-village of Wau-
                     of it, 78.                            wyl, 186.
       on         its divisions, 243.                   Suttee in ancient Britain, 171.
       Sa         its recent continuance           in   Switzerland, antiquities in, 7.
                    some places, 3.                                       .
                                                                     chronology of, 389.
       5          what, 2, '25.                                           nA
                                                                     lake-habitations, 12, 33,
       3          has been denied, 76.                                  178, 178.
       Ss         doubts of Mr. Wright, 77.             Swords, bronze, 29-381, 49, 50.
       %          tumuli of, 118, 137.
Stone and bronze in use at same                  time
                both in Burope and in Ame-                                                   ans
                 Ns WU
  »          axes with holes for handles,               Tables                 of interments,        142-149,   154-
                   95.                                                           156.
  4,         axes, how re-sharpened, 94.                         »             Of animal remains,          197-199,
  »          circles, their size, 118.                                           210, 377.                       ‘
  ?             ”?    in India, 114.                             »             of vegetable remains, 213.
  3             »     in Algeria, 127.                     »   Of statistics, 15,23, 43.
  »          coffin, 94.                                   »   illustrative of savage life, 553.
  »,        hammers, American, 256.                         »  of earth’s excentricity, 411.
  »,        luoplements of America      and             Tacitus on Caledonian swords          of
                        thoseof other coun-                                        iron, 7.
                             tries, 252.                             y»          refers to saered lakes, 217.
  ”                ”       80,000     in   Danish                    “a          allusion to, 300.
                             museums, 76.               Tahiti, notices of, 128, 469, ete.
                                                   INDEX.                                            637
Tahiti, tumulus in, 16-4.                               Tin button, 49.
Tankerville Park wild cattle , 206.                       sy sources of,45, 61, 69.
Tardy, M., discovery by, 42x.                               »        quantity produced in Spain li-
Tasmanians, notices of, 450, 574.                                mited, 70,
Tasman’s visit to New Zealand, 424.                         3 nails, 49.
Tate on rock carvings, 167.                                 » Chiefly from Cornwall, 69.
Tattooing a title to heaven, 565.                           »» its early use, 4.
          oa       in Australia, 446.                       » in Hallstadt bronze, 24.
          =F       in Feegee, 456.                          », bar of, found at Estavayer, 45.
          re       in New Zealand, 463.                   », implements not found in Hurope,
     a      in Tahiti, 475.                                    57.
Taylor, Meadows, on Indian dolmens,                     Tinder from Lake-villages, 192.
          129.                                          Tinieére, coin of, 390.
   »   referred to, 126, note.                          Tinné language has no word for be-
   »    K.C., describes animal-mounds,                          loved, 521.
                  274.                                  Tobacco pipes of ancient Americans,
      »         Rev. R., his adze        from New           258.
                  Zealand, 98.                          Tomahawk, one use of, 93.
      >         9, describes   animal-mounds,                               as a weapon, 95.
                  274,                                  Tonga Islanders, 489.
      »         on Maori      opinions    of Deity,     Tools of Tabitians, 470.
                  466.                                  Tool-stones, 102.
   »            on New       Zealand   funeral   cus-   Torfeeus, his mention of Moussa, 55.
                  tom, 134, 465.                            3»    quoted, 304.
      »         on Aztalan, 26-4.                       Torquemada quoted, 89.
Temple mounds in America, 272.                          Torres Straits, dead houses, 134.
Temples of Feegeeans, 453.                              Tournal and Christol, MM., their dis-
Tennant’s, Sir J. E., “Ceylon,” 64,                         covery of human relics among those
  435.                                                    of extinct animals, 313.
Ten thousand, mound of the, 130.                        Trade winds, 402.
Teocallis of Mexico, 273.                               Tradition 1mperfect, 424.
Tertre on Carib skill, 545.                                          f    important, 427.
Thebes, bronze knife from, 33.                          Transition period from bronze to iron,
Thetford, ancient remains at, 174.                          22.
Thidle, valley of, 14.                                  Travel, its pleasures, 598.
Thomas, Capt., on Beehive houses, re-                   Treenhoi, 46.
  ferred to, 54.                                        Tristram, Dr., on the Sahara, 404,
Thomsen, his services in archeological                  Trojan war, when it occurred, 5.
  science, 6, 224, 226.                                 Troyon, on Bronze Age, 176.
Thorshjerg, find at, 9.                                     »   census of Lake-villages, 180.
Throwing-stick, 442.                                        »   on ancient pottery, 192, 218.
Thule, 65.                                                  »   On population of Pfahlbauten,
Thunberg on Hottentots, 431, 433.                                          357.
Thunderbolt, 427.                                                3
                                                                 ‘Habitations lacustres,” 178.
Thurnam on Megalithic circles, 113.                             observations, 179, 184, 217,
          »        on types of skull, 136.                         218, 220.
          oF       on     est Kennet tumulus,           Truth and fiction combined, 60.
                      161.                              Tschutski, winter dwellings of, 132.
Thyra, tumulus of, 116.                                 Tumuli, abundance of, in Britain, 110.
Tides of Danish coast, 230, 231.                            »     in Algeria, 127.
Tiefenau, coins found at, 7.                                             jn America, 79, 111, 267.
    -     relies from, 7, 221.                                   »       in Brittany, 163.
Tierra del Fuego, customs in, 241.                                       of Denmark, 46, 110, 223.
Tilhuggersteens, 102.                                                    in United States, 268.
Time, its influence on physical features                                 in the Orkneys, 110.
                  of man, 588.                                           in India, 111, 125.
  »,           slow among savages, 567.                                  in other countries, 111, 116,
  »            and geology, 418.                                            168, 528.
638                                             INDEX.

Tumuli, mostly pre-historic, 116.                    Varieties of men, of very                   ancient
    9   of various periods, 151.                        ovigin, 587.
               of uncertain dates, 152.              Veddahs, notices of, 64, 435.
               should be preserved, 172.             Vega, G. de la, quoted, 273.
               how related to shell-mounds,          Vegetable remains in drift, 366.
                  244.                               Vegetables of Lake-men, 212.
               of the Stone Age, 118.                Verneuil, De, opinion of Mammoth,
               near Stonehenge, 123.                                   295.
        7
               chambered, 181.                                     Pr           reference to, 345.
        »      long, 136.                            Verstegan, referred to, 363.
   See also Barrow, Mound,                           Vibraye, Marquis de, 340.
Turner’s Polynesia, 588.                             Vimose, discoveries at the, 11.
Twine found, 213.                                    Virchow referred to, 112, 138.
Tydeus, mound of, 116.                               Virgil cited, 116, 217.
Tylor, Mr., his “ Anahuac,” 89.                      Virginia, temple in, 114.
   >»         ou recent formations, 382.             Virtue, various notions of, 564.
   >»         on supposed degeneracy of sa-          Visconti, Signor, work by him referred
                 vages, 585.                             to, 51.
   »          on Tahitian boiling-stones, 479,       Vitrified walls, 265.
   >,         references to, 559.                    Vivian, Mr., 315, 316.
Tyndall, Prof., visits Silbury Hill, 120.            Vocabularies of savages, 571.
        >       on formation of glaciers, 399.       Vogt, on cave-bear, 292.
Tyrian mechanical                arts in time   of     »   referred to, 139, 218.
   Solomon, 68.                                      Von Sacken’s “* Leitfaden” referred to,
                                                          164, note.
                            Uz                                                    W.
 Uhimann, M., 178, 392.
                                                     Wace quoted, 122.
 Uig, remains at, 54.                                Wallace on Brazilian skill, 545, 548.
 Ulloa, on Brazilian ideas of chastity,                 ss    remark of, 577.
    569.                                                a     varicties of the human races,
Umiak and Kajak, 506.                                                      590.
United States archeology, 250.                            3             Fuegians, 537.
Unity of human race, 586, 587.
                                                          a             on Tahitian ideas of cookery,
Urn-burial in America, 268.                                               477.
Ursus spelaus, or cave-bear, 289.
                                                     Wallis quoted, 481.
Urus or Bos primigenius, 209, 289,                   Wampum, 279.
          306, 377.
                                                     Wangen, finds at, 138-15, 92, 192.
   »    how far extinct, 206.
                                                         x    Lake-dwellings at, 1'79, 186,
Urville, Dumont @’, on city of Ton-
                                                                 189.
                  dano, 176.
                                                               e
                                                              animal remains from, 197-
       Fy      dress in New        South Wales,
                                                                199.
                  446.
                                                     Wansdyke, pre-historic, 113.
        »  mousic of Maories, 465.
                                                     Waukesha animal-mounds, 275.
        »,on Mausoleum in the Friendly
                                                     Warren, Mr., finds flint hatchet                near
              Islands, 483, note.                      Icklingham, 3.17.
Usher, Dr., 287.
                                                     Water held sacred, 217.
Usher’s chronology inadequate, 385.                  Wauwyl, find at, I, 190.                        :
Utica, when built, 68.
                                                           A            Lake-dwellings at, 182, 186.
                                                     Wayland Smith, his myth, 6
                         Vv.                               5S           similar inyth in Ceylon, 6-1.
                                                           3)              >           >    Lipari, Gt.
Vaillant, M. le, referred to, 198, note.                   "1               3          »    Belgiuin,
Vallency, Colonel, on Dighton Rock,                                                           64, note.
   278.                                              Wealden formation, 418.
Vancouver’s Voyage quoted, 508.                      Weapous of savages, 481, 412,                   452,
         aA        Island, 516.                          464, 477, 500, 522, 53.b, 537.
                                                 INDEX,                                             639
Weasel, 207.                                            Wilson, quoted, 114.
Weaving iu the Stone Age, 190.                             », veterred to, 95, note; 255, 261 >
Weems, 53, 78.                                                    489, 517.
West Kennet tumulus, 161.                               Wiltshire tumuli, 123, 155, 161.
Westmoreland               tumuli,   contents     of,   Wisconsin, ancient remains in, 251.
  149.                                                  Witcheraft among savages, 581.
Wheat       found in Lake-villages,             211,    Wokey Hole, 323.
  231.                                                  Wolf, 207, 320, 326.
Whetstone from West Kennet, 163.                        Wolverine, or glutton, 305.
          ss    Switzerland, 189,190.                   Women, lot of, in Australia, 449,
Whitaker, Mr., finds implements, 348.                             aS        -      Feegee, 455.
Whitburn, My., his finds near Guild-                              »     Maori, 466.
  ford, 3.16.                                                     5     North American, 519.
White men worshipped, 567.                                        »,    Tahitian, 487.
Whittesley, Col., 255.                                      »   treatment of, 569.
Whittlesey, on Mound-builders, 261.                     Wood, Colonel, his discoveries of rein-
Wibel on Bronze Age, 57.                                   deer horns, 302.
Wiberg, theory of, 60.                                  Wooden relics in North America, 256.
Wigs of Feegecans, 456.                                 pee              garments found in Jutland,
Wilde, Sir W. R., opinions of, 28.                         46.
   »        on rarity of copper in Bronze               Worsaae,          Prof., his division     of the
              Age, 58.                                                       Stone Age, 243.
   9        his classification of flint arrow-                   a       various opinions and re-
              heads, 102.                                                   marks on shell-mounds,
   »        on stone celts of Dublin Mu-                                    225, 244-247.
              scum, 78.                                           »       ongraves of different periods,
   »        on “Craimoges,” 176.                                            151, 152.
Wilkes, Capt., on Australian funeral,                             »
                                                                 on Jutland tumuli, 45.
               418.                                               »,
                                                                 on efficiency of ancient wea-
   »    quoted, 456, 458, 559.                                      pons, 547,
Wilkinson, Sir G., 33.                                  Worship, tribes without, 575.      See
Williams, on Foegeean towns, 452.                          Religion.
                               agricultural     im-     Wretchedness of savages, 583.
       S              y         “plements, 455.         Wright, Mr., on similarity of bronze
       op             aS       customs, 171,453,                   weapons in different coun-
                                 460.                                      tries, 59.
Wilson, Dr., on carly allusions to the                       ,,         his opinions considered, 17.
          CaledonianWall and Abury,                          ry         his doubts of the Stone Age,
          123.                                                             76.
            on bones from earthworks, 283.                   »          essays on archeology, ete.,
            skill of Polynesians, 515.                                     16, 18, 64, 122.
            on enrly American Metallurgy,                               Homer quoted, 118.
              256.                                      Writing, art of, in ancient America,
            European decorative art, 257.                   279,
            on sandstone relic, 278.                      Wyatt on flint implements near Bed-
            plan of Scioto           valley earth-                        ford, 348.
       works, 262.                                          ,,         referred to, 343, 358.
   OD.      American                 — sepulchral       Wyeth, Mr., on            Indian   implements,
       mounds, 268.                                                       522.
            remains of man, 283.                            ,,         their lack of provisions, 528.
            on sacrificial mounds,              269,    Wylie on lake- dwellings, 217, note.
              272.                                      “ Wummera,” 443,
            on Dighton Rock inscription,
              278,
            on Tahitian costume, 475.                                             2G
            on Kumbecephalic skulls, 186.
            on ancient belief in a future               Xenophon, allusions to, 116, 562.
              state, 139.
640                                          INDEX.

                         %G                          Yule, Colonel, referred to, 125, 127, |
                                                       580.
Yorkshire       tumuli, contents       of, 146-                           Z
  149.                                                                        i
Young,      Dr.,    on    Hieroglyphics,    61, | Zealanders. See New Zealanders.
  note.                                           Zine unknown in Bronze Age, 37.
Yourt, or Yurt, what, 131, 492.                   | Zippe, Prof., 112.




      GILBERT      AND    RIVINGTON,     PRINTERS,     ST.    JOUN’S   SQUALL,    LONDON.
||
 ||| till
        | ill||    Printed in Great Britain
   3607091R00375
                   by Amazon.co.uk, Ltd.,
                       Marston Gate.
oy              SSaca   <     BRST           z


     pi                       Lae    <   3




          ISBN 1-4212-7039-
