                           CHAPTER                  IV.

              THE USE OF STONE IN ANCIENT TIMES.

    HE preceding chapters have been devoted to the Age
     of Bronze. We must now pass on to still earlier times
and ruder races      of men;      to a period which,                       for obvious
reasons, is called by archeologists the Stone Age.
   The Stone Age, however, falls naturally, as has been
already stated, into two great divisions.
   First. That of the Drift, which I have proposed to call the
Paleeolithic or Archzeolithic period.
   Secondly. The later Stone Age, for which I have sug-
gested the term Neolithic, and in which the stone implements
are more    skilfully made, more varied                         in form, and often
polished. We will now consider this later period, reserving
the earlier for a subsequent chapter.
   The immense number of stone implements which occur, in
all parts of the world, is sufficient evidence of the important
part they played in ancient times, M. Herbst has favoured
me with the following list of the numbers contained in the
Copenhagen Museum :—
        Flint axes and wedges.       . . . . . 1070
       LOA     enIsels”.   we     pe           te          Pe         ae   285
       ollowaditiome       tect                an                at        270
       NArrOWwreniceloe)    2     tun          oe   Mart   A          es   O65
       Hollow ditto        ees                      ees                     33
       Ponce                i                          e                   OO)
      Mancesicsdew         eee          eee                a.              606
78     MATERIALS      PREFERRED     FOR   STONE   IMPLEMENTS.

selves,” but also that the antiquary has found clear “evidence
of sucha period.” Part, at least, of this evidence will be
found in the following pages; and though it is true that
much of it has been obtained since our accomplished coun-
tryman published the work from which I have just quoted,
yet he has repeated his previous statements in a lecture
subsequently delivered at Leeds.
   Our knowledge of this ancient perioa 1s derived principally
from four sources, to the consideration of which I propose to
devote four separate chapters: namely, the tumuli, or ancient
burial-mounds; the Lake habitations of Switzerland; the
Kjokkenméddings, or shell-mounds, of Denmark; and the
Bone-caves.     There are, indeed, many other remains of great
interest, such, for example, as the ancient fortifications, the
“castles” and “ camps”? which crown so many of our hill-
tops, and the great lines of embankment, such as Offa’s
dyke and the Wans-dyke, which cross so many of our
uplands; there are the so-called Druidical circles and the
vestiges of ancient habitations; the “ Hut-circles,” “ Clog-
hauns,” “ Weems,” “ Penpits,” “ Picts’ houses,” etc. The
majority of these belong, however, in all probability, to a later
period; and at any rate, in the present state of our know-
ledge, we cannot say which, or how many of them, are
referable to the Stone Age.
   As far as the material is concerned, every kind of stone,
which was hard and tough enough for the purpose, was used
during the Stone Age in the manufacture of implements.
The magnificent collection of celts at Dublin has been specially
studied, from a mineralogical point of view, by the Rev. 8.
Haughton, and the results are thus recorded by Wilde * :—
   “Of the better qualities of rock suited for celt-making,
the type of the felspathic extreme of the series of trap rocks
is the pure felstone, or petrosilex, . . . . ofa pale blueish
              * Catalogue of the Royal Irish Academy, p. 72.
                                       JADE.                                   79

 or grayish green, except where the surface has been acted
upon, and the average composition of which is 25 parts
quartz and 75 felspar. Its physical characters are absence
of toughness, and the existence of a splintery conchoidal
fracture almost as sharp as that of flint....... At the
hornblendic extreme of: the trap rocks we find the basalt, of
which also celts were made; tough and heavy, the siliceous
varieties having a splintery fracture, but never affording so
cutting an edge as the former....... Intermediate in
character between these two rocks, we find all the varieties of
felstone, slate, and porphyry streaked with hornblende, from
which the great majority of the foregoing implements have
been made.”
   It is very remarkable how carefully the best kinds of stone
were selected even when very rare. Of this the most interest-
ing example is afforded by the axes, etc., of Jade.     These,
though far from common, are not very rare, having been
found in many of the Swiss lake-villages, in various parts of
Italy, France, Germany, and England, although Jade itself is
not known to occur in any part of Europe. It was supposed
by some archxologists that it might have been obtained
from the conglomerate known in Switzerland as the “ Nagel-
flue,” but the most careful investigations have not confirmed
this view*. I do not think it would yet be safe to conclude
that these Jade axes were introduced from the East; but no
European locality for Jade has yet been discovered, and it is
perfectly possible that they may have passed from hand to
hand, and from tribe to tribe, by a sort of barter. Other
facts of a similar nature are on record. Thus Messrs. Squier
and Davis tell us that in the tumuli of the Mississippi valley
we find “side by side, in the same mounds, native copper

  * See Damour, Comptes Rendues,          Fischer,   Archiv.   f. Anthropologie,
1865, p. 359.   Fellenberg. Soc. des      1867, p. 337.
Sciences Naturelles de Berne, 1865.
80                            FLINT.

from Lake Superior, mica from the Alleghanies, shells from
the Gulf, and obsidian (perhaps porphyry) from Mexico.”
Good representations of the sea-cow or manatee are found a
thousand miles from the shores inhabited by that animal, and
shells of the large tropical Pyrula perverse are found in the
tumuli round the great lakes, two thousand miles from home.
     On the whole, however, flint appears to have been the
stone most frequently used in Europe, andit has had a much
more important influence on our civilization than is generally
supposed. Savages value it on account of its hardness and
mode of fracture, which is such that, with practice, a good
sound block can be chipped into almost any form that may
be required.
   In many cases blocks and pebbles of flint, picked up on
the surface of the ground, were used in the manufacture of
implements ; but in other cases much labour was spent to
obtain flint of good quality.       A good illustration of this is
afforded by the so-called       Grime’s    Graves, near   Brandon,
one of which has recently, by the kind permission of Mr.
Angerstein, been explored by Mr. Greenwell*. Much dif-
ference of opinion has existed among archeologists as to the
true nature of the graves, but the question has now been set
at rest by Mr. Greenwell, who has shown that they were
excavations made in the chalk for the purpose of obtaining
flint.   They are shallow pits, 254 in number, varying in
diameter from 20 to 60 feet, placed irregularly, generally
about 25 feet apart, and occupying rather more than. 20
acres. Although now comparatively shallow, Mr. Greenwell
has proved that the pits originally went down to a depth of
39 feet, when they branch out into passages, often commu-
nicating with one another. On the east side of the pits isa
mound, apparently consisting of the chalk taken from the
first pit; after which it appears that when a new pit was dug,
                  * Trans, Hthn. Soc, 1870, p. 419.
                 ANCIENT    WORKINGS     FOR FLINT.           81

most of the material was thrown down the old shafts, which
were thus filled in to within a few feet of the surface. As
usual in the Upper Chalk, the flint is disposed in layers,
which differ in quality, while maintaining the same character
over considerable areas. It may be remarked that, as Mr.
Flower has well pointed.out*, Brandon, “though situated in
a bleak and barren district, has evidently been a place of
considerable resort from a very remote period—a circum-
stance which can only be attributed to the abundance and
good quality of the flint found there.” Paleolithic imple-
ments abound in the drift gravels, the surface is strewn with
flint flakes and fragments of flint implements, and at the
present time it is the only place in England where gun-flints
are still made. For this purpose one particular layer of flint is
found to be peculiarly well adapted, on account of its hard-
ness and fineness of grain, while another layer, which is less
suitable for gun-flints, is known as “ wall stone,”’ being much
used for buildmg purposes. Now it is interesting to find
that, even in very early times, the merits of the gun-flint
layer were well known and appreciated; for although there
is abundance   of flint on the surface, the ancient flint-men
sank their shafts down past the layer of “wall stone,” which
occurs at a depth of 194 feet, to the gun-flint layer, which at
the spot in question is 39 feet deep, although about a mile to
the S.W., where it is now worked, it is much nearer the
surface.
   At present the workmen excavate the chalk both above
and below the layer of flint ;but in the old galleries, perhaps
from the greater difficulty of raising the material, the chalk
below the flint bed was in no case removed. The implements
used in making these excavations were deer’s horns, the brow
tine being used as a pick, and the others removed.         Thus
treated, a deer’s horn closely resembles in form a modern
                   * Trans. Ethn. Soc. 1870, p. 437.
                                                       G
82                      GRIMES’ GRAVES         SPIENNES.

pick, but of course it is subject to rapid wear by use, which
accounts for the large numbers of worn-out implements found
by Mr. Greenwell among the rubbish.
   In one case the roof of a passage had given way. On
removing the chalk which had fallen in, the end of the gallery
came in view. The flint had been hollowed out in three places,
and in front of two of these recesses, pointing towards the
half-excavated stone, were two deer-horn picks, lying just
as they had been left, still coated with chalk dust, on which
was in one place plainly visible the print of the workman’s
hand. They had evidently been left at the close of a day’s
work; during the night the gallery had fallen in, and they
had never been recovered.
   “Tt was a most impressive sight,” says Mr. Greenwell,
“and one never to be forgotten, to look, after a lapse, it may
be, of 3000 years, upon.a piece of work unfinished, with the
tools of the workmen still lying where they had been placed
so many centuries ago.”
   Similar deer-horn picks have been found in other localities
where chalk has been worked for flint, and also in the Cornish
Tin Stream Works*. Near Spiennes also, in Belgium, there
are extensive workings for flint, consisting of a system of
shafts and galleries, very like those of Grimes’ Graves, which
have been described by MM. Briart, Cornet, and Houzeau
de Lehaie+, many tools of deer’s horns have been obtained,
but they are of a very different character, having been appa-
rently used as hammers, the horn being cut off just above
the brow tine, which served as a handle.
     In addition      to the       deer-horn    picks, a few adze-shaped
tools of flint have been discovered in Grimes’ Graves, and a
basalt hatchet, in form resembling that represented in fig. 97,
but with an oblique cutting edge, the marks of which were
     * See, for instance,   Rep.   of the      + Mem.   de la Soc.   des Sciences,
Roy. Inst. of Cornwall, 1871, p. xxii.      des Arts, & du Hainaut, 1866-7.
                                PRESSIGNY.                       83

distinctly seen upon the sides of the gallery, showing that it
had been used in excavating the chalk.
   As already mentioned, it was very desirable in the manu-
facture of flint implements, to have the flint of a good
quality, free from cracks and flaws, and easily accessible.
Hence, places which fulfilled these conditions were specially
frequented in ancient times, and whole districts were sup-
plied from these favoured localities. One of the most re-
markable of these manufactories is that discovered by Dr.
Leveillé       at Pressigny-le-Grand,    in France, about half-way
between Tours and Poitiers. Here there is an abundance
of good flint of a honey colour, and even, though coarse,
texture. This flint was largely used in ancient times: the
fields   are    covered   with nuclei, flakes, etc., and implements
made here, and easily recognizable by the peculiar colour,
have been found in various parts of France, and even,
it would seem, in Belgium. I have in my collection a
block of Pressigny flint, from which a flake more than
twelve inches in length has been struck. The large nuclei
of this form, which from their shape are known as “livres
de beurre,” have excited a good deal of discussion. They
are generally from eight to thirteen inches in length, shaped
more or less like a boat, with a broad butt at one end,
tapering gradually to the other.       The form has been at-
tained by a succession of lateral chips, at right angles to the
longer axis, while generally one or more longitudinal flakes
have also been removed.
   At first sight they certainly suggest the idea that they are
early stages in the manufacture of large axes, or some similar
instruments, and from their form it has even been suggested
that they may have been intended to serve as ploughshares.
On the comparison of a large number, however—and I have
had the opportunity of examining many hundreds—it will be
observed that we never meet with specimens in a more
                            a 2
84.                   TOE   FRACTURE   OF FLINT.

advanced state of manufacture, as would certainly have been
the case if this hypothesis were correct. Again, some of them
have an original depression in the flint, very much reducing
the thickness.      This would weaken them so greatly as to
render such specimens useless for implements ; flints of such
a form would certainly, therefore, not have been selected, if
strength had been any object. On the other hand, such
irregularities would have been no disadvantage, if the “ livres
de beurre” were nuclei prepared with some degree of care,
in order to give long and regular flakes. Long flint flakes
were much in demand during the Stone Age for the manu-
facture of spear heads, etc., and these “livres de beurre ”’
appear to have been the blocks or nuclei from which they
were obtained.
  Many of the flakes were certainly never intended to serve
as knives, but were worked up into saws,             awls, or arrow
heads. Many savages use flint or chert, in this manner,
even at the present day; and the Mexicans in the time of
Cortez used precisely similar fragments of obsidian.
   The operations of modern gun-flint makers give us a very
clear insight into the mode of manufacture of the ancient
flint implements, and the process is one of considerable in-
terest.
   If we take a rounded hammer, and strike with it on a flat
surface of flint, a conoidal fracture is produced; the size of
which depends, in a great measure, on the form of the ham-
mer.    ‘The surface of fracture is propagated downwards
through the flint, ina diverging direction, and thus embraces
a cone, whose apex is at the point struck by the hammer,
and which can afterwards be chipped out of the mass. Flint
cones, formed in this way, may sometimes           be found among
heaps of stones broken up to mend the roads, and have doubt-
less often been mistaken for casts of fossil shells.
      If a blow is given, not on a flat surface, but at the angle
                                FLINT FLAKES.                     85
of a more or less square flint, the fracture is at first semi-
conoidal or nearly so, but after expanding for a short distance,
it becomes flat, and may be propagated through a length of
as much as thirteen inches, thus forming a blade-like flake
(figs. 82-89), with a triangular cross section (fig. 90). The
consequence is, that a .      Fic. 82.    Fre. 83.  Fre. 84.
perfect flint flake will
always have a small
bulb, or projection
(fig. 83 2) at the butt
end, on the flat side;
this has been called the
            Pie. Sl.




      Flint core or nnrcleus.           Flint Flakes.—Denmiark.


bulb, or cone, of percussion. After the four original angles
of a square block have been thus flaked off, the eight new
angles may be treated in a similar manner, and so on. Fig.
81, and pl. 1, fig. 6, represent blocks, or cores, from which
86                          FLINT FLAKES.

flakes have been struck off.          <A flake itself is represented in
pl. 1, fig. 7, anda very long one from Fannerup in Jutland
is figured, one-half of the natural size, in figs. 82, 84. The
                                     Fie, 85,




                       Atrow-shaped Flint Flake,—Ireland.

bulb is shown in figs. 83 a and 84, and the flake has been
worked into a point at the end. The largest flake I am
           Fira. 86.     Fig. 8&7,              Fie. §8.        Fie. 89.




                         Flint Flakes,—Denmark.
acquainted with is described by M. de Caneto, in the Revue
de Gascoyne, for 1865.          It was found in the commune                   of
Pauilhaic, and is 184 inches in length.                    Fig. 85 is an arrow-
              DIFFICULTY     OF   MAKING   FLINT     FLAKES.            87

shaped flake chipped away at the base, apparently to adapt
it to a handle or shaft.
   Figs. 86-89 are small Danish flakes: forms exactly simi-
lar may be found in any country where the ancient inhabi-
tants could obtain flint or obsidian. In fig. 86 we see that
another flake had been previously taken from the same block.
Figs. 86, 88, represent flakes of which the points have been
broken off, but we see along their whole length the depres-
sion caused by the previous removal of other flakes. The
section of such a flake is, therefore, not triangular, as in fig.
98 a, but four-sided, as in fig. 90 b.      Sometimes,          though not
often, a wide flake is taken off in such a way as to overlap
two previous flakes, as in the case of the one represented in
fig. 89. In this instance, the section is pentagonal ; the flat
under-surface remaining always the same, but the upper side
showing four facets.
   Easy as it may seem to make such flakes as these, a little
practice will convince any one who attempts to do so, that a
certain knack is required, and a gun-flint maker at Brandon
told me that it took him two years to acquire the art. It is
also necessary to be careful in the selection of the flint. It
is therefore evident that these flint flakes, simple as they may
appear, are always the work of man. ‘To make one, the flint
                  Fre. 90.                    must      be held firmly,
             Pas                              and then a consider-
                                              able      force    must   be
                                        applied, either by pres-
                                    6 sure or by blows, re-
                                        peated three or four
              Seen oF Euakes            times, but at least
three, and given in certain slightly different directions, with
a certain definite force ; these conditions could scarcely
occur by accident, so that, simple as it may seem to the un-
trained eye, a flint flake is to the antiquary as sure a trace
88                       MODERN         FLAKES.

of man, as the footprint in the sand was to Robinson
Crusoe.
  It is hardly necessary to say, that the flakes have a sharp
cutting edge on each side, and might therefore be at once
used as knives, as in fig. 91, which represents a North
American two-bladed knife: they are indeed so named by
                                  Fic. 91,




                           North American Knife,
                                  Fie   92,




                         Australians making flakes.

some archeologists; but it seems to me more convenient
to call them simply flakes, and to confine the name of knife
to implements more especially intended and adapted for
cutting purposes. Fig. 92, from a drawing by Mr. Baines *,
        * See Geol. and Nat. Hist. Repertory, No. 13, May, 1866.
               MANUFACTURE    OF FLAKES      IN MEXICO.                                             89

 represents an Australian       making rude flakes.                                            Fig. 93
 represents an Australian flake, and fig. 94, one from the
 Cape of Good Hope.     Figs. 95, 96, represent a new Cale-
 donian javelin, with an obsidian flake (fig. 96) for a head.
                 Fig. 93.




                                                       Fic. 94.




                                             thesis eeseestsispdtitate AteneAeOUON EHS   AEE

          Australian Flake.          Flake from the Cape of Good Hope.


  Some    of the old Spanish writers in Mexico give us a
description of the manner in which the Aztecs obtained their
obsidian flakes. Torquemada*, who is confirmed by Her-
nandez, tells us—I quote from Mr. Taylor’s Anahuac—“ they
had, and still have, workmen who make knives of a certain
block stone or flint (obsidian), which it is a most wonderful
          * Torquemada, Monarquia Indiana.       Seville, 1616.
90                MANUFACTURE      OF FLAKES   IN MEXICO

                          and admirable thing to see them make ont
                          of the stone; and the ingenuity which in-
                          vented this artis much to bepraised. They
                          are made and got out of the stone (if one
                          can explain it) in this manner : one of these
                          Indian workmen sits down upon the
                          ground, and takes a piece of this black
                          stone, which is like jet, and as hard as flint
                          —and is a stone which might be called
                          precious, more beautiful and brilliant than
                          alabaster or jasper, so much so, that of it
                          are made tablets and mirrors. The piece
                          they take is about eight inches long, or
                          rather more, and as thick as one’s leg, or
                          rather less, and cylindrical;    they have a
                          stick as large as the shaft of a lance, and
                          three. cubits or rather more in length, and
                          at the end of it they fasten firmly another
                          piece of wood, eight inches long, to give
                          more weight to this part; then pressing
                          their naked feet together, they hold the
                          stone as with a pair of pincers, or the vice
                          of a carpenter’s bench.      They take the
                          stick (which is cut off smooth at the end)
                          with both hands, and set it well home
                          against the edge of the front of the stone
                           (y ponenlo avesar   con el canto de la frente
                          de la piedra), which also is cut smooth in
                          that part; and then they press it against
                      |   their breast, and with the force of the pres-
     Nev Caledonian
                  sure there flies off a knife, with its point
                  and edge on one side, as neatly as if one
 were to make them of a turnip with a sharp knife, or of
 iron in the fire. Then they sharpen it on a stone, using a
 hone to give it a very fine edge; and in a very short time
                     AND   AMONG        THE      ESQUIMAUX.                      91

these workmen will make more                      than twenty knives in the
aforesaid manner.    They come out in the same shape as our
barbers’ lancets, except that they have a rib up the middle
and have a slight graceful curve towards the point.”
  Thus it appears that the obsidian flakes were made, not by
blows, but by strong pressure; and the same is the case
with the chert implements of the Hsquimaux, according to
the description given by Sir E. Belcher*. “ Selecting,” he
says, “a log of wood in which a spoon-shaped cavity was cut,
they placed the splinter to be worked over it, and by pressing
gently along the margin vertically, first on one side, then the
other, as one would set a saw, they splintered off alternate
fragments, until the object, thus properly outlined, presented
the spear or arrow-head form, with two cutting serrated
sides.” A very similar account is also given by Lieutenant
Beckwith     of the method              used by the North American
Indians +.
  Next to flint flakes, the axes, wedges, or celts, are, perhaps,
of most importance.  The largest and finest specimens are
found in Denmark; one in my possession, of beautiful white
flint, is 13in. long, 14in. thick, and 3}in. in breadth.                       The
Seeland axes have very often, indeed generally, perpendicular
sides; in Jutland a large proportion have sloping sides ; this
is also generally the case in other parts of North-Western
Europe. In Switzerland, however, the axes, which are much
smaller than those from Denmark, have perpendicular sides
(fig. 164). The common Danish axe or wedge is figured in
pl. 1, fig. 1. Figs. 97 and 98 represent forms which, though
rare in Seeland, are common in other parts of Europe. Those
found in Denmark are sometimes polished, but almost, if not
quite, as often left rough.         On the contrary, in other parts
of North-Western Europe, the axes are usually ground to a
  * Trans. of the Ethnological   Soc.         Surveys of the Pacific Railroad, 1855,
New Series, vol. i. p. 138.                   vol. ii. p. 43.
  + Report of the Explorations   and
92                           STONE     AXES.

more or less smooth surface.               That some were held in the
hand is evident, but that others were fixed inwooden handles
is equally clear, in many specimens, from peculiar polished
spaces, which have been produced by the friction of the
wood.    In almost all cases, the wooden handle has long
perished, but there are one or two instances on record, in
which it has been preserved.                Fig. 99 represents a stone
hatchet, found, some years ago, in the County of Monaghan ;
the handle was of pine, and was 13tin. long.
        en                   Fig. 100 represents another stone
                          axe in its handle; this specimen was
                          found      at Concise,      on      the     Lake         of
                          Neufchatel, and closely resembles the
                          modern African axe (fig. 20). In the
                          latter case, however,        the blade               is of
                          iron. It will be observed that the
                          Swiss specimen differs from the other
                                                                    Fic, 99.

                                           Fre. 98,




                  Stone   Axes —Ireland,                   Stone Celt in handle.


two in haying an intermediate piece of horn. These horn
sockets are very numerous in some of the Swiss lake villages,
as for instance at Concise, while in others, as at Wangen,
though axes are abundant, none have yet been discovered.
                      THE   USE   OF STONE        AXES.              93

   To us, accustomed as we are to the use of metals, it seems
difficult to believe that such things were ever made use of;
we know, however, that many savages of the present day
have no better tools. Yet, with axes such as these, and
generally with the assistance of fire, they will cut down large
trees, and hollow them out into canoes.       The piles used in
the Swiss Stone Age lake habitations were evidently, from the
marks of the cuts on them, prepared with the help of stone axes;
and in the Danish peat bogs, several trees have been found
with the marks of stone axes, and of fire, upon them, and in one
or two cases stone celts have even been found lying at the
side. In the excavations known as Grimes’ Graves again, as
already mentioned (ante, p. 82), a basalt hatchet was found,
which had evidently been used for excavating the gallery, as
the marks were       still distinctly visible on the walls.
                                  Fic. 100.




                              Swiss Stone Axe.

  One use    of the North American               tomahawk was to crush
bones for the sake of the marrow *, and it is most probable
that the ancient stone axes also served the same purpose.
   In many cases the axes themselves bear ample marks of
long continued use. For instance, the specimen represented
in figs. 101, 102 has no doubt once been much longer, and
with surfaces consisting of one continuous sweep, as in pl. 1,
fis. 1. The edge, however, having been destroyed by use,
it was again chipped sharp and repolished, the new surface
      * James’ Expedition to the Rocky Mountains, rol. i. p. 193.
94,           THE        USE   OF ANCIENT       STONE   AXES.

meeting the old one at a A second time the edge has
become destroyed, and the owner, as may be seen in fig. 102,
has commenced the formation of a new one.

             Fie. 101.                                  Fie. 102.




                                           WW

                                 Danish Axe.


   That they were also weapons of war is probable, not only
on & priori grounds, but also because they have frequently
been found in the graves of chiefs, associated with bronze
daggers. About the year 1809, a large cairn in Kircud-
brightshire, popularly supposed to be the tomb of a King
Aldus M‘Galdus, was removed by a farmer.        ‘“ When the
cairn had been removed, the workmen                 came to a stone coffin
 of very rude workmanship, and on removing the lid, they
 found the skeleton of a man of uncommon size.     The bones
 were in such a state of decdmposition, that the ribs and
 vertebree crumbled into dust on attempting to lift them.
 The remaining bones, being more compact, were taken out,
 when it was discovered that one of the arms had been almost
 separated from     the shoulder        by the stroke           of a stone axe,
                               PIERCED     HATOHETS.                              95

 and that a fragment of the axe still remained in the bone.
 The axe had been of greenstone, a material which does not
 occur in this part of Scotland. There were also found with
 this skeleton a ball of flint, about three inches in diameter,
 which was perfectly round and highly polished, and the head
 of an arrow, also flint, but not a particle of any metallic
 substance *.”            ;
   We know also the North American stone axe or tomahawk
 served not merely as an implement, but also as a weapon,
being used both in the hand and also as a missilet.
  Another class of stone hatchets are those which are pierced
for the handle, as in pl. 1, fig. 2.             From the nature of flint,
these were scarcely ever made of that material.     There are,
however, in Copenhagen, two such hatchets, in which advan-
tage has been ingeniously taken of a natural hole in the flint.
In many kinds of hard stone, however, it is quite possible to
drill a hole .by means of a cylinder of bone or horn, with a
little sand and water; yet it is very doubtful whether this
class of implements truly belong to the Stone Age. The
pierced axes are generally found in graves of the Bronze
period, and it is most probable that this mode of attaching
the handle was used very rarely, if at all, until the discovery
of metal had rendered the process far more easy than could
have been the case previously.
   The so-called “scrapers” (figs. 103, 104), are oblong stones,
rounded at one end, which is brought to a bevelled edge by
a series of small blows.             One side is flat, the other, or outer,
one is more or less convex; sometimes they have a short
handle, which gives them very much the appearance of a
spoon. They have been found in England, France, Den-
mark, Ireland, Switzerland, and other countries. They vary

  * New Statist. Acc. Kirkeudbright-       2nd edit. vol. i. p. 187.
shire, vol.   iv. p. 332.   Quoted    by      + Colden’s    History    of the   Five
Wilson,   Pre-his,   Ann, of Scotland,     Nations, vol. i. p. 10.
96                        SCRAPERS.

from one to four inches in length, and from half an inch to
two inches in breadth. A modern HEsquimaux scraper is
represented in figs. 105-107. These modern specimens are
in form identical with the old ones.
          Fie. 103,                           Fre. 104.




                             Scraper.


   To the small, triangular “axes” (figs. 108-110), which are
very characteristic of the Kjékkenméddings, as well as of
the Coastfinds, I have applied the name by which they are
usually known, but without wishing to prejudge the question
as to the purpose. They are flat on one side, and more or
less convex on the other; rudely triangular or quadrangular
in shape, with the cutting edge at the broader end; and from
2tin. to 54in. in length, with a breadth of lhin. to 2hin.
They are never ground, and the cutting edge, though not
sharp, is very strong, as it is formed by a plane, meeting the
                        SHELL-MOUND        AXES.                         97

flat side ata very obtuse angle.        Professor Steenstrup doubts
whether these curious and peculiar implements were                 ever
intended for axes, and regards them as having been, in all
probability, mere      weights for fishing lines, in support of
which view he figures some not, perhaps, very dissimilar stone
objects, used for that purpose by the Esquimaux. The so-
called edge, in his opinion, neither has nor could have been
used for cutting, but is merely the result of that form which
was found by the fishermen to be most convenient.          He
also calls attention to the polished facets on their surfaces,

           Fre. 105,                       Fig. 106,         Fic. 167,
          —_—_                                     Feeder   ceca




                           Esquimaux Scraper.



which he regards as affording strong support to his opinion.
   It must be at once admitted that there are many of these
“axes” which could never have been used for cutting, but
these may be regarded as imperfect, and are certainly not to be
taken as normal specimens. It is true that the two surfaces,
constituting the edge, form a very obtuse angle with one
another, but we must remember that if this detracts from the
sharpness, it adds greatly to the strength.            Moreover, the
angle is almost exactly the same as that which we find in the
adze of the New Zealanders, and other South Sea Islanders.
                                                  B
98                             CHISELS.

Figs. 111-118 represent a recent adze, brought by the Rev.
R. Taylor from New Zealand, and now in the British Museum,
which very closely resembles the typical axes of the Kjékken-
méddings.        The edge, indeed, is polished, but is after all not
smoother than the natural fracture of the flint. The projection
on the underside of the Danish specimen (fig. 110 a.) is acci-
dental, and due to some peculiarity in the flint. This surface
is usually as flat in the Danish specimens as in those from
New Zealand.
           Fie. 108.                      Fria. 109.        Fis. 110.




                                Danish Axe,


     The chisels (pl. 1, fig. 5) resemble the Danish axes, in having
perpendicular sides, but they are narrower, and are almost
always ground to a smooth surface.       Many of them are
slightly hollowed on one side, as in fig. 114.
   The flat, semi-circular, flint instruments represented in pl. 1,
fig. 3 are common in Denmark, but very rarely, if ever, found
in Great Britain, France, or Italy. The convex edge was
evidently fastened into a handle of wood, the marks of which
                        SEMILUNAR    IMPLEMENTS.         AWLS.               99

are still, in many cases, plainly visible. The other edge,
which is either straight or concave, is generally provided with
a number of teeth, giving it more or less resemblance to a
saw.    Insome cases itis so much worn away by use, that the
implement takes the form of a new moon or of a boomerang.
The edge is in many cases quite polished, evidently by con-
tinuous friction against 4 soft substance. I say a soft sub-
stance, because the polished part overlaps on both sides, and

            Fie. ill.                               Fie, 112.    Fre, 113.
                                                                         ~




                               New   Zealand Adze



passes in between the teeth of the saw, which would not have
been otherwise the case. It is probable that the semi-lunar
instruments were fixed in wooden handles, and then used in
cleaning skins. Similarly-shaped instruments are even now
used as knives by the Esquimaux women, under the name of
Ooloos.     It might be convenient to apply this term to the
ancient Danish specimens.
  The     so-called      “awls”      are rude pieces of flint, or flakes
worked up at one place by a number of small chips to a
                                          H 2
100                   SPEARS.     DAGGERS.     SLINGSTONES.

point (fig. 172).               Though not very sharp, they are pretty
strong.
          Fic. 114.
                                    The spear-heads (fig. 115) are very
                                  variable   in size    and   form;   some   of
                                  them are scarcely distinguishable from
                                  large arrow-heads; others are much
                                  larger.    Some      are so rude that it
                                  is questionable       whether   they were
                                  finished, while      others are marvellous
                                  specimens of ancient art.       One in my
                                  possession is 12in. in length, 14 in. in
                                  breadth, and of wonderfully beautiful
                       workmanship.       It is one of six, found
                       together inside a large tumulus in the
                       island of Moen.
                          The daggers (pl. 1, fig. 4, and fig.
                       116) are often marvels of skillin flint-
                       chipping.     Their form so closely re-
                       sembles that of metallic daggers, that
      Hollow Chisel.
                       some antiquaries are inclined to regard
them as copies of bronze daggers, and therefore as not be-
longing to the Stone Age. The localities in which they have
been found do not, however, offer any support to this hy-
pothesis. Another form of flint weapon (fig. 117), which
is common in Denmark, has a handle like that of the last
form, but instead of a blade, it ends in a point, and suggests
the idea, that if the tip of the dagger had been accidentally
broken off, or the blade rendered narrow by wear and tear,
the rest of the weapon might have been worked up into a
poniard, and thus utilized.       In both these classes the
crimping along the edges of the handle is very curious.
   The shngstones are of two kinds. The first are merely
rough pieces of flint (pl. 1, fig. 12), reduced by a few blows
of a hammer to a convenient size and form. But for the
                          SLINGSTONES.                            101

situations in which they are found, these might almost be
regarded as natural fragments. Professor Steenstrup is now
disposed to think that many of them were used as sink-

                         Fie, 116.                  Fre, 117,



   Fic, 115,




                          Dagger.               Dagger (broken at
                                                    the point).



stones for nets, but that some have really served as sling-
stones seems to be indicated by their presence in the Peat-
mosses, which it is difficult to account for in any other way.
102              SLINGSTONES.    ARROWHEADS.

The other kind of slingstones are round, flattish flint disks,
some of which are beautifully made.
   The ovul tool-stones (fig. 118), or “ Tilhuggersteens ”of the
northern antiquaries, are oval or egg-shaped stones, more
or less indented on one or both surfaces. Their use is not at
present thoroughly understood.         Some antiquaries suppose
that they were held between the finger and thumb, and used
as hammers or chippers.         If, however, a large series is
obtained, it will be found that the depression varies greatly
       Be           in depth, and that sometimes the stone is
                    completely perforated, which favours the view
                  / of those who regard these implements as
            :       ringstones for nets, or small hammer heads.
    Oval   stone.   Jt is very doubtful whether these imple-
 ments really belong to the Stone Age.
    Other stones, in which the longer axis is encircled by a
 groove, appear to have been evidently intended as sink-
 stones for nets.
    The arrow-heads are divided by Sir W. R. Wilde into five
varieties. Firstly, the triangular (fig. 119), which frequently
had a notch on each side to receive the string which attached
it to the shaft; secondly, that which is hollowed out or
indented at the base, as in fig. 120; thirdly, the stemmed
arrow, which has a tang or projection for sinking into the
shaft ; fourthly, when the wings are prolonged on each side,
this passes into the Larbed arrow (fig. 121); finally, we have
the leaf-shaped form, a beautiful example of which is repre-
sented in fig. 122. The true arrow-heads are generally
about an inch in length, but they pass gradually into the
javelin, and from that into the spear-head.       The great
similarity of arrow-heads, even from the most distant locali-
 ties, may be seen in figs. 123, 124, and 125, which represent
specimens from France, North America,           and Tierra    del
Fuego, respectively,
                                     ARROWHEADS.                                         103


   The different forms were perhaps in use in different tribes,
but more probably they are due to the variety of purposes
for which they were intended ; thus in North
America the war arrows taper to the end, so                                    Pa.
that when the shaft is drawn out, the head
        Fie. 119.

                                Fig, 120.


                                                       Fie, 121.




                                       Arrow~neads,—Ireland,


                                               Fie. 124,




                    Fie, 123,




                                                                         Fic, 125.




                      France,                                        Tierra del Fuego.




                                                  $


                                             North America.




remains in the wound; while hunting arrows. are expanded
at the end, so that the head is drawn                              out with the shaft.
104,          SAWS.     BONE    IMPLEMENTS.       AWLS.

Among other tribes, the lance-shaped arrows are used in
hunting, barbed arrow-heads in war*.
           Fic. 126.
                              There are various other kinds
                           of flint implements, such as ham-
                                mers, saws (fig. 126), harpoons,
                                etc., but—omitting for the pre-
                oe)             sent the earlier, or drift types—
           Stone Saw.      the above are the principal forms
of stone weapons and implements.
   Besides being employed for handling the stone axes, the
bones and horns of animals were much used as the material
                                 Fie. 127.




                           Bone Awl.—Scotland.

of various simple implements, and those of the stag appear to
have been preferred, as being the hardest.    The commonest
bone implement is the pin or awl (fig.             eae
127) : not much less numerous are certain
oblong chisel-like implements (fig. 128), the
use of which it is not easy to determine.
Ribs split open, and pointed at one end, are
sometimes found, and have been supposed
by some archeologists to have served in
preparing flax; by others to have been used
in the maaufacture of pottery.       Arrow-
heads, spear-heads,    chisels, and bone har-
poons (figs. 129, 130) also occur. Fig. 130
represents a bone harpoon belonging to
the Reindeer period, which will be described
in the chapter on Caves. Fig. 131 repre-                  Bone Tapio
sents a North American bone chisel used in dressing deer-
           * Murray,   Travels in N. America, vol. i, p. 385.
                                               HARPOONS.                         105

 skins for taking off the hair.                       Pierced teeth also were not
 unfrequently worn as amulets.
     Fie. 129,   Fic, 150.         Fre. 131.        Stone implements are fre-
                                                 quently found on the surface of
                                                 the ground, or are dug up in agri-
                                                 cultural or other operations. But
                                                 those found singly in this manner
                                                 have comparatively little scientific
                                                 value: itis only when they occur in
                                                 considerable numbers, and espe-
                                                 cially when associated with other
                                                 remains, that they serve to throw
                                    Mocem
                                      Bone
                                             much light on the manners and
                                  Implement. customs of ancient times.
                                                                       As al-
                                   America,
                             +                  ready mentioned, the tumuli, the
                                 lake habitations,          and the    shell-mounds
                                  are specially valuable in this respect, but
                                  I must also say a few words about the
                                  “ Coastfinds”” of the Danish antiquaries.
                                 “ Coastfinds” are discoveries of rude flint
                                 implements, which are found lying in
                                 large numbers on certain spots along the
                                 whole line of coast. Owing probably to
                                 the elevation of the land which has taken
                                 place in Jutland since the Stone Age,
                                 some of them are now a considerable dis-
                                 tance from the present water-line. Some,
                                 on the other hand, are at low levels; one,
             Ancient Bone for instance, close to the Railway station
                France..  at; Korsér, is exposed only at low tide, and
             others are always covered.                    The “ Coastfinds,” how-
Ancient
             ever, belong, probably, to different classes.                    Thus,
   Bone . one at Anholt was evidently a workshop of flint im-
Harpoon.—
Denmark,     plements, as is shown by the character of the chips,
106                        FLINT FINDS.

and by the discovery of more than sixty flint cores.     Those,
on the contrary, which even at the present day are under
water, were probably so in old times, and as there are no
traces of lake habitations   in Denmark,    it seems   the most
natural supposition that they were the places where the
fishermen used to drag their nets. It is still usual to choose
particular spots for this purpose, and it is evident that many
of the rude objects used in fishing, especially of the stones
employed as net-weights, would there be lost. The objects
discovered are just what might have been expected under
these circumstances. They consist of irregular flint chippings,
net-weights or sling-stones, flakes, scrapers, awls, and axes.
      These six different classes of objects have been found in
most, if not all, of the coastfinds, though in different pro-
portions. To give an idea of the numbers in which they
occur, I may mention that Professor Steenstrup and I
gathered in about an hour at Froélund near Korsér, 141
flakes, 84 weights, 5 axes, 1 scraper, and about       150 flint
chips; while at a similar spot, near Aarhuus in Jutland, I
myself picked up, in two hours and a half, 76 weights, 40
flakes, 39 scrapers, 17 awls, and a considerable number of
flint chips.
      In the sheltered and shallow fjords of Denmark    the sea
is generally calm, and, in many instances,a layer of sand has
accumulated over and thus protected the flint fragments.
This was the case vith both the above mentioned coastfinds,
one of which was exposed in draining the land, the other in
a railway cutting.   Sometimes a change of currents will
remove the light sand, and leave the heavier stones, which
again in other cases have lain apparently undisturbed and
exposed from the first; and in such instances, the spots arc
sometimes so thickly strewn with white flints that they may
be distinguished by their colour, even at a considerable
distance.
                               FLINT FINDS.                                107

    Of course, in a sea like that which surrounds our coast,
 such remains would soon be reduced to mere gravel; besides
 which, we must remember that on our Southern and Eastern
 shores, even in historical           times,   the   sea   has   encroached
 greatly. “Flintfinds,” however, resembling in many respects
 these Danish “ coastfinds,” are not altogether unknown in
 this country. A great number of flint flakes, with a few
 arrows and cores, were found some years ago by Mr. Shelley
 in a field near Reigate, but, so far as I am aware, no other
 forms have yet been observed at this place.
   In the Aberdeen Journal (October, 1863), Mr. T. F.
 Jamieson mentions a spot on the banks of the Ythan, below
 Ellon, where, in a few minutes, he filled his “ pockets with
 flint flakes, abortive arrow-heads, flint blocks, from which
 the flakes have been struck off, and other such nondescript
 articles of ancient cutlery.”          There are many other places,
 as, for instance, Bridlington, Pontlevoy, Spiennes, near Mons,
several localities near Macon, which have been explored by
MM. H. de Ferry and A. Arcelin, and above all the great
workshops at Pressigny-le-Grand, discoveredby Dr. Leveillé*,
where immense numbers of rude hatchets, cores, flakes, spear-
heads, etc., have been found. Now that our attention has
been called to these flintfinds, no doubt many similar dis-
coveries will be made elsewhere.
   Nor are these discoveries confined to Europe.                  Mr. Busk
and Mr. Langham Dale have met with a very similar assem-
blage of flakes, etc., on the Cape Flats, at the Cape of Good
Hopet+.   Throughout the whole of America, Australia, and
Polynesia indeed, stone implements were in use down toa
comparatively modern period, and in many parts are so still.
In Asia and Africa, on the contrary, as in Europe, stone
implements have, for the most part, been long abandoned.
   * See Evans’ “Archzologia”, vol.      actions Ethn. Soc. N. S. vol. v.
40. Steenstrup and Lubbock, Trans-          + Trans. Ethn. Soc, 1869, p. 51.
J08                     FLINT   FINDS.

Still there, as, for imstance, in Algeria and at the Cape, in
Palestine and Assyria, in India and Japan, stone umplements
have been discovered, showing that these countries also, like
Europe, have, in all probability, passed through an age of
Stone.
                                         109




                                 CHAPTER           V.

                    MEGALITHIC    MONUMENTS        AND      TUMULI.


      LL over Europe, we might indeed say all over the world,
        wherever they have not been destroyed by the plough
 or the hammer, we find relics of pre-historic times—camps,
 fortifications,     dykes, tumuli,        menhirs       or    standing     stones,




                                 Danish Tumulus,

cromlechs or stone circles, dolmens* or stone chambers, etc.,
many of which astonish us by their magnitude, while all of
  * In this country it has become the       and “‘ Maen,”     astone.   They should
custom to reverse    these two names.       therefore, I consider, be used as in the
Croralech, however, is derived from         text. I may add that “‘Menhir,” a
“Crom,” a circle,and “Lech,” stone,         standing stone, is derived     from
and Dolmen from “Danul,” a table,           “ Maen,” stone, and “hir,” long.
110                           TUMULI.

them excite our interest by the antiquity of their origin, and
the mystery with which they are surrounded.
                             Fig, 133.




                       Plan of the preceding.


   In our own island the smaller tumuli may be seen on
 almost every down; in the Orkneys alone it is estimated that
                              Fie, 184.




                       Sepulchral Stone Circle,

more than two thousand still remain; and in Denmark they
are even more    abundant;      they are found all over Europe,
                                     TUMULI.                                     Ti
 from the shores of the Atlantic to the Oural mountains; in
 Asia they are scattered over the great steppes, from the

                                     Fie. 135,




                                  Danish Dolmen,

 borders of Russia to the Pacific Ocean, and from the plains of
 Siberia to those of Hindostan; the entire plain of Jelalabad,
 says Masson, “is literally covered with tumuli and mounds*.”
                                         Fie. 136,




                               Sepulchral Stone Circle.

In America we are told that they are to be numbered by
thousands and tens of thousands; nor are they wanting in
Africa tf, where the Pyramids themselves                      exhibit the most
magnificent      development         of the          same   idea;    indeed     the
  * Journeys   in Baloochistan,    Af-           + See, for instance, Livingstone’s
ghanistan, etc., vol. i. p. 164. See         Miss. Travels, pp. 219. 304.
also p. 155, amd vol. di. p. 111-118.
TA                              MENHIRS.

whole world is studded with the burial places of the dead.
Many of them, indeed, are small, but some                   are very large ;
Silbury Hill, the highest in Great Britain, has a height of
one hundred and seventy feet; but though evidently artificial,
there is some doubt whether it is sepulchral.
                                  Fis, 137,




                               Kit’s Coty House.


   The standing stones, or “ Menhirs,” also were no doubt
generally erected in memorial of some particular event, the
majority being in fact the tombstones of Archaic times.
   In addition to these memorials of the past, ancient camps
and fortifications crown many of our hills.
   In some parts of Scotland the old Hill fortresses present the
remarkable peculiarity, first noticed by Mr. John Wiliams
in 1777, of having been subjected to considerable heat.
Until 1837 these vitrified forts were supposed to be peculiar
to our island, but in that year Professor Zippe called attén-
 tion to the existence        of similar remains          in Bohemia,       and
 since that time vitrified forts have been discovered in various
 parts of France and Germany *.
   * References to the various me-         _logie, 1870, p. 258. See also papers
moirs in which these are described         by Mr. Stuart and Dr. Fodisch in the
are given by Virchow, Zeit. f. Ethno-      Proc. Soc. Antiq. Scotland, vol. viii.
                              STONE    CIRCLES.                         113

   Lastly, the country is intersected by great dykes, or lines
 of embankment,—such,            for instance, as the Wansdyke, the
Devil’s Dyke at Newmarket, and Offa’s Dyke, which rungs
from the Bristol Channel to the Dee, thus roughly dividing
England from Wales,—which were no doubt partly boundary
lines and partly fortifications, like the Roman Wall or the
still more remarkable Wall of China.
    Stone circles, or cromlechs, consist of rough upright
stones, arranged in a circle. The usual diameter is about
100 feet, but some are much larger, the principal circle at
Abury, for instance, being 1200 feet across.     The stones
are placed at equal distances, and the number of them had
probably some significance. “ The two inner circles at Abury,
the lesser circle at Stennis, and one at Stanton Drew, each
consisted of twelve; the outer circles at Abury, the outer
circles of uprights and transoms at Stonehenge, the large
circle at Stanton Drew, and the circle at Arbor Low, each
of thirty; those of Rollrich and Stennis of sixty; and the
large enclosing circle of Abury of one hundred stones. Four
circles at Boscawen, and adjacent places in Cornwall, have
each been formed of nineteen stones *.” Stonehenge is the
most celebrated example of a stone circle, but it differs from
the usual type in several respects: in having, for instance,
the principal stones roughly hewn, and in the presence of
capstones.
   Stone circles are by no means confined to Europe. Stanley
saw, a few miles to the north of Tyre, a circle of rough
upright stones ;and Kohen, a Jesuit missionary, has recently
discovered in Arabia, near Khabb, in the district of Kasim,
three large stone circles described as being extremely like
Stonehenge, and consisting of very lofty trilithons f.
  Arctic travellers, again, mention stone circles and stone
  * Thurnam.   OCrania   Britannica.      + Bonstetten.   Sur les Dolmens,
Decade iv.                             Deeds
                                                                T
114                   MENTION      OF STONE    CIRCLES

rows among        the Esquimaux.           These are, however, of a
different character, being quite small, and merely the lower
part of the habitations.
  Lafitan figures an Indian (Virginian) temple consisting of
a circle of upright stones, which, however, are carved at the
top into rude representations of human faces*. Mr. Squier
mentions stone circles as occurring in Peru f.
   Even in Australia stone circles are said to occur. Mr.
Ormond, in a letter to Sir J. Y. Simpson ¢, says that he has
seen many, especially near the Mount Elephant Plains in
Victoria. They are “from 10 to 100 feet in diameter, and
sometimes there is an inner circle. The stones composing
these circles, or circular areas, vary in size and shape.
Human bones have been dug out of mounds near these
circles. The aborigines have no traditions respecting them.
When wee about them, they invariably deny knowledge of
their origin.’
    As regards the eee at, or the purpose for, which the
 European stone circles were erected, history gives us no
 information.
      Mr. George Petrie, indeed, has called Dr. Wilson’s attention
to several cases in which the Orkney circles were mentioned
in old deeds, etc.§         Thus, in 13849, William de Saint Michael
was summoned to attend a court held “ apud stantes lapides de
Rane     en le Garniach,” to answer for his forcible detention
of certain ecclesiastical property; and in 1880, Alexander,
Lord of Regality of Badenoch, and son of Robert II., held a
court, “apud le standand stanys de la Rathe de Kyngucy
Estir,” to enquire into the titles by which the Bishop of
Moray held certain of His lands. Even so late as the year
   * Moeurs des Sauv. Amer. vol. ii.      ings. Proc. Soc. Ant. Scot. vol. vi.
p. 135. I have given acopy in the         1867, p. 81.
Origin of Civilization, 2nd ed. p. 179.      § Pre-historic Annals of Scotland,
   + Amer. Nat. vol. iy. p. 12.           2nd edit. vol. i. p. 164.
   ~ Simpson on Ancient Sculptur-
                      IN ANCIENT   HISTORY.                      145

 1438, we find a notice, that “John off Erwyne and Will.
Bernardson swor on the Hirdmane Stein before oure Lorde
ye Erle off Orknay and the gentiless off the cuntre.” This
comparatively recent use of the stone circles does not, how-
ever, enable us to form any opinion as to the purpose for
which they were originally intended.
   It is perhaps more to the purpose to observe that both in
the Iliad (B. xviii.) and Odyssey (B. viii.) assemblies of elders
are mentioned as sitting in solemn conclave on stone
seats arranged in circles, but in the former case the
seats are said to have been polished. Many, however, of the
British stone circles were certainly sepulchral; and it seems
probable that this was their original purpose; but that, like
other shrines, they were subsequently used as temples.
   As regards stone   pillars and tumuli, we are told, in Gen.
xxxi., that “Jacob took a stone and set it up for a pillar
                                                         ;”
and in verse 51, “ Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap,
and behold this pillar, which I have cast between me and
thee. This heap is a witness, and this pillar is a witness,
that I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou
shalt not pass over this pillar to me, to do me harm,” etc.
At Mount Sinai Moses erected twelve pillars *. And so,
again, when the children of Israel had crossed over Jor-
dan, Joshua took twelve stones and pitched them in Gilgal.
“And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When
your children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying,
What means these stones? Then ye shall let your chil-
dren know, saying, Israel came       over this Jordan       on dry
land +477
  Achan and his whole family were stoned with stones and
burned with fire, after which we are told that Israel “ raised
over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So the Lord
turned from the fierceness of his anger.” Again, the king
     * Hx. xxiv. 4.                       + Joshua iv, 21, 22.
                              12
116                      MENTION    OF TUMULI

of Ai was buried under a great heap of stones; and so also
was Absalom, of whom likewise we are told that he “ reared
up for himself a pillar, which is in the King’s Dale; for he
said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance, and he
called the pillar after his own name, and it is called unto this
day Absalom’s Place.”
   According to Diodorus, Semiramis, the widow of Ninus,
buried her husband within the precincts of the palace, and
raised over him a great mound of earth. Pausanias mentions
that stones were collected together, and heaped up over the
tomb of Laius, the father of Gidipus. In the time of the
Trojan war, Tydeus and Lycus are mentioned as haying been
buried under two earthen barrows. “ Hector’s barrow was
 of stone and earth. Achilles erected a tumulus, upwards of
an hundred feet in diameter, over the remains of his friend
Patroclus. The mound supposed by Xenophon to contain
the remains of Alyattes, Father of Croesus, king of Lydia,
was of stone and earth, and more than a quarter of a league
in circumference.        In later times,       Alexander       the      Great
caused a tumulus to be heaped over his friend Hephesstion, at
the cost of 1200 talents, no mean sum, even for a conqueror
like Alexander, it being £232,500 sterling*.” Virgil tells us
that Dercennus, king of Latium, was buried under an earthen
mound; and, according to the earliest historians, whose
statements are confirmed by the researches of archeologists,
mound-burial was practised in ancient times by the Scythians,
Greeks, Htruscans, Germans, and many other nations.
  By far the greater number of the tumuli in Western
Europe are entirely pre-historic, but there are some few, of
which the date and origin are known to us, such as the
tumuli of Queen Thyra and King Gorm, who died about
950, at Jellinge, in Denmark.
  There are, moreover, other cases in which tumuli are men-
      * Ten Years’ Diggings in the Celtic and Saxon Gravehills, p. v.
                          IN ANCIENT    HISTORY.                            7

tioned, though not in a manner which enables us to identify
them with any of those now existing. Thus Gregory of
Tours *has a quaint story to the effect that Macliav, flying
from his brother Chanaon, took refuge with Chonomor, Count
of the Bretons.   Chanaon sent messengers to demand that
Macliay should be given up to him, but Chonomor concealed
him in a tomb, “rearing over hima tumulus in the usual man-
ner, but leaving a small opening for the entrance of air’? (com-
ponens desuper ex more tumulum, parvumque ei spiraculum
reservans, unde halitum resumere posset). He then showed
this tumulus to the messengers, and assured them that Macliav
was buried in it.
   The Codex Diplomaticus contains references to more than
sixty barrows or lows, bearing the names of particular per-
sons;    some   of them, as for instance,          Wéddne’s      Beorgh,      or
Woden’s     Barrow, are probably mythical, but there is no
reason whatever to doubt         that some,       for instance Alfrede’s
Beorh,    Althelwolde’s      Beorh,     Cissan      Beorh,       Cwichelme’s
Hlcew, Oswolde’s Hlcew, etc., retain the name of the person
really buried within+. It appears that im England the habit
of burying under tumuli was finally abandoned during the
10th century.
   The Danish Sagas also tell us that in the middle of the
8th century, Sigurd Ring, having conquered his uncle, King
Harald Hildetand, in the battle of Braavalla, “washed the
corpse, placed it on Harald’s war chariot, and buried it in a
tumulus which he had formed for the purpose.        Harald’s
horse also was slain and buried with him, with the saddle, so
that Tarald might either ride to Valhalla, or go in his chariot,
as he preferred.       Ring then gave a great feast, after which
he recommended the chiefs present to throw their ornaments

  * Historia Francorum, iv. 4.         Codex     Diplomaticus,    see   Kemble,
   + For an interesting memoir on      Arch, Jour, yol. xiv. p. 119.
notices of heathen interment in the
118             ANTIQUITY       OF    MEGALITHIC    MONUMENTS,

and arms into the tumulus in honour of Harald.                         Finally the
tumulus was carefully closed *.”
  Most of these monuments, however, are doubtless far older.
Some, indeed, were ancient and mysterious even in the days of
Homer.    Thus at the burial of Patroclus, when Nestor is
pointing out to his son Antilochus the course for the chariot
race, he says,—

                                     “ Plain is the goal
         That now I tell thee of ; nor canst thou miss it:
              *         &         *         %         %
                              On either side
          Where narrowest is the way, and all the course
          Around is smooth, rise two white stones, set there
          To mark the tomb of some one long since dead,
          Or form a goal for men in ages past .”

   It is very striking to find these Menhirs mentioned in our
earliest writings, as monuments of events even then already
 lost in the obscurity of the past.
      Many of the very largest tumuli in Western Hurope appear.
 from the nature of their contents, to have been constructed
 during the Stone Age.                  At first, indeed, it seems almost
incredible that the immense tumuli of Brittany should have
been erected by a people who possessed no metal. We must
remember,        however, that some of the South Sea monuments
were quite as considerable. Moreover, though hundreds of
beautiful stone axes and ornaments have been found in the
tumuli of Brittany, no weapons of metal have yet occurred in
them. It has been supposed that the carvings on some of
the stones could not have been cut without metal. Actual
  * Engelhardt.     Guide Tlnstré        du     + Tliad, xxiii. 884.   I have quoted
Musee des Antiquités du Nord 0o-              from Mr. Wright’s translation, which
penhague.   1868.    See also Saxo            im this passage, at lcast, is more
 Grammaticus.     His.   Dan.    l. x. ch.    faithful than that of any other with
xii.                                          which I am acquainted,
120               ABURY    AND    SILBURY HILL.

has grown up at the expense, and in the midst, of the ancient
temple, and out of 650 great stones, not above 20 are still
standing.
   In a very interesting memoir* Mr. Fergusson has at-
tempted to prove that both Stonehenge and Abury belong to
post-Roman times. “The Roman road,” he says, “ from
Bath to Marlborough, either passes under Silbury Hill, or
makes a sudden bend to get round it in a manner that no
Roman road, in Britain at least, was ever known to do. .
No ono standing on Oldborough Down, and casting his eye
along its straight unbending line, can avoid seeing that it
runs straight at the centre of Silbury Hill. It is true, it may
 have diverged just before hitting it, but nothmg can be more
 unlikely. It would have been just as easy for the Roman
 engineer to have carried its arrow-like course a hundred
yards to the right.     This, indeed, would have been a pre-
ferable line, looked at. from a Roman point of view,—straight
for Marlborough, to which it was tending, and fitting better
ta a fragment of the road found beyond the village of Kennet.
But all this was disregarded, if the hill existed at that time,
and the road runs straight at its heart, as if on purpose to
make a sharp turn to avoid it,—a thing as abhorrent to a
Roman road-maker, as a vacuum is said to be to nature.
From a careful examination of all the circumstances of the
case, the conclusion seems inevitable, that Silbury Hill
stands on the Roman road, and consequently must have been
erected subsequently to the time of the Romans leaving the
country.”
   Startled by this argument, and yet satisfied that there
must be some error, I turned to the Ordnance map, and
found, to my surprise, that the Roman road was distinctly
laid down as passing, not under, but at the side of, Silbury
Hill,   Not content with this, I persuaded Professor Tyndall
               * Quarterly Review, July, 1860, p. 209,
                               STONEHENGE.                               121

to visit the locality with me, and we convinced ourselves
that upon this point the map was quite correct.       The
impression on our minds was that the Roman engineer,
in constructing the road from Morgan’s                  Hill, had taken
 Silbury Hill as a point to steer for, swerving                  only just
before reaching it. Moreover, the map will show that not
only this Roman road; but some others in the same part of
England, are less straight than is usually the case.
    Since the first edition of this work was published, excava-
tions, at which I was present, have been made at the side of
Silbury Hill, and the ditches running along the Roman road
were clearly traced. Mr. Fergusson himself admits, in the
passage just cited, that the pieces of the road on the two
sides of Subury Hill are not in the same straight line, so
that there must have been a bend somewhere.         On the
whole, therefore, I quite agree with old Stukeley, that the
Roman road curved abruptly southward, to avoid Silbury
Hill, and that “this shows Silbury Hill was ancienter than
the Roman road*.” How much more ancient it is impos-
sible to say.
   As regards Stonehenge, we have, I think, satisfactory
reasons for attributing it to the Bronze Age,
   The historical account, if I may use such an expression, of
Stonehenge is, that it was erected by Aurelius Ambrosius in
memory of the British chieftains, treacherously murdered by
Hengist and the Saxons, about the year 460.           Guraldus
Cambrensis, writing at the close of the 12th century, says,
“That there was in Ireland, in ancient times, a pile of stones
worthy of admiration, called the Giant’s Dance, because
giants, from the remotest part of Africa, brought them into
  * Mr. Blandford, who superin-        inthe same volume, by the Rev. A.
tended the opening of the Hill in      OC. Smith.
1849, came also to the same conclu-       + Stukeley thinks it was founded
sion. Proc. Archzeol. Inst. 1849, p.   in 1859 z.c., the year of the death of
803. See also theinteresting memoir    Sarah, Abraham’s wife.
122          MYTHICAL     ACCOUNT      OF STONEHENGE.

Ireland; and in the plains of Kildare, not far from the
Castle of Naas, as well by force of art as strength, miracu-
lously set them up; and similar stones, erected in a like
manner, are to be seen there at this day. It is wonderful
how so many and such large stones could have been collected
in one place, and by what artifice they could have been
erected; and other stones, not less in size, placed upon
such large and lofty stones, which appear, as it were, to be
so suspended in the air, as if by the design of the workmen,
rather than by the support of the upright stones. These
stones (according to the British history) Aurelius Ambrosius
king of the Britons, procured Merlin, by supernatural means,
to bring from Ireland into Britain.      And that he might,
leave some famous monument of so great a treason to future
ages, in the same order and art as they stood formerly, set
them up where the flower of the British nation fell by the
cut-throat practice of the Saxons, and where, under the
pretence of peace, the ill-secured youth of the kingdom, by
murderous designs, were slain*.”’
   This account is clearly mythical. The larger stones were
evidently obtained in the neighbourhood, and are in fact
“‘ Sarcens,” identical with those which occur in hundreds on
Salisbury Plam.     Moreover, the very name of Stonehenge,
like those of Stanton Drew,          Stennis, etc., seems   to me a
very strong argument against those who attribute these
monuments to so recent an origin. Stonehenge is generally
considered to mean the Hanging-stones, as indeed was long
ago suggested by Wace, an Anglo-Norman poet, who says:
                Stanhengues ont nom en Englois
                Pieres pandues en Francois f,
but it is surely more natural to derive the last syllable from
the Anglo-Saxon word “ing,” a field; as we have Keston,
           * Giraldus.   Topogr. of Ireland.
           + Wright’s Wanderings of an Antiquary, p. 301.
                         ORIGIN    OF THE NAMD.                     123

originally Kyst-staning, the field of stone coffins.              What
more natural than that a new race, finding this magnificent
ruin, standing in solitary grandeur on Salisbury Plain, and
able to learn nothing of its origin, should call it simply the
place of stones? What more unnatural than that they should
do so, if they knew the name of him in whose honour it was
erected?      The plan also of Stonehenge seems to be a suffi-
cient reason for not referring it to post-Roman times. It
has, indeed, been urged that if Stonehenge had existed in
the time of Cesar, we should find it mentioned by ancient
writers.     Hecatzeus, however, does allude to a magnificent
circular temple, in the island of the Hyperboreans, over
against Celtica, and many archeologists have confidently
assumed that this refers to Stonehenge. But why should we
expect to find it described, if it was, as we suppose, even at
that time aruin, more perfect, no doubt, than at this day,
but still a ruin? The Caledonian Wall was a most impor-
tant fortification, constructed by the Romans themselves,
and yet, as Dr. Wilson tells us*, only one of the Roman
historians   makes    the least allusion        to its erection, nor is
Abury itself mentioned by any medieval author.
   It is evident that Stonehenge was at one time a spot of
great sanctity. A glance at the Ordnance map will show
that tumuli cluster in great numbers round, and within
sight of it; within a radius of three miles, there are about
three hundred burial mounds, while the rest of the country
is comparatively free from them. If, then, we could deter-
mine the date of these tumuli, we should be justified, I think,
in referring the Great Temple itself to the same period.
Now, of these barrows, Sir Richard Colt Hoare examined
a great number, 151 of which had not been previously
opened. Of these the great majority contained interments
by cremation, in the manner usual during the Bronze Age.
               * Pre-Historic Ann. of Scot. vol. ii. p. 39.
124,    STONEHENGE   A MONUMENT    OF THE BRONZE   AGE,

Only two contained any iron weapons, and these were both
secondary interments; that is to say, the owners of the iron
weapons were not the original occupiers of the tumuli.    Of
the other burial mounds no less than 39 contained objects of
bronze, and one of them, in which were found a spear-head,
and pin of bronze, was still more connected with the temple
by the presence of fragments, not only of Sarcen stones, but
also of the blue stones which form the inner circle at Stone-
henge; and which, according to Sir R. C. Hoare, do not
naturally occur in Wiltshire. Stonehenge then may, I think,
be regarded as a monument of the Bronze Age, though
apparently it was not all erected at one time, the inner circle
of small, unwrought, blue stones being, probably, older than
the rest; as regards Abury, since the stones are all in their
natural condition, while those of Stonehenge are roughly
hewn, it seems reasonable to conclude that Abury is the
older of the two, and belongs either to the close of the Stone
Age, or to the commencement of that of Bronze.
   Both Abury and Stonehenge were, I believe, used as
temples. Some of the stone circles, however, have been
proved to be burial places. In fact, a complete burial place
may be described as a dolmen, covered by a tumulus, and
surrounded by a stone circle.     Often, however, we have only
the tumulus,    sometimes   only the dolmen,    and sometimes
again only the stone circle.
   The celebrated monument of Carnac (fig. 138), in Brit-
tany, consists of eleven rows of unhewn stones, which differ
greatly both in size and height, the largest being 22 feet
 above ground, while some are quite small. It appears that
 the avenues originally extended for several miles, but at
 present they are very imperfect, the stones having been
 cleared away in places for agricultural improvements.  At
 present, therefore, there are several detached portions, which,
 however, have the same general direction, and appear to
                  MEGALITHIC        MONUMENTS      IN INDIA.                 125

have been connected together. Fig. 138 is from a sketch
made by Dr. Hooker, when we visited Brittany together, in
the spring of 1867.
   Most of the great tumuli in Brittany probably belong to
the Stone Age, and I am therefore disposed to regard Carnac
as having been erected during the same period.




                                     Carnac.

  Megalithic erections, resembling those which are generally,
but without     sufficient   reason        ascribed    to the Druids, are
found in very distant countries. In Moab, De Saulcy ob-
served rude stone avenues, and other monuments, which he
compares    to Celtic dolmens.            Lieut. Oliver, also, mentions
that the Hovas of Madagascar to this day erect monoliths
and stone tombs closely resembling those of Western
Europe*.     Mr. Maurice+ was, I believe, the first to point
out, that in some parts of India, there are various monuments
of stone, which, in the words of Colonel Yule, “recall strongly
those mysterious, solitary, or clustered monuments of un-
known origin, so long the puzzle and delight of antiquaries,
which abound in our native country, and are seen here and
there in all parts of Europe and Western Asiat.” Mr. Fer-

 * Trans. Ethn. Soc. 1870, p. 67.         - t{ Jour. of the Asiat. Soc. of Ben-
 + India Antiqua.                         gal, yol. xiii. p. 617. See also Proc.
126                 MEGALITHIC       MONUMENTS     IN INDIA,

gusson goes farther, and argues with great ingenuity that
the “Buddhist architecture in India, as practised from the
third century B.c. to seventh a.D., is essentially tumular,
circular, and external, thus possessing the three great cha-
racteristics of all the so-called Druidical remains*.” These
resemblances, indeed, are too great to be accidental, and the
differences represent, not so much a difference in style, as in
civilization. Thus, the tumuli of India, though sometimes of
earth, are “generally of rubble masonry internally, and of
hewn stone or brick on the external surface, and originally
were apparently always surrounded by a circular enclosure of
upright stones, though in later times this came to be attached
to the building as an ornamental band, instead of an imde-
pendent feature. In the most celebrated example in India,
that at Sanchee, the circle consists of roughly squared
upright stone posts, joined at the top by an architrave of the
same thickness as the posts, exactly as at Stonehenge; the
only difference being the insertion of three stone rails be-
tween each of the uprights, which is a masonic refinement
hardly to be expected among the Celts.”                       In India, then,
the circles of stones seem generally to have surrounded
tumuli; but this is not always the case, and there are some,
“which apparently enclose nothing.’ Again, they are gene-
rally covered with sculpture;               but to this also there are
exceptions, as, for instance, at Amravati, where there are
numberless little circles of rude unhewn stone, identical
with those in this country, but smaller.”
   In Europe we know that the stones of Megalithic monu-
ments are almost invariably uncarved.
   There is indeed a dolmen, near Confolens in Charente, in
Soc. Antiq. Scotland, vol. i. p.93.       Wise, ditto, p. 154. Hooker’s Hima-
Babington, Trans. Lit. Soc. Bombay,       layan Journals. Taylor, Trans. Roy.
1823.   Congreve,   Madras   Jour.   of   Inrish Acad. vol. xxiv. &e.
Lit. and Science, 1847. Yule, Proc.         *EON, Cy ps ize
Soc. Ant. Scotland, vol. i. p. 93.
                      MODERN     INDIAN    DOLMENS.                       127

 which the upper stone is supported, not on rude stone blocks,
 but on four slender columns*. I agree, however, with M.
 Rochebrune, that the supports were probably carved at a
 period long subsequent to the erection of the monumentt.
 At Stonehenge the stones are roughly hewn, but at this stage
 the Megalithic architecture inWestern Europe seems to have
 been replaced by a totally different style. In Algeriat, on
 the contrary, it advanced        further; we      there find tumuli of
 regular masonry and stone circles, in which the floors are
 paved. On the principal stones in one of the stone circles
 are letters, the meaning of which, however, is unknown,                   In
India it reached a still higher stage of development, so that
it requires an observant eye to detect in the rude cromlechs,
stone circles, and tumuli, the prototypes of the highly deco-
rated architecture of the Buddhists.
   It is a very remarkable fact, that even to the present day,
some of the hill tribes in India continue to erect menhirs,
cromlechs, and other combinations of gigantic stones, some-
times singly, sometimes         in rows,     sometimes      in circles, in
either case very closely resembling those found in Western
Europe. Among the Khasias$, “the funeral ceremonies are
the only ones of any importance, and are often conducted with
barbaric pomp and expense; and rude stones of gigantic
proportions are erected as monuments,               singly or in rows,
circles, or supporting one another like those of Stonehenge,
which they rival in dimensions and appearance.”
   The single pillars are sometimes tombstones, sometimes
memorials of important events. Colonel Yule once asked a
native if there were any tradition about one of these pillars,
   * Statistique Monumentale de la    de la Société Archéologique de la
Charente.                             Province de Constantine.   1863, p.
  + Mém. sur les Restes d’industrie   214.    See also Letournenx.      Ar. f.
appartenant aux temps primordiaux     Anthropologie.    1868, p. 307.
dans le Dép. de la Charente, 1866.       § Dr. Hooker’s Himalayan Jour.
  t Recueil des Notices et Mémoires   vol. ii. p. 276. See also p. 320.
128                    MODERN     INDIAN DOLMENS.

which is known as Mausmai, i.e. “the stone of the oath.”
‘“‘ There was war,” said the man, “ between two villages, and
when they made peace, and swore to it, they erected this stone
for @ witness *,”




                                 Indian Doimens.

    Dr. Hookert has called attention to the fact that the
 Khasian word for a stone, “ Mau,” as commonly occurs in
 the names of their villages and places, as that of Man, Maen,
and Men does in those of Brittany, Wales, Cornwall, etc.,
thus Mausmai signifies in Khasia the Stone of Oath,—
Mamloo, the Stone of Salt,—Mouflong, the grassy Stone,
just as in Wales, Penmaenmawr signifies the hill of the big
stone; while a Menhir is a standing stone, and a Dolmen a
table stone, etc.       Those    who     believe   that the use of metal
was introduced into Europe by a race of Indo-European
origin, will find in these facts an interesting confirmation of
their opinion.
  How closely these Indian dolmens resemble those of
HKurope may be seen by comparing figs. 1389 and 140, with
581 and 137,
    * Proc. Soc. Antiq. Scotland, vol.       t+ Address to the British Associa-
 i. p. 93.                                tion, 1868, p. 7.
                       MODERN    INDIAN             DOLMENS.                   129

   The Indian dolmens, as shown in the valuable memoirs by
Captain Meadows Taylor* (figs. 139, 140), may truly be
said to be identical with those of Western Europe. He exa-
mined a very considerable number, having obtained particu-
lars of no less than 2129 dolmens in the district of Bellary,
in the Dekhan, and it is interesting that, as is sometimes the
case in Europe, more than 1100 had an opening in one of
the side stones, doubtless in order to introduce food for the
dead. Montperieux figures (pl. xxx.) a dolmen with a similar
hole in his work on the Caucasus ; and Schoolcraft mentions
that in the United States the Redskins very frequently left
an opening in the grave cover for the same purpose.
                                       Fre.   140




                                Indian Dolmen,

   We must not, however, attribute too much importance to
the similarity existing between the megalithic erections in
various parts of the world. Give any child a box of bricks,
and it will immediately build dolmens, cromlechs, and “ tri-
lithons,” like those of Stonehenge, so that the construction of
these remarkable monuments may be regarded as another
illustration of the curious similarity existing between the
child and the savage.
  * Trans. BR. Irish Academy, vol.            Races of Scotland.”
xxiv. p. 329.   See also Col. Forbes             + Schooloraft’s Indian Tribes, Pt.
Leslie’s valuable work, “The Early            i, p. 33.
                                                                     K
130               MODES    OF BURIAL    IN TUMULI.

   Tumuli or barrows are much more numerous and more
widely distributed than stone circles. No doubt the great
majority of them are burial mounds, but some also were
erected as memorials, like the “heap of witness’ erected
by Laban and Jacob, or the mound heaped up by the Ten
thousand in their celebrated retreat, when they obtained their
first view of the sea.
   The size of the tumulus may be taken as a rough indication
of the estimation in which the deceased was held, as             James*
also tells us was the case among the North American Indians.
The Scotch Highlanderst have a complimentary proverb,
“ Curri mi clach er du cuirn,” i.e. “I will adda stone to your
cairn,” and Iam informed by Mr. R. Gray that the custom
still exists in the Hebrides, as it does among various savage
and semi-savage races.
   The remark made by Schoolcraft as regards the American
Indians is applicable to many savage tribes. ‘‘ Nothing that
the dead possessed was deemed too valuable to be interred
with the body. The most costly dress, arms, ornaments, and
implements, are deposited in the grave;” which is “placed
in the choicest scenic situations—on some crowning hill or
gentle eminence in a secluded valley.” And the North
American Indians are said, even until within the last few
years, to have cherished a friendly feeling for the French,
because, in the time of their supremacy, they had at least
this one great merit, that they never disturbed the resting-
places of the dead.
   Coffins do not appear to have been used during the Stone
Age, though Mr. Greenwell has sometimes found traces of
decayed wood, and in one case the side of a grave showed the
impression of a rough board. The majority of tumuli are mere
heaps of earth, or of stones, covering the bones or ashes of the
   * Expedition to the Rocky Moun.      _   Wilson, Pre-historic Annals of
tains, vol. li. p 2.                   Scotland, vol. i. p. 86, 2nd ed.
                        CHAMBERED    TUMULI.                     181

dead; in many cases, however, the mound          contains a cist of
stones, evidently intended to protect the remains of the de-
ceased, while in other cases the dead was buried in a dolmen,
more or less resembling those represented in figs. 135-187,
and the whole was then covered over.      Such dolmens, either
covered or uncovered, occur, as already mentioned, in Northern
Africa, and in India. “Some archeologists have considered
that all dolmens were originally covered with earth or stones,
but I think the evidence shows that some at least were
intentionally left exposed.
   Some of the oldest tumuli of Scandinavia are of a different
character. They contain a passage, formed by great blocks
of stone, almost always opening (as do those of Brittany)
towards the south or east—never to the north—and leading
into a large central chamber, round which the dead sit. At
Goldhayn, for instance, in the year 1830, a grave (if so it can
be called) of this kind was opened, and numerous skeletons
were found, sitting on a low seat round the walls, each with
his weapons and ornaments by his side. Now, the dwell-
ings used by Arctic nations—the “winter-houses” of the
Esquimaux and Greenlanders, the “‘Yurts”’ of the Siberians—
correspond closely with these “Ganggraben” or “ Passage
graves.” The Siberian Yurt, for instance, as described by
Erman, consists of a central chamber, sunk a little in’ the
ground,   and, in the absence       of great stones,    formed   of
timber, while earth is heaped up on the roof and against
the sides, reducing it to the form of a mound. The opening
is on the south, and a small hole for a window is sometimes
left on the east side. Instead of glass, a plate of ice is used ;
it is at first a foot thick, and four or five generally last through
the winter.       The fire-place is opposite the entrance ; and
round the sides of the room, against the walls, “the floor is
raised for a width of about six feet, and on this elevated part
the inmates slept at night, and sat at work by day.”
                               K 2
132                THE    USE    OF TUMULI          AS DWELLINGS.

   Captain Cook gives a very similar description of the winter
habitations used by the Tschutski in the extreme north-east
of Asia.      They are, he says*, “exactly like a vault, the floor
of which is sunk a little below the surface of the earth.                       One
of them, which I examined, was of an oval form, about twenty
feet long and twelve or more high. The framing was com-
posed of wood, and the ribs of whales, disposed in a judicious
manner, and bound together with smaller materials of the
same sort. Over this framing is laid a covering of strong
coarse grass, and that, again, is covered with earth; so that,
on the outside, the house looks like a little hillock supported
by a wall of stone three or four feet high, which is built
round the two sides and one end.”
                                         Fie. 141




                       Summer and Winter Dwellings.—Kamskatka

   Fig. 141* represents the plan of a Laplander’s gamme, or
hut, at Komagfiord, as given by Mr. Brooke+. It was built of
sods, supported by a rude framework, and the interstices were
stuffed with moss. The greatest height was 6ft., the breadth
14ft., the whole length 30ft. A is the door; B, the passage,
8ft. high, 6ft. broad, and 12ft. in length; C is the inner door,

  * Voyages to the Pacific Ocean,                   + Brooke’s Travels in Lapland, p.
vol. ii. p. 450. See also yol. iii. p. 374.    318.
                          YURTS     AND    GAMMES.                     eS)

opening into the gamme, D; H, the fire-place, composed of
a few large stones to confine the wood-fire; F, an opening
in the roof to let out the smoke;            G, G are sleeping divisions,
which serve also to support the roof; His a portion fenced
off for the sheep and goats. A comparison of this hut
with the corresponding plan of a tumulus (fig. 148) will
show how closely these dwellings appear to agree with




                           Laplander’s Gamme, or Hut.

the “Ganggraben:”          indeed, it is possible that im some
cases ruined dwellings of this kind have been mistaken
for sepulchral tumuli*; for some mounds have been exa-
mined which contained broken implements, pottery, ashes,
etc., but no human bones; in short, numerous indications
of life, but no trace of death. We know, also, that several
savage tribes have a superstitious reluctance to use any
thing which has belonged to a dead person; in some cases
this applies to his house, which is either deserted or used as
a grave. The-Indians of the Amazons bury their dead under
their houses, which, however, are not therefore abandoned
by the living.
  Among the New Zealanders, on the contrary, according to
     * The so-called ‘“‘Pond-barrows”’ perhaps belong to this class.
134                   HUT-BURIAL   AMONG     MODERN       SAVAGES,

Mr. Taylor, “when the owner died, and was buried in his
house, it was left with all it contained: the door was tied up
and painted with ochre, to show it was made tapu, and then
no one ever entered it again*.’” In many villages, he says,
nearly half the houses belonged to the dead.
   The islanders of Torres Straits also used the ordinary huts
as dead housesf.
  Denhamj also states that in the great central African king-
dom of Bornou “every one is buried under the floor of his
own house, without monument or memorial; and among the
commonalty the house continues occupied as usual, but
among the great there is more refinement, and it is ever
afterwards abandoned.”  ‘The same is the case with the
Dahomans, Yorubans, and other races of the Gold Coast§.
It is still more significant that the Esquimaux themselves
frequently leave the dead in the houses which they occupied
when alive ||. Nor can any one compare the plan of a Scandi-
navian “passage grave,” as, for instance, the one represented
in fig. 148, with any drawing (see fig. 141*) of an Hsquimaux
snow house, without being struck with the great similarity
existing between them.
      Under these circumstances, there seems much probability
in the view advocated by Professor Nilsson, the venerable
archeologist      of Sweden,        that these       “Ganggraben”           are a
copy, a development, or an adaptation, of the dwelling-house ;
that the ancient inhabitants of Scandinavia, unable to imagine
a future altogether different from the present, or a world quite
unlike our own, showed their respect and affection for the
dead, by burying with them those things which in life they
had valued most : with women their ornaments, with warriors
  * New     Zealand    and its Inhabi-     55-130.
tants, p. 101.                               § Burton’s    Mission   to Dahome,
   + M'Gillivray, Voyage of the Rat-       vol. ii. p. 2.
tlesnake, vol. ii. p. 48.                     || Ross’ Arctic Expedition,   1829-
   { Travels in Africa, vol. iv. pp.       1833, p. 290.
                             PIOTS’ HOUSES.                     185
                                                                 Q




their weapons.    They buried the house with its owner, and
the grave was literally the dwelling of the dead.          When a
great man died, he was placed on his favourite seat, food and
drink were arranged before him, his weapons were placed by
his side, his house was closed, and the door covered up;
sometimes, however, to be opened again when his wife or
children joined him in the land of spirits.
   It is just possible that the comparative rarity of chambered
tumuli in England and France may be connected with the
greater mildness cf the climate, which did not necessitate
the use of underground “ winter-houses ;” or it may be an
indication of a difference in race.  Further investigations
will, doubtless, decide this point.        In the meantime we must
remember that the so-called “ Picts’ Houses’ are abundant
in the northern parts of Great Britain.         These curious
dwellings are “scarcely distinguishable from the larger
tumuli; but on digging into the green mound, it is found to
cover a series of large chambers, built generally with stones
of considerable size, and converging towards the centre,
where an opening appears to have been left for light and
ventilation. These differ little from many of the subter-
ranean weems, excepting that they are erected on the
natural surface of the soil, and have been buried by means of
an artificial mound heaped over them *.”
  According to Mr. Bateman, who has recorded the syste-
matic opening of more than four hundred tumuli (a very
large proportion of which were investigated in his presence),
and whose opinion is, therefore, of great value, “ the funda-
mental design of them (i.e. the British tumuli), with the
exception of the very few chambered or galleried mounds
in Berkshire, Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, Ireland, etc., as
New Grange, Wayland Smith’s Cave, Uleybury, and others,
and those of the much later Saxon period, is pretty nearly
                     * Wilson, l. c. vol. i. p. 116.
136                     THE    MOUND    BUILDERS.

the same in most         places; the leading feature of these
sepulchral mounds        is, that they enclose either an artless
stone vault, or chamber, or a stone chest, otherwise called a
Kistvaen, built with more or less care; and, in other cases,
a grave cut out more or less below the natural surface, and
lined, if need be, with stone slabs, in which the body was
placed in a perfect state, or reduced to ashes by fire*.’’
   The “long” tumuli of Great Britam resemble, in some
respects, the Scandinavian “ Ganggraben,” and, like them,
in districts where large blocks of stones occur, contain mega-
lithic chambers,     in which        the dead were        buried    and not
           vices           burnt.      No trace of metal has yet been
      SOROS                found in this class of tumulus;             which
                           therefore probably belongs to the Stone
                           Age. The skulls found in these tumuli
                           are very long and narrow skulls, which
                           have received from Dr. Wilson the
                           name of “Kumbecephalic,” or boat-
                           shaped skulls, resembling the one in
                           fig. 142, which was obtained by Mr.
                          Bateman from the tumulus known                    as
                           “Longlow,”          near   Watton,      in Derby-
   ving Skal—Deryskive, shire. This tumulus contained the re-
mains of thirteen individuals who had been buried in the
usual contracted position. They were contained in a cist
composed of large stones, and were accompanied with several
worked flints, including three carefully made arrow-heads.
Long skulls are comparatively rare in the round tumuli of
England, while on the contrary, no round skulls have yet
been met with in the long tumuli, at any rate in Wiltshire and
Gloucestershire: so that the evidence appears to support Dr.
Thurnam’s aphorism, Long barrows, long skulls, round bar-’
rows, round skulls+.          This conclusion rests on the measure-
   * Bateman, Ten Years’ Diggings,          + Mem, Anthropological Soo. vol.
p. xi.                                 i.    The following facts, however, are
                                LONG BARROWS.                                      137

ments of 137 skulls, 70 from round barrows and 67 from
long ones, and it must be observed that these are not selected
specimens, but so far as the long barrow skulls are concerned,
comprise the whole number which we possess in a sufficiently
perfect condition, while as regards the 70 from round tumuli,
Dr. Thurnam has taken the whole number (41) contained in
the Bateman collection, those described in the Crania Brit-
tannica, and all those in his own collection. It is important to
observe, therefore, that in neither case has any selection been
made which could influence the results. Now if we class
those skulls in which the relation of the breadth to the length
is less than 73 to 100 as long heads or Dolichocephalic, those
in which it is from           74-79     to 100 as medium          heads, and
those in which the proportion is 80 or more than 80 to 100
as short heads, or Brachycephalic, we shall have the following
result :—
         Total number of      Dolichocephalic   Orthocephalic    Brachycephalic
                    skulls.       63-73.           74-79.                 80-89.
one GarrOws se Oli               OD        cer Weigle       is   cn          0
imound barrows,          (U5.         0.    « o>     26.5.            »    oh
   Thus there is not a single long head among the 70
specimens from round barrows, nor a single round head
among the 67 specimens from long barrows.      So remarkable
a distinction certainly appears to imply a difference of race,
and Dr. Thurnam is disposed to refer the Dolichocephalic
people to the Neolithic Age, the Brachycephalic to that of
Bronze.
  As yet, no bone belonging to any of the extinct mammalia
has been found in a tumulus.               Even the reindeer, so far as
our present evidence goes, is entirely wanting. Again, the
stone implements, as already mentioned, are of a character
very different from those used by Palwolithic men.    It is
mainly taken from his second paper         of which Dr. Thurnam has been go
(in the memoirs of the same Society),      kind as to forward me the proofs,
138             OBJECTS    BURIED    WITH     THE DEAD.

therefore not surprising to find that the skulls which have
been obtained from tumuli attributed to the Stone Age indi-
cate that Europe was, even at that period, already inhabited
by more than one race of men.       On the Continent, as in
England, some are brachycephalic, or short-headed, and
so far resemble those of the Lapps, while others are doli-
chocephalic, or long-headed* (fig. 142). Virchow+ has re-
cently published a memoir on the skulls obtained from Danish
tumuli, and contained in the Copenhagen Museum. Omitting
fragmentary specimens, and those belonging to young persons,
he has examined 41 skulls referred to the Stone Age, 3 to the
Bronze Age, and 5 to the Iron Age, and compared them with
the specimens of Lapp (6), Greenland (5), and Finn (8) skulls
contained in the same collection. On the whole, these Stone
Age skulls are orthocephalic, inclining to brachycephalism ;
the Bronze Age and Iron Age specimens are dolichocephalic,
but it must be remarked that 1+ would not be safe to draw
any definite conclusion from so small a number of specimens;
and that even if the Bronze Age indicates the immigration of
a new race into Western Europe, they would probably not
exterminate the earlier inhabitants, but would at any rate
spare the young women, so that, until we have a considerable
body of evidence, it would be very unsafe to speculate on
the character of the population during the Bronze Age.
   The Greenlanders are dolichocephalic, the Lapps and
Finns, on the contrary, brachycephalic; but Virchow ob-
serves that if, in this respect, the skulls of the latter resemble
the type of the Danish Stone Age, they differ greatly in
height and breadth, so that no ethnic affinity can be predi-
cated between them.
   In some cases the skulls obtained from one and the same
tumulus differ from one another very considerably.                  Thus
  * Nilsson’s Stone Age.   English       + Ar. fir Anthropologie.   1870,
ed. p. 121.                           p. 55
                    OBJECTS    BURIED     WITH THE     DEAD.                     139

among those found in the great tumulus                      at Borreby, in
Denmark,       the breadth,      taking     the length at 100, varied
from 71:8 to 85°7, or no less than 14 per cent*.
   The care with which            the    dead   were    interred, and the
custom of burying implements with them, have been regarded
by some archeologists as proving the existence of a belief
in the immortality of the soul, and in a material existence
after death.       ‘That the ancient Briton,” says Dr. Wilson +,
“lived in the belief of a future state, and of some                    doctrine
of probation and of final retribution, is apparent from the
constant deposition beside the dead, not only of weapons,
implements, and personal ornaments, but also of vessels
which may be presumed to have contained food and drink.
That his ideas of a future state were rude and degraded, is
abundantly manifest from the same evidence.”
   But it is very far from being “constantly” the case,
that the dead were so well supplied with what we call the
necessaries of life; indeed, it is quite the exception and not
the rule,—so that if we are to apply the evidence of the
tumuli      in this manner,      we     must, I think, come to a con-
clusion     exactly the reverse of that stated by Dr. Wilson.
Thus, out of more than 250 interments described by Sir R.
Colt Hoare in the first volume of his great work on Ancient
Wiltshire, only 18 had any implements of stone, only 31 of
bone, 67 of bronze, and 11 of iron; and while pottery was
present in 107, more than 60 of these contained only sepul-
chral urns, intended          to receive the ashes of the dead, and
certainly never meant to hold food. So far, however, as
stone implements are concerned, I must confess that Sir R.
C. Hoare appears to have overlooked the ruder instruments
and weapons.    I will, therefore, rely principally on the
evidence afforded by the researches of Mr. Bateman and
Mr. Greenwell.
  * Busk,     Vogt’s Lectures on Man, p. 384.          + 1. c. vol. i. p. 498.
140          THE DEAD   WERE   FREQUENTLY   BURIED

  Although a large number of the interments described by
Mr. Bateman had been already examined, there were 297
which had not been previously disturbed, and though he
carefully mentions even the rudest bit of chipped flint, no
less than 100 of these were without any implement at all,
either of stone or metal, and the drinking-vessels and food-
vases were only about 40 in number. Moreover, lest it
should be supposed that these ill-provided interments were
those of poor persons or enemies, we will leave all these out
of consideration. This we can easily do. We may be sure
that these tumuli, which must have required much labour,
were only raised in honour of the rich and the great; though
they may have served, and, no doubt, often did serve
afterwards, as burial places for the poor. But it is almost
always easy to distinguish the primary interment ; for though
there are some few cases in which the original occupant has
been ignominiously ejected from his grave to make room for
a successor, these instances are rare, and can       generally be
detected, while the secondary interments are usually situated
either above the first, or on the sides of the tumulus.      The
same feeling which made our ancestors prefer to bury their
dead in a pre-existing tumulus, generally prevented them
from desecrating the earlier interments.
  In the following tables, then, I have recorded the primary
interments only; the first colamn contains the name of the
tumulus, the succeeding nine indicate the disposition of the
corpse, and the articles found therewith, while the last is
reserved for any special remarks.    Out of 139 interments
examined by Mr. Bateman, only 105 had any implements or
weapons, and only 85 were accompanied by any pottery that
can have held either food or drink.   Moreover, if we examine
the nature of the implements which were deposited with the
dead, we shall find that they are far from representing com-
plete sets of tools or ornaments. The rarity of bronze in
         WITHOUT   ANY   ORNAMENTS   OR   IMPLEMENTS,     141

tombs is, perhaps, not surprising; but to men so practised as
our predecessors, 1t must have been an easy matter to make
a rude arrow-head, or a flint flake. Yet some of the corpses
are accompanied by but one single arrow-head, others by a
small flint flake; some, again, by a single scraper. It must
also be observed that many of the stone objects found by Mr.
Bateman are much ruder than might be supposed from the
names he has given them.
                                            ‘ported uoxrg-ojsuy oy} 07 peSuojog uo paurezuoo Ors                                                                           NUN, oY} JO [VISAS Fey O[Geqoad st qT *
               “Moung            Jov “Bop adwy
                              woyajayxg)                      pa           4819        wenn           |             cam.          Ah              wes        re               rv          ticn        oon          con            “5        fetrh        aucany     (to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      here          “eee             ue
               “mong      peay|eso ‘Inq   esse]                 syuaueFerg
                                                                      fe   asig                    syne             vy            [orn                        woe             ose            Jove     tee          oe             ch                                                ae               wey
               “mouteg                    [yetug
                                 “MOLE ATIVI BSBA SIU,        See I810fe   asig   oo   aie   +e                                   pve co                      fore            wen oo        foe
                                                                                                                                                                                              ite     onaoe                       Pl  ase                                           ae               wey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           poom Wesseg
                                          *y}99) SasIOH]}         3819                                                               ote            aes                           et          oH         oF             Ree           oe                                                    IME wosseID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘xog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *oq2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘a[paou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               XI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O'T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9pNL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JOOW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SJUIUINIISUL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘spuaq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LaATis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ssepy|fees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     “”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [itnit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     peay-readg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ylayse9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a8t9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cece
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    “ss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Aan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4819
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [1UUeH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    “moureq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [[nug}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    “|S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3s.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     USnUNIySUL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     uxoSOg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OAT,
                                     *somog UeUINY JUIN]          4819                                de               nt          |ELG             seat        Mere              aS                          queuiniysutauQ                                                               “0778                LL
                                                                                                                                                           suid
                                                                                                                                                           ZJo
                                                                                                                                                            syuouARIy
                                                                                                                                                            Pauls[eo
                                                                                                                                                            ‘QUIY
              pus ‘[eoo odpuauiwry Jo syuauieuso omy]              **                                ere               ss            Iq seddeq                  |                             **s7UIMINI}SUL OPN OA                                                                                  AOTION     OL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ohava
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     lore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     aieoe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     perl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ote
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     {Tews
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     “woueq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     £4e,}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4819
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     M07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     QUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     wee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ory
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     vee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ove
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     19930
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       suul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4sio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              quaut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     +a[er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [*"*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       stan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |]
                                                                   eae    win    Teryotndeg                            wre               dees       wee         deer              ere         owe    “        sSuddiyo wis                          We              IE       ined   |asn   ace       uoplays       More
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [vowtoyds
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   roary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Z1 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OMT,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘soyAd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |-najsur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       padeys-Aaupyy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ooatg]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       481M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       urg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       wort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "033
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *saquid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sqUudUInIyS
              JO a0Tq     “BURJUT Ue Jo sUYeWaL ay YITAA]         JeIQ   |* dnd JuTZUUG              |*"*              are                    2            Lur               aay |‘speay-moare g ‘saddeq | ++ | + | ee                                                      |——lere        Mong UaeTD           IL
                                                 “ys
              ‘uy gt ynoqe ATuo snqaumy,        ones fe
INTERMENTS.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *."”oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 one
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 feo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lene
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ae  oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     eee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     eid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oy}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘sauog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     uojxa[aXs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     JUIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     UA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ys19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BS0IQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     UeUMY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MOT
                                                         *PItYO) 4819 |'* dno upquig                 |                     Same ih tee                          ee                oy                     as             s<            seed ||                ened     [aa           “+     + wort sadug 6
                                             "43003 8,as104                                                                                                                                                quiy paddiya
              B pus UaZP[M) OF Jo souog yung WITM]                y8ID | WIM TeLy[Ndag               |                     ahaa          bia        ita!        ie                we}          @ JO pues 3f99 B JO 31g |——| + | + | se [eres mod ssorg g
                                             *sauod                                                                                                                                                  SJUGUINITSUT JaYIO
              UeUNG      FUNG UM “Aayslfod ouoyspues]             ysig   fs                   tt                           Arr od(ita               lata «|as                     |}           aazy) pue peay-souey |——| wre | ve | ove fore ee    Om ATT £
                                                                                                                                                                                                     spUPWINIYSUT Ae[Na
                                                                  ysio   |e      syuaui3erg |                              os            aS         FEE) |eco                     “|           -ry9 03 puke peay-souvy | = | --- |__| +» laoowy uojSursseig 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘aqa ‘SAUX %
TABULATED



                                                                                                                                                                           urloy                ‘speay-aveds % ‘spastyo
                                   “31400   patJO 831q   daIUL]   ys1Q   |"     dno 9susouy                                a             ae                          oO Jamwerry          | ze      ‘spvay-AOLe                 OME}           co                    Co     ood                  <     SUiT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    deve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a|"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    dee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rallies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    gquausEy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     urg
                                                                  qsro   |        oi          eo              ere                         ipeve                                   creel       aes      ee      es     Stel                                                   se     [es mor spURT § +20g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MoT
                                       "SUOJOTIYS OMT)                   {tt                  we     [pBay-MOITY                         |"         a                             oe          yes   QUDUINL}SUL Te[MOMD |——]                                 --              “*     ["100W UO PPLA &
                                                “908,
              -INS OY} Iwau FIN uowy “yur nae
              JO sadaig “YSty “93 RI ‘sntnuing afaeq)                    |        as          a           ae           a al ae                      ae               ay           ss          ("4799 pue peag-Mosty | e+                                    {oe fof          oe     fee    oo              aT ft
                                                                                6 KUALLOI                      ‘ x NOUT                    c AZ NOU                       A INO                               a ANOLS                       aZ| re}    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             eo}5 | 8]
                                                                    a                                                                                                                                                                       Be)                     i]       7
                              ‘SMUVWA                               a                                                                                                                                                                       Beie/215
                                                                    8                                                                                                                                                                       Proje | Pils
                                                                    3                                                                           410 SLOALAO                                                                                 g2\ 9       ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         “aSduOo
                   “TUIHSATHAG                            SHLLINOIINV
                                                             AO                                                                      S\NVWALVS SHOILSAAFHL
                                                                                                                                                  JO
142
                                 “SINHWUALNI                                                                   AXYVWIUd
                                                                                                                                            (apearqaoum )
143
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pray-seads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1as5eq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3


                                       saridula 19A\0] 84} JO ULOD SseIQ JUO                                                               S[aSSAA § JO STIG                                                                                                                                                                    MOT FUIUUIW 9%
                                                                                                                        “UOXES
                                                                                                                                 4810
                                                                                                                                    W810
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                “*       MOTPINA
                                                                                                         JO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OT JOUIIN                       Td
                                                                    *TeUUe         auIos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     uo}LOW ay
                                                                  Japusys
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              $Z
                                    BJO
                                                                                                       & 400}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &%
               adiey
                 8,09                                                            puosas                        "u0xes
                                               ‘sajvulay aloD

                                 ‘“uojalayxs                           “mote          eF1ey                 “UuL0y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7 “ane
                                                                                                 auc YA,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WOU WaourA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‘s}UIY  peay-rieads ou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -MOLIeass oie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U0                 Uayorg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qWaWINI}su]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        “                                     oe 1Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   peay-readg




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                         Acryl                                                                afew *syUaOeMLLO                                                                                                                                                           ie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         apni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         aU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OM}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AOLYy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pray
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      eae




                                                                         0M}    pue
                                                                                                                                                             suryuuqg
                                                                                                                                                             dno

               yo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                uoppeH 19AO                                  61
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MOT 1OYNOT                                   Bt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \ 1s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          s7USUINn




                           *JULJUL UB JO UOITAXS 97 UII ‘ojeutaz
                                                                                                                                                  SaStA OMT,                                    vee                                                                                                                             aes     ¥                                     at Ll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 uapsny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AOT
                                                                “P(Lya B JO UOJaTaAS OY YIM
                                                                                              “u10Y 5,38)
                                                                                 oy) YA                    ‘opemag                           dno Supquug                |"                      as                                                                                                                              “MOT OAV
                        *JURJUL Uv JO UOJTYS
                                                                               “surgjo sdurddiyp 5                                                                                                                                    peay-readg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <8                                                                                  sauojsAouoyy
                                                                                                                                                  ane      ser          foe     se    | rad3eq                                                                                                                                  MOT    pug
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 peay
 INTERMENTS.




                                                                                                                                             dno Surquyg                        tte   foes      5                                                                                                                                          “* Jamod                           If
                                                                                                        “pnys jor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7
                                                 ar                                                   eed se                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve             “                              6
                                                                                                     fie puosag
                    JOPUN 19977¥] OM 9yI foovsAINS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                em0}satHNYS



                                                                                      ous |Axepuosag
                        yeanyeu                  ay             uo     JOULIOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                      [VAQ  doard
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                    “ojo ‘speay-avads aaryy,                                                                        quag MOT g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          aepoaod.



                                                                     “YSLY Joos 8,2 ‘sninuLOT,                                                                                                          S,avys UIOY                                                                                                             * MOT 00g £
                                                                                                                                                                                      1033ep                                             sdurddiy9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sas
                                                                                                                                                  a        cae          ||      mer |pane 418                                                        *   qury aepnosng                                                                                                            9
                                                                                                  *yof Jo prog                                                                                                                                       a     proy-readg                                                                               uoyoq
                            “PLIYO B fo UOJaTOHXs FUINGu 34s WIT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              g
 TABULATED



                                     *punouc ut punos £10330d jo
                        SUSU FVIY “YSLY Joos OM} JNOGS sarMUNY,                                                                                                                                 Ras
                                                                                                                                                  oe    | OSTA                  see   [owe                                                                                                                              cco             wo7y adivgs                           Ot
                               “pILyo B yt ‘apwatay v AUOPIAT
                        ‘gonyyoou 9u0g puke 49¢     *Y100} S,M0D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IOOW UOJT[PPIAL                                 nN
                        ‘dno durquupejosparyg “souog 8,[euluy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oe       Key Alar                                      {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   paddyyosjuty             ear,
                                                                                                                                                                 SONTO OIG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         quoumnsjsut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         pepaa

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      peaq-reads                                                                        WeIOH                                        68
                                                                                                                                                                        |""*   ony    |                                                                                                                                                              yseAUoW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8¢
                                                                               Rau [RUNUe JUINg                                            ve      * TOSSA                                                                           “ay                     pTjoB                                                                                   "
                                                                               “quiy jo sovard Aun                                           un   jeryorndag                                                                                                                                                             ayepxela                                     9¢
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         yyoumg                                       Le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     82 6% oF
                                                                                                                                                                                                     19ddeq
                                                                      *quyy qurng Jo avard [[wurg                                           tum peroradag                                                               -1B[NIAO      pray-reads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           puwoes          one             wee                                       "UOJ               TPPUAL             WUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MOEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OTe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OMT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SIUSUINI}SUL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   quUaTUNIySUy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   apNy




                                                      *su0qo[ays OMT,                                                                                                                                                       quaminsysur                       zUILT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       quawmnujsut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Outaysey
                                               “gTeulay @ A[Qeqoig                                                                                                                                                          SPBoY-MOIIY                      OMT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             “MOTT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MOD    ¢¢
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    “mot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    dng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 @M0M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ZY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MOT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           uojxng
                        *TI09} ,SOSIOH{T “SoUOG WeLUNE WING Yt AL                                                                                                                                                                               ae          oe              oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [ews
                                      *sUOISUDUIP OFIRT JO UOJD[AXS                                                                                                                          Jaddeq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              "OT
                                                                                                                                           dno Suryuig
                                                                                                                                           ee  “WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                 io
                                                                                                                                                                                                  oe          jiIvads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     raulWeH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3|"                                                                                                             “        uONaM LB
                                                                 5                        mene                                                                         SLOarKo
                                                                                                                                                                          AO                                                                         :                                                                        144
                                                                8           y             Bal                                                                                                                                                        8
                                                                PRIS
                                                                wu
                                                                SWUVAAW
                                                                  ks tele Mh PS
                                                                      “ASduoo             cere                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                 3              12)       Sais
                                                                 2              a} | uM   Awl                         "<NOLS                               ‘<Now|           ‘aznoud    *NOUL
                                                                 |e.                  ale 4                                                                                                                                            ‘AUTLLOL
                 2z          Suruurp
                                   MOT [et                       ee       |__|] fe wr |     aULOG POOT SPU     |                                                |quoumardwy ““radseq      hE                        Reo                        ove       see
                 gz          uopIyegx00                            [fs os | ve | ++ | aug 100d quiy Kyo tee         see                                         hes  Coe    ee            fog                       bel                        |"          4sto
                 6z       IH  peoHt*                             foe   vee | ve      -——}T, UTIL        WUAUINAZSUT OO                                                 GESte              Hie                       BS           ste           |"          4st|    ayy         aAeIs          PaUTYUoD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ea1Y}               SUOJIEHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           JO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘wour      saprseqI9YI0           S[eMIUe*souog
                 OF                 JUIULATOU+                                                          poon             Guatnysul
                                                                                                                               Pe'o}a“                                                                              #88                        {°°        4819
               1¢                            ppyysnig
                                               ™                                                 ase                              fee             tae                                                               oo                   |"               4st
                Eg                UIPPeL,“MOIS                                                   cr                               ees 1] Es                                                                         aa           oa      |**
               SESS:                    eeOMCI
                                         a ee fe                                                 ae                                                                                                                                                       4sI9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                ATqeqotg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                v   Oye]               “yUsUTIIzUr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [LEWIS     “MOLL
                                                                                                                                  ne                                                                                       YUU           |"               asto
               bE        QOH            SIN                OSMOHS                                UB           a         ae        es                                                                                             eae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ae                      4ST| 19                 Teryo[udas “Aaqureyfo
               og         OO TTL see                       me                                           apNyy            quaUINAZsUT
                                                                                                                                ae                                                                                  We           ae      ©               one      UT           *[OAvIs
               9g                       HIeuLsi09g
            Le                                     tee        see
            96               iS                    ane       see                                                                                                                                                                                                              sdeyieg “doxes
           65                                      ee        see
           OF                os                              coyote
           TF                      [Lewis
                                        [aoa              as)
                                                                                                        OYLIPUR        ayUH       ox                                                                                                                                          ‘AWM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                yng you        “9Tos         ‘q[eWaT
           aa            “              eee                  se                                           ‘1atdeqeads‘oa                                ouog au        |)   pee                           hee
                                                                                                                                                                                                          oer             uid dun              “dno
                                                                                                                                                         3uy 9Tni                                                                                                                                                                 TABULATED
          SF                         UOWloMaYD
                                         "  “*
          FF                      UOppeHDIPT“*                                                                     ‘peoq-Mouy
                                                                                                                       ‘938                             ysagy opnx
                                                                                                                                                                 |
          SF                           AQ[MOLUL,                                                                                                                            “TAY
O41
                                                                                                             pray-aouy                                                                                  ‘dno Joryquudg
TITH
OF                                                                                                          peatpivadg
atepdaaq
LF                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OM,             *suozopays
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wg Jo           "Atoyjod
                                                                                                        Moly pRay-     oc              se       |                           “"Tagdeq
          BF                 OSNOWAO'T                                                                            peay-Ieadg
                                                                                                                      pue
                                                                                                                        4         SMOLIG ow,    ardenv=                     ae
                                                                                                                                           sjuaur                                                      Suryquug                        dno
                                                 “                                               y       Jeau                GUSULN]SUL
                                                                                                                                  *           |"                            Taddeg
                                                                                                 y      aay   uvau                syuawarduit                                                                                                                          OMT,            ‘suOJaTaYs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wg Jo           “Aioj}40d            INTERMENTS.
         6p 09                    MPUOTL                                                                 peraaag             squomterduu [eIAAgG
                                                                                                                                              -Ul]
                                    “                     “=                                                                                                syuamald
                                    uojueg                                                             omy,        pajutodsyury “"                      apuy -Wt                                                                                                       YITAL JUING "souog
                                                                                                                                                           quauia[d
                                                                                                                  peay-avadg
                                                                                              peddiuyg
                                                                                              guatanaysut
Udpqry
1g
AOT 2g
    Aajmoryy                                                                                                      peay-MoLry
                                  ** “                                                                                 “
                                                                                              Spvay-MOLe
                                                                                              O47,                                                                                                                                                                     TILA      FING      uvUIMY “souog
                                       * *
                                                                                                                  pray-ivadg
                                                                                                                       puv       a1j[esrq
        gg £¢ g¢ 9¢ 1G            MOTTaQuIOT                                                     oxe                                                                              ‘uin
                                                                                                                                                                                  yerqoyndas
                                                                                                                                                         “WIL                                   dno
                                                                                                                                                                                                 “+
                                                                                                                                                                                                asuaouywin
                                                                                                                                                                                                       perqorudag
                                                          so                                                      proy-Mony
                                                                                                                       oe        os                                                                                 qusuda                                             eMLOS        spUAWTAQSU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jo  yULY   PUNO;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UT ayy
                                              KOIMOLUT,                                                                                                     syuauerd                                                                                                     Yea aaognBq}UL
        69                           ULeqaIVD
                                           asOTqniny                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        “4NATULII}
e10[T
Be                                   *"U0}OM                                                           oF yvou          poyutod “MUySUT                                                                                                                            JITJOB          ‘SBA
                                        saysung
                                                                                                 s}uaar                                 Ug arg,          [BIdA—ag
AS                                              oen       en                                         daly,          sjUOUINIISUL                                                                                                                                   OMI,               Jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   suozo[DYS unos ‘udu
Q9 19                                                                                                svadg pray pUue [BAO -UT
                                                 oe                                              quauiniys
         79                        AVO[SIB                                                             wayorg        quamindysar
                                                                                                                          “+                                                                                                                                                     popunoung
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    fq                  “sauojspuvs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OMT        Tl2WS
                         fe dug        oy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sasaid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jo            ‘€raj10d
                                                                                                                                                                |           xoaseq
Apey
AOT
gg
                Gog        WH
                                                  punoy         yur ts
                                                                                                                                             ;                Ppapuno
                                                                                                                                                                   Kq mng
                                                                                                                                                                        xs    1ay}O                 Popevsjtloa
                  u197885                                                                                                                                    ‘Suojajays
                                                                                                                                                                     YON arom                       Aq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 pxueduoaar
                   auo}sxT                         peuaAog         syuoUNa
                                                                       “T jsuT                                                                         aoaty apN “SINT
                                          Wy     May             S}UOUINYSUE
            “                                                                                                                                        JUNG      uBUNY “‘souod
                U0}RD 100                                                                                                                         4st9 you        Afastua             “payBavoxa     Sn[NUnT,
                GojoqHOH
                       *                                                                                                                            <tWo auo yooy ‘WAY
                                          T, OAL               S}GOUIMAasISUL
            prog        UolRT
                           ""                                                                                                                               ‘peay-Moxry
                                                                                                                                                                 d}0 punos
                                                                                                                                                                        UT a3                        “SNM,
                                                                                 OAT,   SQulod                  sytaudury
       AA          Uses                                                                                                                                       qudra-Ajuam
                                                                                                                                                                        xoauoo syoaf{qo
                                                                                                                                                                                    Jo               ‘guoq
                                                                                                                                                   axI]     u0}3nq    “sp[nour
                                                                                                                         sptag
                                                                                                                            “           a0           uoxrg ‘€pep duu pur       HuesJo                “AAtIs
                    Suuayqog                                                                                                                           ao001q
                                                                                                                                                           pur Yau 908)jo      ‘xoquie              ‘uyelaosod
                  WeIUIES                               peay-s
                                                            “' ory Bee                                                                             pus     ‘sse[d AUGaq) yW3099                    *Suluyeuras
                           sdweg
                    wioyymeg                                                                                            9se4 “     ry
                                                        pvay-readg                                                         asuaouy
                                                                                                                                dno*
                                                                                             8g   “aod
                orpury
                     de,                                                                                                                          OAT          *sU0}9[9X8
                                               OAL,
                                                  UT           S}UOMUNAS                                            Al FORT ore
                   Suayorg
                                                  [eIaAag        SMITINIYSUT                                                   [waya(n
                                                                                                                                    HIdag
                                                                                                                            Furr  dno
                                                 [eIaAag           "S}UBL
                                                                       WMLUTLQSUL                                         qin    aipuey
                                                   Juipnjo
                                                      v              Peay-ieads                                          YOULL Tassaa
                                                                                                                                   “              YT aI               UOJaIayXs
                                                                                                                                                                         JO UB         “WUDsUY
                                                              spEaYy
                                                                  PUR-aoUR[
                                                                       OUO OM
                                                            papua-punoy                                                Osu
                                                     peay-irOCedg      ane
                                                        pray-r
                                                            * vadg                                                                               571gJO UB     “UID
                                                                                                                       LON ort
                                                aoaeypus               ““Peo-MoLe                                       [assa,                                                                          TABULATED
                                                      Pray-rwadg
                                                            ae
                                                festygpur           me                                                 asua
                                                            -ivads “pray                                                                                auoqare
                                                                                                                                                           Jov         ‘daays
                                                ‘ooueT         ‘peay-aoue
                                                                   pur
                                                  Av[NoLa      JuaWNIYSUL
                                            omy, pur     Juatay “NQSUL
                                                sjuaur
                                                    ‘pvoy-twadg |‘proy-Kole
                                     |       pue
                                            omy
                                                       Jauumey |                                                                                  peayy
                                                                                                                                                     Jo€       “quod
                                                    sivadspuw    “PUnod                                                                                                                                 INTERMENTS.
                                                  papua          quUaWNASUL
                                                      “pray-ivad
                                                          “072 g aa
                                                      peaty-aouy
                                                           pue   ysnor                                                    asuaouy
                                                                                                                              dno “=
                                                           SPUsWNTsUy                                                         [Rryo(n
                                                                                                                                  wm dag
                                                 suynjyng          ~
                                                                 spuaumysul
                                         y, aay dood uty               (eo                                                                       oa,     [yews stteq
                                                                                                                                                                  JO         *9U0}8
        “                                F, uaa au0-S] duty           S}uatlof                                              agua
        “
        rr                  5               ino0g Nasut Saw
                  UO}SraITyUalIRA\                                    eae
                                           aarg s}yINy oh             <
                  Sup“ayorg                                                                                           aSBA “"
                                             oyu=       eve
            “                                     peay-readg                                                             asuaouy
                                                                                                                               dno
6g                UOWUATTYW2LBA\                                                                                      SBA a
00T     QD        UHH
                                                punoy          Juammiysur
                                                                    “                                                    asuaouy
                                                                                                                               dao “*
10L             Ayueg     a8ueip
                             ™                                                                                    4 Ara       Ayja1asead           punoyy
                                                                                                                                                       jou              AjjeurS1y0
                                                                                                         Lue   sdungy                                                                  “Tedqa[ndas
 Zor                    aUosyNOID                                                                                                                  ‘uoxegneq          AYUo            |
                                                                                                                                                                                     Suturemar Mota;
                                                 LepnIII9       quau w
                                                                    MaysUl
                                                                                                                                                        Suryun
                                                                                                                                                            ‘dnd
                                                                                                                                                               p
                                                                                                                                               WIT         qUING ‘souog              Ajjuaredde Pajstsodap
                                                                                                                                             32 9y}         UTES ‘OWT}
                                                                                                                                                                                                      145
                                                     *aArid
              Oy} UT IeOq ev JO sapr}q     Jap{NoYys OAT,                  “ gavrd doaq                                                                                                                                                  arepropug Aqny sz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘ONICIY LSVL
                                 saovjans [einzeU 9q3 UO                                                    -    mun AreroutD                                           quing uy Jo aatg                                               UWS              #2
                                                                                                                                ca{peus
                                                                                                                                BULA
                                                                                                                JP UTTIEM BuO
                                 “dows TerNyeU oN} UO                                                       uin         Areqaury                                         yung ‘peay uljaier                                                            ‘ITA         s            &%
                                                                          david MOT[EUS
                                                                                                                                                                      ' IY Jo savard m98y
                                                                                                                                                                    JUNG                                                                               TA           S            a4
                                                                          aAvid MOT[LYS                                                                                 puny "GUL JO a9                                                                "A           g            1G
                             *1aaUILIp UT Yaay IMoy fa3po                                                     uin pirys & fq
              UO 49s ‘satloys JO ajou9 B Aq papunowns                                                       peraa0oau0 ‘sumn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                aRUy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                JULY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                wdaery


                                                                                                                        ONY                                             quing ‘yur Jo avarg                                            eo AVE                       H        0z
                                                                                                                                                                                                           7
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Josasardoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                           yung
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ‘uly


              pue ‘aoujins Mivu 043 WO sUIN aL                                                               Arerutd
                                                                                                                                                                                                             St /
                                  “DOBJANS [VINJVU aq} UO
                                                                   oy                                                                                                                                                                 —— EE                         "        6
                                                                                                                                   [[ewg
                                                                                                                                   un
                                                  “MOLIEQ
                                                                                                                                                                                        quinqun
                                                                                                                        [[ewg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       one             ‘Il          ee           gL
              ay) JO aseq oq} punor youcry oivndg                         aaerd MOT[eYS                                                                                                                                                                             hy ZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ly fooprumegay
                                                                                                                                                                             rodeos
                                                                                                                  un
                                                                                                                                                                                                  punoyy
                                                                                                  MOTIEYS
                                                                                                  aAerd

              saonyins [einyzeu ay} UodT sauog Jo pisodaqy
                                                                                        MOT[VYS


                                                                                                                                                                 jury
                                                                                    MOT[EYS
                                                                                      AOL[RUS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       re
                                                                                                                                                                        Jo
                                                                  DAvAT
                                                                sAeid  aaesd
                                                                     aABid        MOTUS


                                                                                                                dno asuaouy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Hie LEAT                                  ¥
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mou
INTERMENTS.




                                                                                                            sdnoasusauy omJ)
                                                                                                            +     dno osuaouy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sipe                                      Oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PEE



                               “aoeyims Temnjeu oy} woody                                                         um Arexourg
                                                                                                                  dna asuaauy                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                       min [[euL                                                                                                       “ltr                         “
                                                           MOTLEYSARIS                                                                                                                                                                                                               oe
              -a0Ry IMs [eINJeU 911} UOdN sau0g Jo y1sodaq MOT[TRUSsaved
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "T ‘preaoy aise           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘Il
              aoryans [eanzeu ayy uodn sag Jo pisodaqy
                                                                               aAvr3 MOTLETS                       assaA poowd                                                                                                                         a iftes      fs           9
                                                                                                                  doo asuaouy                                                                                                                          gal          2            g
TABULATED



                                                                               aARIS MOT[EYS
                                                                               dAvIS MOT[EYS                                                                                                                                                           *] ‘LOO UOJSTALID ¥
                              *g0BJINS [INU         ay) uodQ.                                                     uin Arelauty)                                                                                                        aa              ie        uoja[quiey{ g
                                         ‘9U( INS    [eANjZeU                                                                                                                                                                                          ery               “       Zz
              att} BAOQe 4aay AMOF sauog Jo Rsodsap oy,
                                        ‘aovjins yemmjpeu
              att] 9AOQR aaj BI) SAUOG JO Wsodop OYL                                                               JassaA poor                                                                                                                         “<"T Gaopw 0043q          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘ONIGMY           HLUON
                                                                                                                                               “AZNOUT
                                                                                                                                               "NOUL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   aeelms
                                                                                                                  “AUALLOL                                “TNO                             “INOLS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pe)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i-] Ss n a »a
                              ‘SHUVNA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         “A8duoo

                                                                                                                                           gO SLOaLgZo
                                      TTUMNGTHD                                              “M ATH                      CHL AM CANINVX                  TIOWOL                       FO SLNHLNOO
146
    9g      uojZueqprom                  |}-—lJ|            wT         TeV
                                                                                           ee              a       +e               ne         oo“    “ee       os       wee    os            wee          oe         -                    “    Vv          ‘aru uo        ayy           jernjeu       ‘QORJINS‘pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     os0[o0}     ‘uryev       !uewom ays pey wv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  jaf     ‘peaq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             v     avardJo  s,taap '1300)    ‘passard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                v       vyLAU        Bpaosord viqaqaA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jo@    ‘qsy pure
                                         (eae oy            aaa         cee                we              |          oar      ordun sory,                      Bae      te     aux.          Oe           ||ne    deal,                   |"        aay        ‘saytmoo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ye zoyy
                                                                                                                        ‘syuaUTfauo  STAB                                                                                                                                     "ystem
                                                                                                                   9H BUI MOQ
                                                                                                                  jov     Tip
    lt          *
             qaps3uq does                [_ oe              eee         ae                 ase             deee    vee                                fae       see      dewe
    gz           UOzRISaFT                                                                                                                                                      are           on           dove    soe                     |"            Apog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UO      ayy          [wINyeU     “aoBjANS
                                            +
                                         |—_/""DIOMOy ~                 see                                a                                          roe       coe      fae el oa            a8                           OARID                V          PLIYD
    6z       umaroyg
                   PIomM
                     [I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                JHOQe ad1Y4 SIBaK"PLO
                                                    —-~-|   8           oe                                                                            (ss                              poog         [assoa         age                              UC ON}              [RINIEU       “adUJINS
    0s      ra            ‘II                   eae         one         on                                                                            ave                              poor         Jassad                 doog DART
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |'**          UL     si)              PuNouLSIDA OY)      SUTLULIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JOB   URW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pur@                ‘uewom          v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       duiktwao ysodap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jo
                                                one         ve          -                  “               erry    Coos             dane       wee    se        .        *|            poog         [ossaa
                                                                                                                                                                                                         |"                doag    oar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |t                   yung         ‘souog            e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ayqeqorgfueursty         OFT
                                  >                 ||         upaaep‘pray guimq     [=>                                                              [ate      mses     ie     wee.          a           Pen     eee               |"   pun                       ‘anes
    Ie      “                  as SON               SS      ove    ane    ses   bee                                                                   ery       Cre      [eee   ses           oe          |"                 Morpeysgdae
    a       “                  ie                   ees     obs    oe     we    ie                                                                    Kec                or     meee                                         Moyuysaaerd
    ee       i“                          |—fa
                                            |                  rederog
                                                                   pue ¢       s3urddiyo
                                                                                   | “*                                                               a                                                           pS                   |"           UG ayy              [eNQeU       *aoUsANs
    #
    eg       Pr
          19330                 TA  | «ow
                               uoydworg                     aN     aes    oe    Dawe se                                                               ae                                      sas         |"                 Morley[adeTdUy]              oy}          oAvAT SBM ayy         ApoqJo B           Puyo
          PIOM       Rs              «
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Duryonoy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ayy  Layo “Apod
                                                    |——]              payeioyiag
                                                                           ‘axe yung
                                                                                  {es                              ve               eer    =          the       Habis           Seay          oo          |               daaq    ears
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |"          uy     ayy  aavsF autos   UAYOIQ                       ULUINIT Souog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pue autos       “sproqsjod
    9¢      «         cy               [| ws                a           or                        “                ae               fs         Ae     on                                      ase                            MOTeYsaAwd
    Lg                 se}             |e cen               Rs          wae 8                              fase    ane              ue                “                                             [assaa                doog aavid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | y                    uvuryo           o[pptur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘odeye      ayy jseo ‘pua Due
                                       |— |                     avoury yurodjo                         Guu
                                                                                                        ) “                         ‘2                me                                      ba                  ass                  ft                 ayyae 48am
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  &                Juno’ “ueur
                                                                   peqieq                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TABULATED
L   8¢      mee!          gar:       capeail|       ama     cass        aaa                SS              Re)          MRCS,       RUG etc)                    plaice
    6g
                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                  moyeygjaawid ayy, urn pretwo s9y                        apis    uodnoy)           “souog
                      Pas                       a           sae,                                                   Sy               pe                                                                            aes                  |***               puryog:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ous         peoy sea ou           Apog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jo @        Ara
                               }         fe Boe                                                                    wg               Soe                                                                           sre                  |                  dunok “pigs
    OF
    It                    “TASee     aes                          ms               i                       eee     eee                                                   pes    ss                                           MOTLEYSDALIT
                          ira“ ||) |                        Suoy jurg                  apy
                                                                                         UL                           fauy                     Se      loess             rhs    BD            —           |"              daaqy aAvAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |*** UT               ay)        aAvIT V19AK OY}               PIt0j;7BOS SULEULIL
                                                                   ‘aaerd ynq              Jou             Qua                                                                                                                                      Jo
                                                        IBYQIEayy                                                                                                                                                                                              aariy       ‘sarpoq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pue            [sadas          SjusWBvIy
                                                                                                 WUINQUN
                                                                                                    Ho                                                                                                                                      vo          Juyyucp,,
                                                        quing Apog                                                                                                                                                                                             ,,‘dnopue OM} aay      SAOge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oy}     satpoq 919M 941     satoqJO @      yuing
                                               ates a         nae                                       oa                       “as                                     face   eee                       llhns
    gy     uoquen ‘ploa,
                    "LT                  |_| +      one                                                  te                      us                                                                               pase                       “£p0q                                                                      INTERMENTS.
    £F       a       “II                                                                                                                                                        3                                 o                |*     UC 9IQ      [VIMZLU *doNJINs
                                         | -        =                                                 pe           sy           ee             sit                                wt                                         Molleusfoavsd aarg saipoqora prey asoj9             1943990)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pue
    tF      a                   |
                               11T |—- + |                                                                                                                                                                                                       AQuaprad pating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ye ay} aules “oully
                                                            yeag          Jadezos                     Fe           a                           aa              pas       ba     aaa           oe          glhos   ive              |"     UO OY)
    Sb      bs        f (is              een us             ae                                                                                                                                                                                        [YINyBU “2oVJLNS
                                                                        nee                                 fees tee                           nae   fee       sre       |-*           poog         [assoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                        |"                doag aavsd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |**               aug, Apog pey             usaq prey         uodn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  v             uspoom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ed          “au0y) yotyM paysar uoda                   *Ssaye}s
    OF      “             A’             ETN est            ae          te                 a                                                                             “eh                  ase                            MOLLUSDATIZ
    Lb      ug                 SAL       fe ne              “5          tee                we
    SF                         JIA“
                                 =  |—|                     wag                ‘sadeizosquing                                                                                                                             daaq  aavsd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 +
                                                                                                                                               iss                              <                                           MOTTEUSdAeIF
    6F      at                 Het:
                              lee eee                                   ose                =a                                   “              oe
    O¢ ETAL AqroT “PION [—_}'T
                            os                                          meet                                                                                                                  tee                 eo                            UC        OY}          [eINIeU       ‘OoUJANS
                                                                                                           Came    |                oo                                          Oe            Go                        doog aavs3
    1¢                         IL        |——l + gp}                    ‘soatuyoau
                                                                           py  yung                          [sdryo
                                                                                                                 ve                 ue                                                 poo          [2SSeA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         |"               daaq aausd
    e        5                                ee                        ee    ss                                                               ae                               a             See        |'"              daa aaurd             uy 944             aAvIday}            pa1eqBas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             saulogBJO         “{poq
    es                          AD        fe see                        oe             -                                                                       vee                     poo          [aSsaa
                                                                                                                                                                                                        [ts       +                °            uo       ayy           [LIN}eU       ‘DORJINS
    *¢      %                            [PA
                                           oe                                                                                       te               Pisce     mara                          Supyurg
                                                                                                                                                                                                  [dao                      Moypeysaaeid
    sg       =                 TA        |) ve              ese         ae                 me                                   <                    (ek       Liha             a            ae          |"             daag      aavid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |" V                       “ueWON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FW        aR      19y}0pulaJO      ay}      OATIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sem e      usu pue    oa1yy    ‘uoIpyyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          941
                                 P       t                                                                                                                                                                                                             souoq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jo     Woy pelt usoq      paov[(dsip
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘pue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       preyer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UT v   4108Jo APN ‘IOPIO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      147
                                                    ‘S8aHO9
                                       5                                                                                                 SLOIrao
                                                                                                                                            IO                                                                                           TAVUO                                                                      146
                                       3                                                                                                                                                                                           me                                                   ‘SHUVNGa
                                              lal
                                       F        z                                                                                                                                                                                      “~S19
                                       z        ¢                               ‘ANOS                                "SNOT                           ‘AZNOUT               *NOUL                                ‘SMALE
                                alae            =|                                          —
    9¢               “*
                  UoIspnyy |e               |
                                           eee Se             sae          ne               |"                 qnyy       epeut                                      ny                                    duryug
                                                                                                                                                                                                               |dno              aavay     |"     UT        at       9a212 O79M Ot}              SUTEWAI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BJO -SIp
                                                                                                               wory ati                 d                ta                          a                                                                       paqunt ‘Apoq
                                                                                                                 rape
                                                                                                                   Jo fe
                                                                                                    a0ppar
 2g                  ‘qormyzazyng[——t}-y
                                     |“                         agnecgy oo        ee        fooe         ter          ee|r                       ‘yadgeqsae                         fete     wee           o         oo         daaq       gAntgaa               asiryot     puZ ao           ‘QU0}s      *W0})Nq

 gc          “               far                     —|       ve        ane       oo        [ewe         see                oo                 ee tien we                                              £ceraury
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ur fer          we
 6S AA                 ad
                     1OYJeABa |——-7
                                 “"                           ca     eS           xa                    Beles               Ga 4        inet             Res                                                                                        uO      aq            fermyea    ‘aoupins
                                                                                                                                                                                    |"              poog      assed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |"             aawin
 09          oe               |—l"y)
                                 * |                           adiey ayey         4        ieee         ee                                           :                                       Ae            ee     |'"*           daety     |"   y           Apoqino            yFnoryy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ur           JuLyeur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   oT         *QavAS
19           oe         7                  |—-Fy
                                              |                ayypur           edre{ aE                a                                                                                    33        |"         doag gavr3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         “+
29           g                             enol,
                                              Se              a                                         se                                                                                     Ug Jory feeding see       |   uC oy                                        yeanqeu ‘aoejANs
£9           a              IRAN                     ese Gap                                            ee                         >                              ie:                        3             eg       |"             Mol[eys
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         joaesd           aAogya)    aavid aram aalyy Speay[ -UJIAL
                                                                                                                                        Ss               sd                         Oy,                                                                atto    samoy ‘smul     Atyuyoreo  paysodop
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ay        wosJo "A
#9           ss             ot                  ail 2                   ve                                                                                                                                          |"          doa       ~gaei3s
             2              TTA |——[ |                    (wag               xoleros
                                                                                zo auruy
                                                                                     |r                                      Souvom                                                                                 [fo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     aawng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        =  | emog                                          paninisip
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  seuodJo 8        PUUE ous         TABULATED
                                                                                                               pare         [8299p,,                                            ‘                                                                           “onerd
                                                                                                   “Koque
                                                                                                   yno
99           a              ele emi Pas                    koe          eae      Ga)       en           ore                <                                      se                        UIQ)                    |           AoA        |motieys              aoepyoan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jo  jaf          ‘speeqGIL FLY            AB[NITD
                                                                                                                                       ee        .                          .                                                     aud                       ‘systpur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &                 Ie[ndueLN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [19109            ‘yuppuad
29
89       ‘&                 XI
                            [2:6 oresiecr                  Seeae     cnow        ob                                                    ier              :       Vea ca                                              ie    Bae              |        uO ayy             [eanieu ‘soupINs
                                                                                 gumsisPe                                  |vie                      Gaywry
                                                                                                                                                      |     anBuog, [yO oe                                          fi          aA         |Moreys                  Jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 vovpyoanontq sse[s ‘speaqUIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B                  -3}2
                                                                                                                                                 A                                  SERIE                                         aavrd                Suz          uIa}Ied
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UT           “ayy
                                                                                                                                                              BAL
                                                                                                                                                              {3
                                                                                                                                                              -OLQ                                                                                                                                                  INTERMENTS.
                                                                                                                                                                     wax            azuoiq
69       «                                     LbAS                    .        A“         [ove         ts                                                                                  on  on                  |"          A104                     B                           ‘dNo1d
                                                                                                                           “f Y; WL JOP                          lanae                     alee                                   oars |morleYS‘SON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 69-89G9-99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "UasUt              AY[Tews StaTMUIY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       JO 19-99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OL, ‘uourosn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OPM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘ads} ‘pue ay ayi                     ‘SoevpyoouIe[lutts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                puNoZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Selly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                osoyy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14B
OL       “                                    erry
                                                 ate                   -05       ae        ies          Coe                then    roe               foae        aay                he      neo)           oe      |            Aro,       wopeys
                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                    aavid
a        “                             |r
                                        ve                a            ais       oa       [pre         fn                 [hea     fms               pen         As                 le      A          ect         |            kro        morreys
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OABL
ra       “             b-              nerl               on           ee        oo        fave        ste            .            oy                fees        are                        ee         wen         on            cee              uy     oqy         aaeis attos       FLING      saUdGpus -Un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jung sdu0g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  JoB        ‘priya
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [[e                  ‘pasoqeas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [eaaaas svverd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jo¢ ,,                    Supqurap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      «dno
el       a              AXle           efAbn              hae                    Be                    paras                       eed                           Cah                                   Ren Be                              he       ee“ayjo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Gnaputut &cipee                     Vortman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       asraaar         Sere
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘uorypsod
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BML
                            ]          es hy              oes          ate       one      [ae          sen          fone ove                         dete        ee                        wal ee                  oes            MOLTRYSARIF ULL           seK           UaaMjog“Way
PL       “                             —_Frayx
                                          1               os           we        ave      foe                     sauuepyto                          ove         sen            fase       ase 1                   [eee   vee              |"     UC     oy3          [einqeu saousins
                                                                                                     par       aap        uot
         °                             |}~— |‘?                      pajyeiojiag
                                                                           ‘axe
                                                                             @            {punos“*                        ties     ae                            none                      SMES ee                 |**          daaq 2AvId
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |              Ue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        : UT        ay)       ‘aAvId ows         sauog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JoB      “SIP
SL       82             Bagiec
                          i                                   radvsas
                                                                 jo   ‘jurgpus            IYRYL                                                                                                                                                             paqtty “Ypoy
                            i]         |— tt |            os, qurp                     sgurddryo fe                       | g                        |sBulitwa
                                                                                                                                                          ve                    ies        seerey      Te         |:            daaq      aavs3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                 ‘uvutoay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ayy, oa             saaurF poutof
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fq ue
                            \                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Supuado
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OM] 499)           "apTM
  9f                                   ‘adroyziaavaM
                                                                             wearerpray
  £/                       sy
                         ‘edroqyug[ee “                                                                                                               daaq       “aavid
                             RPG
                              0Gbig)
                                am                                                                                     wig     or                                     UG ay}      [VINJLU                     ‘QIUJINEug   prep    uodn
  at                               SU                                                                                                                                   ot}  *saUog
                                                                                                                       wp      vee                                |*  UO 9}       TRINJBU                     “dORJINGwa   prep    uodn
  64          S                        rE                                                                                                                                         oud    *sauog
                                                                                                                       OMT, SUIN                                                                    peAnjeuoaoqeysne
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘aovjinssury,          qsHuoure
                                                                                                                                                                                  oy}    *saulog
       aR                         mo   A                                                                                                                                           daly,490F       DAOQEOY}       [VINJLU *OIVJINE
      i3                         ely                                                                                                                  dooq          “And
      re
       EB                URBYpAwy)
                           *P tq =“                                                                                                                    aavlyg       is
pean)                                                                                                                         frer9uTg
                                                                                                                                  tin                    MOTTEYS
                                                                                                                                                               PATI
ees#8                                                                                                                                                   NOTLEUSPABIA
      a98 Mee                               mor
                                            read,                                                                                                       MOTTRYUSPARIS
             JSAM
                                                                                                                                                        MOLTEYSARID
                                           “ONICIU
  18                    puqkuiagy
                          as                              five
                                                                                                                              Suryung
                                                                                                                                   dno                oArIn      io
                                           “ONVTUAEWND
                                                                                                                                                                              t
  gg         apysep                    ‘yoosreD
                                          I
  68          v                          A    Pea      duo pue                                                                Suryung
                                                                                                                                    “dno 3S)                  |                    Mopag
                                                                                                                                                                                       ayy          [BINjeU *‘aOBJANS
                                                                  MOLIet ‘ayy,
                                                                                                                                                        MOTIEYUS
                                                                                                                                                               MARIS
                                           ANVTITUOWLSAAL quanqin                                                                                                                                                                        TABULATED
  06         AOOW! YLOAIT
  16          Aqary  ‘uaydayg“ly                                                                                       poog }Ssea                     aAvIN,     |                aUOyg a[a119 PUNOXBY}         BSEqJO JY}        “UMD
  £6              «                                                                                                       asuaouy
                                                                                                                              dno                       MO[[BUGARIT
                                  fay we
  £6              sf                    foe
                                          oe                                                                                                                                 UO 91)            [BIN;eU    “aoBjANs
  £6                          “Coote
                                  71 {fesscrc
  $6         Aqsy             we            [se    Fess
                                                                                                                                                                             UC 91}       [BINZEU ‘OOBJINS
                                                             Ee                                                                                         MOTELSDABIZ            aUu0}g apox19 prinox
                                            UPTANNQHLUON                                                                                                                                          at} aseqJo               “used
                             “ANVT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         INTERMENTS.
  96         ‘prog oT                                       oj}                                                        pooy          [assaa      4810           Re       y          Asiana   Funok “p[Lya aU0}g afatto PUNOL
  AB Me                Tee                  |e ce            Saat                 Jo
                                                                               yuaMSeIT‘GUIP       wuNG                                                                       94}      aseqJO 9}      “MOLLE
  eso)                  SU                         pelle |e                                                                  AlerIULD
                                                                                                                                 win                                            yafnogy-
                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘spweq     Jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                yIsodaq saUOg
                                                                                                                                                                                                          UO                      ‘adBJINS
                                                                                                           yuourse1y
                                                                                                              \yo            Arexeutg
                                                                                                                                 urn                                         UG 911}     [RINIEU *OOBJANS
  66     a             “AI                  [=Oe   ane
                                                                             paqulog
                                                                                  [BAO     7
                                                                                          AFLWY “UN   md                                      lett
                                                                 (eo
                                                                   quiny                                                                      DAVID

   006     4UONRYD dere sae                                            ory        ‘yur0d-a\quinq
   10T plo       fyotMog {_|'y
                             se                                                                                                                       SABID     ate
                                                                                                                       poo       ]esseaA         qstp           ©           Moog ay}       [BINIVU “OBJINS
   rahe                                                                                                                               Ie
                  at                                 ely
                                                      | Bo                                                                                                                   punoxraseqJO     ‘urlva
                                                                                                                                                 we             is          AVO[ag
                                                                                                                                                                                943       [RINALU *dOVJIMS        a[2112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  au03g
   LOT                       UOJL9[[OUD
                                     it                                                                                                                                      puNnosaseqJo     “Wled                 DILII SUL}
                                                                                                                                                 4s19           :        UO ay}        [LINyeU ‘AOBJINS



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         149
150      MODELS   OF   IMPLEMENTS   SOMETIMES   BURIED.

   In the table with which Mr. Greenwell has been so good
as to furnish me, and which shows the primary deposits in 102
tumuli examined by him, it will be observed that only thirty
contained any implement, the other 72 being altogether bare.
There is not a single case in which the corpse was deposited
in that extended position which seems to us so natural.
  Thus, then, there seems to have been no intention of de-
positing with each corpse a complete set of implements.    The
barrow on Cronkstone Hill, for instance, contained the
skeleton of a man, with whom had been buried the burnt
bones of some one, probably a slave, or, perhaps, a wife, who
had been sacrificed at his grave, and yet the only implement
found with him was a “circular instrument,” probably a
flint scraper or a sling-stone. Again, the mound known as
“Cow Low” contained only a bone pin. The affectionate
relatives who heaped up this tumulus would certainly not
have sent their dead sister into the new world with nothing
but a bone pin, if they had thought that the things they
buried with her could be of any use. Even the great tumulus
at Arbor Low contamed only a bone pin, a piece of iron
pyrites, a kidney-shaped instrument of flint, and two vases.
It would be easy to multiply illustrations, and it is, I think,
sufficiently evident that the articles found in the graves can-
not seriously be considered as affording any evidence of a
definite belief in a future state of existence, or as having
been intended for the use of the dead in the new world
to which they were going.         Moreover, there is a well-
marked speciality in each case, which seems to show that
the presence of these rude implements, far from being the
result of a national belief, are simply the touching evidence
of individual affection.
   In some few cases, again, small models of weapons have
been found, in lieu of the weapons themselves. In modern
Esquimaux graves small models of kajaks, spears, etc., are
           BARROWS    BELONG    TO   VERY   DIFFERENT     PERIODS.         151

 sometimes buried, and a similar fact has been observed in
Egyptian tombs.      Mr. Franks informs me that much of
the jewellery found in Etruscan tombs is so thin that it can
scarcely have been intended for wear during life. In Japan
those who are entitled to wear swords during life have
wooden ones placed in their graves, as insignia of rank ; and
it has long been the custom in China to burn paper cut-
tings, or drawings, of horses, money,            etc., under     the belief
that the objects so represented will be actually possessed by
the deceased*.
   We must always bear in mind that the ancient tumuli do
not all belong to one period, nor to one race of men. No
tumuli belonging to the Palaolithic period have yet been
discovered, but this mode of burial appears to have existed
in Northern and Western Europe from the Neolithic, or
second Stone period, down to the introduction of Chris-
tianity. Indeed it was the examination of the tumuli which
first induced Sir R. Colt Hoare, and other archeologists, to
adopt for Northern Europe the division into three great
periods.     In Denmark, especially, there was supposed to be
so sharp and well-marked a distinction between the tumuli
of the Stone Age and those of the Bronze period, that the
use of bronze might be considered as having been introduced
by a new race of men, who rapidly exterminated the previous
inhabitants, had entirely different burial customs, and were
altogether in a much higher state of civilization. It was
stated that the tumuli of the Stone Age were generally sur-
rounded by a circle of great stones, and contained chambers
formed of enormous blocks of stone; and that the dead were
buried in a contracted or sitting posture, with the knees
brought up under the chin, and the arms folded across the
breast. On the contrary, the burial places of the Bronze
Age were described as having “no circles of massive stones,
   * See, for instance, Marco Polo’s Travels.   Edin. 1816, pp. 248-260.
152            DIFFICULTY    OF DETERMINING      THE PERIOD

no stone chambers;           in general, no large stones         on the
bottom, with the exception of stone cists placed together,
which, however, are easily to be distinguished                from the
stone    chambers;      they consist, as a general rule, of mere
earth, with heaps of small stones, and always present them-
selves to the eye as mounds of earth, which, in a few rare
instances, are surrounded    by a small circle of stones, and
certain relics of bodies which have been burnt and placed in
vessels of clay, with objects of metal*.”
  Thus, therefore, the barrows of the Age of Bronze appeared
+o be distinguished from those of the earlier period, not only
by the important fact that, “instead of the simple and uni-
form implements and ornaments of stone, bone, and amber,
we meet, suddenly, with a number and variety of splendid
weapons, implements, and jewels of bronze, and sometimes,
indeed, with jewels of gold+;” but, also, because the con-
struction of the tumuli themselves was different in the two
periods ; and the corpse which, in the Stone Age, was always
buried in a contracted posture, was in the Bronze Age always
burnt.      Subsequent      investigations, however, have furnished
the Danish antiquaries rather with exceptions to, than con-
firmations of, this generalization ; and, on the whole, it must
be admitted that (though the passage-graves and long barrows
seem always to belong to the Stone Age) we are not acquainted
with any external differences by which the tumuli of the
Stone, Bronze, and Iron Ages can, with certainty, be dis-
tinguished from one another.    The contents of the graves
are, however, more instructive.  Eventually, no doubt, the
human remains themselves, and especially the skulls, will
prove our best guides; but, at present, we do not possess a
sufficient number of trustworthy descriptions or measure-
ments, to justify us in drawing any generalization from them,
      * Worsaae’s Primeval Antiquities, p. 93.          + Ibid. p. 24.
                TO WHICH   A TUMULUS    BELONGS.             153

excepting, perhaps, this, that the skulls found with bronze in
some cases closely resemble those discovered in graves con-
taining only stone implements; from which we may infer
that, even if the use of bronze was introduced by a new and
more   civilized race, the ancient inhabitants were not alto-
gether exterminated.      The pottery does not at present help
us much ; that found in company with bronze is often coarse,
il-burnt, hand-made, and, in form, ornamentation, and mate-
rial, closely agrees with that which occurs in graves containing
stone implements only. We too often see that tumuli are
referred to the Stone Age because they contain one or two
implements made of that material. This, however, is a very
unsafe deduction. We know that stone was extensively used
throughout the Bronze Age; and, indeed, out of 37 tumuli
in which Mr. Bateman found objects of bronze, no less than
29 contained also stone implements, many cf which were
extremely rude.
   There are also cases in which it is evident that flint imple-
ments were deposited in graves rather in deference to ancient
customs, than because they were still in every day use. Thus
in the tumulus known as Kouloba, or “ Hill of Cinders,”
near Kertch, a heap of sharp flints was found. This tumulus
was of considerable size, and contained the remains of a chief,
his wife, servant, and horse.    He wore a cap ornamented
with plates of gold, a gold enamelled necklace, and gold
bracelets.   His sword was of iron, the handle covered with
leaves of gold embossed with figures of hares and foxes.    His
shield was also of gold, covered with heads of Medusa, etc.
An electrum plate, which had formed part of a quiver, was
also ornamented with figures of animals, such as a tiger seizing
a goat, and a deer attacked by a griffin. Above the tail of
the tiger was written 7opvayo.    Statuettes, bronze cauldrons,
and many other things were deposited around.
154                         TABULATED            INTERMENTS.

   The queen was also richly ornamented. The tumulus con-
tained also a diadem of gold, a necklace of gold filagree, to
which were suspended small bottles of fine gold ; medallions
of green and blue enamel; a magnificent vase in electrum ;
two gold bracelets ; and six knives with ivory handles, besides
many other gold ornaments.        Many of these objects were
ornamented with beautiful figures of animals. A mitre, for
instance, had a plate of electrum, on which were represented
four women in Greek costume, sitting in the midst of gar-
lands of lotuses, the stalks of which                           served as seats and
backs. The plate was attached to the mitre by four masks
of lions, and the bottom of the mitre was bordered by a
diadem of gold, adorned by small enamelled rosettes. In the
same tumulus, under this tomb, was a second still richer one,
from which no less than 120 pounds weight of gold jewellery
are said to have been taken.
   In such a tumulus as this, flint flakes could evidently have
but a symbolical meaning *.
   Evidently, therefore, the mere presence of a few imple-
ments of stone is in itself no sufficient reason for referring
any given interment to the Stone Age. The following tabu-
lar statement of 297 interments, recorded by Mr. Bateman,
will, however, I think, be found interesting :—

                                                 CORPSE.
      Implements.       aS            a    ae      a       ee      ee        Total,
                        Contracted.       Bumt.        Extended.   hoa


  NON     Geeta             27              63              3            7    100
  ISUONOe .aihee ease       53              48              2           31    1384
                                                            5
                                                            4



  These      interments are all from the counties of Derby,
        * Journal of the British Archeological Association, vol. xiii,
                                           STATISTICS.                                     155

Stafford, and York.                   In his work on ancient Wiltshire, Sir
R. C. Hoare               records        the examination            of 267 interments,
which may be tabulated in a similar manner as follows :—

                                                   CORPSE.

      fmplements.          ioe            min    see hi CL, hale             oS   Total.
                           Contracted?      Burnt.     Extended.     tae


   ONG    ise vase iets          9           160              3         12        184,
   Stone                         2                5           1          1           9
   BrOuzeer ae,                  4.             49            2          8         63
   Prone ances                  —               —             7          4,        see

   PROTA ceceasmactese
                    ore         15          214              ifs}      25         267



   We see that in this latter table nearly all the cases of
bronze were in interments preceded by cremation, but in the
northern interments the reverse is the case; and, as regards
Wiltshire, if we are to regard cremation as a test of the
Bronze Age, we must refer almost the whole of these inter-
ments to that period. I confess that I am somewhat inclined
todoso. No less than 270 tumuli cluster round Stonehenge,
and it seems most probable that the dead were brought from
a distance tc lie near the great temple. In this case the
great majority of the tumuli belong, therefore, to one period,
that, namely, at which the temple was held sacred. Some
few, indeed, may be referable to earlier or later times, but as
out of 152 of these interments which were examined by Sir
R. C. Hoare, no less than 39 contained objects of bronze, I
am disposed to regard the whole group as belonging to the
Bronze period. Now in these 152 cases the corpse was con-
tracted in four only, and extended in three. In 16 the dispo-
sition of the corpse was not ascertained, and in no less than
129 it had been burnt.
   If we combine the observations of Sir R. C. Hoare and
Mr. Bateman, we shall obtain the following table :—
156                  DIFFICULTY          OF DETERMINING          THE   PERIOD
 a                                  a        a                    A           a

                                                 CORPSE.

         Implements.                                                     xy       Total

                               Contracted.   Burnt.   Extended.        Wie


      INONO Ae see waeeeens         36        223           6           19        284
      StON@seccwereseces            55         53           3           32        143
      iBronz@esessrentes            19         59           if          15        100
      1GYoyo osnenodbacensns         2          3          21           11         67/

      Ota lee eteeeees            112        338           87           at        564


   Some of these interments were no doubt Anglo-Saxon;
if these had been eliminated the argument would have
appeared still stronger, but taking them as they are, out of
87 graves containing iron weapons or implements, the corpse
was certainly extended in 21 cases, and, probably so, in
several others; while, out of no less than 527 cases in which
iron was not present, the corpse was extended only in 16,
the proportion being at least ;%,ths im one case, and only
gard in the other. On the whole we may certainly conclude
that this mode of burial was introduced at about the same
period as the use of iron.
   As regards the habit of burning the dead, the evidence is
less conclusive. Out of 100 cases, indeed, of graves charac-
terized by the presence of bronze, the corpse appears to have
been buried, in a contracted posture, 19 times only; in an
extended position, only seven times. It is evident, there-
fore, that during the Bronze Age, the dead were generally
burnt.     It is true that there are many cases in which
interments by cremation, if I may use such an expression,
contain no weapons or objects of bronze. We know, how-
ever, that this metal must always have been expensive, and
 it is not unreasonable to suppose that many, if not most, of
 these interments may belong to the Bronze Age, although
 no objects of metal occurred in them.
    There can be no doubt that in the Neolithic Stone Age
i5 was usual to bury the corpse in a sitting or contracted
                  TO WHICH     A TUMULUS     BELONGS.                157

posture; and, in short, it appears probable, although far
from being satisfactorily established, that in Western Europe
this attitude is characteristic of the Stone Age, cremation of
that of bronze; while those cases in which the skeleton was
extended may be referred, with little hesitation, to the Age
of Iron. At the same time it must be admitted that the
evidence is very far from conclusive ; and we must remember
that in Anglo-Saxon times the dead were burned by some
tribes, and buried by others.
   But although the presence of a few flint flakes, or other stone
implements, is certainly no sufficient reason for referring any
given tumulus to the Stone Age, the case is different where
a large number of objects have been found together; for
instance, I have in my collection a group of stone implements
consisting   of 14   beautifully    made     axes,   wedges,     chisels,
spear-heads, etc., and more than 60 capital flakes, which
were all found together in one of the large Danish sepul-
chral chambers,      on the    island of Méen*,         and have been
described by M. Boye. The tumulus had a circumference of
140 ells, and a height of about eight ells. It is probable that
it had been surrounded by a circle of stones, for M. Jensen,
the owner, remembered that, many years before, the northern
side had been surrounded by a row of stones standing close
together.    None of them, however, at present remain.               Un-
fortunately M. Boye was not present when they began to
remove the tumulus; still he thinks that fhe account given
to him may be relied on with safety. M. Jensen began to
dig on the east side of the Low, and the first thing which he
came to was a jar, which he unfortunately broke.       It con-
tained burnt bones and a bronze pin, the head of which was
ornamented with concentric lines. Towards the $.S.E. was
found a cist, about an ell long, and formed of flat stones.
In it were burnt bones, a bent knife, and a pair of pincers
     * Annaler for Nordisk Oldkyndighed og Historie, 1858, p. 202.
158                            DANISH    TUMULUS

two inchés in length; both these objects were of bronze.
Not far from this cist was another urn, containing burnt
bones, with several objects of bronze, namely, a knife four
inches in length, part of a small symbolical sword, and two
fragments of an awl. It is evident that these three inter-
ments belonged to the Bronze Age, and also that they were
secondary, that is to say, that they belonged to a later
date than the original sepulchral chamber, over which the
tumulus had been made.
                                   Fria, 143,




                     _——
                 Vis +f




                ey                   tere                          (anaes

         ‘WwW             i;                                            E
                           .            \Booas gta            meen a




                Plan of the Chamber in a Danish Tumulus in Méen,


   The sepulchral chamber itself (fig. 143) lay north and
south, was of an oval form, about eight and a half ells in
length, and twenty and a half in circumference, and about
two and a half in height. The walls consisted of twelve
very large, unhewn stones, which, however, did not in most
cases touch one another, but left intervals which were filled
up by smaller stones. The roof was formed by five great
blocks, the spaces between them being filled up by smaller
ones.   The passage, which was on the east side, was five ells
                           IN THE   ISLAND   OF MOEN.                           159

long and one ell broad, and was formed by eleven side stones
and three roof stones. At the place (a) was, on each side, a
smaller stone, which, in conjunction with another on the
floor between them, formed a sort of threshold, probably
indicating the place where the door stood. Similar traces
of a doorway have been found in other Danish tumuli, and
may, perhaps, be taken as evidence that the mounds had
been used previously as houses; at the time of the inter-
ment the construction of a door would have been simply
purposeless, the passage leading to it being filled up with
rubbish. The chamber was filled up with mould to within
               Fre. 144,                                   Fre, 1465,




                    Skull from a Danish Tumulus at Moen,

half an ell of the roof.            About the middle, not far from
the bottom, a skeleton was extended                   (at 6), with the head
towards the north. On the south side (at ¢ and d) occurred
two crania, each of which lay on a quantity of bones, indi-
cating that the corpses had been buried in a sitting posture.
At (e) was a similar ‘skeleton, close to which were three
amber beads, a beautiful flint axe, which did not seem to
have been ever used, a small unfinished chisel, and some frag-
ments of pottery, ornamented with points and lines. At (/)
was another skeleton, in a similar position, with a flint flake,
an amber bead, and some fragments of pottery.                           Figs. 144,
160              DANISH      CHAMBERED         TUMULUS.

145, represent one of the skulls from this stone chamber.
Several other skeletons were found sitting round the side
walls, but they had unluckily been removed and thrown
away before the arrival of M. Boye. With them were at
least 20 different jars or urns, all of them inverted, and
prettily decorated with points and lines.
                                   Fia. 146,




             View in the Chamber looking through the entrance.



  Besides these objects, the earth in the chamber contained
five flint spear-heads, a fragment ofa flint spear which had
been broken and worked up again, two small flint chisels,
53 flint flakes, varying from three to five and a half inches in
length; 19 perfect, and 31 broken, amber beads, of which
         DESCRIPTION      OF A BARROW             AT WEST    KENNET.             161

the greater number were hammer-like, the rest tubular or
ring-shaped.  The passage was filled up by earth, mixed
with fragments of pottery, and small stones. About the
middle was a skeleton, with the head towards the east, at
the side of which were five flakes and anamberbead.                            Close
to the feet was a jar, unornamented,                  and much ruder than
those found in the chamber itself.                Not the smallest fragment
of metal was found either in the chamber or in the passage.
            Fie. J47.                 Fig. 148.                    Fie, 149,




                                    Fia. 150,




               Flint faviewents toca the Tumulus at West Kennet.

   Again, as a second case of the same sort, I may mention
the Long Barrow (fig. 146) near West Kennet, in Wiltshire,
described by Dr. Thurnam*.                The tumulus in this case is
336 feet in length, 40 feet wide at the west end, and 75 feet
at the east, with a height of eight feet.                   The walls of the
                   * Archzxologia, vol. xxxviii. p. 405.
162       POTTERY       FROM     THE WEST       KENNET      TUMULUS.

chamber   are   formed         by six great blocks           of stone,       and it
opens into a passage, so that the ground plan very closely
resembles that of the tamulus just described, and, in fact, of

            Fig. 151,                                            Fre, 152,




          Fre. 153.




                                                             Fig.   154,




                      Pottery from the Tumulus at West Kennet.


the “Passage graves” generally.      The chamber and en-
trance were nearly filled with chalk rubble, containing also
bones of animals, flint implements (figs. 147-150), and
fragments of pottery. In the chamber were four skeletons,
                                  BRETON      TUMULI.                            163

two of which appear to have been buried in a sitting posture.
 In different parts of the chamber were found nearly 800
 flakes, three or four flint cores, a whetstone, a scraper, part
 of a bone pin, a bead of Kimmeridge                          shale, and several
heaps of fragments of pottery (figs. 151-156) belonging
apparently to no less than 50 different vessels, and all made
by hand, with one doubtful exception. No trace of metal
was discovered. The two pieces (figs. 155, 156) were found
apart from the rest, and may, perhaps, be of later origin.

             Fic, 155.                                              Bre. 156,




                         Pottery from the Tumulus at West Kennet.


  The large tumuli of Brittany, most of which have recently
been opened, have afforded several other instances of the
same kind. Thus the great Mont St. Michel, at Carnac,
which is no less than 380 feet in length, and 190 feet broad,
with an average height of 33 feet, was found to contain a
square chamber, in which were eleven beautiful jade celts,
two large rough celts, and twenty-six small fibrolite celts,
besides 110 stone beads and stone fragments of flint*. Again,
the chamber in the tumulus called Manné-er-H’roek contained
a hundred and three stone axes, three flint flakes, and fifty

  * Rapport 4 M. Le Préfet duMor-             Michel.    Par M.Réné Galles.     1862.
bihan sur les fouilles du Mont St.
                                          mM 2
164                            BRETON     TUMULI.

beads of jasper, quartz, and agate, but neither of these great
tumuli contained a trace of metal*.
   Other similar cases might be mentioned+, in which tumuli
of large size, covering a sepulchral chamber, constructed with
great labour, and evidently intended for a person, or persons,
of high rank, have contained numerous objects of stone and
pottery, without a trace of metal.
  It appears reasonable to conclude that these interments
belong to the ante-metallic period; especially when, as in the
first-mentioned case, we find several secondary interments,
plainly belonging to a later age, and although presenting
no such indications of high rank, still accompanied by objects
of bronze.
   It may seem at first sight very improbable that works so
considerable should have been undertaken and carried out
by nations entirely ignorant of metal. The burial mound of
Oberea, in Otaheiti, was nevertheless two hundred and sixty-
seven feet long, eighty-seven wide, and forty-four in height.
And in treating of modern savages, I shall hereafter have
occasion to notice other instances quite as extraordinary.
   The practice of burying in old tumuli, which continued
even down to the times of Charlemagne}, has led to some
confusion, because           objects of very different date are thus
liable to be described as coming from one grave; yet, on the
other hand, it is very instructive, as there are several cases
on record, besides the one above mentioned, of intcrments
characterized by bronze being found above, and being, there-
fore, evidently subsequent to others, accompanied by stone
only §.
   * Manné-er-H’roeck. Rapport 4 la        tianornm Saxonorum ad cemeteria
Société Polymathique.    Par M. Le-        ecclesie deferantur, et non ad tumu-
febyre et M. Réné Galles. 1863.            los paganorum.”
  + See, for instance, Lukis, Archaz-         § See, for instance, Von Sacken
ologia, vol. xxxy. p. 247.                 Leitfaden zur Kunde des heidnischen
  t+ One of his regulations ran as fol.    Alterthumes, p. 15.
lows:—‘‘ Jubemus ut corpora Chris-
                      SEPULCHRAL    POTTERY.                          165

  On the whole, however,       though it is evident              that the
objects most frequently buried with the dead would be those
most generally used by the living, and though the prevalence
of stone implements proves the important part played by
stone in ancient times, and goes far to justify the belief in a
Stone Age; still, the evidence to be brought forward on this
point in the following chapters will, probably, to many minds
seem more satisfactory; and, at any rate, we must admit that,
in the present state of our knowledge, there are comparatively
few interments which we could, with confidence, refer to the
Neolithic Stone Age, however firmly we may believe that a
great many of them must belong to it.
   Mr. Bateman has proposed to range the pottery found in
ancient British tumuli under       four different heads, namely,
1. Urns; 2. Incense Cups;          8. Food Vases; 4. Drinking
Cups.   The urns generally ac-                     ere
company interments by crema-
tion, and have either contained
or been inverted over burnt
human bones. They are gene-
rally of large size, “ from ten
to sixteen inches high, with a
deep border, more or less deco-
rated by impressions of twisted
thongs, and incised patterns in
which the chevron or herring-
bone constantly recurs in va-
rious combinations,    occasion-
ally relieved by circular punc-
                                               Sepulchral Urn.
tures, or assuming a reticulated
appearance.    They are all made by hand, no trace of the
potter’s-wheel being ever found on them. They almost inva-
riably have an overtanging rim. The material of which they
are formed is clay mixed with pebbles, and some of them
166          URNS.     FOOD VASES.             “INCENSE        CUPS.”

have been described as “sun-dried.” This, however, appears
to be altogether a mistake, arising from the imperfect manner
in which they were burnt.   In colour they are generally
brown or burnt umber outside and black inside. Fig. 157
represents a specimen from Flaxdale Barrow, in Derbyshire.
                        Fig. 158




                            Vessels from a Tumulus at Arbor Low.

      Secondly, the “incense cups,” so called by Sir R. Colt
Hoare. They differ very much in shape, and are seldom
more than three inches high. When decorated, the patterns
                            are the same as those on the
          Fic. 160.
                            urns, and are usually on the
                            under surface, but they are often
                            left plam.     They are often
                                           pierced, and it is possible that
                                           some of them were used for
                                           lamps, as was, I believe, first
                                           suggested by Mr. Birch. “The
                                           third division includes vessels of
                                           every style of ornament, from
                                           the rudest to the most elabo-
                                           rate, but nearly alike in size,
                                           and more difficult to assign to
                                           a determinate period than any
               er                          other, from the fact of a coarse
            Drinking Cup.                  and a well-finished one having
several times been found in company.”                       The above woodcuts
                             DRINKING CUPS.                                167

(figs. 158, 159) represent two vessels found in a barrow on
the circle at Arbor Low, in Derbyshire.
   Fourthly, “The drinking-cups (fig. 160) are generally from
six and a half to nine inches high, of a tall shape, contracted
in the middle, globular below, and expanding at the mouth:
they are carefully formed by hand, of fine clay, tempered
with sharp sand, and well-baked; the walls are thin, aver-
aging about three-eighths of an inch, light brown outside
and grey within.” They are generally much ornamented,
and usually accompany well-made flint implements; but in
some cases bronze awls have been found with them. Mr.
Bateman considers that the greater number belong to the
ante-metallic period.
   Numerous as are the varieties of pottery found in ante-
Roman tumuli, they appear (so far, at any rate, as those
discovered by Mr. Bateman are concerned) to have been
all made by hand, without any assistance from the potter’s
wheel; they are formed of clay tempered with sand, and
often with pebbles; they very rarely have handles, and
spouts seem to have been unknown; the ornaments consist
of straight lines, dots, or marks, as if a cord had been im-
pressed on the soft clay; circular or curved lines are rare, nor
is there the slightest attempt to copy any animal or plant.
   Asa general rule the megalithic monuments are constructed
of rough stones neither hewn nor ornamented.                  Lately, how-
ever, many instances of engravings have been observed.                      In
the north of England and in Scotland these generally take
the form of cups, spirals, circles with a dot in the middle, or
incomplete circles with a dot in the middle, or incomplete
circles with a line running from the centre through the
interval, as in fig. 161*. We have as yet no satisfactory

   * See Tate on the sculptured rocks   Cups and Concentric Rings, ete. Proc.
of Northumberland, 1865. Sir J. Y.      S. of Antiquaries of Scotland, vol. vi.
Simpson, on Ancient Sculpturings of     1867. The monuments described by
168                        ROCK     SCULPTURES.

clue to the meaning of these engravings, many of which have
been figured by Mr. Tate and Sir J. Y. Simpson. They occur
in evident association with ancient oppida and fortifications,
as well as on menhirs, and on the stones composing dolmens
and cromlechs.       Fig. 161 represents a characteristic group
on the rocks of Auchnabreach in Argyllshire.                  The surface of
the rock is well adapted to receive such sculpturings, having
been smoothed and prepared by glacial action.
                                       Fic. 161.




                          Rock Seulptures.—Scotland.


   Similar sculpturings have been found in Ireland, where
also the great tumuli on the Boyne afford instances of more
elaborate ornamentation. The great stone at the entrance
of New Grange, for instance, is covered with double spirals,
Mr, Stuart, in his great work on the        work.    For rock carvings in Spain
Sculptured Stones of Scotland,belong       gee Don M. de Géngora y Martinez.
to a much later period, and scarcely         Antigiiedades Prehistdricas de Anda-
fall within the scope of the present       _lucia.
                 BONES   OF ANIMALS   IN TUMULI.                169

 and those forming the central chamber             are also covered
 with circles, spirals, and other patterns,        one of the most
 remarkable being that of a so-called fern leaf, which occurs
 also in Brittany and in the so-called temple of Hagar Kem,
in Malta.
   Mr. Conwell has recently discovered an extensive series of
interesting sepulchral sculptures in the county of Meath.
   With the exception of the “fern leaf,” all these archaic
sculpturings in Great Britain are mere geometrical figures.
The same figures also occur in Brittany, accompanied, how-
ever, by frequent representations of stone axes, both with
and without handles.
   The rock sculptures of Scandinavia present a still further
advance, many of them being rude representations of boats,
much like those on some of the bronze knives (figs. 42-45).
   The most remarkable monument of this kind, however, is
that of Kivik in Scania, close to the shore of the Baltic.
    The remains of other mammals found with ancient human
 relics have acquired increased interest, since the admirable
 researches of the Danish and Swiss zoologico-archeologists,
 and especially of Steenstrup and Riitimeyer, by whose skilful
 cross-examination much valuable and unexpected evidence
has been elicited, from materials of most unpromising
appearance. Unfortunately the non-human remains found in
tumuli are usually in a very fragmentary condition, and have
received little attention from archeologists.   No remains of
any extinct animal have ever been found in the tumuli of
Western Europe. Even the reindeer is altogether absent. The
deer and ox are most frequent. The latter was certainly
domesticated im Switzerland as early as the Neolithic period.
Whether this was the case in Northern Hurope is still uncer-
tain. Some archeologists believe the dog to have been at
that period the only animal domesticated; others, on the con-
trary, consider the cow, sheep, pig, and goat, if not the horse,
to have been at that early period domesticated in the North.
170            SEPULCHRAL   FEASTS.   SACRIFICES.

In the contents of British barrows, bones of these animals
have been frequently observed ; but it is not as yet deter-
mined whether they belong to wild or tame individuals.
  As far, however, as the horse is concerned, we may pro-
bably assume that all the remains belong to a domesticated
race, for there is no reason to suppose that any wild horses
existed in Great Britain at a period so recent. I have
thought, therefore, that it might be of interest to point out
the class of graves in which bones or teeth of horses were
found.    In Mr. Bateman’s valuable works there are, alto-
gether, twenty-eight cases ; but of these, nine were in tumuli
which had been previously opened, and in one case no body
was found. Of the remaining eighteen, five were tumuli
containing iron, and seven were accompanied with bronze.
In one more case, that of the “ Liffs,” it is doubtful whether
the barrow had not been disturbed.      Of the remaining six
tumuli, two contained beautiful drinking vessels, of a very
well marked type, certainly in use during the Bronze Age,
if not peculiar to it; and in both these instances, as well as
in a third, the interment was accompanied by burnt human
bones, suggestive of dreadful rites. Even, however, if these
cases cannot be referred to the Bronze Age, we still see that
out of the two hundred and ninety-seven interments only
sixty-tbree contained metal, or about twenty-one per cent.,
while out of the eighteen cases of horses’ remains twelve, or
about sixty-six per cent., certainly belong to the metallic
period.   This seems   to be prima facie evidence     that the
horse was very rare, if not altogether unknown in England
during the Stone Age. Both the horse and bull appear to
have been sacrificed at graves during later times, and pro-
bably formed part of the funeral feast. The teeth of oxen are so
common in tumuli, that they are even said by Mr. Bateman to
be “uniformly found with the more ancient interments.”
  The very frequent presence of the bones of quadrupeds in
                     PRE-HISTORIC      RACES   OP MEN.                   171

tumuli appears to show that sepulchral feasts were generally
held in honour of the dead, and the numerous cases in which
interments were accompanied by burnt human: bones tend
to prove the prevalence of still more dreadful customs, and
that not only horses* and dogs, but slaves also, were fre-
quently sacrificed at their masters’ graves; it is not impro-
bable that wives often were burnt with their husbands, as
in India, and among           many savage tribes.           For instance,
among the Feegees it is usual on the death of a chief to
sacrifice a certain number of slaves, whose bodies “are called
‘grass’ for bedding ” the grave+.       ‘It is probable,” says
Mr. Bateman, “that the critical examination of all deposits
of burnt bones would lead to much curious information
respecting the statistics of suttee and infanticide, both which
abominations we are unwillingly compelled, by accumulated
evidence, to believe were practised in pagan Britam.” From
the numerous cases in which the bones of an infant and a
woman have been found together in one grave, it seems
probable that if any woman died in childbirth, or while
nursing, the baby was buried alive with her, as is still the
practice among some of the Esquimaux families.
   I would practically urge on those who may in future open
any barrows—
   1. To record the sex of the person buried; this is more
satisfactorily to be determined from the form of the pelvis,
than from the skulJl.       In this manner we may hope to deter-
mine the relative position, and the separate occupations (if
any) of the two sexes.
   2. To observe the state of the teeth, from which we may
derive information as to the nature of the food.
   8. To preserve carefully any bones of quadrupeds that
   * Even so lately as in 1781, Fre-       + Manners and Customs of the
derick Casimir was laid in his grave   Feegees, by T. Williams, 1860, vol. i.
with his slaughtered horse.    Horw     p. 189.
ferales, p. 66.
172   DBSIRABILITY    OF    PRESERVING   MEGALITHIC   MONUMENTS.


may be present, in order to ascertain the species, and, in the
case of the ox and hog, to determine, if possible, whether
they belong to wild or domesticated individuals.
   We may fairly hope that when thoroughly questioned they
will not only answer many of these interesting questions, but
that they will also tell us many things which it would never
occur to us to ask.        It is evident, at least, that when a suf-
ficient number shall have been examined we shall know much
more than we do yet, about the social and domestic life of
those early ages ; we shall know whether during the Stone
Age they had domestic animals in the North as would
appear to have been the case in Switzerland; we shall
know in part what kind of clothes they wore, and by the
remains found with female skeletons we shall even be able
to ascertain, in some measure, the position occupied by
woman with reference to man.
   If, however, we are to acquire all the information that can
be derived from the burial mounds, it must be done quickly.
Livery year many are destroyed, and Abury itself, the grandest
of megalithic monuments, was sacrificed for a paltry profit of
a few pounds.
   Moreover, as population increases, and land grows more
valuable, these ancient monuments           become more and more
liable to mutilation and destruction. We cannot afford them
the protection of our museums, but it is very desirable that
Government should select some competent archeologist to
act as conservator of the national antiquities, whose duty it
would be, as far as possible, to preserve from wanton injury
the graves of our ancestors and other interesting monuments
of the past; to make careful drawings of all those which
have not yet been figured, and to report from time to time
upon their condition,        At a very trifling expense the Danish
government have bought for the nation a large number of
tumuli, and have thus preserved many national monuments
which would otherwise have been destroyed.
                              178




