                        CHAPTER      VI.

       THE ANCIENT LAKE-HABITATIONS OF SWITZERLAND.

    N consequence of the extraordinary dryness and cold of
      the weather during the winter months of 1858, the
rivers of Switzerland did not receive their usual supplies, and
the water in the lakes fell much below its ordinary level, so
that, in some places, a broad strand was left uncovered along
the margin, while in others shallow banks were converted
into islands. The water level of this season was, indeed, the
lowest upon record. The lowest level marked on the so-
called stone   of Stafa was   that of 1674; but in 1854 the
water sank a foot lower still.
   In a small bay between Ober Meilen and Dollikon, on the
Lake of Zurich, the inhabitants had taken advantage of the
lowness of the water to increase their gardens, by building a
wall along the new water-line, and slightly raising the level
of the piece thus reclaimed, by mud dredged from the lake.
In the course of this dredging they found great numbers of
piles, of deer-horns, and also some implements. M. Aeppli
of Meilen, on the Lake of Zurich, was the first to observe
these specimens    of human workmanship,      whichhe justly
supposed might throw some light on the history and con-
dition of the early inhabitants of the Swiss valleys. He at
once, therefore, called the attention of Dr. Keller to them,
and that eminent antiquary soon satisfied himself as to their
true nature, and proved that the early inhabitants of Switzer-
174     LAKE-DWELLINGS   MENTIONED      BY    HERODOTUS.

land constructed some, at least, of their dwellings above the
surface of the water, and that they must have lived in a
manner very similar to that of the Paonians, as described
by Herodotus*.
   “Their dwellings,” he says, “are contrived after this
manner: planks fitted on lofty piles are placed in the
middle of the lake, with a narrow       entrance from the main
land by a single bridge. These piles, that support the planks,
all the citizens anciently placed there at the public charge;
but afterwards they established a law to the following effect:
whenever a man marries, for each wife he sinks three piles,
bringing wood from a mountain called Orbelus: but every
man has several wives. They live in the following manner:
every man has a hut on the planks, in which he dwells, with
a trap-door closely fitted in the planks, and leading down to
the lake. They tie the young children with a cord round the
foot, fearing lest they should fall into the lake beneath. To
their horses and beasts of burden they give fish for fodder;
of which there is such an abundance,          that when a man has
opened his trap-door, he lets down an empty basket by a
cord into the lake, and, after waiting a short time, draws it
up full of fish.”
  At the Newcastle meeting of the British Association, in
1863, Lord Lovaine described a Lake-dwelling observed by
him in the South of Scotland; and in the “ Natural History
Review,” for July, 1863, I had already mentioned one in the
North, which, however, had not at that time been thoroughly
examined.    Sir Charles Bunbury has recorded (Quarterly
Journal of the Geological Society, vol. xii. 1856) some similar
remains found near Thetford, which have been. described at
greater length by Mr. Alfred Newton, in an interesting
paper “ On the Zoology of Ancient Europe,” read before the
Cambridge Philosophical Society, in March, 1862. In his
                      * Terpsichore, v. 14.
          PILE   DWELLINGS      IN   OTHER   PARTS    OF   EUROPE.          175

fifth memoir on the Pfahlbauten*, Dr. Keller has described
a Lake-dwelling at Peschiera, on the L. di Garda; and we
are indebted to MM. B. Gastaldit, P. Strobel, and L. Pigorini
for a description of ruins of a similar nature, which have been
found in Northern Italy. Dr. Lisch has described several
Pile-dwellings in Mecklenburg, and M. Boucher de Perthes,
in his celebrated work, “ Antiquités Celtiques et Antédilu-
viennes,” mentions         certain remains found in the peat near
Abbeville, which appear to have been the ruins of Lake-
dwellings; an observation which is of special interest, ag an
additional argument for referring the Swiss Lake-dwellings
to the period of the peat in the Somme valley, and therefore
to an epoch long subsequent to that of the drift-hatchets.
This inference is entirely in accordance with the conclusions
derived from the study of the stone implements themselves.
   But it is not necessary to go back to pre-historic times;
nor need we appeal to doubtful history or ancient remains
for evidence of the curious habit of water-dwelling. Many
savage or semi-Savage tribes live in the same manner, even
at the present day. I have been informed by a friend who
lives at Salonica that the fishermen of Lake Prasias still
inhabit wooden cottages built over the water, as in the time
of Herodotus.   The city of Tcherkask also is built over the
Don. In parts of Sinde the pastoral tribes “ dwell in habi-
tations elevated eight or ten feet from the ground, to avoid
the damp and the insects occasioned by it}.” Similar dwell-
ings are extensively used in the northern parts of South
America; Venezuela, indeed, having been so called because
the houses resemble those of Venice in being constructed

  * Mittheilungen    der Antiquaris-     lacustri nei Laghi di Lombardia. Atti
chen Gesellschaft in Zurich, 1863.       della Soc. Italiani di Scienze   Natu-
  + Nuovi Cenni sugli oggetti di         rali, 1868, vol. v. p. 154.
Alta Antichita trovati nelle Torbiere       t Burnes. Travels into Bokhara,
enelle Marniere dell’ Italia. Seo also   vol. ili. p. 90.
Stoppani, Prima ricerca di Abitazioni
176                   MODERN     LAKE DWELLINGS.

over water. But it is in the Hast Indies that this habit
prevails most extensively. The city of Borneo is altogether
built upon piles, and similar constructions have been de-
scribed by various travellers in New Guinea, Celebes, Solo,
Ceram,    Mindanao,       the   Caroline       Islands,    and    elsewhere.
Dampier long ago mentioned similar dwellings constructed
over the water, and Dumont d’Urville*, quoted by M.
Troyon, tells us that “Jadis toute la ville de Tondano était
construite sur le lac, et lon ne communiquait d’une maison
& une autre qu’en bateau. Forts de cette disposition, en
1810, les habitants eurent de démélés avec les Hollandais, et
voulurent secouer leur joug: ils s’armérent et furent battus.
 Ce ne fut pas sans peine qu’on en vint a bout: il fallut y
porter de lartillerie et construire des bateaux canoniers.
Depuis ce temps, et pour éviter cet mconvénient, on a dé-
fendu aux indigénes de construire leurs habitations sur le
lac.” The Bishop of Labuan thus describes the dwellings
of the Dyaks: “They are built along the river side, on an
elevated platform twenty or thirty feet high, in a long row;
or rather it is a whole village in one row of some hundreds
of feet long. The platforms are first framed with beams, and
then crossed with laths about two inches wide and two inches
apart, and in this way are well ventilated; and nothing
remains on the floors, but all the refuse falls through and
goes belowt.”
  In Ireland a number of more or less artificial islands called
“ Crannoges{” (fig. 162) are known historically to have been
used as strongholds by the petty chiefs. They are composed
of earth and stones, strengthened by piles, and have supplied
the Irish archeologists with numerous weapons, implements,
and bones.      From     the Crannoge          at Dunshauglin,       indeed,

  * Voyage de l’Astrolabe, vol. v. p.   Series, vol. ii. p. 28.
635.                                       t See Wilde’s Catalogue, vol. i. p.
  + Trans. of the Ethnol. Soc. New      220.
                           IRISH     CRANNOGES.                          (erg

more than one hundred and fifty cart-loads of bones were
obtamed and used as manure!     ‘These Lake-dwellings of
Ireland, however, are referable to a much later period than
those of Switzerland, and are frequently mentioned in early
history. Thus, according to Shirley, “One Thomas Phetti-
place, in his answer to an inquiry from the Government, as
to what castles or forts O’Neil hath, and of what strength
they be, states (May 15, 1567): ‘For castles, I think it be
not unknown unto your honors, he trusteth no point there-
unto for his safety, as appeareth by the raising of the strongest
castles of all his countreys, and that fortification which he
only dependeth upon is zn sartin freshwater loghes in his
                                   Fic. 162.




             Section of a Crannoge in Ardakillin Lough, Roscommon.

country, which from the sea there come neither ship nor
boat to approach them: it is thought that there in the said
fortified islands lyeth all his plate, which is much, and
money, prisoners, and gages: which islands hath in wars
to fore been attempted, and now of late again by the Lord
Deputy there, Sir Harry Sydney, which for want of means
for safe conducts upon the water it hath not prevailed.’”
   Again, the map of the escheated territories, made for the
Government, a.p. 1591, by Francis Jobson, or the “ Platt
of the County of Monaghan,” contains rough sketches of the
dwellings of the petty chiefs of Monaghan, which “are in all
cases surrounded by water.”             In the “Annals of the Four
Masters,” and other records of early Irish History, we meet
with numerous instances in which the Crannoges are men-
                                                                     N
178   LAKE   DWELLINGS   FOUND   IN MOST   OF   THE   SWISS   LAKES.

tioned, in some of which their position has not preserved
them from robbery and destruction; and we need not, there-
fore, be surprised to find that many of the Swiss Pfahlbauten
appear to have been destroyed by fire.
   The Swiss “ Pfaklbauten,” or Lake-habitations, have been
described by Dr. Keller, in six memoirs presented to the
Antiquarian    Society of Zurich, in 1854, 1858, 1860, 1863,
and 1866, and subsequently translated into English by Mr.
Lee. M. Troyon, also, in a special work, “ Sur les Habita-
tions Lacustres,” 1860, has given a general account of the
ancient habitations of his native land, accompanied with the
Lake-dwellings of other countries and times. The discoveries
in Lake Moosseedorf have been described by MM. Jahn and
Uhlmann (Die Pfahlbaualterthiimer von Moosseedorf. Bern,
1857); Mr. Desor has published a memoir entitled                   Les
Palafittes ou constructions      lacustres du lac de Neuchatel;
the Lake-habitation at the Pont de Thiéle has also been
described in a separate memoir by M. V. Gilliéron (Actes de
la Société jurassienne d’Emulation, 1860); and we owe to
Dr. Riitimeyer two works on the animal remains from the
Pfahlbauten, the first, “ Untersuchung der Thierreste aus
den Pfahlbauten der Schweiz,” published by the Antiquarian
Society of Zurich, in 1860; and still more recently, a larger
work—* Die Fauna der Pfahlbanten in der Schweiz.” Col-.
lections of objects from these localities have also been made
by many Swiss archeologists. The Flora has been studied
by M. Heer, whose        results are contained        in the memoirs
published by Dr. Keller, and in asnecial vaper “ Die Pflanzen
der Pfahlbauten.”
   Nor must we omit to mention M. Morlot’s excellent paper
in the “ Bulletin de la Société Vaudoise (March, 1860),” and
his no less admirable “ Legon d’Ouverture d’un cours sur la
haute Antiquité fait & Académie de Lausanne (Dec. 1860).”
The Swiss archeologists have indeed made the most of a
golden opportunity. Not only in the lake of Zurich, but
                 NUMBERS   OF LAKE VILLAGES.                179

also in Lakes Constance, Geneva, Neufchatel, Bienne, Morat,
Sempach, in fact in most of the large Swiss lakes, as well
as in several of the smaller ones (Inkwyl, Pfeffikon, Moos-
seedorf, Luissel, etc.), similar Lake-habitations have been
discovered.   In the larger lakes, indeed, not one, but many
of these settlements existed;     thus, there are already on
record, in Lake Bienne, twenty; in the Lake of Geneva,
twenty-four; in Lake Constance, thirty-two; in Lake Neuf-
chatel, as many as forty-nine; on the whole more than two
hundred; and many others, doubtless, remain to be discovered.
Of those already known, some belong to the Iron Age, some
few even to Roman times; but the greater number appear to
be divided in almost equal proportions between the age of
Stone and that of Bronze.
   Though the architecture of this period was probably simple,
still the weight to be sustained on the wooden platforms must
have been considerable ; and many of the piles are either bent
or broken; and to prevent them sinking too deeply into the
soft mud they were sometimes driven through boards which
rested on the bottom.
   The dwellings of the Gauls are described as having been
circular huts, built of wood and lined with mud. The inter-
stices appear to have been filled with moss.     Some of the
huts on the Pileworks were probably of a similar nature.
This supposition is not a mere hypothesis, but many frag-
ments of the clay used for the lining have been discovered.
Their preservation is evidently due to the building having
been destroyed by fire, which has hardened the clay, and
enabled it to resist the action of the water. These fragments
bear, on one side, the marks of interlaced branches, while on
the other, which apparently formed the inner wall of the cabin,
they are quite smooth.    Some of those which have been found
at Wangen are so large and so regular, that M. Troyon felt
justified in concluding that the cabins were circular, and from
ten to fifteen feet in diameter. It would be most interesting
                               N 2
180             ATTEMPT   TO MAKE   A CENSUS.

if we could construct a retrospective census for these early
periods, and M. Troyon has made an attempt to do so. The
settlement at Morges, which is one of the largest in the Lake
of Geneva, is 1,200 feet long and 150 broad, giving a surface
of 180,000 square feet. Allowing the huts to have been fifteen
feet in diameter, and supposing that they occupied half the
surface, leaving the rest for gangways, he estimates the
number of cabins at 311; and supposing again that, on an ave-
rage, each was inhabited by four persons, he obtains for the
whole a population of 1244. Starting from the same data,
he assumes for the Lake of Neufchatel a population of about
5000. Sixty-eight villages belonging to the Bronze Age are
supposed to have contained 42,500 persons; while for the
preceding epoch, by the same process of reasoning, he esti-
mates the population at 31,875.
   So far as these calculations rest on the fragments of the
clay walls, they must be regarded as altogether unsatisfactory,
since Dr. Keller informs me that the largest pieces yet dis-
covered are only a footin their greatest diameter. There is
also good reason to believe that the huts were generally not
circular, but rectangular. Nor am I inclined to attribute
much value to the estimates of population based on the
extent of the platforms. M. Troyon himself admits that his
“chiffres sont peut-étre un peu élevés, eu égard aux habi-
tations sur terre ferme, dont il ne peut étre question dans ce
calcul, et vu qu’on est encore bien loin de connattre tous les
points des lacs qui ont é+é occupés,” and, indeed, in the
three years which have elapsed since his book was written,
the number of Lake villages discovered has been doubled.
Moreover, M. Troyon assumes that the Lake villages of the
Bronze Age were contemporaneous, and that the same was
the case with those belonging to the Stone Age.      This also
I should be disposed to question; both these periods, but
especially the Stone Age, in all probability extended over a
                 CONSTRUCTION   OF THE   PLATFORMS.              181

long series of years, and though in these matters it is of
course necessary to speak with much caution, still if we are
to make any assumption in the case, it would seem safer to
suppose that in each period some of the villages had perished,
or been forsaken, before others were built.
  We might feel surprised that a people so uncivilized should
have constructed their houses with immense labour on the
water, when it would have been so much more easy to have
built them on dryland. But we have already seen how, even
in historical times, such dwellings have served as simple
and yet valuable fortifications. Still, though it is evident
that the security thus given would amply compensate for
much extra labour, it remains difficult to understand in what
manner the piles were driven into the ground,
  In many cases, indeed, settlements of the Stone Age are
characterized by what are called “ steinbergs,” that is to say,
artificial heaps of stones, etc., evidently brought by the
natives to serve as a support to the piles. A boat laden
with stones, apparently for this purpose, was some years ago
discovered in the Lake of Neufchatel. In fact, they found it
easier to raise the bottom round the piles, than to drive the
piles into the bottom. On the other hand, some of these
constructions,   as, for instance, those at Inkwyl and Wauwyl,
described respectively by M. Morlot and Col. Suter, more
closely resemble    the Irish   Crannoge.      We   see, therefore,
that, as Dr. Keller says, the Lake-dwellers followed two
different systems in the construction of their dwellings,
which he distinguishes as “ Pfahlbauten,” or Pilebuildings,
and “ Packwerkbauten,” or Crannoges:           in the first of which
the platforms were simply supported on piles; im the second
of which the support consisted not of piles only, but ofa
solid mass of mud, stones, etc., with layers of horizontal and
perpendicular  stakes, the latter serving less aS a support
than to bind     the mass   firmly together.     Tt is evident that

the “ Packwerkbau ” isa much simpler and ruder affair than
182              COMPARISON   OF LAKE-DWELLINGS

the    “ Pfahlbau,”   in which no small skill must have been
required to connect the perpendicular and horizontal piles
firmly together. Still the “ Packwerkbauten” were not
suitable for the larger lakes, as during storms they would
have been injured by the waves, which must have passed
harmlessly through the open work of the “ Pfahltbauten.”’
We find, therefore, that while the former method         of con-
struction prevailed only in small lakes or morasses, the latter
was adopted in the larger lakes, and even sometimes, possibly,
on dry land; a custom which, however singular, exists at
the present day, as, for instance, in the island of Borneo,
and even in Switzerland itself.
   The antiquities found at Wauwyl, Robenhausen, at the
Pont     de Thiéle, at Moosseedorf,    and elsewhere    in small
lakes and peat-bogs, are more or less covered by a thick
layer of peat, which perhaps at some future date will give us
a clue to their age.  On the contrary, im the large lakes no
peat grows. At the entrance of the rivers, indeed, much
mud and gravel is of course accumulated; the Lake of
Geneva, for mstance,      once   no doubt   extended   for a con-
siderable distance up the Valley of the Rhone. But the
gravel and mud brought down by that river are deposited,
as every one knows, near its entrance into the lake, and the
water of the lake is elsewhere beautifully clear and pure.
   The lake itself is very deep, in parts as much as nine
hundred and eighty feet ; and the banks are generally steep,
but round the margin there is, in most places, a fringe of
shallow water, due, probably, to the erosive action of the
waves, and known to the fishermen as the “ blancfond,”
because the lake is there of a pale greyish hue, when
contrasted with the bright blue of the central deeper water.
It is on this “blancfond,” and at a depth of sometimes as
much as fifteen feet, that the Pfahlbauten were generally
constructed. On calm days, when the surface of the water
                       OF DIFFERENT      PERIODS.               183

is unruffled, the piles are plainly visible. Few of them now
project more than two feet from the bottom; eaten away by
the incessant action of the water, some of them “ n’apparais-
sent plus que comme aiguilles,” which finally also disappear,
and leave only a black disk at the surface of the mud. This,
however, is the case principally in the Lake villages of the
Stone Age.      “Ce qui les distingue surtout,” says Prof.
Desor, “c’est la qualité des pieux, qui sont beaucoup plus
gros que ceux des stations du bronze: ce sont des troncs
entiers, mesurant jusqu’a 28 et 30 centimétres. Au lieu de
faire saillie dans V’eau, ils sont 4 fleur du fond.” On the
other hand, in speaking of the Bronze Age piles, he says:
“Tes pieux sont plus gréles; ce sont fréquemment des
troncs fendus en quatre, n’excédant guére 4, au plus 5 pouces
de diamétre; au lien d’étre 4 fleur du fond, ils s’élévent de
1 @ 2 pieds au-dessus de la vase, ce qui permet de les
reconunaitre facilement, malgré leur plus grand profondeur.”
M. Troyon also tells us that “On peut dire que les pilotis
de la fin du deuxiéme 4ge, anciens de plus de deux mille
ans et saillants d’un 4 trois pieds au-dessus de la vase, pré-
sentent 4 peu prés partout le méme aspect, tandis que ceux
de age de la pierre ont été généralement usés jusqu’a la
surface du limon dont ils sont parfois recouverts *.”
   The more complete destruction of the piles belonging to
the earlier period depends not only on their greater age, but on
their occurrence in shallower water. The action of the waves
being greatest near the surface, and diminishing gradually
downwards, not only are those piles which occupy the deeper
parts least liable to destruction, but in each the erosion takes
place gradually from above, so that the upper end of the
piles is often more regularly pointed even than the lower.
Lying among     them are fragments of bone, horn, pottery,
and sometimes objects of bronze.           Most of these are em-
          * Les Constructions lacustres du lac de Neufchatel.
184          CONDITION   OF THE OBJECTS FOUND.

bedded in the mud or hidden under the stones, but others
lie on the bottom yet uninjured; so that when for the first
time I saw them through the transparent water, a momentary
feeling of doubt as to their age rose in my mind. So fresh
are they and so unaltered,-they look as if they were only
things of yesterday, and it seems hard to believe that they
can have remained there for centuries. The explanation of
the difficulty is, however, to be found in the fact that the
action of the most violent storms is perceptible only to a
small depth.     Except, therefore, near the mouths of rivers,
or where there is much vegetation, which in the large lakes
is rarely the case, the deposition of mud at depths greater
than four feet is an extremely slow process, and objects
which fall to the bottom in such situations will neither
be covered over nor carried away.       “J’ai péché,” says M.
Troyon, “sur emplacement en face du Moulin de Bevaix,
les fragments d’un grand vase qui gisaient & peu de distance
les uns des autres, et que j’ai pu réunir de maniére a les
remontre complétement.       A la Tongue, prés d’Hermance,
j’ai trouvé les deux fragments d’un anneau support, distants
de quelques pieds, qui, en les rapprochant ne laissent aucun
interstice.’ The upper parts of the objects also, which are
bathed by the water, are generally covered by a layer of
carbonate of lime, while the lower part which has sunk into
the mud is quite unaltered. M. Troyon once obtained at
Cortaillod a pair of bracelets in one haul of the dredge—the
first, which had been visible from the boat, was greenish and
covered with incrustation ; the second, which had been ‘in
the mud immediately below, was as fresh as if it had only
just been made.
   As piles of the Bronze Age are sometimes found at a
depth of as much as fifteen feet, and it is manifest that build-
ings cannot have been constructed over water much deeper
than this, it is evident that the Swiss lakes cannot       then
                    LEVEL   OF THE   SWISS   LAKES.           185

have stood at a much -higher level than at present. This
conclusion is confirmed by the position of Roman remains
at Thonon, on the lake of Geneva, and we thus obtain
satisfactory evidence that the height of the Swiss lakes
must have remained almost unaltered for a very long period.
   In the large lakes the passing traveller may readily mark the
number and general distribution of the piles, he may determine
the area which they occupy, and pick up fragments of bone
and pottery; but, on the whole, the peat-mosses are more
instructive. In them we not only obtain evidence as to the
size, form, and construction of the huts, but implements of
wood, specimens of fruit, nuts, grain, and even fragments of
clothing, none of which can be preserved in the open water
of the large lakes.
   After haying chosen a favourable situation, the first step
in the construction of the Lake-habitations was to obtain the
necessary timber.     To cut down a tree with a stone hatchet
must have been no slight undertaking.   It is, indeed, most
probable that use was made of fire, in the same manner as
is done by existing savages in felling trees and making
canoes. Burning the wood and then scraping away the
charred portion renders the task far more easy, and the men
of the Stone period appear to have avoided the use of large
trees, except in making their canoes. Their piles were em-
bedded in the mud       from   one   to five feet, and must also
have projected from four to six feet above the water level,
which cannot have been very different from what it is at
present.   They must, therefore, have had a length of from
fifteen to thirty feet, and they were from three to nine inches
in diameter.   The pointed extremity which entered into the
mud still bears the marks of the fire and the rude cuts made
by the stone hatchets. The piles belonging to the Bronze
period, being prepared with metal axes, were much more
regularly pointed, and the differences between the two have
186                                 NUMBER     OF PILES USED.

been ingeniously compared to those shown by lead pencils
well and badly cut. Moreover, a cut by a stone axe is
necessarily more or less concave, whereas those made with
metal are flat. To drag the piles to the lake, and fix them
firmly, must also have required much labour, especially when
their number is considered.                         At Wangen alone M. Léhle
has calculated               that 50,000 piles were             used; but we   must
remember that these were probably not all planted at one
time, nor by one generation. Wangen, indeed, was certainly
not built in a day, but was, no doubt, gradually enlarged as
the population increased. Herodotus informs us that the
Peeonians made the first platform at the public expense, but
                         that, subsequently, at every mar-
                     :
          Fie. 163,
  oes
       Moule     FL
                  £2
                         riage (and polygamy was permitted),
                         the bridegroom was expected to add
             Lett
               l BF Fb.
                  _acertain number of piles to the com-


  cae
        (    ze Feng   2    WCE

   |   re besls
                   mon support. Fig. 163 represents
                   a section taken at Niederwyl, and
  halted cri    ! shows two series of piles, one over
     | ti    if    the other. The layer of ashes ap-
                   pears to indicate that the settle-
                                             ment   was burnt     down, and subse-
                                             quently rebuilt.     The pile-works of
                          subsequent periods differ little from
            Section at Niederwy].
                          those of the Stone Age, so far at
least as can be judged by the parts remaining, but the piles
are less decayed, and project above the Sar Gatien than 3is
the case with those of the preceding epoch.
        Through the kindness of Col. Suter I had an opportunity
of examining                 the     construction      of the Lake-dwelling       at
‘Wauwyl, near Zofingen, in the Canton of Lucerne.                               This
 apparently belonged to the Stone Age, no trace of metal
 having yet been discovered in it. It is situated in a peat
 moss, which was evidently at one time the bed of a shallow
          DESCRIPTION   OF THE   REMAINS   AT WAUWYL.       187

lake. By the gradual growth of peat, however, the level has
been raised several feet, and. the plain has recently been
drained. We were assisted by six labourers, who dug out
the peat, which we then carefully examined. I mention this,
because the difference in the objects collected from different
Pfahlbauten may probably be, in part at least, accounted for
by the different ways in which the search has been made. The
peat at Wauwyl varies in thickness from three to ten feet,
and rests on a white bed consisting of broken fresh-water
shells. This stratum, though only a few inches thick, is
found in the old beds of many small lakes, and is frequently
mentioned by the Swiss archeologists under the name of
“weissgrund.’”    It must not, however, be confounded with
the “ blancfond”’ of the larger lakes. The piles go through
the peat and the “ weissgrund” into the solid ground below.
It is not easy to obtain them whole, because the lower por-
tions are much altered by time, and so thoroughly saturated by
water, that they are quite soft. Col. Suter, however, extracted
two of them; one was 14ft. 6in. in length, of which 4ft. was
in the peat, and the remaining 10ft. 6in. in the sand beneath,
the other was only 8ft. 6in. long, 4ft. of which was in the
peat, the other 4ft. 6in. in the solid ground. ‘The piles vary
from three to five inches in diameter, and are always round,
never having been squared. The lower part is very badly
cut, so that it is difficult to understand how they can have
been forced to so great a depth into the ground.
   In most of the Pfahlbauten the piles are scattered, more
or less irregularly, over the whole extent of the settlement ;
at Wauwy]l this is not the case, but they enclose, as it were,
four quadrangular areas, the interiors of which are occupied
by several platforms one over the other, the interstices being
filled up by branches, leaves, and peat. The objects of
antiquity are not scattered throughout the peat, but lie
either on the layer of broken shells, which formed the then
188        WEAPONS     AND     IMPLEMENTS         OF THE   LAKEMEN.

bottom of the lake, or in the lower part of the peat.                         It
is, therefore,      evident     that     almost     the whole,    if not     the
whole, of the peat has grown since the time at which this
interesting ruin was inhabited.    The upper part had,
however,     been    removed        before     our    arrival,   so   that   the
“culturgeschicht,” the layer containing the objects of anti-
quity, was exposed ready for examination in the manner
already described.
   Some of the piles still stand two or three feet above the
level of the peat, but the greater number are broken off
lower down. We stood on one of the upper platforms,
which seems to have been the floor on which the huts were
           Cty                    erected, and the beams of which are
                                 still perfectly preserved.    It was at
                                 first a question in what manner the
                                platforms at this place were sup-
                                 ported; whether they rested like a
                                 raft on the surface of the water, rising
                                 and sinking with it*; or whether they
                                  were fixed, and rested on a sort of
                                  artificial island, formed by the clay,
                                  branches, etc., which now occupy
                                  the interspaces between the different
                                  platforms. Subsequent observations,
                                  however, confirmed as they have
                                  been by discoveries elsewhere, as, for
                           instance, at Inkwyl and Niederwy]l,
                           have decided the question in favour
         Swiss Stone Axe.
                           of the latter hypothesis.
      During my visit at Wauwyl we obtained four small stone
 axes, one arrow-head, four flint flakes, fifteen rude stone ham-

    * Dwellings of this characteroccnr       Sumatra, p. 395. Squier, American
 in the East and in S. America. See,         Naturalist, vol. iv. p. 18.
 for instance, Anderson’s     Mission to
                       AXES.   KNIVES.                           189

mers, eight whetstones, thirty-three slingstones, eight instru-
ments of bone, and two of wood, besides numerous bones, and
a great quantity of broken pottery. Col. Suter regarded this
as a fair average day’s work. Altogether about 500 instru-
ments of stone and bone have been discovered at Wauwy] ;
at Moosseedorf more than 3300; at Wangen no less than
5800, while M. Troyon estimates that those at Concise must
have amounted to 25,000.
   The axe was pre-eminently     the implement of antiquity.
It was used in war and in the chase, as well as for domestic
purposes, and great numbers have been found, especially at
Wangen (Lake of Constance) and Concise (Lake of Neuf-
chatel). With a few exceptions, they were small, especially
when compared with the magnificent specimens from Den-
mark ; in length they varied from one to six inches, while the
cutting edge bad generally a width of from fifteen to twenty
lines. Flint was sometimes used, and nephrite or jade, in a
few cases, but serpentine and diorite were the principal ma-
terials. Most of the larger settlements were evidently manu-
facturing places, and many spoilt pieces and half-finished
specimens have been found. After having chosen a stone,
the first step was to reduce it by blows with a hammer
to a suitable size.   Then grooves       were   made   artificially,
which must have been. a very tedious and difficult operation,
when flint knives,.sand, and water were the only available
instruments. Having carried the grooves to the required
depths, the projecting portions were removed by a skilful
blow with a hammer, and the implement was then sharpened
and polished on blocks of sandstone.
  The axes appear to have been fastened into the handles by
means of bitumen, obtained either from the Val de Travers
near Neufchatel or from the Perte du Rhone.
   The stone knives may be considered as of two sorts.
Some differ from the axes principally in having their width
190                SAWS.       SPINDLE        WHORLS.            FLAKES.

greater than their length.                  In other cases flint flakes were
set in wooden handles and fastened, like the axes, by means
of bitumen.          Saws also (fig. 126) were made in a similar
manner, but with their edges somewhat rudely dentated; we
do not find in Switzerland any of the semi-lunar stone im-
plements, which are frequent in Denmark. The arrow-heads
were made of flint, or in some cases of rock crystal, and
were of the usual forms. Spindle whorls of rude earthen-
ware (fig. 165) were abundant in some of the Lake villages
even of the Stone Age. This indicates a knowledge of
weaving, which, as we shall presently see, is proved by even
         Fis. 165.      more conclusive evidence. There are
                        also found rounded stones, pierced
                        with one or sometimes two holes.
                                       The use         of these is uncertain, but
                                   _ they may perhaps have been used to
                                     sink fishing lines.
                                        The flint flakes offer no peculiari-
                                     ties; the Swiss specimens are, how-
      Spindle Whorl (Stone Age).   | ever, of small size.                  Corn-crushers,
which are round balls of hard stone, two or three inches in
diameter, occur even in the villages of the Stone Age.
   The list of objects hitherto found at Wauwy] is as follows:
     Stone axes, principally of serpen-
         LINO Sek        er ae e        OO ees
       Smalt flint arrow-heads        . . .    86
       Blntiilakes =: \ 2, (inet.     wae e e O0
       Corn-erusiers.-       nn            eee LG
       Rude stones used as hammers,
                                               a6                          Not all
          common (say) . . .
                                                                           collected.
       Whetstones      > 4        eae      ere 26
        Nimpatones Obese                nae       ey   eee          nro

            Inallabout.            .    .     .   .    .     .     426 articles of stone.
       ARROWHEADS.       IMPLEMENTS     OF BONE AND    WOOD.      191

   The flint, of which the flakes and arrow-heads were
formed, must have come from a distance, and the best pieces
in all probability were obtained from France. Visits may
have been made to the French quarries, just as Catlin tells
us. that the American tribes, from far and near, visited the
red pipestone quarry of Coteau des Prairies. A few frag-
ments of Mediterranean       coral have been found at Concise,
and of Baltic amber at Meilen.           Some archeologists have
argued from these facts, that there must have been a certain
amount of commerce even in the Stone Age. As, however,
both these settlements appear to have belonged to the transi-
tional period between the age of Stone and that of Bronze,
it would be safer to refer both the amber-and the coral to the
later period.
   Like other savages, the Lake-dwellers made the most
of any animal they could catch. They ate the flesh, used
the skin for clothing, picked every fragment of marrow out
of the bones, and then, in many cases, fashioned the bones
themselves   into weapons.      The    larger and more      compact
ones, as well as horns of the deer, served as hammers, and
were used as handles for hatchets.   In some cases, pieces of
bone were worked to an edge, but they are neither hard nor
sharp enough to cut well. Bone awls are numerous, and
may have been used in preparing skins for clothes. Fig.
128 (p. 104) represents a chisel or scraper of bone, from
Wangen.     One purpose for which these were used was no
doubt to scrape off the hair in dressing skins.
  A few objects made of wood have also been found at
Wauwyl and elsewhere; but these, even if originally
numerous,    would   be difficult   to distinguish   from   the sur-
rounding peat, especially as it contains so many branches of
trees and other fragments       of wood; and it would also be
very difficult to extract them entire. Perhaps, therefore,
implements of wood may haye been much more varied and
192                          POTTERY.

common than the collections would appear to indicate. Tin-
der has been found in several of the Lake villages, and was
no doubt used in obtaining fire.
   The pottery of the Stone Age presents nearly the same
characters in all the settlements. Very rude and coarse, it
is generally found in broken pieces, and comparatively few
entire vessels have been obtained. There is no evidence that
the potter’s wheel was known, and the baking is very imper-
fect, having apparently taken place in an open fire.                  The
material is also very rude, and generally contains numerous
grains of quartz. The form is frequently cylindrical, but
several of the jars are rounded at the base, and without feet.
A curious character is the frequent presence of a row of de-
pressions which do not completely penetrate the thickness of
the vessel; but the commonest decorations are simple lines
or furrows, made sometimes by a sharp instrument, some-
                               Bie. 166,




                  Piece of Pottery.—Lake of Zurich,   °

times by the finger-nail (see fig. 166), and occasionally pro-
duced by pressing a cord on the soft clay.                Curved lines are
rare; no representation of any animal has yet been met
with; and the vase found at Wangen, which has been
figured both by Dr. Keller and by M. Troyon, is almost the
only instance in which any attempt has been made to repre-
                              DRESS.                          1938

sent a plant. In this case the design is ruder than might
be inferred from the figures given. In some of the Bronze
Age villages rings of pottery are found, which were evidently
intended to serve as supports for these earthenware tumblers,
but none of them have yet been met with in any of the Stone
Age villages. Possibly the earthenware during the Stone
Age rested on the soft earth, and tables were only intro-
duced in the Bronze Age, when by means of metallic imple-
ments it became so much easier to cut wood, and particularly
to make boards. Many of the vessels had small projections,
which were pierced in such a manner that strings might be
passed through them, and which may, therefore, have served
for suspension.  Some of the vessels, also, are pierced by
small holes at different levels; it has been suggested that
these may have been used in the preparation of curds, the
                                Fic. 1¢8.




                    Piece of Tissue from Robenhausen.


small holes being intended to permit the escape of the milk.
The ornaments on the pottery belonging to this age are of a
very rude and simple character. Sometimes a row of knobs
runs round the vase, just below the lip; this style of orna-
mentation is common on the pottery found by M. Gilliéron
at the Pont de Thiéle.
   Although there can be no doubt that the skins of animals
                                                        18)
194          THE FAUNA   OF THE   LAKE-DWELLINGS.

supplied the ancient Lakemen with their principal articles of
clothing, still in several of the settlements, and especially at
Wangen    and Robenhausen, both of which belong to the
Stone Age, pieces of rude fabric (fig. 168) have been found
in some abundance.    They consist either of flax fibres or
straw. The presence of spindle-whorls has been already
mentioned.
   For our knowledge of the animal remains from the Pile-
works we are almost entirely indebted to Prof. Riitimeyer,
who has published two memoirs on the subject (Mittheilungen
der Antig. Gesellschaft in Ziirich, Bd. xin. Abth. 2, 1860 ;
and, more recently, a separate work, Die Fauna        der Pfahl-
bauten in der Schweiz, 1861). The bones are in a very
fragmentary condition, and have been broken open for the
sake of the marrow.    There is also the same absence of
certain bones and parts of bones, so that it is impossible
to reconstruct   a perfect skeleton   even of the commonest
animal.
   The total number of species amounts to about seventy, of
which ten are fishes, four reptiles, twenty-six birds, and the
remainder quadrupeds.     Of tho latter, six species may be
considered as having been domesticated; namely, the dog,
pig, horse, goat, sheep, and at least two varieties of oxen.
The bones very seldom occur in a natural condition; but
those of domestic and wild animals are mixed together, and
the state in which they are found, the marks of knives upon
them, and their having been almost always broken open
for the sake of their marrow,     are all evidences   of human
interference.
   Two species, the one wild, the other domestic, are especially
numerous—the stag and the ox. Indeed, the remains of these
two equal those of all the others together. It is, however, an
interesting fact, that in the older settlements, as at Moossee-
dorf, Wauwyl, and Robenhausen, the stag exceeds the ox in
                            MOOSSEEDORF.                                  195

the number of specimens indicated, while the reverse is the
case in the more modern settlements of the western lakes, as,
for instance, those at Wangen and Meilen.
   Next to these in order of abundance is the hog. Less
numerous again, and generally represented by single speci-
mens where the preceding occur in numbers, are the roe, the
goat, and the sheep, which latter is most abundant in the
later settlements. With these rank the fox and the martens.
Foxes are occasionally eaten by the Esquimaux*, Captain
Lyon seems      to have   taken      rather a fancy to them+,            and
Franklin assures us that fox is better than lean venison tf.
They also appear, whether from choice or necessity, to have
been eaten during the Stone period. This conclusion is de-
rived from the fact that the bones often present the marks
of knives, and have been opened for the sake of the marrow.
While, however, the fox is very frequent in the Pileworks of
the Stone epoch, it has not yet been found in any settlement
belonging to the Bronze period. Oddly enough, the dog is
rarer than the fox, at least as far as the observations yet go,
in the Lake-dwellings of the Stone period, though more com-
mon than the horse; and of other species but few specimens
have been met with, though in some localities the beaver, the
badger, and the hedgehog appear in some numbers. The
bear and the wolf, as well as the urus, the bison, and the elk,
seem to have occasionally been captured; it is probable that
the latter species were taken in concealed pits.
   From the small lake at Moosseedorf, M. Riitimeyer has
identified the following list :—Of the dog, three specimens;
fox, four specimens; beaver, five specimens; roe, six speci-
mens; goat and sheep, ten specimens; cow, sixteen speci-
mens; hog, twenty specimens; stag, twenty specimens.                          It
is certainly very striking to find two wild species represented
  * Crantz, History of Greenland,         + Lyon’s Journal, p. 77.
vol. i p. 73.                             + Franklin, vol. if. pp. 219-239.
                                    0 2
196                      ‘THE FAUNA.

by the greatest number of specimens, and particularly so,
since this is no exceptional case; but the whole sum of the
wild exceeds that of the domesticated       individuals, a result
moreover, which holds good in other settlements of this
epoch. Not only does this indicate a great antiquity, but
also that the population must have been sometimes sub-
jected to great privations, partly from the unavoidable
uncertainty of supplies so obtaimed, partly because it is im-
probable that foxes would have been eaten except under the
pressure of hunger.
   The bones of the stag and the wild boar often indicate
animals of an unusual magnitude, while, on the other hand,
the fox appears to have been somewhat smaller than at present.
The dogs varied less than they do now; in fact they all belong
to one variety, which was of middle size, and appears to have
resembled our present beagles. (M. Rittimeyer describes it
as “resembling the Jagdhund” and the “ Wachtelhund.”)
The sheep of the Stone period differed from the ordinary form
in its small size, fine legs, and short goat-like horns; par-
ticulars in which it is nearly resembled by some northern
 and mountain   varieties at the present day, as, for instance,
by the small sheep of the Shetlands, Orkneys, Welsh hills,
and parts of the Alps.   At Wauwyl, however, M. Riitimeyer
found traces of an individual with large horns.       Our know-
ledge of the wild species of sheep is so deficient, that M.
Riitimeyer does not venture to express any opinion con-
cerning the origin of the domestic varieties, but his present
impression is that they will eventually be traced up to several
wild races.
   In his first memoir, Prof. Riitimeyer gives an interesting
table, which, with some additions which I owe to his kind
courtesy, is here subjoined, the relative frequency being
indicated by numerals:
          1 denotes a single individual ;
                                               THE FAUNA.                                                         197

                     2 indicates that the remains of several individuals
                           have been met with;
                     3 the species which are common ;
                    4 those which are very common;                                    and lastly,
                     5 those which are present in great number.

                                                      oi                      §
                   LIST OF SPECIES.
                                                       ENE
                                                       3 e 4                            5
                                                                                          as       S          g       &
                                                       eo)        2)          2)        a)      8)       3)
                                                       pee              oe                      =         & | 8

  POMS S VAM CUOR metas  taccsverecie                  2        2             2      2          oe        2
  Pie MGVES VATION, susececauctecm                     2        2             3      ve         af        3
  Seiustela, FOIA, o5... «.c.neeseee                   2        3             3       2         Bae       it
  4           oF       larbes vemos seestesente        2        3             3       2         ul        2
  5           ss       PO EOTITIS erence Waseca        2        2              1     Au         aise      A
  6       i            TORII ten acscoarekor          58       2              ans    ‘ei                 ree
  7       5            Lutra vulgaris ......          al       wl              2     Pa                  nee
  S\ AOE
       eliChUA)st ae ee                               mre       1             i       1         il       1
  9    ,, familiaris (palustris)...|                   2        2             2       3         3        3         3
 NO Mes femVOULPOSicccpeuccice weseee ate              3        3             3      2          2        2         aed
 11 Felis Catus (ferus)               ............|    2        2             1     2                   200: yh) aD05
 12 Erinaceus europzeus       .........                1       a              3      2                  bre       “3
 HSMOARbOL Hiei syescpascneeser.                       3      2               3      2                  2         eee
 14 Sciurus evropseus...............|                  2      2               2      2                  ne        ae
 ES Wns sylvaticns ....-....07..0-00>                 os      sh              2     Ao                  ace       ate
 WGm opus timmdus .2...0.s.cs- ocee-                   i      Me              1     1                   cos H) cop
 Aaa SUS SCLOLALOLUS 26.44.5010 00000                  3      2               4,    2          2        2      2
 Sire     RLOLUSGIAG snenta
                        cate ssciseeiens               5      5               3     5          5        3      3
 19 ,, Scrofa domesticus.........                     nie     il             iss    ia         ne      2          2
 20) Heuns) Caballus......ssvesse-+0s                  iL     2               2      2         i       2          3
 AOC VISA COS) oie ea siceiniecieltoeniecie            1      il              2     aah        2       ih          il
 22      rp ARNG SIAN coerce oncdacgnecs               5       5              5      5         5       5          5
 23      RECARO OLUS tenn sececan sr                  4        2              4      2         2       3          as
 HE (Obs onesh NWSey¢ Aen psecsopdoccLouce            Sie    palme ts        oA     ee         1       “te        a
 25      PM         LEINCTIS saseaanc
                                 seco sceece          2       2              2      2          ae      2          34
 26 Ovis Aries..        Sener                                2               a       2          i       3          3
 27 Antilope rupicapra_ Siasaduwcece                  el                            ash        ae      ig         ane
 28 Bos primigenius ...............                   2      2                3      1                  2         ane
 OM   MPSOM ea. secu esaseneessanes                    1     1                4      iy                vase       ie
 80 ,, Taurus primigenius......|                      2      y                5      ?         2        5         2
 81 ,, Taurus brachyceros......{                      5      5               2       5         6       2          5
 32 ,, Taurus froptosus .........                            i               oe     ae                 2          2



   The almost entire absence of the hare is doubtless owing
to the curious prejudice which was and is entertained by
many races against the flesh of this animal. It was never
eaten by the ancient Britons, and is avoided by the Lapps at
198                                BIRDS.

the present day. According to Burton* the Somal Arabs
will not touch it, and M. Schlegel also states that the preju-
dice against it existed among the ancient Chinese+. Among
the Hottentots it was eaten by the women, but was forbidden
to ment. It was regarded as unclean by the Jews, being
erroneously supposed to chew the cud. According to Crantz,
the Greenlanders §, if in want, will eat foxes rather than hares.
Finally, its remains do not occur in the Danish shell-mounds.
   The birds which have been discovered are :—
      Aquila fulva. The golden eagle. At Robenhausen.
      Aquila halietus. A smgle bone found at Moosseedorf
           is rather doubtfully referred to this species by
           M. Riitimeyer.
      Falco milvus. Robenhausen.
      Falco palumbarius. Wauwyl, Moosseedorf.
      Falco nisus. Moosseedorf.
      Falco buteo. Moosseedorf, Robenhausen.
      Strix aluco, Concise.
      Strix otus.
      Sturnus vulgaris. Robenhausen.
      Corvus corone.
      Corvus corax.
      Cinclus aquaticus.
      Columba palumbus.      5                         Moosseedorf.
      Tetrao bonasia.                    -
      Tetrao lagopus. Moosseedorf.
      Ciconia alba. Not unfrequent at Moosseedorf and Robenh.
      Ardea cinerea. Robenhausen.
      Grus cinerea.
      Fulica atra.                 ”
      Larus. Two sp.               Py,

  * First Footsteps, p. 155.                   { Le Vaillant, Voyages dans I’Af-
  + Notes and Queries on       China,        rique, vol. iv. p. 187.
Japan, Hongkong, May, 1868,                   § History of Greenland, p. 78.
                         MOUSE.          CAT.   ASS.                         199

      Cygnus olor.     Robenhausen.
     Anser segetum.            a
     Anas boschas.      Robenhausen, Moosseedorf, Wauwyl.
     Anas querquedula.        __,,                      -
     Podiceps minor.     Robenhausen.
     Mergus merganser.               =
   The reptiles and fishes are represented by about ten of our
commonest species.
  The common mouse and our two house-rats, as well as the
domestic cat, are absent from the Lake-habitations of Switzer-
land, as also from the Kjékkenméddings of Denmark;                           the
same is the case with the common fowl, which                   seems, more-
over, to have been unknown               to Homer       and Hesiod;        Prof.
Riitimeyer    attributes to a later period a single bone                  of the
latter bird which was found at Morges, a settlement belong-
ing to the Bronze period.
   The earliest remains of the ass mentioned by Prof. Riiti-
meyer are those found at Chayvannes and Noville, which,
however, were not connected with Pfahlbauten, and be-
longed to post-Roman times.              In the Bible the ass is first
mentioned in the time of Abraham, who had “sheep, and
oxen, and he-asses, and men-servants, and maid-servants,
and she-asses, and camels*.”    It will be observed that
in this enumeration    no mention is made of horses.                 Laban,
again, had sheep, and goats, and cattle, and camels, and
asses, but apparently no horses. Again, the present which
Jacob sent to Esau consisted of two hundred she-goats
and twenty he-goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams,
thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine and ten
bulls, twenty she-asses aud ten foalst.                Indeed, no mention
whatever is made of horses until the children of Isracl went
into Egypt; and from the copious and interesting detals of
their pastoral life, we may feel sure that horses would have
     * Gen. xii. 16.                                   + Gen. xxxi. 14.
200                    HORSE.    BOAR.

been alluded to if the Hebrews had possessed them. As
regards Egypt, the horse is not represented on any of the
monuments anterior to the 18th dynasty, after which, however,
it appears to have become abundant in that country.
  As regards the Swiss Lake-villages, it is singular, that
though remains of the horse have been found in all the Pile-
works, they are so rare that their presence may almost be
considered accidental: thus, Wangen has only produced a
single tooth;   Moosseedorf,    a metatarsal    bone, which   has
been polished on one side; Robenhausen, a single Os navi-
culare tarsi; and Wauwyl, only a few bones, which may all
have belonged to a single individual. On the other hand,
when we come to the Bronze period, we find at Nidau
numerous   bones   of this species;      so that, as far as these
slight indications go, the horse, even if present in the Stone
Age, seems to have been rarer than at subsequent periods.
All the remains of this animal belonged apparently to the
domestic horse (Eguus caballus), while those which occur in
the Drift gravel beds and in caves fall into two well-marked
races, named by Prof. Owen, H. fossilis and H. speleeus.
   Though he refers some bones to the wild boar, and others
to the domestic hog, yet Prof. Riitimeyer considers that the
greatest number of the remains of this genus belong to a dif-
ferent race, which he calls Sus palustris. This variety was,
in his opinion, less powerful and dangerous than the wild
boar, the tusks being much      smaller in proportion;    in fact,
he describes it as having, with the molar teeth of an ordi-
nary full-grown wild boar, premolars, canines, and incisors
resembling those of a young domestic hog. He considers
that all the bones of this variety from Moosseedorf belonged
to wild individuals, while of those from Nidau, Robenhausen,
Wauwyl, and Concise, some bear, in his opinion, evidences
of domestication. It has been supposed by some naturalists
that this variety was founded only on female specimens, but
                            SUS PALUSTRIS.                          201

in his last work Prof. Riitimeyer combats this opinion at some
length, and gives copious descriptions and measurements of
the different parts. He also points out numerous sexual
differences in the Sus palustris, of the same nature, but not
so well marked, as those of the wild boar. Relying also on
its well-defined geographical and historical range, he denies
that it can be considered’ as a cross between the wild boar
and domestic hog, or that the differences which separate
it from the former can be looked upon as mere individual
peculiarities. He considers, indeed, that as a wild animal
it became extinct at a very early period, though the tame
swine of India, which agree closely with this race, may perhaps
have descended from it.
  M. Schiitz, on the contrary, regards the Sus palustris as
derived from the Sus sennariensis, which still exists in central
Africa, and does not think that it ever inhabited Switzerland
in a wild state*. He moreover points out that the skulls of
this animal found in the later Pfahlbauten differ considerably
from those in the earlier ones, showing clearly the influence
of domestication, and affording an additional indication that
between the foundation of the earlier and later Lake-villages,
a considerable period must have elapsed.
  Our domestic hog first makes its appearance in the later
Pileworks, as, for instance, at Concise.       Prof. Riitimeyer does
not, however, believe that it was tamed by the inhabitants of
Switzerland, but is rather disposed to look upon it as having
been introduced during the Bronze Age, and the more so, as
he also finds at Concise traces of an ox (B. trochoceros) which
does not occur in the earlier Pileworks.
   The discovery of dung among the remains of the Pfahl-
bauten sufficiently proves that the Lake-dwellers had domestic
animals, but there are also other indications from which we
may draw the same conclusion
         * Zur Kenntniss des Torfschweins.   Berlin, 1868, p. 44.
202       COMPARISON      OF THE BONES           BELONGING        TO

  In endeavouring to ascertain whether any given bones
belonged to a wild or domesticated animal, we must be
guided by the following considerations: the number of indi-
                                    Fic. 169.




                                                         Wy
                        Part of tho Vertebra of a Cow.

                                    Fie. 170.




               Part of the corresponding Vertebra of the Bison.


viduals represented; the relative proportions of young and
old; the absence or presence of very old individuals, at least
                 WILD    AND   DOMESTICATED   RACES.         203

in the case of species that served for food; the traces of
long, though indirect, selection, in diminishing the size of
any natural weapons which might be injurious to man; the
direct action of man during the life of the animal; and,
finally, the texture and condition of the bones.
   Applying these considerations to the Sus palustris from
Moosseedorf, it is evident, says Prof. Riitimeyer, firstly, that
the argument derivable from the number of young specimens
loses much of its force on account of the great fertility of the
sow, and the ease with which the young can be found and
destroyed; secondly, in the number of individuals repre-
sented, it is equalled by the stag, which certainly was never
domesticated; thirdly, some bones of very old individuals
have been found, and some of very young, even of unborn
pigs; the smallness of the tusks is, according to Prof. Riti-
meyer, a characteristic of the race, and not an evidence of
domestication; the bones are of a firm and close texture, and
the only cases of decay have arisen from an extreme degrada-
tion of the teeth, which would certainly be unlikely to occur
in a domestic animal. Finally, none of the teeth show traces
of any filing or other preparation, except such as may have
taken place after the death of the animal; from all which
reasons Prof. Riitimeyer therefore infers that the inhabitants
of Moosseedorf had not yet succeeded in taming either the
Sus scrofa palustris or the Sus scrofa ferus.
   Prof. Rittimeyer has paid great attention to the texture
and condition of the bones themselves, and believes that he
can, in many cases, from these alone distinguish the species,
and even determine whether the bone belonged to a wild or
a domesticated animal.
  In wild animals the bones are of a firmer and closer tex-
ture; there is an indescribable, but to the accustomed      eye
very characteristic, sculpturing of the external surface, pro-
duced by the sharper andmore numerousimpressions ofvessels,
204                           OXEN,

and the greater roughness of the surfaces for the attachment
of muscles     There is also an exaggeration of all projections
and ridges, and a diminution of all indifferent surfaces. The
contrast thus produced will be seen from figs. 169 and 170,
the first of which represents a portion of a vertebra belonging
to a domestic cow, the second the correspondmg surface of
the same bone from the bison.         In the consideration of
the remains of oxen, these distinctions have proved of the
greatest importance. By their assistance, Prof. Riitimeyer
has convinced himself that besides the two wild species of
 bos, namely, the urus (B. primigenius) and the aurochs (B.
 bison or Bison Europceus), four principal races of domestic
 oxen occur in the Lake-villages*.
     The first of these, the Primigenius race, closely resembles
 the Urus or Bos primigenius, and was no doubt descended
 from it. It occurs in all the earlier Pileworks, and in the
 present day is best represented by the wild cattle of Chil-
 lingham, and the great oxen of Friesland, Jutland, and
  Holstein.
     The second, or Trochoceros race, resembles a fossil form
 first observed in the diluvium        of Arezzo      and Siena, and
described by F. von Meyer. It has not hitherto been found
in any of the Stone Age villages. Riitimeyer regards it as
scarcely distinguishable from the urus, and observes that its
peculiarities are principally, though not exclusively, developed
in the female sex.
   The third, or Frontosus race, occurs but sparingly in the
older Pfahlbauten; becomes more frequent in the Bronze
Age villages, and prevails at the present day in northern
Switzerland. Prof. Riitimeyer considers this variety also as
 derived from the urus, and remarks that while the wild cattle
 of Chillimgham are true to the primigenius form, some of
 the Lyme Park cattle approach to the frontosus type. He
                * Ar, fiir Anthropologie, 1866, p. 219.
                    ABSENCE    OF EXTINCT    SPECIES.                  205

has, however, never seen a skull of this type belonging to an
undoubtedly wild animal.
  The fourth is the Longifrons or Brachyceros race.                   The
name Brachyceros, by which it was at first known, must be
abandoned, because it had been previously applied by Dr.
Gray to an African ox. This variety is extremely abundant
in all the Pfahlbauten. - Prof. Riitimeyer regards it as de-
scended, not from the urus, but from a second and smaller
species. He remarks, however, that if it is derived from the
urus, it is at least a more distinct, and must be an older
variety than any of the preceding. Prof. Riitimeyer admits
that we have no evidence that B. longifrons ever existed in
a wild state in Central Europe.
   M. de Quatrefages* considers that all our domestic oxen
are descendants of the urus; while Mr. Darwin} regards B.
longifrons and B. frontosus as the modern representatives of
wild ancestors, specifically distinct from B. primigenius, and
concludes therefore that our “ domestic cattle are almost
certainly the descendants of more than one wild form.’
   Mr. Boyd Dawkins has recently { shown that as far as
this country is concerned, we have no conclusive evidence of
more than two species of wild oxen, namely, the urus and the
bison. The smaller varieties appear to have been introduced.
as domesticated animals, and do not go back beyond the
Neolithic period.      According to Nilsson, on the contrary,
both the Bos frontosus and B. longifrons inhabited Sweden
as wild races§.   My own impression is that the urus was
domesticated in Europe, but also that some at least of the
early settlers brought domestic        cattle with them, and these
may very probably have belonged to a distinct wild race.

   * Rey. des Cours Scientifiques,      t Boyd Dawkins, Geol. Jour. 1867,
1868, p. 563.                        p. 182.                      é
  + Animals and Plants under Do-        § Ann. and Mag. of Nat. His. 1849,
mestication, vol. i. p. 81.          pp. 349-351.
206          ABSENCE     OF EXTINCT      SPECIES.         AUROCHS.

Further evidence, however, is much needed on this interest-
ing subject.
  Making allowance then for the marine animals, such as
seals, fish, oysters,       cockles, whelks, etc., which we could
not expect to find so far away from the sea, the fauna
indicated by the remains found in the Swiss lakes agrees
remarkably with that which characterizes the Danish Kjék-
kenméddings, so far as wild animals are concerned, and
belongs evidently to a far later age than that of the cele-
brated stone hatchets, which were first made known to us by
the genius and perseverance of M. Boucher de Perthes.
   Instead of the elephant and rhinoceros we find in the Neo-
lithic or second Stone period—in that, namely, of the Kjok-
kenméddings and “ Pfahlbauten ”’—the urus and bison, the
elk and the red deer already installed as monarchs of the
forest. yen the reindeer is altogether absent. The red
deer on the contrary,     and the boar, appear to have been
very frequent, and to have formed a most important article
of food to the Lake-dwellers. The urus, or great fossil ox, is
now altogether extinct, at least as a wild species*. It is
mentioned by Cesar, who describes it as being little smaller
than an elephant. (Hi sunt magnitudine paulo infra ele-
phantos specie et colore et figura tauri). According to
Herberstein, it still existed in Germany during the sixteenth
 century,    soon after which, however,               it must have become
extinct.
   The aurochs, or Kuropean bison, seems to have disappeared
from Western Europe at about the same period as the urus.
There is no historical record of its existence in England or
Scandinavia. In Switzerland we cannot trace it later than
the tenth century; but it is mentioned in the “ Niebelungen

   * Prof. Riitimeyer, as   I have al.    Park      are     unmistakable,   though
 ready mentioned, considers that the      dwarfish,   descendants       of the   B.
 celebrated wild cattle of Tankerville    primigenius.
                           ELK.    IBEX.                    207

Lied,” of the twelfth century, as occurring in the Forest of
Worms, and in Prussia the last was killed in the year 1775.
At one period, indeed, it appears to have inhabited almost
the whole of Europe, much of Asia, and part even of America,
but at present it is confined in Europe to the imperial forests
in Lithuania, where it is preserved by the Emperor of Russia;
while, according to Nordmann and Von Baer, it still exists in
some parts of Western Asia.
   We have no notice of the existence of the elk in Switzer-
land during the historical period, but it is mentioned by
Cesar as existing in the great Hercynian forest; and even
in the twelfth century it was to be met with in Sclavonia
and Hungary, according to Albertus Magnus and Gesner. In
Saxony, the death of the last is recorded as having occurred
in 1746. At present it inhabits Prussia and Lithuania, Fin-
land and Russia, Scandinavia and Siberia, to the shores of
the Amoor.
   The ibex disappeared from most of the Swiss Alps, perhaps
not much later than the elk. It has lingered longest in the
West. In Glarus the last one perished in 1550, though near
Chiavenna it existed until the commencement of the seven-
teenth century, and in the Tyrol until the second half of the
eighteenth, while a few still exist in the neighbourhood of
Mont Iséran, where they are protected by the King of Italy.
  The extermination of the bear, like that of the ibex, seems
to have begun in the Hast, and is not yet complete, since
this animal still occurs in the Jura and the Grisons, whence
it occasionally visits the Valais, and the south-eastern parts
of Switzerland. The fox, the otter, and the different species
of weasels, are.still the common     carnivora of Switzerland,
and the wild cat, the badger, and the wolf, still occur in the
Jura and the Alps, the latter in cold winters venturing even
into the plains. The beaver, on the contrary, has at last
disappeared.   It had long been very rare in Switzerland, but
208                  GENERAL   CHARACTER

a few survived until the beginning of the present century in
Tiucerne and Valais. Red deer were abundant in the Jura
and Black Forest in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
though they do not appear to have been so large as those
which lived in earlier times.    The last was shot in the
canton of Basle, at the close of the eighteenth century,
while in western Switzerland and Valais they lingered some-
what longer. The roedeer still occurs in some places.
   It appears, therefore, that the animals of the Swiss Pile-
works belong to the fauna, which has occupied Europe from
the commencement of the Paleolithic period down to the
present time.
      While, however, we must regard the fauna of the Stone
Age as belonging to the same great zoological epoch with
that of the river drift gravels on the one hand, and the pre-
sent time on the other, we cannot forget that the immense
period which has elapsed since the end of the tertiary period
has produced great changes in the fauna of Kurope. In this
post-tertiary era the Pileworks occupy, so to say, the middle
position. Distmguished from the present fauna of Switzer-
land by the possession of the urus, the bison, the elk, the
stag, and the wild boar, as well as by the more general
distribution of the beaver, the bear, the ibex, etc., their
fauna differs from that of the drift gravels in the absence of
the mammoth, the rhinoceros, the musk ox, the cave hyana,
and the reindeer.
   Prof. Riitimeyer thinks that from similar considerations
alone, even if we had no other evidence, we might carry this
division farther; and if we take the settlements at Moossee-
dorf, Wauwyl, Robenhausen, and Nidau, which have been the
most carefully studied in this respect, it certainly appears
that the three former, which belong to the Stone Age, offer a
marked contrast to the latter, which is the locality whence the
largest number of bronze objects has as yet been obtained.
                          OF THE FAUNA,                       209
   It is of course unnecessary to point out the interest and
importance of such a distinction, which accords so well
with that indicated by the study of the weapons and the
state of preservation of the piles. Thus, the urus has only
occurred at Moosseedorf, Wauwyl, Robenhausen, Wangen,
and Concise; the -aurochs only at Moosseedorf, Wauwyl,
and Robenhausen ; the bear only at Moosseedorf, Wauwyl,
Robenhausen, Wangen, and Concise. A glance at the table
given at page 192 will show that several other species have
as yet only occurred at Moosseedorf and Robenhausen; a
fact, however, which indicates, perhaps, rather the richness
than the antiquity of these localities.     Possibly we may
consider the presence of these larger species as an indication
of their greater abundance in the oldest period; but we must
not forget that not only the bear and the elk, but also the
aurochs and the urus appear at a comparatively late period.
On the other hand, the abundance of wild animals, and the
fact that at Moosseedorf and Wauwyl the fox was more
abundant than the dog, while elsewhere the reverse is the
case, certainly speak in favour of the greater antiquity of these
two settlements.
   The evidence derived from the distribution of the domestic
animals, is, perhaps, more satisfactory. The sheep is present
even at Moosseedorf, though not so numerous as at Nidau.
On the other hand, the horse is frequent at Nidau, while at
Moosseedorf only a single bone of this animal was discovered,
in a different condition from that of the other bones, and
probably more recent.      Finally, the domestic     hog of the
present race is absent from all the Pileworks of the Stone
period, excepting the one at Wauwyl, and becomes frequent
only at Nidau. The following table shows the proportions
of wild and tame animals at Wauwyl, Moosseedorf, as repre-
senting the Age of Stone, and at Nidau, as perhaps the best
illustration of that of Bronze. 1 represents a single mdi-
                                                 E
210            COMPARISON                  OF      THE        DIFFERENT       LAKE         VILLAGES,


vidual; 2, several; 8, the species which are common;                                                   4, those
which are very common; and 5, those which are present in
large numbers.

                                                              Wauwyl.    | Moosseedorf.|      Nidau,
                    Witp        ANIMALS.




           se)sc,fe)Q &



                    See               ee     ey                 BO
                                                                bo
                                                                G9
                                                                hO
                                                                FH
                                                                bO
                                                                FE
                                                                69
                                                                 4




            by (eo)Q =) 8 wy

                                      ween      eee eee cee
                                                                |ex
                                                                  noroere: fol
                                                                           opmowHmetocw:
                                                                            rrr
                Domestic          ANIMALS.
           Domestic            Boar                             fe)
           Horse                                                                o>.

           (=)i)


                                                                     DD
                                                                     He
                                                                     Ne
                                                                     Od           Oe:
                                                                                  NNN            ow
                                                                                                 woskownw



   If succeeding investigations confirm the conclusions thus
indicated, we may infer that the domestic animals, which
were comparatively rare in the Stone period, became more
frequent after the introduction of bronze; a change which
indicates and perhaps produced an alteration of habits on the
part of the inhabitants.
   Rare, indeed, as they may have been, oxen, horses, sheep,
and goats could not be successfully kept through the winter
in the climate of Switzerland, without stores of provisions
and some sort of shelter, A pastoral people, therefore, must
have reached a higher grade than a mere nation of hunters.
  * Considered by Prof. Riitimeyer                                   mesticated at Nidau and in the later
to. have     been at first wild, but do-                             Pfahlbauten.                      ‘
               THE   FLORA   OF THE   PFAHLBAUTEN.           ila

We know, moreover, in another way, that at this period
agriculture was not entirely unknown,     This is proved in
the most unexpected manner, by the discovery of carbonized
cereals at various points. Wheat is most common, having
been discovered at Meilen, Moosseedorf, and Wangen. At
the latter place, indeed, many bushels of it were found, the
grains being united in large thick lumps. In other cases the
grains are free, and without chaff, resembling our present
wheat im size and form, while more rarely they are still in
the ear. Ears of the Hordeum hexastichon L. (the six-rowed
barley) are somewhat numerous.       This species differs from
the H. vulgare L. in the number of rows and in the smaller
size of the grains. According to De Candolle, it was the
species generally cultivated by the Ancient Greeks, Romans,
and Egyptians. In the ears from Wangen, each row has
generally ten or eleven grains, which, however, are smaller
and shorter than those now grown.
   Three varieties of wheat were cultivated by the Lake-
dwellers, who also possessed two kinds of barley, and two of
millet. Of these the most ancient and most important were
the small six-rowed barley and small “ Lake-dwellers” wheat.
The discovery of Egyptian wheat (Triticum turgidum) at
Wangen and Robenhauseu, is particularly interesting. Oats
were cultivated during the Bronze Age, but are absent from
all the Stone Age villages. Rye also was unknown.
   Wheat and millet only seem to have been used for making
bread. Prof. Heer thinks the barley was probably roasted.
In the six-rowed barley the husks adhere very closely to the
grain, and it would have been difficult to separate them;
when roasted, however, they are easily detached from        one
another.
  Still more unexpected was the discovery of bread, or
rather cakes, for their texture is so solid that leaven does
not appear to have been used.         They were flat and round,
                          Pod
pala                   GRAIN.   FRUITS.

from an inch to fifteen lines in thickness, and, to judge from
one specimen, had a diameter of four or five inches. In
other cases the grains seem to have been roasted, coarsely
ground between stones, and then either stored up in large
earthenware pots, or eaten after being slightly moistened.
Grain prepared in a similar manner is even now eaten in
Germany and Switzerland.     In what way the ground was
prepared for the cultivation of corn we know not, as no
implements have as yet been discovered, which can with
certainty be regarded as agricultural.
   Carbonized apples have been found at Wangen, sometimes
whole, sometimes cut into two or more rarely into four pieces,
and evidently dried and put aside for winter use. They have
occurred not only at Wangen, but also at Robenhausen in
Lake Pfeffikon, and at Concise in Lake Neufchatel.     They
are small, and resemble generally those which still grow wild
in the Swiss forests; at Robenhausen, however, specimens
have occurred which are of larger size and were probably
cultivated. No traces of the vine, the walnut, the cherry, or
the damson have yet been met with, but stones of the wild
plum and the Prunus padus have been found. Seeds of the
raspberry and blackberry, and shells of the hazel-nut and
beech-nut occur plentifully in the mud, but those of the
strawberry are rare.   Peas have been found at Moosseedorf,
but beans do not appear until the Bronze Age.
   From all this, therefore, it is evident that the nourishment
of the dwellers in the Pileworks consisted of corn and wild
fruits, of fish, and the flesh of wild and domestic animals.
Doubtless also milk was an important article of their diet.
  Altogether 115 species of plants have been determined.
The wild species are almost entirely the same as those now
living; the Silene cretica, however, a South European weed,
which was doubtless introduced originally and accidentally
with the cereals, and which has been found at Robenhausen,
                                     DRAPA           NATANS.           FLAX.                                          213

does not now inhabit Switzerland, and the Drapa natans,
which was used as food by the inhabitants of Moosseedorf
and Robenhausen, was supposed to be extinct in Switzer-
land, but is now known to occur in one locality.
   I subjoin a table which I have compiled from Dr. Heer’s
memoir, which shows the more interesting species and
varieties.
                                                      STONE AGE, TRANSITION,                       BRONZE AGE.
                                                                  |             3              ,                      E
                                                           a      3             g         &
                                                           OE     SSee ae ge
                                                           eee
                                                           a  = a=)  =
                                                                      ee av) a

   1 Hordeum          hexastichon sanc-
                      RUD ere coerce cee               ‘          ;                 oe                  ae
  2       i               -     densum.|               ...        ae                *          *         *
  3    -      distichum .........                           *    oe            aan        a
  4 Triticum vulgareantiquorum|                             *         *             *     a             ve             “2
  5       39              >»       compactum
      SUMLICUTIMMEE ee oe a tee                             *         *             *          *             *       ae
  6 Triticum turgidum (Egyp-
      PLATING COG) ata tasenesr
                             ates:                          af   Ace            *                                    ves
  % Triticum: spelta <.25.1.cceeses                    LS                                                              %
  8       5         GICOGCTIM. venccuere+e                 ze                            te
  9       a         monococcum       ......                *1                            eae
 10 Secale cereale             .........sccs0000-                                        Bs                          nes
 11 Avena sativa (Oats) .........                      ei                                  a                          *
 12 Panicum miliaceum                    .........         x                   os          g)
 13 Setaria italica ...........0..00-                                           *          a
 14 Silene cretica .............0000                                            3
 15 Centaurea cyanus ............                                wa             A
 16 Pastinaca sativa                         ie                   “0                                   oe             s
 i ZasHaino) yOletairid aycabesme reais sale           A         -                         *               *          =
 Se hisnue sAvlyilii meres   eereece                   os         zs           Bi        Ne            ae             x
 19 Ervum leus ..... Sennctea eee                                                        tes           see             d
 20 Pyrus         malus         (small      crab;
              Che) Oo) epReadoc: scgeieecane               *      iy            4
 LY Trae; DALAS)               easiscoacaielsias
                                              oe.      atte       *            wee
 22 Jinum angustifolium .........                                 f             ig       ote           a             ges
              ea                                 a                         ee                                    1




   Neither hemp, oats, nor rye have yet been found. Small
pieces of twine and bits of matting made of flax may have
been part of some article of clothing.                                     For this purpose also
                                                         used,
there can be little doubt that the skins of animals were

                                 1 Only one ear, subsequently lost.
214                     ANCIENT      AGRICULTURE.

fragments of leather have been met with, and some of the
stone implements seem well adapted to assist in their pre-
paration, while the bone pins, and the needles made from the
teeth of boars, may have served to fasten them together.
  Dr. Heer, from whose very interesting memoir* the above
facts are borrowed, calls particular attention to the fact that,
while the remains of wild species found in the Pfahlbauten
agree in the most minute particulars with those still iving in
Switzerland,    the cultivated plants, on the contrary, differ
from all the existing varieties, and invariably have smaller
seeds or fruits. Man has evidently in the course of time
effected considerable improvements. It is also very interest-
ing to observe how the evidence derived from these Swiss
Lake-dwellings agrees with the evidence contaimed in the
most ancient writings that have come down to us. Thus
flax is mentioned in the Pentateuch and m Homer, it was
also largely used by the ancient Egyptians, while hemp seems
to have been unknown until a later period. So also wheat and
barley, but neither oats nor rye+ are mentioned in Exodus
or by Homer. Even in the time of David, when Barzillai the
Gileaditet “brought beds, and basins, and earthen vessels,
and wheat, and barley, and flour, and parched corn, and
beans, and lentiles, and parched pulse, and honey, and butter,
and sheep, and cheese of kine,” it will be observed that
neither oats nor rye are mentioned.     Flax also is mentioned
nine times in the Old Testament, and linen thirteen times,
but hemp not once.
      To what race of men these interesting remains are ascrib-
able we have as yet no direct evidence.              Human      bones are
very rare in the Pileworks, and may probably be referred to
accidents, especially as we find that those of children are
   * Die Pflanzen der Pfahlbanten.     in Exodus ix. 32, really means spelt.
   + According to the best Hebrew         + 2 Sam.    xviii. 28,
                                                   ‘pies
scholars, the word translated “rye
                 SCARCITY   OF   HUMAN   REMAINS,          915

most numerous.     M. Desor, indeed, states that nota single
human skeleton has yet been found in any of the stations
belonging to the Stone Age, and Dr. Keller, in his fifth
report, informs us that all the Lake-villages taken together
have not yet produced more than halfa dozen. One mature
skull from Meilen has been described by Professor His, who
 considers that it does not differ much from the ordinary
 Swiss type. While his work was in the press, Prof. Riiti-
 meyer received from Col. Schwab four more skulls, two of
which were obtained at Nidau, one at Sutz, and one at Biel.
Another skull shown to me by Professor Desor, and found at
Auvernier, completes the number mentioned by Dr. Keller.
All these settlements, however, appear to have belonged to
the Bronze Age, nor has it yet been possible certainly to
refer any of the ancient tumuli found in Switzerland to the
earlier period.
   Passing now to the Lake-habitations belonging to the
Bronze Age, we find that they are less generally distributed
than those of the earlier period. They have as yet been
found principally on the Lakes of Geneva, Luissel, Neuf-
chatel, Morat, Bienne, and Sempach ; scarcely any in eastern
Switzerland.   It has been supposed from this that the Age
of Stone lasted longer in the east than in the west, and that
flint and serpentine were in use on Lake Constance long
after bronze had replaced them on the western lakes. We
can, however, hardly suppose that the inhabitants of Inkwyl
and Moosseedorf in Berne, who imported flint from France,
can have been ignorant of the neighbouring civilization on
the Lake of Bienne. Moreover, one settlement of the Bronze
Age has been found on the Lake of Constance; but as the
question now stands, Pileworks of the Metallic period are
almost peculiar to western and central Switzerland. The
constructions of the Bronze Age are more solidly built, but
do not otherwise appear to have differed materially from
216               BRONZE   AGE LAKE-VILLAGES.

those of the Stone Age.      They are often, however, situated
farther from the land and in deeper water, partly no doubt
on account of the greater facility of working timber, but
partly also, perhaps, because more protection was needed as
the means of attack were improved. The principal objects
of bronze are swords, daggers, axes, spear-heads, knives,
fish-hooks, sickles, pins, rings, and bracelets.    The number
of these articles which have been discovered is already very
great, the collection of Col. Schwab alone contaiming no less
than 4846 objects of metal. They are classified in the table
in p. 43, which gives an idea of the relative proportions in
which they occur.
   Many of them are really beautiful, and as bronze must
have been at that early period of considerable value, it is
difficult to understand how so many can have been left un-
 cared for and forgotten, along the shallow margins of the
 Swiss lakes. “Tl est évident,” says Prof. Desor, “ que ce ne
 sont pas des rebuts qui se seraient perdus, sans qu’on s’en
 inquiétat. Is ne sont pas tombés & leau par hasard, non
 plus que cette quantité de vases qui sont accumulés sur cer-
 tain points, ni les jattes & provisions qu’on retire intactes.”
 On the whole he is inclined to think that in some of these cases
 at least, we have “de simples magasins destinés aux usten-
 siles et aux provisions, et qui auraient été détruits par l’in-
 cendie, comme semble l’indiquer la trace du feu que montrent
 fréquemment les poutres aussi bien que les vases en terre.
 On expliquerait ainsi comment      il se fait que les objets en
 bronze sont presque tous neufs, que les vases       sont entiers
 et réunis sur un seul point.     Cette hypothése semble cor-
 roborée par Popinion de plusieurs de nos chercheurs d’an-
 tiquités les plus expérimentés, qui pretendent que lon n’a
 chance de faire de bonnes trouvailles que 14 ot les pieux
 sont brilée, tandis que l’on perd son temps & fouiller les
 stations ou les pieux ne sont pas charbonnés.”     Col. Schwab
                           THE WORSHIP   OF LAKES.                     Pe?
 however, than whom no man has had more experience in
 such matters, while agreeing that comparatively little is ever
 found except in such Lake-villages as show traces of fire,
 expresses himself decidedly, and I think with reason, against
 the “ bazaar ” theory.
    It has been suggested that the early inhabitants of Switzer-
 land may have worshipped the Lakes, and that the beautiful
 bracelets, etc., may have been offerings to the gods. In
 fact, it appears from ancient writers that among the Gauls,
Germans, and other nations, many lakes were regarded as
sacred. M. Aymard (Etude Archéol. sur le Lac du Bouchet.
Le Puy. 1862) has collected several instances of this kind.
According to Cicero*, Justin}, and Strabot, there was a lake
near Toulouse in which the neighbouring tribes used to de-
posit offerings of gold and silver. Tacitus, Pliny, and Virgil
also mention the existence of sacred lakes. Again, so late
as the sixth century, Gregory of Tours, who is quoted by M.
Troyon and M. Aymard, tells us (De Glor. Confes. chap. ii.)
that on Mount Helanus there was a lake which was the
object of popular worship. Every year the inhabitants of
the neighbourhood brought to it offerings of clothes, skins,
cheeses, cakes, etc. Traces of a similar superstition may still
be found lingering in the remote parts of Scotland and
Ireland; in the former country I have myself seen a sacred
spring surrounded by the offerings of the neighbouring pea-
santry, who seemed to consider pence and halfpence as the
most appropriate and agreeable sacrifice to the Spirit of the
Waters. Neither the coarse, broken pottery, the castaway
fragments of bones, nor the traces of habitations, can, how-
ever, be accounted for in this manner§.
  The pottery of the Bronze period is more varied and more

 * De Nat. Deor. lib. iii. xxx.         § See also Wylie “ On Lake-dwell-
             ii. iii                 ings of the Early Periods,” Archzol.
 t Geog. vol. iv.                    vol. xxxvili, p. 181.
218             THE POTTERY    OF THE    BRONZE     AGE.

skilfully made than that of the Stone Age, but the potter’s
wheel does not seem to have been in use. Rings of earthen-
ware are common, and appear to have been used as supports
for the round-bottomed vases. The ornaments are of the same
general character as those on the objects of bronze. Many of
the large urns appear to have been used as store-places for
the grain, etc., which were collected during the summer for
the winter’s use. In the absence, perhaps, of boxes and cup-
boards, even ornaments and instruments seem to have been
kept in large jars. Some beautiful bracelets were found with
several sickles in a jar at Cortaillod. Pieces of pottery, dis-
torted by fire during the process of baking, have, according
to M. Troyon, been found in many of the Lake-villages,
whence he concludes that the pottery was manufactured on
the spot.                .
   Colonel Schwab has found at Nidau more than twenty
crescents made of earthenware, and with the convex side
flattened to serve as afoot. They are compressed at the sides,
sometimes plain, sometimes ornamented, from ten to twelve
inches wide, and six to eight in height.            Dr. Keller was      at
 first inclined to regard them as emblems of moon worship,
but it is more probable that they were pillows*. Though this
seems at first very unlikely, and they must, one would think,
have been very uncomfortable,           still we know that several
barbarous races at the present day use wooden pillows or
neck-rests of the same kind, as, for instance, the Feegeeans,
who, having enormous        heads    of hair,     sacrifice   comfort   to
vanity, and use a mere wooden bar as a pillow.                 The very
long bronze pins found with these “crescents” indicate that
during the Bronze Age the hair was worn very long and
carefully arranged.
      M. Troyon is of opinion that the inhabitants of Switzer-
land during the Bronze Age were of a different race from
                   * Vogt’s Lectures on Man, p. 368.
              INHABITANTS   OF THE LAKE-VILLAGES.             219:
those who had lived there during the earlier period, and he
agrees with some of the Scandinavian archeologists in re-
garding them as the true “Celts,” and in attributing to them
the habit of burning their dead. “Dés que le bronze se
répand en Europe, l’incinération devient d’un usage général.
L’apparition d’un nouveau peuple répond évidemment A celle
de ce métal. L’urne cinéraire, de méme que la tombe cu-
bique, se retrouve sous la surface du sol ou dans le tumulus,
mais celui-ci généralement moins élevé que dans l’4ge pri-
mitif, ne recouvre plus guére de salle funéraire.    Quand on
voit combien il est rare que le bronze accompagne le premier
mode d’inhumation, on doit reconnaitre que l’envahisseur est
resté maitre du sol; du reste il ne pouvait en étre autrement
de la part d’un peuple possédant des armes en métal, or ces
armes sont celles des anciens Celtes qui n’inhumaient point
leur morts, mais les livraient au flammes    du bicher.    L/’in-
cinération étant une    partie intégrante   de leurs pratiques
religieuses, et Purne cinéraire devenant d’un usage général
avec le bronze, il en résulte que le Celte n’est pas le premier
habitant de ’ Europe dans laquelle il a introduit les arts
metallurgiques.” It would be very desirable to have some
statistics, in order that we might appreciate the value of
the evidence to be derived from these Swiss tumuli. M.
Troyon relies on the fact that many of the Lake-villages
were destroyed by fire, and that when, as appears to have
been the case at several places, they were rebuilt during the
Bronze Age, this was done, not exactly on the same spot,
but farther away from the bank. Dr. Keller, on the other
hand, considers that the primitive population did not differ,
either in disposition (anlage), mode of life, or industry, from
that which was   acquainted with the use of bronze; and that
the whole phenomena of the Lake-villages, from thei com-
mencement    to their conclusion,   indicate clearly a gradual
and peaceable development.      The number of instances in
22.0             CHARACTER   OF THE OBJECTS

which Lake-villages had been destroyed by fire has been,
he considers, exaggerated. Of the settlements on the Lakes
of Bienne and Neufchatel, amounting in all to sixty-six, only
a quarter have, according to Col. Schwab, shown any traces
of combustion; a proportion which is, perhaps, not greater
than might have been expected, remembering that the huts
were built of wood, and in all probability covered by thatch.
Moreover, if these conflagrations had resulted from the attacks
of enemies, we ought surely to have found numerous remains
of the slain, whereas all the Lake-villages together have not
as yet supplied us with the remains of more than half a dozen
human skeletons.
   It must, I think, be confessed that the arguments used by
M. Troyon do not justify us in believing with him that the
introduction of bronze was accompanied by an entire change
of population. The construction of Lake-dwellings is a habit
go unusual, that the continuance of similar habitations during
the Bronze Age seems to me a strong argument against any
such hypothesis.
   Towards the close of the Bronze Age the Lake-villages
appear to have gradually become less numerous. During the
Stone Age they were spread over the whole country. Bronze
Age settlements are very rare in the east of Switzerland, and
the Iron Age is represented only on the Lakes of Bienne and
Neufchatel.    In these settlements not only has a new sub-
stance made its appearance, but the forms of the implements
are different. We have, indeed, copies of the bronze axes
made in iron, just as we found before that some of the earlier
bronze celts resembled the stone axes in form; but these are
exceptional cases. The swords have larger handles, and are
more richly ornamented; the knives have straight edges; the
sickles are larger; the pottery is more skilfully made, and is
of the kind generally known as Roman; coins occur, the per-
sonal ornaments are more varied, and glass for the first time
                FOUND    IN DIFFERENT    LAKE-VILLAGES.                  221

makes its appearance. Bronze also is present; but i. the
first place it is no longer used for weapons, and in the
second it is worked in a different manner, being hammered*,
while, as already mentioned, all the objects of the Bronze
Age are cast.
   A field of battle at Tiefenau, near Berne (see p. 7), is
remarkable for the great number of iron weapons and imple-
ments which have been found on it. Pieces of chariots, about
a hundred swords, fragments of coat of mail, lance-heads,
rings, fibule, ornaments, utensils, pieces of pottery and of
glass, accompanied by more than thirty Gaulish and Massa-
hote coins of a date anterior to our era, enable us to refer
this battle-field to the Roman period. About forty Roman
coins have also been found at the small island on the Lake
of Bienne.
   After this period we find no more evidences of Lake-
habitations on a large scale. Here and there, indeed, a
few fishermen may have lingered on the half-destroyed plat-
forms, but the wants and habits of the people had changed,
and the age of the Swiss Puleworks was at an end.
   We have, however, traced them through the ages of Stone
and Bronze down to the beginning of the Iron period. We
have seen evidences of a gradual progress in civilization,
and improvement         in the arts, an increase in the number of
domestic animals, and proofs at last of the existence of an
extended commerce.     We found the country inhabited only
by rude savages, and we leave it the seat of a powerful nation.
Changes so important as these are not effected in a day; the
progress of the human mind is but slow; and the gradual
additions to human knowledge and power, like the rings in
trees, enable us to form some idea how distant must be the
date of their commencement.      So varied, however, are the
conditions of the human mind, so much are all nations affected
  * See Desor, Les Constructions lacustres da Lac de Neuchatel, p. 27.
222             ANTIQUITY   OF LAKE-VILLAGES.

by the influence of others, that when we attempt to express
our impressions, so to say, in terms of years, we are baffled
by the complexity of the problem.
   Some attempts have, indeed, been made to obtain a more
definite chronology, and they will be alluded to in a later
chapter. Though we must not conceal from ourselves the
imperfection of the archeeological record, still we need not
despair of eventually obtaining some     approximate   chrono-
logy.   Our knowledge of primitive antiquity has made an
enormous stride in the last ten years, and we may fairly look
forward with hope to the future.
  The Swiss archeologists are continuing their labours, and
they may rest assured that we in England await with interest
the result of their mvestigations.    Few things, indeed, can
be more interesting than the spectacle of an ancient and
long-forgotten people thus rising, as it were, from the waters
of oblivion, to take that place which properly belongs to it
in the history of the human race.
                               223




                       CHAPTER       VII.

       THE DANISH KJOKKENMODDINGS,     OR SHELL-MOUNDS,

      ENMARK occupies a larger space in the history, than
         on the map of Europe; the nation is greater than the
country.     Though, with the growth of physical power in
surrounding populations, she has lost much of her influence
in political councils, and has been recently deprived of a great
part of her ancient possessions, still the Danes of to-day are
no unworthy representatives of their ancestors. Many a
larger nation might envy them the position they hold in
science and in art, and few have contributed more       to the
progress of human knowledge. Copenhagen may well be
proud both of her museums and of her professors, and I
would especially point to the celebrated Museurn of Northern
Antiquities, as being most characteristic and unique.
   For the formation of such a collection Denmark offers
great opportunities. The whole country appears to have
been, at one time, thickly studded with tumuli: where the
land has not been brought into cultivation, many of them
are often in sight at once, and even in the more fertile and
thickly populated parts, the plough is often diverted from its
course by one of these ancient burial places. Fortunately,
the stones of which they are constructed are so large and
so hard, that their destruction and removal     is a laborious
and expensive undertaking. While, however, on the one
hand, land grows gradually more valuable, and the stones
themselves are-more and more coveted for building or other
224                   DANISH    TUMULI.

purposes: on the other, the conservative traditions, the
feeling of superstitious reverence for the dead, which have
so long protected them from desecration, is gradually be-
coming weaker; and it is estimated that not a day passes
without witnessing the destruction of one or more of these
tumuli, and the loss of some perhaps. almost 1rrecoverable
link in the history of the human race.
  Many of these barrows, indeed, contain in themselves          a
small collection of antiquities, and the whole country may
even be considered as a museum on a great scale. The peat
bogs, which occupy so large an area, may almost be said to
swarm with antiquities, and Professor Steenstrup estimates
that, on an average, every column of peat three feet square
contains some specimen of ancient workmanship.     All these
advantages and opportunities, however, might have been
thrown away, but for the genius and perseverance of Pro-
fessor Thomsen, who may fairly be said to have created the
museum over which he so long and so worthily presided.
   In addition to the objects collected from the tumuli and
the peat bogs, and to those which have been found from
time to time scattered at random      im the soil, the Museum
of Northern Antiquities contains an immense collection of
specimens from some very interesting shell-mounds, which are
known in Denmark under the name of “ Kjékkenméddings,”
and were long supposed to be raised beaches, like those
which are found at so many points along our own shores.
True raised beaches, however,     necessarily contain a variety
of species; the individuals     are of different ages, and the
ishells are, of course, mixed with a considerable quantity of
sand and gravel.   But it was    observed, in the first instance,
I believe, by Professor Steenstrup, that in these supposed
beaches, the shells belonged entirely to full-grown, or to
nearly full-grown, individuals: that they consisted of four
species which do not live together, nor require the same
                 KJOKKENMODDINGS,      OR SHELL-MOUNDS.               225
 conditions, and would not, therefore, be found together alone
 in a natural deposit: and thirdly, that the stratum con-
 tained scarcely any gravel, but consisted almost entirely
 of shells.
    The discovery of rude flint implements, and of bones still
 bearing the marks of knives, confirmed the supposition that
these beds were not natural formations, and it subsequently
became evident that they were, in fact, the sites of ancient
villages ; the primitive population having lived on the shore
and fed principally on shell-fish, but partly also on the pro-
ceeds of the chase. In many places hearths were discovered
consisting of flat stones, arranged in such a manner as to
form small platforms, and bearing all the marks of fire. The
shells and bones not available for food gradually accumulated
round the tents and huts, until they formed deposits generally
from three to five feet, but sometimes as much as ten feet in
thickness, and in some cases more than three hundred yards
in length, with a breadth of from one hundred to two hundred
feet. The name Kjékkenmédding, applied to these mounds,
is derived from Kjékken, “kitchen,” and médding (corre-
sponding to our local word        midding), “a refuse heap,” and
it was, of course, evident that a careful examination of these
accumulations would throw much light on the manners and
civilization of the then population.
   Under these circumstances a committee was formed, con-
sisting of Professor Steenstrup, the celebrated author of the
treatise   “On     the   Alternation    of Generations,’       Professor
Forchhammer, the father of Danish Geology, and Professor
Worsaae, the well-known archeologist: a happy combina-
tion, promising the best results to biology, geology, and
archeology. Much was naturally expected from the labours
of such a triumvirate, and the most sanguine hopes have
been fulfilled.     More than fifty of the deposits have been
carefully examined, many thousand specimens have been col-
                                                           Q
226            DESCRIPTION    OF THE    SHELL-MOUNDS.

lected, ticketed, and deposited in the Museum at Copenhagen,
and the general results have been embodied in six Reports,
presented to the Academy of Sciences at Copenhagen*.
   It is from these reports, and from the excellent Memoir by
M. Morlot, that the following information has principally
been derived. Being, however, anxious to present to my
readers a complete and accurate account of these mterest-
ing shell-mounds, I have twice visited Denmark; first in
1861, with Professor       Busk, and again in the           summer      of
1868. On both these occasions, through the kindness of
Professor Thomsen and Herr K. Herbst, every facility has
been afforded me of examining the large collections made
in different Kjdkkenméddings, in addition to which I had
the great advantage of visiting several of the shell-mounds
under the guidance of Professor Steenstrup himself—espe-
cially one at Havelse in 1861, and those at Meilgaard and
Fannerup,in 1863.
   Mr. Busk and I also visited by ourselves one at Bilidt, on
the Isefjord, close to Fredericksund;         but this is one of the
places at which it would seem that the inhabitants cooked
their dinners actually on the shore itself, so that the shells
and bones are much mixed up with sand and gravel; and we
were not very successful in the search for flint implements.
At Havelse, on the contrary, the settlement was on rather
higher ground, and, though close to the shore, quite beyond
the reach of the waves;       the shelis and bones are, therefore,
almost unmixed with extraneous substances. At this place
the Kjékkenmédding is of small extent, and is in the form
of an irregular ring, enclosing a space on which the ancient
dwelling or dwellings probably stood. In other cases, where

  * Untersdgelser i geologisk-anti-    lent abstract of the Reports in the
quarisk Retning af G. Forchhammer,     Mém. de la Société Vandoise, +t. vi.
J. Steenstrup, og J. Worsaae.    M.    1860.
Morlot also has published an excel-
              DESCRIPTION   OF THE   SHELL-MOUNDS.          227lol

the deposit is of greater extent, as, for instance in the cele-
brated shell-mound at Meilgaard, the surface is undulating,
the greater thickness of the shelly stratum in some places
apparently indicating the arrangement of the dwellings.
When the shell-mound at Havelse was previously visited
by Professor Steenstrup, the shells were being removed to
serve as manure, and the mound, presenting a perpendicular
section, was in a very favourable condition for examination
The small pit thus formed had, however, been filled in; so
that we were obliged to make a fresh excavation. In two or
three hours we obtained about a hundred fragments of bone,
many rude flakes, slingstones, and flint fragments, together
with nine rude axes of the ordinary “shell-mound” type
(figs. 108-110), several of which, however, were picked up
on the surface.
   Our visit to Meilgaard in 1863 was even more successful.
This, which is one of the largest and most interesting shell-
mounds hitherto discovered, is situated not far from the sea-
coast, near Grenaa in north-east Jutland, in a beautiful
beech-forest called “Aigt,” or “Aglskov,” on the property of
M. Olsen, who, with a praiseworthy devotion to science, has
given orders that the Kjékkenmodding should not be de-
stroyed, although the materials of which it consists are well
adapted for the improvement of the soil, and for other pur-
poses, to which, indeed, they had already been in part ap-
plied before the true nature of the deposit was discovered.
Arriving at his house, without invitation or notice, we were
received by M. Olsen and his family with kindness and
hospitality. M. Olsen immediately sent two workmen to
clear away the rubbish which had fallen in since the last
archeological visit, so that when we reached the spot we
found a fresh wall of the shell-mound ready for examination.
In the middle, this Kjékkenmédding has a thickness of about
ten feet, from which, however, it slopes away in all dlirec-
                              q 2
923          DISTRIBUTION   OF THE   SHELL-MOUNDS.

tions; round the principal mound are several smaller ones,
of the same nature.   Over the shells a thin layer of mould
has formed itself, on which the trees grow. A good section
of such a Kjékkenmédding can hardly fail to strike with as-
tonishment any one who sees it for the first time, and it is
difficult to convey in words an exact idea of the appearance
which it presents. The whole thickness consists of shells,
oysters being at Meilgaard by far the most numerous, with
here and there a few bones, and still more rarely stone im-
plements or fragments of pottery. Excepting just at the top
and bottom, the mass is quite unmixed with sand and gravel;
and, in fact, contains nothing but what has been, in some
way or other, subservient to the use of man. The only ex-
ceptions which I could see were a few, very few, rough flint
pebbles, which were probably dredged up with the oysters.
While we were in this neighbourhood, we visited another
Kjokkenmédding at Fannerup on the Kolindsund, which was
even in historical times an arm of the sea, but is now a fresh-
water lake. Other similar deposits have been discovered on
the Randersfjord and Mariagerfjord in this part of Jutland,
nor are the two settlements at Havelse and Bilidt by any
means the only ones on the Isefjord; in the neighbourhood
of Roeskilde,   Kjékkenméddings       occur    near   Gjerdrup, at
Kattinge, and Kattinge Verk, near Trallerup, at Gjershdi,
and opposite the island of Hyldeholme; besides several far-
ther north, others have been found on the islands of Fyen,
of Moen, and of Samsoe, and in Jutland along Liimfjord
and Horsensfjord, as well as on the Mariagerfjord, Randers-
fjord, and Kolindsund. The southern parts of Denmark have
not yet been carefully examined.  Generally it is evident that
deposits of this nature were    scattered here and there over
the whole coast, but that they were never formed inland.
The whole country was more intersected by fjords during
the Stone period even than it is now.         Under these circum-
                     SHELL-MOUNDS      IN     SCOTLAND.                   229
 stances it is evident that a nation which subsisted principally
 on marine mollusca would never form any large inland settle-
 ments. In some instances, indeed, Kjjkkenméddings have
 been found as far as eight miles from the Proves:Fie.171,
 coast, but in these cases there is good reason for sup- f~XA
 posing that the land has encroached on the sea. On
 the other hand, in those parts where Kjékkenméddings
 do not occur, their absence is no doubt occasioned by
 the waves having to a certain extent eaten away
 the shore: an explanation which accounts for their
 being so much more frequent on the borders of the
inland     fjords   than   on   the   coast     itself;   and   which
seems to deprive us of all hope of finding any similar
remains on our eastern and south-eastern shores.
Shell-mounds, although probably belonging to a later
date, have, however, actually been found on our coasts.
They were observed by Dr. Gordon, of Birnie, on the
shores of the Moray Firth. I have had the advantage
of visiting these shell-mounds with him. The largest of
the Scotch Kjékkenméddings is on Lech Spynie.                     We
did not find any implements or pottery in it, although
we searched for several hours, but a labourer, who had
been employed in carting it away for manure, had
previously found some fragments of rude pottery and
the bronze pin (fig. 171). Loch Spynie has been
partially drained, and is shut out from the sea by a
great accumulation of shingle, so that the water is now
perfectly fresh. From ancient records it appears that
the shingle barrier was probably completed, and tke                     Bronze
                                                                        pin from
lake shut out from         the sea, in the thirteenth and               a Scotch
                                                                         Shell-
                                                                        mound.
fourteenth centuries.       On the other hand, I have sub-
mitted the bronze pin figured here to Mr. Franks, who gives
it as his opinion that it is probably not older than 800 or
900 a.p.    If, therefore, it really belongs to the shell-monnd,
230               SHELL-MOUNDS          IN OTHER    COUNTRIES.

and there seems no reason to doubt the statement of the man
who found it, we thus get an approximate date for the
accumulation of the mound itself. At St. Valéry, close to
the mouth of the Somme, Mr. Evans, Mr. Prestwich, and I
found a large accumulation of shells, from which I obtained
several flint flakes and some pieces of rude pottery. Mr.
Pengelly and Mr. Spence Bate have recently described some
shell-mounds in Cornwall and Devonshire.      Similar remains
have been observed in various parts of the world, as, for
instance, in Australia and Dampier *, in Tierra del Fuego by
Mr. Darwin +, in the Malay Peninsula by Mr. Harle t, in the
Andaman islands by Dr. Stoliczka §, and in both North|| and
SouthY America.
   The fact that the majority of the Danish shell-mounds are
found at a height of only a few feet above the sea appears to
prove that there has been no considerable subsidence of the
land since their formation, while, on the other hand, it clearly
shows that there can have been no elevation. In certain
cases, however, where the shore is steep, they have been
found at a considerable height. It might indeed be sup-
posed that where, as at Bilidt, the materials of the Kjékken-
médding were rudely interstratified with sand and gravel,
the land must have sunk; but if for any length of time such
a deposit was subjected to the action of the waves, all traces
of it would be obliterated, and it is, therefore, probable that
an explanation is rather to be found in the fact that the
action of waves and storms may have been greater at that
time than they are now.   At present the tides only affect
the Kattegat to the extent of about a foot and a half, and
the configuration of the land protects it very much from the
   * Pinkerton’s Travels, vol. ii. p.           § Proc. As. Soc. Bengal, Jan.
473.                                         1870.
   + Journal, p. 234.                           || H. Wyman, The American Natu-
  t Ethnological        Soc, Trans.,   New   alist, vol. ii. Nos. 8, 9, and 11.
Ser. vol. ii. p. 119,                          { Brett's Indian Tribes of Guiana.
            FLORA   OF THE   DANISH   SHELL-MOUNDS,       231

action of the winds.  On the other hand, the tides on the
west coast of Jutland rise about nine feet, and the winds
have been known to produce differences of level amounting
to twenty-nine feet; and as we know that Jutland was
anciently an archipelago, and that the Baltic was more open
to the German Ocean than it is now, we can easily under-
stand that the fluctuations of level may have been greater,
and we can thus explain how the waves may have risen over
the Kjékkenmédding at Bilidt (which is after all not much
more than ten feet above the water), without resorting to the
hypothesis of a subsidence  and subsequent elevation of the
coast.
   In the Lake-habitations of the Stone Age in Switzerland,
grains of wheat and barley, and even pieces of bread, or
rather biscuit, have been found. It does not, however, appear
that the men of the Kjékkenméddings had any knowledge
of agriculture, no traces of grain of any sort having been
hitherto discovered.    The only vegetable remains found in
them have been burnt pieces of wood, and some charred sub-
stance, referred by M. Forchhammer to the Zostera marina,
a sea-plant which was, perhaps, used in the production of
salt.
   The four species which are the most abundant in the shell-
mounds are—
              The oyster, Ostrea edulis, L.
              The cockle, Cardium edule, L.
              The mussel, Mytilus edulis, L. and
              The periwinkle, Littorina littorea, L.
all four of which are still used as food for man.      Other
species occur more rarely, namely,—
              Nassa reticulata, L.
              Buceinum undatum, L.
              Venus pullastra, Mont.
              Heliw nemoralis, Mil.
292             FAUNA   OF THE    SHELL-MOUNDS.

               Venus aurea, Gm.
                Trigonella plana, Da. C.
               Littorina obtusata, L.
              Helix strigella, Mill. and
              Carocolla lupicida, L.
  It is remarkable that the speeimens of the first seven
species are well developed, and decidedly larger than any
now found in the neighbourhood. This is especially the case
with the Cardiwm edule and Itttorina littorea, while the
oyster has entirely disappeared, and even m the Kattegat
itself occurs only in a few places ; a result which may, perhaps,
be partly owing to the quantities caught by fishermen. Some
 oysters were, however, still living in the Isefjord at the be-
 ginning of this century, and their destruction cannot be alto-
 gether ascribed to the fishermen, as great numbers of dead
 shells are still present ; but in this case it is attributed to the
 abundance of starfishes, which are very destructive to oysters.
 On the whole, their disappearance, especially when taken in
 connexion with the dwarf size of the other species, is evi-
 dently attributable in a great measure to the smaller pro-
 portion of salt in the water.
    Of Crustacea only a few fragments of crabs have hitherto
 been found. The remains of vertebrata are very numerous
 and extremely mteresting. In order to form an idea of the
 number of bones, and of the relative proportions belonging
 to different animals, Professor Steenstrup dug out from three
 different parts of the shell-mound at Havelse, square pillars
 with sides three feet in length, and carefully collected the
 bones therein contained.        In the first pillar he found 175
 bones of mammals, and 35 of birds; m the second pillar he
 found 121 of mammals and 9 of birds; in the third 309 of
 mammals and 10 of birds.   The pillars, however, were not
 exactly comparable, because their cubic contents depended
 on the thickness of the shell-mound at the place where they
                      FISH.   BIRDS.    MAMMALS.                 200

were taken, and varied between seventeen and twenty cubic
feet. On the whole, Prof. Steenstrup estimates that there
were from ten to twelve bones in each cubic foot. It will be
seen, therefore, that the number of bones is very great.
Indeed, from the mound at Havelse alone the Committee
obtained in one summer 3500 bones of mammals, and more
than 200 of birds, besides many hundred of fishes, which
latter, indeed, are almost innumerable. The most common
species are—
                Clupea harengus, L. (the herring),
                Gadus callarias, L. (the dorse),
                Pleuronectes limanda, L. (the dab), and
                Murcena anguilla, L. (the eel).
   The remains of birds are highly interesting and instruc-
tive. The domestic fowl (Gallus domesticus) is entirely
absent. The two domestic swallows of Denmark (Hirundo
rustica and H. urbica), the sparrow and the stork are also
missing. On the other hand, fine specimens of the caper-
cailzie (Tetrao wrogallus) which feeds principally on the buds
of the pine, show that, as we know already from the remains
found in the peat, the country was at one time covered with
pine forests. Aquatic birds, however, are the most frequent,
especially several species of ducks and geese. The wild swan
(Cygnus musicus) which only visits Denmark in winter, is
also frequently found ; but, perhaps, the most interesting of
the birds whose remains       have been identified, is the Great
Auk   (Alea impennis, L.), a species which is now            almost,
if not altogether, extinct.
  Of mammalia by far the most common are—
               The stag (Cervus elephas, L.)
               The roedeer (Cervus capreolus, L.) and
               The wild boar (Sus scrofa, L.)
Indeed,   Professor    Steenstrup      estimates   that these three
234                              MAMMALS.

species form ninety-seven per cent. of the whole; the others
are—
              The urus (Bos urus, L.)
              The dog (Cants familiaris, L.)
              The fox (Canis vulpes, L.)
              The wolf (Canis lupus, L.)
              The marten (Martes sp.)
              The otter (Lutra vulgaris, Exl.)
              The porpoise (Delphinus phoceena, L.
              The seal (Phoca sp.)
              The water-rat        (Hypudceus      amphibius, L. and
                           Hypudeus agrestis, L.)
              The beaver (Castor fiber, L.)
               The lynx (Felis lynx, L.)
               The wild cat (Felis catus, L.)
               The hedgehog (Hrinaceus ewropeeus, L }
               The bear (Ursus arctos, L.)
               The mouse (Mus flavicollis, Mel.).
There are also traces of a smaller species of ox.               The Lithu-
anian   aurochs    (Bison europceus)        has   been     found,    though
rarely, in the peat bogs, but not yet in the Kjokkenméd-
dings. The musk ox (Ovtbos moschatus) and the domestic
ox (Bos taurus), as well as the reindeer, the elk, the hare, the
sheep, and the domestic hog, are all absent*.
   Professor Steenstrup does not believe that the domestic
hog of ancient Hurope was directly derived from the wild
boar, but rather that it was introduced from the east; and
the skulls which he showed me in support of this belief cer-
tainly exhibited very great differences between the two races.
The sheep, the horse, and the reindeer are entirely absent,
the domestic cat was not known in Europe until about the
  * It isa curious fact that,as Prof.   land indicate, asa general rule, larger
Steenstrup informs me, the bones        and more powerful animals than those
from the Kjékkenméddings of Jut-        of the Islands.
                      CONDITION    OF THE BONES.                            285

ninth century, and the bones of the urus are probably those
of wild specimens, so that the dog * appears to have been the
only domestic animal of the period; and though it may
fairly be asked whether the bones may not have belonged to
a race of wild dogs, the question admits of a satisfactory
answer.               :
   Among the remains of birds, the long bones which form
about one fifth of the skeleton, are, in the Kjékkenméddings,
about twenty times as numerous as the others, and are almost
always imperfect, the shaft only remaining. In the same
manner it would be impossible to reconstruct a perfect skele-
ton of the quadrupeds, certain bones and parts of bones being
always absent.        In the case      of the ox, for instance,             the
missing parts are the heads of the long bones (though while
the shaft only of the femur is found, in the humerus one end
is generally perfect), the back bone except the first two
vertebree, the spinous processes, and often the ribs, and the
bones of the skull except the lower jaw and the portion
round the eyes. It occurred to Prof. Steenstrup that these
curious results might, perhaps, be referred to dogs; and,
on trying the experiment, he ascertained that the bones
which are absent from the Kjékkenméddings are precisely:
those which dogs eat, and those which are present are the
parts which are hard and solid and do not contain                      much
nourishment. Prof. Steenstrup has since published a diagram
of a skeleton, tinted in such a manner as to show at a glance
which of the bones occur in the Kjékkenméddings, and
points out that it coincides exactly with one given by M.
Flourens to illustrate those portions of the skeleton which
are first formed.    Although a glance at the longitudinal
section of a long bone, as, for instance, of a femur, and a
comparison of the open cancellated tissue of the two ends
  * Prom the marks of knives onthe     was then, as it is still among several
bones, it seems evident that the dog   savage tribes, an article of food.
236             PREVALENCE   OF CERTAIN BONES.

with the solid, close texture of the shaft, at once justifies and
accounts for the selection made by the dogs, it is interesting
thus to ascertain that their predilections were the same in
primeval times as at present. Moreover, we may in this
manner explain the prevalence of some bones in fossil strata.
I have already mentioned that of the skull, the hard parts
round the eye and the lower jaw are the only parts left ;
now the preponderance of lower jaws in a fossil state is well
known.
    For instance, in the “ Proceedings of the Geological Society
for 1857,” p. 277, Dr. Falconer, after describing some of the
 fossils found by Mr. Beccles at Swanage, says :—“‘ The
 curious fact that only lower jaws should have turned up
 among the Stonesfield mammalian remains has often been the
 subject of speculation or remark. The same, to a certain
extent, has held good with the remains found in the Purbeck
bedshsusiaces In these minute creatures, unless the bone
be complete, and, supposing it to be a long bone, with both
its articular surfaces perfect, it is almost hopeless, or at any
rate very discouraging, to attempt to make out the creature
that yielded it; whereas the smallest fragment of a jaw, with
a minute tooth in it, speaks volumes of evidence at the first
glance. This I believe to be one great reason why we hear
so much of jaw remains, and so little of other bones.” No
doubt it is so, but these observations, made by Prof. Steen-
strup, afford a farther explanation of the fact, and it is to be
regretted that the parts of the long bones which are most
important to the paleontologist are also those which are
preferred by beasts of prey.
   In every case the bones which contained marrow are split
open in the manner best adapted for its extraction; this
peculiarity, which is in itself satisfactory proof of the pre-
sence of man, has not yet been observed in bones from the
true tertiary strata.
               HABITS   OF THE   MOUND-BUILDERS.               237

   The Kjékkenméddings were not mere summer quarters ;
the ancient fishermen resided on these spots for at least two-
thirds, if not the whole of the year.     This we learn from an
examination   of the bones of the wild animals, as it is often
possible to determine, within very narrow limits, the time of
year at which they were killed. For instance, the remains
of the wild swan (Cygnus musicus) are very common, and
this bird is only a winter visitor, leaving the Danish coasts
in March, and returning in November.        It might naturally
have been hoped that the remains of young birds would
have supplied evidence as to the spring and early summer,
but unfortunately, as has been already explained, no such
bones are to be found. It is, therefore, fortunate that among
the mammalia two periodical phenomena occur; namely, the
shedding and reproduction of stags’ antlers, which, with
slight variations according to age, have a fixed season ; and,
secondly, the birth and growth of the young. These, and
similar phenomena, render it highly probable that the
“ mound-builders ” resided on the Danish coast all the year
round, though I am disposed to think that, like the Fuegians,
who lead, even now, avery similar life, they frequently moved
from spot to spot. This appears to me to be indicated not
only by the condition of the deserted hearths, but by the
colour of the flint flakes, etc. ; for while many of these retain
the usual dull bluish black colour which is characteristic of
newly-broken flints, and which remains unaltered as long
as they are surrounded     by carbonate    of lime,   others   are
whitened, as is usual with those which have been exposed
for any length of time. Perhaps, therefore, these were lying
on the surface during some period of desertion, and covered
over only when the place was again inhabited.
   The flint implements found in the Kjokkenméddings re-
semble those which are characteristic of the “ coastfinds.”
They may be classed as flakes (figs. 82-96) ; “ Shell-mound ”
238                   FLINT IMPLEMENTS

axes, which, as we have already observed, present a peculiar
                          Fre. 172.




                           Awl.




                                                 Fre. 175.
      Fre, 173,                                    aay




                           Lance-heads,


form (figs. 108-110, and pl. 1, figs. 8, 9), awls (fig. 172),
                      FROM       THE    SHELL-MOUNDS,                 239

slngstones or net-weights (pl. 1, fig. 12), and rude lance-
heads (figs. 173-175). With these occur other forms, which,
though very rude, are evidently artificial, such as fig. 176,
which appears to have been a kind of axe, and others of which
the sharp edges were evidently used for cutting purposes.
                             -         Fic. 176.




                                 Rude Flint Implement.

   In the two days which we spent at Meilgaard, we found
the following objects :—
        Peepelemomia      ame        « » » s «            Ad
         takeseee           8 ce        at st       =    BD
         POMOADIE OBC. tel ak           es       bs        6
         CCG     Mere   Cat     ce” iy ies ip recy         6
         POmery OO          eo          a Ge               4 pieces
         OOM CMNS TUNEL        oe      le ye ss            1
         Dime stolice. 200Ute, 2s.         « » «          20)
                                                         195
  Of the three “ pillars” of material, just alluded to (p. 232),
the first contained    seven flint flakes, two axes, one worked
piece of horn, three worked pieces of bone, and some pottery;
in the second were sixteen flint flakes, one axe, and seven
slingstones; in the third, four flint flakes, two flint axes,
and a pointed    bone.           In short, without appearmg     to be
richer than other Kjékkenméddings, Meilgaard and Havelse
have each produced already more than a thousand of these
rude relics, though but a small portion of the mound has
240        ABSENCE   OF POLISHED    FLINT   IMPLEMENTS.

in either case been hitherto removed.         We need not, there-
fore, wonder at the number of axes found in the valley of
the Somme, where      so much      larger a mass   of material has
been examined.
   None of the large polished axes have yet been found in
the Kjékkenméddings: but a fragment of one, which was
discovered at Havelse, and which had been worked up intoa
scraper, shows that they were not altogether unknown.        A
very few carefully formed weapons have been found, but the
implements generally are very rude, and of the same types
as those which have been already described as characteristic
of the “‘Coastfinds.”” Small pieces of very coarse pottery
have also been discovered, and many of the bones from the
 Kjokkenméddings bear evident marks of a sharp mstrument;
 several of the pieces found by us were in this condition, and
had been fashioned into rude pins.
    The observations of Arctic travellers prove that even if
human bones had been found in the shell-mounds, this
would not of itself be any evidence of cannibalism; but the
absence of such remains satisfactorily shows that the primi-
tive population of the North were free from this practice.
On the other hand, the tumuli have supplied us with
numerous skeletons which probably belong to the Stone Age.
The skulls are very round, and in many respects resemble
those of the Lapps, but have a more projecting ridge over
the eye.   One curious peculiarity is, that their front teeth
did not overlap as ours do, but met one another, as do those
of the Greenlanders of the present day. This evidently
indicates a peculiar manner of eating.
  Much as still remains to be made out respecting the men
of the Stone period, the facts already ascertained, like a few
strokes by a clever draughtsman, supply us with the elements
of an outline sketch. Carrying our imagination back into
the past, we see before us on the low shores of the Danish
             FOOD   OF THE   SHELL-MOUND   BUILDERS.          241

Archipelago a race of small men, with heavy overhanging
brows, round heads, and faces probably much like those of
the present Laplanders. As they must evidently have had
some protection from the weather, it is most probable that
they lived in tents made of skins. The total absence of
metal in the Kjékkenméddings indicates that they had not
yet any weapons except those made of wood, stone, horn, and
bone. Their principal food must have consisted of shell-fish,
but they were able to catch fish, and often varied their diet
by game caught in hunting. It is, perhaps, not uncharitable
to conclude that, when their hunters were unusually suc-
cessful, the whole community gorged itself with food, as is
the case with many savage races at the present time. It is
evident that marrow was considered a great delicacy, for
every single bone which contained any was split open in the
manner best adapted to extract the precious morsel.
   We have already seen that the mound-builders were
regular settlers and not mere summer visitors; and on the
whole they seem to have lived in very much the same
manner as the Tierra del Fuegians, who dwell on the coast,
feed principally on shell-fish, and have the dog as their only
domestic animal. A very good account of them is given in
Darwin’s Journal (p. 234), from which      I extract the follow-
ing passages, which give us a vivid and probably correct
idea of what might have been seen on the Danish shores,
long, long ago. ‘The inhabitants, living chiefly upon shell-
fish, are obliged constantly to change their place of residence;
but they return at intervals to the same spots, as is evident
from the pile of old shells, which must often amount to some
tons in weight. These heaps can be distinguished at a long
distance by the bright green colour of certain plants which
invariably grow on them... . . . The Fuegian wigwam
resembles, in size and dimensions, a haycock. It merely
consists of a few broken branches stuck in the ground, and
                                                 R
242                        THE   FUEGIANS.

very imperfectly thatched on one side with a few tufts of
grass and rushes. The whole cannot be so much as the work
of an hour, and it is only used for a few days. ....          At a
subsequent period, the Beagle anchored for a couple of days
under Wollaston Island, which is a short way to the north-
ward. While going on shore, we pulled alongside a canoe
with six Fuegians. These were the most abject and miser-
able creatures I any where beheld. On the east coast, the
natives, as we have seen, have      guanaco     cloaks, and on the
west, they possess sealskins. Amongst the central tribes the
men generally possess an otter-skin, or some small scrap about
as large as a pocket-handkerchief, which is barely sufficient
to cover their backs as low down as their loins. It is laced
across the breast by strings, and according as the wind
blows, it is shifted from side to side.        But these Fuegians
in the canoe were quite naked, and even one full-grown
woman was absolutely so. It was raming heavily, and the
fresh water, together with the spray, trickled down her
body: £23  ai x These poor wretches were stunted in their
growth, their hideous faces bedaubed with white paint, their
skins filthy and greasy, their hair entangled, their voices
discordant,   their   gestures   violent     and without   dignity.
Viewing such men, one can hardly make oneself believe they
are fellow-creatures and inhabitants of the same world... .
At night, five or six human beings, naked, and scarcely pro-
tected from the wind and rain of this tempestuous climate,
sleep on the wet ground coiled up like animals.      Whenever
it is low water, they must rise to pick shell-fish from the
rocks; and the women, winter and summer, either dive to
collect sea eggs, or sit patiently in their canoes, and, with a
baited hair-line, jerk out small fish. If a seal is killed, or
the floating carcase of a putrid whale discovered, it is a
feast: such miserable food is assisted by a few tasteless
berries and fungi.     Nor are   they exempt from      famine, and,
   THE   RELATION   OF   THE   SHELL-MOUNDS   TO   THE   TUMULI.     243

as a consequence, cannibalism accompanied by parricide.”
In this latter respect, however, the advantage appears to be
all on the side of the ancients, whom we have no right to
accuse of cannibalism.
   If the absence of cereal remains justifies us, as it appears
to do, in concluding that they had no knowledge of agri-
culture, they must certainly have sometimes suffered from
periods of great scarcity, indications of which may, perhaps,
be seen in the bones        of the fox, wolf, and other carnivora,
which would hardly have been eaten from choice; on the
other hand, they were blessed in the ignorance of spirituous
liquors, and saved thereby from what is at present the
greatest scourge of Northern Europe.
   Prof. Worsaae has proposed to divide the Stone Age into
two divisions, the first of which he again sub-divides. His
classification stands as follows :—
                         The Older Stone Age.
  1. The stone implements found in the drift, and in caves
with remains of the mammoth, rhinoceros, hyzna, and other
extinct animals.
   2. The Kjdkkenméddings and Coastfinds.
                     The Later Stone Age.
   Characterized by the beautifully worked stone mmplements
and large tumuli.
   The shell-mounds and coastfinds, according to Professor
Worsaae, are characterized by very rough flint implements
(figs. 108-10, 172-6) and are the remains of a muchruder and
more barbarous people than that which constructed the large
Stone Age tumuli, and made           the beautiful weapons,        etc.,
found in them.      He does not altogether deny that a few
well-worked implements, and fragments of such, have been
found in the Kjékkenméddings, but he considers that some
of these at least may be altogether more recent than the
                           R 2
244           THE RELATION OF THE SHELL-MOUNDS

shell-mounds in which they are reported to have been found,
and, at any rate, that their presence is altogether exceptional.
At Meilgaard, for instance, the researches undertaken under
the superintendence of the late king in June, 1861, produced
more than five hundred flint flakes and other rude implements,
but not a single specimen with a trace of polishing, or in any
way resembling the flint implements found in the tumuli.
On the other hand these rude implements are said to be
wanting in the tumuli, where they are replaced by instru-
ments of a different character and more skilful workmanship.
Moreover, while it is admitted on all hands that the shell-
mound makers had no domestic animal but the dog, and no
knowledge of agriculture, Prof. Worsaae considers that during
the later Stone Age, the inhabitants of Denmark certainly
possessed tame cattle and horse~ and had in all probability
some knowledge of agriculture.
  Prof. Steenstrup is of an entirely different opinion, and
considers that the Kjdkkenméddings and Stone Age tumuli
were contemporaneous. He denies altogether that remains of
tame oxen or horses have been found in tumuli of the Stone
Age, except in very few instances, and in these he maintains
that the fragments which have occurred are evidently not
coeval with the mounds themselves, and that in all proba-
bility they have been introduced by foxes. He admits that
the stone implements from the shell-mounds and coastfinds
are altogether different from, and much ruder than, those
from the tumuli; he considers the two classes as representing,
not two different degrees, but two different phases of one
single condition of civilization. ‘The tumuli are the burial
places of chiefs, the Kjékkenméddings are the refuse heaps
of fishermen.    The first contain all that skill could contrive,
affection offer, or wealth command; the second, those things
only which art could not make available, which were
thrown away as useless, or accidentally lost.          In order,
                          TO THE   TUMULI.                  245

therefore, to compare these two classes of objects, we must
take,—not the ordinary rude specimens which are so numerous
in the shell-mounds, but the few better made implements which,
fortunately for science and for us, were lost among the oyster-
shells, or which had been broken, and therefore thrown away.
These, though few in number, are, in Professor Steenstrup’s
opinion quite as numereus as could have been expected under
the circumstances.     Moreover, the long flint flakes, which
are so common in the Kjékkenméddings, are sufficient evi-
dence that great skill in the treatment of flint had already
been attained.    Indeed, as Professor Steenstrup has pointed
out, we are apt, in consequence of their simplicity, and the
small number of blows required in forming these flakes, to
underrate the skill required for their manufacture. Any one,
however, who will try to make some for himself, while he
will probably be very unsuccessful, will at least learn a
valuable lesson in the appreciation of flint implements. Some
of the flakes found in the Kjékkenméddings are equal to any
from the tumuli; several of those which we found at Meil-
gaard were more than five, and one was more than six, inches
in length, while I have in my possession a giant flake from
Fannerup (figs. 82-84), given to me by Professor Steenstrup,
which has a length of eight inches and three quarters. As
regards the rude, more or less triangular “axes” (figs.
108-10) which are so characteristic of the Kjékkenméddings
and coastfinds,   Prof. Steenstrup,   as we have already seen,
declines to compare    them with the polished axes      of the
tumuli, because in his opinion they were not intended for
the same purposes.      In addition to the direct evidence
derived from the discovery of some few well-made flint axes
of the tumulus type, Professor Steenstrup relies much on the
indirect evidence derivable from the other contents of the
shell-mounds.    Thus the frequent remains of large and
full-grown animals, for instance of the seal, and the wild
246                     1HE OPINIONS   OF

ox, are in his opinion sufficient evidence that the shell-mound
builders must have had weapons more useful and destructive
than any which Prof. Worsaae will concede to them; more-
over, he considers that many of the cuts which are so common
on the bones found in the shell-heaps must have been made
by polished implements, and are too smooth to be the marks
of flint flakes, according to the suggestion of Professor
Worsaae.    Finally, Professor Steenstrup, though not at-
tributing so much weight as Professor Worsaae to the
absence of the ruder implements from the tumuli, even if
this had been the case, disputes the fact on the ground
that these implements would not until recently have been
recognized and collected, and that they have, im fact, been
found whenever they were looked for.
   After having carefully considered the evidence on both
sides, I find myself, as might naturally be expected, unable
altogether to agree with either.
      The small rude axes seem to me even less well adapted to
the purpose suggested by Prof. Steenstrup, than for those
which have generally been attributed to them. ‘There are,
no doubt, some which could never have been used for cutting,
but these may have been failures, owing to some want of skill
on the part of the manufacturer, or some flaw in the flint
itself. Others appear to me, as to Prof. Worsaae, serviceable,
though rude; and well adapted for some purpose (possibly for
oyster dredging or chopping wood), which required a strong,
rather than a sharp edge. They also very closely resemble
 in form some of the adzes used by the South Sea Islanders,
 one of which I have figured for comparison (see pp. 98, 99).
 They seem to me, however, as to Prof. Steenstrup, to differ
 in character from the well-made and generally polished
 axes, and not to be ruder implements of the same type.
 Although the carefully formed knives, axes, lance-heads, etc.,
 would not be likely to abound in the Kjékkenméddings, any
              MESSRS.   STEENSTRUP   AND   WORSAAE,             247

more than works of art, or objects of value, in modern dust-
heaps; still I confess I should have expected that fragments
of these instruments, recognizable to us, though useless to
their original owners, would have been more numerous than,
in reality, they appear to be.
   In addition to the five hundred rude implements, described
by Prof. Worsaae, as having been found at Meilgaard during
the king’s visit, I myself obtained a hundred and forty flint
flakes, with about fifty other implements, in the visit to
this celebrated locality which I made last year under the
guidance   of Prof. Steenstrup.      To    these, again, must   be
added many which had previously been collected by M.
Olsen, and the members of the Kjékkenmidding committee ;
and yet among so large a number of instruments of various
kinds there is only one which in any respect resembles the
well-worked implements of the tumuli. So, again, at Havelse
only a single fragment of a polished axe has been found
among more than a thousand objects of the ruder kind. It
might, however, fairly be urged that in such a comparison,
neither the flakes nor “slingstones” ought to be brought
into consideration;   in this case, and if we were to count the
axes only, the numbers would be greatly diminished.
   There is also much weight in Prof. Steenstrup’s argument
derived from the flint flakes, and he has not at all exag-
gerated the skill shown in their manufacture.         Their edges,
however, are so sharp that it would, I cannot help thinking,
be very difficult to distinguish a cut produced by a flake,
from one made by a ground axe. On the other hand, the
alleged absence of rude implements in the Stone Age barrows
has been satisfactorily explained by Professor Steenstrup.
In this country it might be argued from the statements of so
intelligent an antiquary as Sir R. Colt Hoare, that rude im-
plements were never, or very rarely, found in tumuli, but
the more recent researches    of Mr. Bateman, Mr. Greenwell,
248           ANTIQUITY   OF THE   SHELL-MOUNDS.

and other archeologists, have shown that this is very far
from being the case, and have made it evident that the ruder
implements of stone were overlooked by the earlier arche-
ologists. In the tumuli examined by Mr. Bateman, he ob-
tained many flint flakes, etc., quite as rude as those which
are found in the shell-mounds.     So faras I am aware, however,
none of the small triangular axes, which are so characteristic
of the shell-mounds, have yet been met with in the tumuli.
Nor, on the other hand, has a single specimen resembling
those which are characteristie of the Paleolithic Age, yet
been found in the shell-mounds.
   Finally, as regards the supposed remains of domestic
animals (other than the dog) in Stone Age tumuli, the evi-
 dence brought forward by Professor Worsaae seems to me
inconclusive, which, however, is of the less consequence, as
the poimt will certainly be determined ere long, now that
attention has specially been directed to it.
   On the whole, the evidence appears to show that the
Danish shell-mounds represent a definite period in the history
of that country, and are probably referable to the early part
of the Neolithic Stone Age, when the art of polishing flint
implements was known, but before it had reached its greatest
development.
  It is, however, as yet, impossible to affix even an approxi-
mate date in years to the formation of the Kjékkenméddings.
Their accumulation, indeed, must      evidently have occupied a
considerable period, and it is of course highly probable that
some are much older than others. They must all, however,
be of very considerable antiquity.       We know that the
country has long been covered by beech forests, and yet it
appears that during the Bronze Age beeches were absent,
or only represented by stragglers, while the whole country
was covered with oaks. This change implies a great lapse
of time, even if we suppose that but a few generations of
              ANTIQUITY   OF THE   SHELL-MOUNDS.           249

oaks succeeded one another. We know also that the oaks
had been preceded by pines, and that the country was in-
habited even then.
  Again, the immense number of objects belonging to the
Bronze Age, which have been already found in Denmark,
and the great number of tumuli, appear to justify the
Danish archeologists in assigning to this period a great
lapse of time. This argument applies with peculiar force
to the remains of the Stone period; for a country, the inhabi-
tants of which live by hunting and fishing, can never be
thickly populated; and, on the whole, the conclusion is forced
upon us, that the country must have been inhabited for a
lengthened period, although none of the Danish remains yet
discovered belong to a time as ancient as some of those
which have been found in other parts of Europe, and which
will be described in subsequent chapters.
                             250




                      CHAPTER      VIII.

                NORTH AMERICAN ARCHHOLOGY.

    UR knowledge of North American Archeology is de-
      rived mainly from the valuable researches of Mr. Caleb
Atwater, contained   in the first volume   of the Archeologia
Americana, and from four excellent memoirs published under
the auspices of the Smithsonian Institution:—1. Ancient
Monuments of the Mississippi Valley, comprising the Re-
sults of extensive Original Surveys and Explorations, by
EH. G. Squier, A.M., and HE. H. Davis, M.D.       2. Aboriginal
Monuments     of the State of New       York,   comprising    the
Results of Original Surveys and Explorations, with an illus-
trative Appendix; by H.G. Squier, A.M.      3. The Antiqui-
ties of Wisconsin, as surveyed and described by J. A.
Lapham. 4. The Archeology of the United States, or
Sketches,   Historical and Biographical,    of the Progress    of
Information and Opinion respecting Vestiges of Antiquity in
the United States; by Samuel F. Haven.          Nor must I
omit to mention Schoolcraft’s History, Condition, and Pro-
spects of the Indian Tribes of the United States.
   The memoir by Messrs. Squier and Davis, occupying more
than three hundred pages, is chiefly descriptive of ancient
fortifications, enclosures, temples, and mounds, and of the
different implements, ornaments, etc., which have been ob-
tained from them.      It is embellished with forty-eight plates,
and two hundred and seven woodcuts.
                            BIBLIOGRAPHY.                      Do

   In his second work, Mr. Squier confines himself to the
antiquities of the State of New York. Within these limits,
however, he describes many ancient monuments of various
kinds, and he feels “warranted in estimating the number
which originally existed in the State at from two hundred
to two hundred and fifty.’ He comes to the conclusion,
“little anticipated,” he-says, “when I started on my trip of
exploration,” that the earthworks of Western New York
were erected by the Iroquois, or their western neighbours,
and do not possess any very great antiquity.
   The systematic exploration of the ancient remains in the
State of Wisconsin, described in the memoir by Mr. Lapham,
was undertaken on behalf of the American Antiquarian
Society, by which the necessary funds were provided. The
cost of the publication, however, which from the great num-
ber of engravings (fifty-five plates, besides sixty-one wood
engravings) was considerable, was defrayed by the Smith-
sonian Institution, and the work is included in the seventh
volume of “ Contributions.”
  Mr. Haven’s work is well described in the title, and forms
an interesting introduction to the study of North American
Archeology.     He gives us comparatively few observations or
opinions of his own; but after a careful examination of what
others have written, he comes to the conclusion that the
ancient earthworks of the United States “ differ less in kind
than in degree from other remains concerning which history
has not been entirely silent. They are more numerous, more
concentrated, and in some particulars on a larger scale of
labour, than the works which approach them on their several
borders, and with whose various characters they are blended.
Their numbers     may   be the result of frequent    changes   of
residence by a comparatively limited population, in accord-
ance with a superstitious    trait of the Indian nature, leading
to the abandonment of places where any great calamity has
252               CLASSIFICATION   OF ANTIQUITIES.

been suffered; but they appear rather to indicate a country
thickly inhabited for a period long enough to admit of the
progressive enlargement and extension of its movements.”
  Although Mr. Schooleraft’s work is more                especially de-
voted to the present, or recent, condition and habits of the
Indian tribes, still he gives us much archeological informa-
tion, and I shall have occasion frequently to quote from his
elaborate work.
  The antiquities themselves fall into two great divisions:
Implements (including ornaments) and Harthworks.        The
earthworks have been again divided by the American Archee-
ologists into seven classes:—1. Defensive enclosures; 2.
Sacred and miscellaneous enclosures; 3. Sepulchral mounds;
4, Sacrificial   mounds;     5. Temple      mounds;       6. “ Animal”
mounds;      and 7. Miscellaneous       mounds.       These      classes   I
shall treat separately, and we can then better consider the
* mound-builders” themselves.
   The simple weapons of bone and stone, found in America,
closely resemble those which occur in other countries.
The flakes, hatchets, axes, arrow-heads, and bone imple-
ments     are, for instance, very similar      to those which occur
in the Swiss Lakes, if only we            make       allowance     for the
differences of material. In addition to the simple forms,
which may almost be said to be ubiquitous, there are some,
however, which are more complicated. In many cases they
are perforated, as for instance those figured by Messrs. Squier
and Davis*. The perforated axes found in Europe are gene-
rally considered to belong to the Metallic Age; but as far as
America is concerned, we have not yet any evidence as to
the relative antiquity of the perforated and imperforated
types.
      At the time of the discovery of America, iron was abso-
  * Ancient Monuments   of the Mississippi Valley.    By E. S. Squier and
E. H. Davis.
                          IMPLEMENTS.                     200

 lutely unknown to the natives, with the exception, perhaps,
 of a tribe near the mouth   of the La Plata, who had arrows
tipped with this metal, which they are supposed to have
obtained from masses of native iron. The powerful nations
of Central America were, however, in an age of Bronze,
while the North Americans were in a condition of which we
find in Europe but scanty traces—namely, in an age of
Copper. Silver is the only other metal which has been found
in the ancient tumuli, and that but in very small quantities.
it occurs sparingly in a native form with the copper of Lake
Superior, whence, in all probability, it was derived. It does
not appear to have been ever smelted.         From the large
quantity of galena which is found in the             Fra. 177,
mounds,    Messrs.   Squier and Davis are   dis-
posed to think that lead must have been used
to a certain extent by the North American
tribes: the metal itself, however, has not, I
believe, yet been found.
   Copper, on the other hand, both wrought
and unwrought, occurs frequently in the
tumuli. It is interesting to observe that the
copper arrow- or spear-heads (fig. 177) resemble
the American type of stone arrow-heads. The
axes have a striking resemblance to those simple
European forms, which contain the minimum
quantity of tin, and as in them the socket,
when there is one, is made by flattening
the copper and turning over the edge (fig. copper Arrowhead.
178) ; and some of the Mexican paintings give us interesting
evidence as to the manner in which they were handled and
used.   These, however, were of bronze, and had, therefore,
been fused; but the Indian axes, which are of pure metallic
copper, appear in all cases to have been worked in a cold
state, which is remarkable, because, as Messrs. Squier and
254                    THE   USE     OF COPPER.

Davis have pointed out, “the fires upon the altar were suf-
ficiently intense to melt down the copper implements and
ornaments deposited upon them. The hint thus afforded
              does not seem to have been seized upon*.” This
    Fig. 178,
              is the more surprising, because, as Schoolcraft +
            tells us, “in almost all the works lately opened,
            there are heaps of coals and ashes, showing that
            fire had much to do with their operations.” Thus,
            though they were acquainted with metal, they did
            not know how to use it; and as Professor Dana has
            well observed in a letter with which he has favoured
            me, they may in one sense be said to have been in
            an age of Stone, since they used the copper, not
             as metal, but as Stone.          This mtermediate con-
             dition between an age of Stone and one of metal
             is most interesting.
               In the neighbourhood of Lake Superior, and in
            some other still more northern localities, copper
            is found native in large quantities, and the In-
            dians had therefore nothing to do but to break
            off pieces and hammer them into the required
            shape. Hearne’s celebrated journey to the mouth
            of the Coppermine River, under the auspices of the
            Hudson’s Bay Company, was undertaken in order
            to examine the locality whence the natives of that
            district obtained the metal. In this case it oc-
    Copper  curred in lumps actually on the surface, and the
  Spearies’ “Indians seem to have picked up what they could,
without attempting any thing that could be called mining.
Round Lake Superior, however, the case is very different. A
short account of the ancient copper-mines is given by Messrs.

  * One “cast” copper axe is re-        evidence to show by whom it was
corded as having been found in the      made.
State of New York, but there is no         + Indian Tribes, p. 97.
                    ANCIENT   COPPER-MINES.                     250

Squier and Davis in the work already so often cited,
by Mr. Squier in “The Aboriginal Monuments of the State
of New York,” by Mr. Lapham *, and by Mr. Schooleraft +,
while the same subject is treated at considerable length by
Professor Wilson.     The works    appear to have been first
discovered in 1847 by the agent of the Minnesota Mining
Company.              ’
   “Following up the indications of a continuous depression
in the soil, he came at length to a cavern where he found
several porcupines had fixed their quarters for hybernation;
but detecting evidences of artificial excavation, he proceeded
to clear out the accumulated soil, and not only exposed to
view a vein of copper, but found in the rubbish numerous
stone mauls and hammers of the ancient workmen.           Sub-
sequent observations brought to light ancient excavations of
great extent, frequently from twenty-five to thirty feet deep,
and scattered over an area of several miles. ‘The rubbish
taken from these is piled up in mounds alongside ; while the
trenches have been gradually refilled with the soil and decay-
ing vegetable matter gathered through the long centuries
since their desertion; and over all, the giants of the forest
have grown, and withered, and fallen to decay.     Mr. Knapp,
the agent of the Minnesota Mining Company, counted three
hundred and ninety-five annular rings on a hemlock-tree,
which grew on one of the mounds of earth thrown out of an
ancient mine.   Mr. Foster also notes the great size and age
of a pine stump, which must have grown, flourished, and died
since the works were deserted; and Mr. C. Whittesley not
only refers to living trees now flourishing in the gathered
soil of the abandoned trenches, upwards of three hundred
years old, but adds, ‘On the same spot there are the decayed
trunks of a preceding generation or generations of trees that
have arrived at maturity, and fallen down from old age.’
     #lie, p. 74.                             ap i, @syeh whe
256                  ANCIENT     COPPER-MINES.

According to the same writer, in a communication made to
the American Association, at the Montreal meeting in 1857,
these ancient works extend over a tract from 100 to 150
miles in length, along the southern shore of the lake.”
   In another excavation was found a detached mass of native
copper, weighing upwards of six tons.         It rested on an
artificial cradle of black oak, partly preserved by immersion
in water. Various implements and tools of the same metal
were found with it. The commonest of these are the stone
mauls or hammers, of which from one place ten cart-loads
were obtained.     With these were “stone axes of large size,
made of greenstone, and shaped to receive withe-handles.
Some large round greenstone masses, that had apparently
been used for sledges, were also found. They had round
holes bored in them to a depth of several inches, which
seemed to have been designed for wooden plugs, to which
withe-handles might be attached, so that several men could
swing them with sufficient force to break the rock and the
projecting masses of copper.    Some of them were broken,
and some of the projecting ends of rock exhibited marks of
having been battered in the manner here suggested *.”’
   Wooden implements are so perishable that we could not
expect many      of them to have been found.               Two or three
wooden bowls, a trough, and some shovels with long handles,
are all that appear to be recorded.
   It has often been stated that the Indians possessed some
method, at present unknown, by which they were enabled to
harden the copper. This, however, from examinations insti-
tuted by Professor Wilson, seems to be an error.       Some
copper implements, which he submitted to Professor Crofts,
were found to be no harder than the native copper from
 Lake Superior. “The structure of the metal was also
 highly laminated, as if the instrument had been brought
       * Prof. W. W. Mather in a letter to Mr. Squier, l. c. p. 184,
                             POTTERY.                         957

to its present shape by hammering         out a solid mags     of
copper.”
   Before the introduction    of metallic vessels, the art of the
potter was more important even than it is at present. Ac-
cordingly, the sites of all ancient habitations are generally
marked by numerous fragments of pottery: this is as true
of the ancient Indian settlements, as of the Celtic towns of
England, or the lake villages of Switzerland.     These frag-
ments, however, would generally be those of rude household
vessels, and it is principally from the tumuli that we obtain
those better-made urns and cups from which the state of the
art may fairly be inferred. Yet very few indeed of the
British sepulchral urns, belonging to ante-Roman times,
have upon them any curved lines. Representations of ani-
mals or plants are also almost entirely wanting. They are
even absent from all articles belonging to the Bronze Age in
Switzerland, and I might almost say in Western Europe
generally, while ornaments of curved and spiral lines are
eminently characteristic of this period. The ornamental
ideas of the Stone Age, on the other hand, are confined, so
far as we know, to compositions of straight lines, and the
idea of a curve scarcely seems to have occurred tothem. The
most elegant ornaments on their vases are impressions made
by the finger-nail, or by a cord wound round the soft clay.
   Dr. Wilson has well pointed out, that, as regards Hurope,
“in no single case is any attempt made to imitate leaf or
flower, bird, beast, or any simple natural object ; and when,
in the bronze work of the later Iron period, imitative forms
at length appear, they are chiefly the snake and dragon
shapes and patterns, borrowed seemingly by Celtic and Teu-
tonic wanderers, with the wild fancies of their mythology,
from the far Hastern cradle-land of their birth.”
   Very different was the condition of American Art. “The
art of pottery attained to a considerable degree of perfection.”
                                                      S
258                             ORNAMENTS.

Some of the vases found in the tumuli are said to rival, “ in
elegance of model, delicacy, and finish,” the best Peruvian
specimens. The material used is a fine clay: in the more
delicate specimens, pure; in the coarser ones, mixed with
pounded quartz. The art of glazing and the use of the
potter’s wheel appear not to have been known, though that
“* simple approximation to a potter’s wheel may have existed,”
which consists of “a stick of wood grasped in the hand by
the middle, and turned round inside a wall of clay formed
by the other hand, or by another workman*.”’
    Among the most characteristic specimens of ancient Ameri-
 can pottery are the pipes. Some of these are simple bowls,
 smaller indeed, but otherwise not unlike a common every-day
 pipe, from which they differ, however, in having generally no
 stem, the mouth having apparently been applied direct to the
bowl. Many are highly ornamented, others are spirited
representations of monsters or of animals, such as the beaver,
otter, wild cat, elk, bear, wolf, panther, raccoon,             opossum,
squirrel, manatee, eagle, hawk, heron, owl, buzzard, raven,
swallow, parroquet, duck, grouse, and many others.      The
most interesting of these, perhaps, is the Manatee or Laman-
tin, of which seven       representations have been found in the
mounds of Ohio. These are no mere rude sculptures, about
which there might easily be a mistake, but “the truncated
head, thick semicircular snout, peculiar nostrils, tumid, fur-
rowed upper lip, singular feet or fins, and remarkable
moustaches, are all distinctly marked, and render the recog-
nition of the animal complete+.”             This curious animal is not
at present found nearer than the shores of Florida, a thousand
miles away.
   The ornaments which have been found in the mounds
consist of beads, shells, necklaces, pendants, plates of mica,
bracelets, gorgets, etc.        The number of beads is sometimes
  * Squier and Davis, 1. c. p. 195.      + Squier and Davis, 1. c. p. 252.
                          FORTIFICATIONS.                            259

 quite surprising.     Thus the celebrated Grave Croek mound
 contained   between    three and       four   thousand     shell-beads,
besides about two hundred and fifty ornaments of mica,
several bracelets of copper, and various articles carved in
stone. The beads are generally made of shell, but are some-
times cut out of bone   or teeth; in form they are generally
round or oblong; sometimes the shell of the Unio is cut and
strung so as to “exhibit the convex surface and pearly nacre
of the shell.” The necklaces are often made of beads or
 shells, but sometimes of teeth.        The ornaments     of mica are
thin plates of various forms, each of which has a small hole.
The bracelets are of copper, and generally encircle the arms
of the skeletons,    besides   being frequent      on the     “ altars.”
 They are simple rings “ hammered out with more or less skill,
 and so bent that the ends approach, or lap over, each other.”
 The so-called “‘ gorgets” are thin plates of copper, always
 with two holes, and probably therefore worn as badges of
 authority.
    The earthworks are most abundant in the central parts of
 the United States. They decrease in number as we approach
 the Atlantic, and are very scarce in British America and on
 the west of the Rocky Mountains.
    The works belonging to this class “ usually occupy strong
natural positions,” and as a fair specimen of them we may
take the Bourneville Enclosure in Ross County, Ohio. “This
work,” say Messrs. Squier and Davis (l.c. p. 11), ‘ occupies
the summit of a lofty detached hill, twelve miles westward
from the city of Chillicothe, near the village of Bourneville.
The hill is not far from four hundred feet in perpendicular
height; and is remarkable, even among the steep hills of the
west, for the general abruptness of its sides, which at some
points are absolutely inaccessible. .... The defences con-
sist of a wall of stone, which is carried round the hill a little
below the brow; but at some places it rises, so as to cut off
                               5 2 at
260                      EARTHWORKS.

the narrow spurs, and extends across the neck that connects
the hill with the range beyond.” It must not, however, be
understood that any thing like a true wall now exists; the
present appearance is rather what might have been “ expected
from the falling outwards of a wall of stones, placed, as this
was, upon the declivity of a hill.’ Whereit is most distinct
it is from fifteen to twenty feet wide, by three or four in
height. The area thus enclosed is about one hundred and
forty acres, and the wall is two miles and a quarter in length.
The stones themselves vary much in size, and Messrs. Squier
and Davis suggest that the wall may originally have been
 about eight feet high, with an equal base. At present, trees
 of the largest size are growing upon it. On a similar work
 known as “Fort Hill,” Highland County, Ohio, Messrs.
 Squier and Davis found a splendid chestnut tree, which they
 suppose to be six hundred years old. “If,” they say, “to
this we add the probable period intervening from the time
of the building of this work to its abandonment, and the
 subsequent period up to its invasion by the forest, we are
led irresistibly to the conclusion that it has an antiquity
 of at least one thousand years. But when we notice, all
around us, the crumbling trunks of trees, half hidden in the
accumulating soil, we are induced to fix on an antiquity still
more remote.”
  The enclosure known as “ Clark’s Work,” in Ross County,
Ohio, is one of the largest and most interesting. It consists
of a parallelogram, two thousand eight hundred feet by
eighteen hundred,   and enclosing      about   one   hundred   and
eleven acres. To the right of this, the principal work is a
perfect square, containing an area of about sixteen acres.
Hach side is eight hundred and fifty feet in length, and in
the middle of each is a gateway thirty feet wide, covered by
a small mound. Within the area of the great work are
several smaller mounds and enclosures; and it is estimated
                             ENCLOSURES.                            261

that not less than three millions of cubic feet of earth were
used in this great undertaking. Yet from the peculiarly
mottled character of the earth forming these mounds, it would
appear to have been brought in bags or small parcels*. It
has also been observed that water is almost invariably found
within, or close to these enclosures.
   It is remarkable that there is not a single case in which
counter-works occur near any of the ancient North American
fortifications.  Col. Whittlesey+ draws from this fact the
conclusion that the period during which the mound-builders
turned “ their attention to military affairs was probably short,
and, when their preparations were made, they may have with-
drawn farther south without a vigorous defence.” I should
rather infer that the warfare of the mound-builders, like that
of the more modern Red Indians, consisted not of persevering
sieges, but of sudden attacks and surprises.
   If the purpose for which the works belonging to the first
class were erected is very evident, the same cannot be said
for those which we have now to mention.      That they were
not intended for defence is inferred by Messrs. Squier and
Davis from their small size, from the ditch being inside the
embankment,      and from their position, which is often com-
pletely commanded by neighbouring heights.
   Dr. Wilson also (vol. i. p. 824) follows Sir R. C. Hoare in
considering the position of the ditch as being a distinguish-
ing mark between military and religious works. But Catlin
expressly tells us that in a Mandan village, which he describes,
the ditch was on the inner side of the embankment, and the
warriors were thus sheltered while they shot their arrows
through the stockade. We see, therefore, that in America
at least, this is no reliable guide.
   While, however, the defensive earthworks occupy hill tops,
  # Whittlesey, On the Weapons and Character of the Mound-builders.
Mem. Boston Soc. of Nat. Hist., vol. i. pt. iv. p. 473. + lic. p. 479.
262                   SACRED    ENCLOSURES.

and other situations most easy to defend, the so-called sacred
enclosures are generally found on “ the broad and level river
bottoms, seldom occurring upon the table-lands or where the
surface of the ground is undulating or broken.” They are
usually square or circular in form; a circular enclosure being
often combined with one or two squares. Occasionally they
are isolated, but more frequently in groups. ‘The greater
number of the circles are of small size, with a nearly uniform
diameter of two hundred and fifty or three hundred feet,
and the ditch is invariably inside the wall. Some of the
circles, however, are much larger, enclosing fifty acres or
more. The squares or other rectangular works never have a
ditch, and the earth of which they are composed appears to
have been taken up evenly from the surface, or from large
pits in the neighbourhood.      They vary much in size; five or
six of them, however, are “ exact squares, each side measur-
ing one thousand and eighty feet—a coincidence which could
not possibly be accidental, and which must possess some
significance.” The circles also, in spite of their great size,
are so nearly round, that the American archeologists con-
sider themselves justified in concluding that the mound-
builders must have had some standard of measurement, and
some means of determining angles.
   The most remarkable group is that near Newark, in the
Scioto Valley, which covers an area of four sguare miles! A
plan of these gigantic works is given by Messrs. Squier and
Davis, and another, from a later survey, by Mr. Wilson.
They consist of an octagon, with an area of fifty, a square
occupying twenty acres, and two large circles occupying
respectively thirty and twenty acres. From the octagon an
avenue formed by parallel walls extends southwards for two
 miles and a half; there are two other avenues which are
 rather more than a mile in length, one of them connecting
 the octagon with the square.
               EARTHWORKS   OF THE   SCIOTO   VALLEY.          263

   Besides these, there are various other embankments          and
 small circles, the greater   number     about     eighty feet in
 diameter, but some few much larger.          The walls of these
small circles, as well as those of the avenues          and of the
irregular portions of the works generally, are very slight,
and for the most part about four feet in height.         The other
embankments are much more considerable;           the walls of the
large circle are even now twelve feet high, with a base of
fifty feet, and an interior ditch seven feet deep and thirty-
five in width. At the gateway, however, they are still more
imposing;   the walls being sixteen feet high, and the ditch
thirteen feet deep. The whole area is covered with “ gigantic
trees of a primitive forest ;” and, say Messrs. Squier and
Davis, “in entering the ancient avenue for the first time,
the visitor does not fail to experience a sensation of awe,
such as he might feel in passing the portals of an Egyptian
temple, or gazing upon the silent ruins of Petra of the
desert.”
   The city of Circleville takes its name from one of these
embankments,    which, however, is no more remarkable than
many others. It consists of a square and a circle, touching
one another; the sides of the square being about nine hun-
dred feet in length, and the circle a little more than a
thousand feet in diameter.  The square had eight doorways,
one at each angle, and one in the middle of each side, every
doorway being protected bya mound. The circle was peculiar
in having a double embankment.       This work, alas! has been
entirely destroyed; and many others have also disappeared,
or are being gradually obliterated by the plough. Under
these circumstances, we read with pleasure that “ The Direc-
tors of the Ohio Land Company, when they took possession
of the country at the mouth of the Muskingum River, in
1788, adopted immediate measures for the preservation of
these monuments.     To their credit be it said, one of their
264                         AZTALAN,

earliest official acts was the passage of a resolution, which is
entered upon the Journal of their proceedings, reserving the
two truncated pyramids and the great mound, with a few
acres attached to each, as public squares.”’ Such enlightened
conduct deserves the thanks of archeologists, and I sincerely
hope that the Company has prospered.
   Both as being the only example of an enclosure yet ob-
served in Wisconsin, and also as haying in many respects a
great resemblance to a fortified town, the ruins of Aztalan
are well worthy ofattention.     They are situated on the west
branch of Rock River, and were discovered in 1836 by N. F.
Hyer, Esq., who surveyed them hastily, and published a
brief description, with a figure, in the “ Milwaukie Adver-
tiser.”” In “ Silliman’s American Journal,” No. XLIV., is a
paper on the subject by Mr. Taylor, from which was derived
the plan and the short account given by Messrs. Squier
and Davis*. The most complete description is contained in
Mr. Lapham’s ‘ Antiquities of Wisconsint.”        The name
“ Aztalan’’ was given to this place by Mr. Hyer, because the
Aztecs had a tradition that they originally came from a
country to the north, which they called Aztalan. It is said
to be derived from two Mexican words, Atl, water, and An,
near. “The main feature of these works is an enclosure of
earth (not brick, as has been erroneously stated), extending
around three sides of an irregular parallelogram ;” the river
“forming the fourth side on the east. The space thus en-
closed contains seventeen acres and two-thirds. The corners
are not rectangular, and the embankment         or ridge is not
 straight.”      “The ridge forming the enclosure is 631 feet
long at the north end, 1419 feet long on the west side, and
700 feet on the south side; making a total length of wall of
2750 feet. The ridge or wall is about 22 feet wide, and from
one foot to five in height. The wall of earth is enlarged on
         Ik, Choy disiks                          + p. 41.
                       VITRIFIED   WALLS.                    265

the outside, at nearly regular distances, by mounds       of the
same material.    They are called buttresses, or bastions; but
it is quite clear that they were never intended for either”
the one or the other. They vary from sixty-one to ninety-
five feet apart, the mean distance being eighty-two feet.
Near the south-west angle are two outworks, constructed in
the same manner as the main embankment.
   In many places the earth forming the walls appears to
have been burnt. “Irregular masses of hard reddish clay,
full of cavities, bear distinct impressions of straw, or rather
 wild hay, with which they had been mixed before burning.”
 “This is the only foundation for calling these ‘brick walls.’
 The ‘ bricks’ were never made into any regular form, and it
 is even doubtful whether the burning did not take place in
 the wall after it was built.’ These walls must therefore
 present some faint resemblance to the celebrated vitrified forts
 of Scotland, and to fortifications of a similar character which
 have recently been observed in France and Germany. Some
 of the mounds or buttresses, though forming part of an
 enclosure, were also used for sepulchral purposes, as was
 proved by their containing skeletons in a sitting posture,
 with fragments of pottery.       The highest pomt inside the
 enclosure is at the south-west corner, and is “occupied
by a square truncated mound, which . . . . presents
the appearance of a pyramid, rising by successive steps like
the gigantic structures of Mexico.”         “At the north-west
angle of the enclosure is another rectangular, truncated,
pyramidal elevation, of sixty-five feet level area at the top,
with remains of its graded way, or sloping ascent, at the
south-west corner, leading also towards a ridge that extends
in the direction of the river.”
   Within the enclosure are some ridges about two feet high,
and connected with them are several rings, or circles, which
are supposed to be the remains of mud houses. “ Nearly the
266                 MODERN    EARTHWORKS.

whole interior of the enclosure appears to have been either
excavated or thrown up into mounds and ridges; the pits
and irregular excavations being quite numerous over much
of the space not occupied by mounds.”        These excavations
and ridges are, in all probability, the ruins of houses. Some
years ago a skeleton was found in one of the mounds, wrapped
apparently in cloth of open texture, “like the coarsest linen
fabric ;” but the threads were so rotten as to make it quite
uncertain of what material they were made.
   The last Indian occupants of this interesting locality had no
tradition as to the history or the purpose of these earthworks.
   Among the Northern tribes of existing Indians there do
not appear to be any earthworks corresponding to these so-
called Sacred Enclosures.      ‘‘ No sooner, however, do we pass
to the southward, and arrive among the Creeks, Natchez,
and affiliated Floridian tribes, than we         discover   traces   of
structures which, if they do not entirely correspond with the
regular earthworks of the West, nevertheless seem to be
somewhat analogous to them*.”’ These tribes, indeed, appear
to have been more civilized than those of the North, since
they were agricultural in their habits, lived in considerable
towns, and had a systematized religion, so that, in fact, they
must have occupied a position intermediate, as well econo-
mically as geographically, between the powerful monarchies
of Central America and the hunting tribes of the North.
The “structures” to which Mr. Squier alludes are described
by him, both in his “Second            Memoir,”    and also in the
 “ Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley” (p. 120).
 The “ Chunk Yards,” now or lately in use among the Creeks,
 and which have only recently been abandoned among the
 Cherokees, are rectangular areas, generally occupying the
 centre of the town, closed at the sides, but with an opening
 at.each end.   They are sometimes from six to nine hundred
                        * Sqwer, |. c.-p. 186,
                        CHUNK   YARDS.                    267

feet in length, being largest in the older towns. The area is
levelled and slightly sunk, being surrounded by a low bank
formed of the earth thus obtained. In the centre is a low
mound, on which stands the Chunk Pole, to the top of which
is some object which serves as a mark to shoot at. Near each
corner at one end, is a small pole, about twelve feet high;
these are called the “slave posts,” because in the “ good old
times,” captives condemned to the torture were fastened to
them. The name “ Chunk Yard” seems to be derived from
an Indian game called “ Chunke,” which was played in them.
At one end of, and just outside, this area stands generally
a circular eminence, with a flat top, upon which is elevated
the Great Council House. At the other end is a flat-topped,
square eminence, about as high as the circular one just men-
tioned; ‘upon this stands the public square.”
   These, and other accounts given by early travellers among
the Indians, certainly throw much light on the circular and
square enclosures; some of which, though classed by Messrs.
Squier and Davis under    this head, seem   to me   to be the
slight fortifications which surrounded villages, and were un-
doubtedly crowned by stockades. We have already seen that
the position of the ditch is in reality no argument against
this view; nor does the position of the works seem conclu-
sive, if we suppose that they were intended less to stand a
regular siege than to guard against a sudden attack.
   The Sepulchral mounds are very numerous in the central
parts of the United States. “To say that they are innumer-
able in the ordinary sense of the term, would be no exag-
geration. They may literally be numbered by thousands and
tens of thousands,”      They vary from six to eight feet in
height; generally stand outside the enclosures; are often
isolated, but often also in groups; they are usually round,
but sometimes elliptical or pear-shaped.    They cover gene-
rally a single skeleton, which, however, is often burnt.  Oc-
268                       SEPULCHRAL     MOUNDS.

casionally there is a stone cist, but urn burial also prevailed
to a considerable extent, especially in the Southern States.
The corpse was generally buried in a contracted position.
Implements both of stone and metal occur frequently ; but
while personal ornaments, such as bracelets, perforated plates
of copper, beads of bone, shell or metal, and similar objects,
are very common, weapons are but rarely found; a fact
which, in the opinion of Dr. Wilson, “indicates a totally
different condition of society and mode of thought” from
those of the present Indian.
      Certain small tumuli found in America have been regarded
as the remains of mud huts. Mr. Dille* has examined and
described some small tumuli observed by him in Missouri.
He dug into several, but never succeeded in finding any thing
except coal, char, and a few pieces of pottery, whence he
concluded that they were the remains of mud houses+. The
 Mandans, Minatarees, and some other tribes, even until quite
 lately, built their huts of earth, resting on a framework of
wood.
   On the other hand, there are some tumuli to which it
would seem that this explanation is quite inapplicable, and
which are full of human remains. This was long supposed
to be the case with the great Grave Creek Mound, which
indeed was positively stated by Atwater t, to be full of human
remains.      This has turned out to be an error, but the state-
ment is not the less true as regards other mounds.    In
conjunction with them may be mentioned the “ bone pits,”
many of which are described by Mr. Squier§.                          “One of
these pits, discovered some years ago in the town of Cam-
bria, Niagara County, was estimated to contain the bones of
several thousand individuals. Another which I visited in the
  * Smithsonian   Contributions, vol.     t See also Lapham, 1. c. p. 80.
i. p. 186.                                 SHER jayon iis Goh Gira (lel, Vale (Gh.
   + Archzologia Americana, vol. i      106, 107. Squier and Davis, l. c. p.
p. 228.                                 118, etc.
                             OSSUARIES.                          269

town of Clarence, Erie County, contained not less than four
hundred skeletons.” A tumulus described by Mr. Jefferson
in his “ Notes on Virginia,” was estimated to contain the
skeletons of a thousand       individuals, but in this    case   the
number was perhaps exaggerated.
   The description given by various old writers of the solemn
“ Festival of the Dead” satisfactorily explains these large
collections of bones. It seems that every eight or ten years
the Indians used to meet at some place previously chosen,
that they dug up their dead, collected the bones together,
and laid them in one common burial place, depositing with
them fine skins and other valuable articles. Several of these
ossuaries are described by Schoolcraft*.
   The so-called “ Sacrificial Mounds,” are, says Dr. Wilson,
“a class of ancient monuments, altogether peculiar to the
New World, and highly illustrative of the rites and cus-
toms of the ancient races of the mounds.     This remarkable
class of mound has been very carefully explored, and their
most   noticeable   characteristics    are, their almost mvariable
occurrence within enclosures;          their regular construction
in uniform layers of gravel,           earth, and sand, disposed
alternately in strata conformable to the shape of the mound;
and their covering, a symmetrical altar of burnt clay or
stone, on which are deposited numerous relics, in all in-
stances exhibiting traces, more or less abundant, of their
having been exposed to the action of fire.” The so-called
“altar” is a basin, or table of burnt clay, carefully moulded
into a symmetrical form, but varying much both in shape
and size.      Some are round, some elliptical, and others
squares or parallelograms, while in size they vary from two
feet to fifty feet by twelve or fifteen. The usual dimensions,
however, are from five to eight feet.        They are almost
always found within sacred enclosures.    Of the whole number
                            FRVEC. Dan 02:
270             SO-CALLED   SACRIFICIAL MOUNDS.

examined by Messrs. Squier and Davis there were only four
which were exterior to the walls of enclosures, and these
were but a few rods distant from them.
   The “altar” is always on a level with the natural soil,
and bears traces of long continued heat; in one instance,
where it appears to have been formed of sand, imstead of
clay, the sand for a depth of two inches is discoloured, as if
fatty matter of some sort had been burnt on it. In this case
a second deposit of sand had been placed on the first, and
upon this stones a little larger than a hen’s egg were
arranged, so as to form a pavement, which strongly reminds
us of the ancient hearths in the Danish Kjékkenméddings.
    In a few instances traces of timber were found above the
 altar. Thus in one of the twenty-six tumuli forming the
 “Mound City” on the Scioto River were a number of pieces
of timber, four or five feet long, and six or eight inches
thick. “ These pieces had been of nearly uniform length;
and this circumstance, joined to the position in which they
occurred in respect to each other and to the altar, would
almost justify the inference that they had supported some
funeral or sacrificial pile*.” The contents of these mounds
vary very much.        The one just mentioned contained a
quantity of pottery and many implements of stone and
copper, all of which had been subjected to a strong heat.
The pottery may have formed a dozen vessels of moderate
size. The copper articles consisted of two chisels, and about
twenty thin strips. About fifty or a hundred stone arrow-
heads, some flakes, and two carved pipes, completed the list
of articles found in this interesting tumulus. In another
mound nearly two hundred pipes were buried.                  Generally
speaking,   the deposit is homogeneous:               “that is to say,
instead of finding a large variety of relics, ornaments,
weapons, and other articles, such as go to make up the pos-
                  * Squier and Davis, 1. c. p. 151.
                   SO-CALLED     SACRIFICIAL   MOUNDS.                     OTA

sessions ofa barbarian dignitary, we find upon one altar pipes
only, upon another a single mass of galena, while the next
one has a quantity of pottery, or a collection of spear-heads,
or else is destitute of remains, except perhaps a thin layer of
carbonaceous material.      Such could not possibly be the case
upon the above hypothesis, for the spear, the arrows, the pipe,
and the other implements, and personal ornaments of the
dead, would then be found in connexion with each other*.”
   This conclusion does not seem altogether satisfactory;
and, although these altar-containing mounds differ in so
many respects from the above-described tumuli, I still feel
disposed to regard them as sepulchral rather than sacrificial.
Not having, however, had the advantage of examining them
for myself, I throw this out as a suggestion, rather than
express it as an opinion. It is difficult to understand why
“altars”? should be covered up in this manner; I can call
to mind no analogous case. On the other hand, if Professor
Nusson’s suggestion with reference to ancient tumuli be
correct, the long continued          fire will offer no           difficulty.
Among     the   Buraets, for instance, the          hearth     is made of
beaten earth, on which a good fire is kept blazing at all
timest.    Such a house, if used finally as a sepulchre, would
present an altar very much like those above described; while
the wooden constructions and the burnt bones will all be
explicable on the hypothesis that we have before us a
sepuichre, rather than a temple.
  Nor does the “ homogeneousness”’ of the deposits found in
these mounds appear so decisive to me as to Messrs. Squier
and Davis.   Take, for instance, the cases in which pipes are
found. The execution of these isso good that “pipe-carving”
was no doubt a profession ; the division of labour must have
already begun. Exactly the same feeling which induces
many savage races to bury weapons with the dead hunter,
   * Squier and Davis, p. 160.           + Ernan, l. c. vol. il. p. 408.
272,                 GRAVE   CREEK   MOUND.

in order that he may supply himself with food in Hades as
on earth; that feeling, which among some ancient nations
suggested the placing of money in the grave, would account
not only for the presence of these pipes, but also for their
number.     The hunter could use but few weapons, and must
depend for success mainly on his strength and skill; whereas
the pipe-seller, if he could dispose of a pipe at all im the
grave, might render his whole stock-in-trade available.
   I have already mentioned     the great number     of objects
found in the Grave Creek Mound, which was undoubtedly
sepulchral, and in which one of the skeletons was accom-
panied by seventeen hundred bone beads, five hundred sea-
shells, and one hundred and fifty pieces of mica, besides
other objects. Many flakes, arrow-heads, etc., have been at
times found in tumuli, so that the mere number of objects
seems no argument against the sepulchral nature of these
so-called “ sacrificial mounds.”
   If, therefore, “the accumulated    carbonaceous matter, like
that formed by the ashes of leaves or grass,” which suggests
to Professor Wilson “the graceful offerings of the first-fruits
of the earth, so consonant    to the milder forms    of ancient
sacrifice instituted in recognition of the Lord of the Harvest,”
seems to me only the framework of the house, or the material
of the funeral pyre; on the other hand, I avoid the con-
clusion to which he is driven, that on “the altars of the
mound-builders, human sacrifices were made; and that
within their sacred enclosures were practised rites not less
hideous than those which characterized the worship which
the ferocious Aztecs are affirmed to have regarded as most
acceptable to their sanguinary gods.”
   Another class of mounds, called by Messrs. Squier and
Davis “Temple Mounds,” “are pyramidal structures, trun-
cated, and generally having graded avenues to their tops.
In some instances they are terraced, or have successive
                       TEMPLE   MOUNDS.                       7S

stages.    But whatever their form, whether round, oval,
octangular, square, or oblong, they have invariably flat or
level tops, of greater or lesser area.’’? These mounds much
resemble the Teocallis of Mexico, and had probably a similar
origin. They are rare in the North, though examples occur
even as far as Lake Superior, but become more and more
numerous as we pass down the Mississippi, and especially on
approaching the Gulf, where they constitute the most nume-
rous and important portion of the ancient remains.     Some
of the largest, however, are situated in the North.   One of -
the most remarkable is at Cahokia, in Dlinois.      This gigantic
mound is stated to be seven hundred feet long, five hundred
feet wide at the base, and ninety feet in height. Its solid
contents have been roughly estimated at twenty millions of
cubic feet.
  Probably, however, these mounds were       not used as tem-
ples only, but also as sites for dwellings, especially for
those of the chiefs. We are told that among the Natchez
Indians “the temples and the dwellings of the chiefs were
raised upon mounds, and for every new chief a new mound
and dwelling were constructed.” Again, Garcilasso de la
Vega, in his history of Florida, quoted by Mr. Haven*,
says, “The town and house of the Cacique of Osachile are
similar to those of all other caciques in Florida, and, there-
fore, it seems best to give one description that will apply
generally to all the capitals, and all the houses of the chiefs
in Florida. I say, then, that the Indians endeavour to place
their towns upon   elevated   places; but because    such situa-
tions are rare in Florida, or that they find a difficulty
in procuring suitable materials for building, they raise
eminences in this manner.       They choose a place, to which
they bring a quantity of earth,  which they elevate into a kind
of platform two or three pikes in height (from eighteen to
                          FCM   DEO
274:                       ANIMAL    MOUNDS.

twenty-five feet), of which the flat top is capable of holding
ten or twelve, fifteen or twenty houses, to lodge the cacique,
his family, and suite*.”
   Not the least remarkable of the American antiquities are
the Animal Mounds, which are principally, though not ex-
clusively, found in Wisconsin. In this district “thousands
of examples occur of gigantic basso-relievos of men, beasts,
birds, and reptiles, all wrought with persevering labour on
the surface of the soil,’ while enclosures and works of de-
fence are almost entirely wanting, the “ancient city of
Aztalan” being, as is supposed, the only example of the
former class.
   The “Animal Mounds” were discovered by Mr. Lapham
in 1836, and described in the newspapers of the day, but the
first account of them in any scientific journal was that by
Mr. R. C, Taylor, in the American Journal of Science and
Art, for April, 1838. In 1843 a longer memoir, by Mr. S.
Taylor, appeared in the same journal. Professor J. Locke
gave some account of them in a “ Report on the Mineral
Lands of the United States,”’ presented to Congress in 1840.
Messrs. Squier and Davis devoted to the same subject a part
of their work on the “Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi
Valley ;” and, finally, the seventh volume of the Smithsonian
Contributions contains the work, by Mr. Lapham, which
gives the most complete account of these interesting remains.
  Mr. Lapham      adds a map, showing the distribution                of
these curious earthworks.       They appear to be most numerous
in the southern counties of Wisconsin;              and extend from the
Mississippi to Lake Michigan, following generally the course
of the river, and being especially numerous along the great
Indian trail, or war-path, from Lake               Michigan, near   Mil-
waukie, to the Mississippi, above the Prairie du Chien. This,
however, does not prove any connexion between the present
               * See also Schoolcraft, 1. c. vol. iii. p. 47.
                        ANIMAL   MOUNDS.                        215

Indians and the mounds; the same line has been adopted ag
the route of the United States’ military road, and may have
been in use for an indefinite period.
  The mounds     themselves not only represent animals, such
as men, buffaloes, elks, bears, otters, wolves, raccoons, birds,
serpents, lizards, turtles, and frogs, but also some inanimate
objects, if at least the American archeologists are right in
regarding some of them as crosses, tobacco-pipes, etc.
   Many of the representations are spirited and correct, but
others, probably through the action of time, are less definite;
one, for instance, near the village of Muscoda, may be either
“a bird, a bow and arrow, or the human figure.”           Their
height varies from one to four feet, sometimes, however, rising
to six feet, and as a “regular elevation of six inches can be
readily traced upon the level prairies” of the West, their
outlines are generally distinctly defined where they occupy
favourable positions. It seems probable that many of the
details have disappeared under the action of rain and vege-
tation. At present a “man” consists generally of a head
and body, two long arms, and two short legs, no other details
being visible. The “birds” differ from the “men” principally
in the absence of legs. The so-called “lizards,” which are
among the most common forms, have a head, two legs, and a
long tail; the side view being represented, as is, indeed, the
case with most of the quadrupeds.
   One remarkable group in Dale County, close to the Great
Indian War-path,    consists   of a man    with   extended   arms,
seven more or less elongated mounds, one tumulus and six
quadrupeds. The length of the human figure is one hundred
and twenty-five feet, and it is one hundred and forty feet
from the extremity of one arm to that of the other. The
quadrupeds vary from ninety to a hundred and twenty-six
feet in length.
   At Waukesha are a number of mounds, tumuli, and animals,
                            saa
276                    ANIMAL   MOUNDS.

iucluding several “lizards,” a very fine “bird,” and a mag-
nificent “turtle.” “This, when first observed, was a very
fine specimen of the art of mound-building, with its graceful
curves, the feet projecting back and forward, and the tail,
with its gradual slope, so acutely pointed, that it was im-
possible to ascertain precisely where it terminated. The
body was fifty-six feet in length, and the tail two hundred
and fifty; the height six feet.” This group of mounds is
now, alas, covered with buildings: “A dwelling-house stands
on the body of the turtle, and a Catholic church is built
upon the tail.”
   “But,” says Mr. Lapham, “the most remarkable collection
of lizards and turtles yet discovered is on the school section,
about a mile and a half south-east from the village of Pew-
aukee.    This consists of seven turtles, two lizards, four ob-
long mounds, and one of the remarkable excavations before
alluded to. One of the turtle mounds, partially obliterated
by the road, has a length of four hundred and fifty feet,
being nearly double the usual dimensions.      Three of them
are remarkable for their curved tails, a feature here first
observed.”
   In several places a very curious variation occurs.      The
animals, with the usual form and size, are represented, not in
relief, but intaglio ; not by a mound, but by an excavation.
   The few “Animal Mounds” which have been observed out
of Wisconsin differ in many respects from the ordinary type.
Near Granville, in Ohio, on a high spur of land, is an earth-
work, known in the neighbourhood as the “ Alligator.”        It
has a head and body, four sprawling legs, and a curled tail.
The total length is two hundred and fifty feet; the breadth
of the body forty feet, and the length of the legs thirty-six
feet.   “The   head, shoulders, and rump    are more elevated
than the other parts of the body, an attempt having evidently
been made to preserve the proportions of the object copied.”
                        ANIMAL   MOUNDS.                      O77.

 The average height is four feet, at the shoulders six.     Even
 more remarkable is the great serpent in Adams            County,
 Ohio. It is situated on a high spur of land, which rises a
 hundred and fifty feet above Brush Creek. ‘“ Conforming to
the curve of the hill, and occupying its very summit, is the
serpent, its head resting near the point, and its body winding
back for seven hundred feet, in graceful undulations, termi-
nating im a triple coil at the tail.     The entire length, if
extended, would be not less than one thousand feet. The
accompanying plan, laid down from accurate survey, can
alone give an adequate conception of the outline of the work,
which is clearly and boldly defined, the embankment being
upwards of five feet in height, by thirty feet base at the
centre of the body, but diminishing somewhat toward the
head and tail. The neck of the serpent is stretched out, and
slightly curved, and its mouth is opened wide, as if in the act
of swallowing or ejecting an oval figure, which rests partially
within the distended jaws. This oval is formed by an em-
bankment of earth, without any perceptible opening, four
feet in height, and is perfectly regular in outline, its trans-
 verse and conjugate diameters being one hundred and sixty,
 and eighty feet respectively.”
    When, why, or by whom these remarkable works were
erected, as yet we know not. The present Indians, though
they look upon them with reverence, can throw no light
upon their origin. Nor do the contents of the mounds
themselves assist us in this inquiry. Several of them have
been opened, and, in making the streets of Milwaukie, many
of the mounds have been entirely removed; but the only
result has been to show that they are not sepulchral, and
that, excepting by accident, they contain no implements or
ornaments.
  Under these circumstances      speculation would be useless;
we can but wait, and hope that time and perseverance        may
278                           ROCK CARVINGS.

solve the problem, and explain the nature of these remark-
able and mysterious monuments.
   There is one class of objects which I have not yet men-
tioned, and which yet ought not to be left entirely un-
noticed.
  The most remarkable of these is the celebrated Dighton
Rock, on the east bank of the Taunton River.    Its history,
and the various conclusions which have been derived from it,
are very amusingly given by Dr. Wilson*.                     In 1783, the
Rev.   Hzra    Stiles, D.D., President         of Yale     College, when
preaching before the Governor of the State of Connecticut,
appealed to this rock, inscribed, as he believed, with Pheeni-
cian characters, for a proof that the Indians were descended
from Canaan, and were therefore accursed. Count de Gebelin
regarded the inscription as Carthaginian. In the eighth
volume of the “ Archzeologia,” Colonel Vallency endeavours
to prove that it is Siberian ; while certain Danish antiquaries
regard it as Runic, and thought that they could read the
name “Thorfinn,” “with an exact, though by no means so
manifest, enumeration of the associates who, according to the
Saga, accompanied Karlsefne’s expedition to Vinland, in
A.D. 1007.” Finally, Mr. Schoolcraft submitted a copy of it
to Chingwauk, an intelligent Indian chief, who “ interpreted
it ag the record of an Indian triumph over some rival native
tribe,’ but without offering any opinion as to its antiquity.
   In the “Grave Creek Mound” was found a small oval
disk of white sandstone, on which were engraved twenty-two
letters. Mr. Schoolcraft, who has especially studied this relic,
finally concludes, after corresponding with many American
and Huropean Archeeologists, according to Dr. Wilson +, that
of these twenty-two letters, four corresponded “ with ancient
Greek, four with the Etruscan, five with the old Northern
Runes, six with the ancient Gaelic, seven with the old Erse,
       * Pre-historic Man, vol. ii. p. 172.              + Ibid. p. 180.
                            WAMPUM.                          279

ten with the Phoenician, fourteen with the Anglo-Saxon, and
 sixteen with the Celtiberic; besides which possibly equiva-
lents may be found in the old Hebrew. It thus appears that
this ingenious little stone is even more accommodating than
the Dighton Rock, in adapting itself to all conceivable
theories of ante-Columbian colonization.” A stone of such
doubtful character could prove little under any circumstances;
but it must also be mentioned that “Dr. James W. Clemens
communicated to Dr. Morton all the details of the exploration
of the Grave Creek Mound;        . . . . without any refer-
ence to the discovery of the inscribed stone. Nor was it till
the excavated vault had been fitted up by its proprietor for
exhibition, to all who cared to pay for the privilege of admis-
sion, that the marvellous inscription opportunely came to
light, to add to the attractions of the show.”
   One or two other equally doubtful cases are upon record,
but upon the whole we may safely assert that there is no
reason to suppose that the nations of America had developed
for themselves any thing corresponding to an alphabet. The
art of picture-writing, which they shared with the Aztecs and
the Quipa of the Peruvians, was supplemented among the
North American Indians by the “wampum.”            This curious
substitute for writing consisted of variously-coloured beads,
generally worked upon leather. One very interesting example
‘is the belt of wampum     “ delivered by the Lenni Lenape
Sachems to the founder of Pennsylvania, at the Great Treaty,
under the elm-tree at Shachamox in 1682.”       It is still pre-
served in the collection of the Historical Society at Phila-
delphia, and consists of “eighteen strings of wampum formed
of white and violet beads worked upon leather thongs,” the
whole forming a belt twenty-eight inches long, and two-and-
a-half broad. “On this five patterns are worked in violet
beads on a white ground, and in the centre Penn is repre-
sented taking the hand of the Indian Sachem.” The numerous
280                    THE   MOUND-BUILDERS.

beads found in some of the tumuli were perhaps in a similar
manner intended to commemorate the actions and virtues of
the dead.
   Just as the wigwam of the recent Mandan consisted of an
outer layer of earth supported on a wooden framework, so
also, in the ancient sepulchral tumuli, the body was pro-
tected only by beams and planks; when therefore these latter
decayed, the earth sank in and crushed the skeleton within.
Partly from this cause, and partly from the habit of burying
in ancient tumuli, which makes it sometimes difficult to dis-
tinguish the primary from secondary interments, it happens
that from so many thousand tumuli we have very few well-
preserved skulls which indisputably belong to the ancient
race. ‘These are decidedly brachycephalic; but it is evident
that we must not attempt to build much upon so slight a
basis.               .
   No proof of a knowledge of letters, no trace of a burnt
brick, have yet been discovered; and so far as we may judge
from their arms, ornaments, and pottery, the mound-builders
closely resembled some at least of the recent Indian tribes,
and the earthworks agree in form with, if they differ in mag-
nitude from, those still, or until lately, in use. Yet this very
magnitude is sufficient to show that, at some early period, the
great river valleys of the United States must have been more
densely populated than they were when first discovered by
Kuropeans. ‘The immense number of small earthworks, and
the mounds, “ which may be counted by thousands and tens
of thousands,” might indeed be supposed to indicate either a
long time or a great population; but in other cases we have
no such alternative.     The Newark constructions;   the mound
near Florence in Alabama, which is forty-five feet in height
by four hundred and forty feet in circumference at the base,
with a level area at the summit of one hundred and fifty feet
in circumference;      the still greater mound on the Etowah
               EVIDENCE   OF ANCIENT          POPULATION.       281

river, also in Alabama, which has a height of more than
seventy-five feet, with a circumference of twelve hundred
feet at the base, and one hundred and forty at the summit;
the embankments at the mouth of the Scioto river, which are
estimated to be twenty miles in length; the great mound at
Selserstown, Mississippi, which covers six acres of ground;
and the truncated pyramid at Cahokia, to which we have
already alluded; these works and many others which might
have been quoted, indicate a population both large and
stationary ; for which hunting cannot have supplied enough
food, as it has been estimated that in a forest country each
hunter requires an area of not less than 50,000 acres for his
support; and which must, therefore, have derived its sup-
port, in a great measure, from agriculture. ‘There is not,”
say Messrs. Squier and Davis, “and there was not in the
sixteenth century, a single tribe of Indians (north of the
semi-civilized nations) between the Atlantic and the Pacific,
which had means of subsistence sufficient to enable them to
apply, for such purposes, the unproductive labour necessary
for the work; nor was there any in such a social state as to
compel the labour of the people to be thus applied.” We
know also that many, if not most of the Indian tribes, at
that time still cultivated the ground to a certain extent, and
there is some evidence that, even within historic times, this
was more the case than at present. Thus De Nonville esti-
mates the amount of Indian corn destroyed by him in four
Seneca villages at 1,200,000 quarters.
   Mr. Lapham* has brought forward some ingenious reasons
for thinking that the forests of Wisconsin were at no very
distant period much less general than at present.           In the
first place, the largest trees are probably not more than five
hundred years old; and large tracts are now covered with
“young trees, where there are no traces of antecedent
                          ch TUE Keb gle SO
282            TRACES      OF ANCIENT    AGRICULTURE.

growth.” Every year many trees are blown down, and
frequent storms pass through the forest, throwing down
nearly every thing before them. Mr. Lapham gives a map of
these windfalls in one district; they are very conspicuous,
firstly, because the trees, having a certain quantity of earth
entangled among their roots, continue to vegetate for several
years; and, secondly, because           even when      the trees them-
selves have died and rotted away, the earth so torn up forms
little mounds, which are often mistaken by the inexperienced
for Indian graves. ‘“ From the paucity of these little ‘ tree-
mounds,” we infer that no very great antiquity can be
assigned to the dense forests of Wisconsin, for during a
long period of time, with no material change of climate,
 we would expect to find great numbers of these little monu-
 ments of ancient storms scattered every where over the
 ground.”
    But there is other more direct evidence of ancient agricul-
 ture. In many places the ground is covered with small
mammillary elevations, which are known as Indian corn-hills.
“They are without order of arrangement, being scattered
over the ground with the greatest irregularity. That these
hillocks were formed in the manner indicated by their name,
is inferred from the present custom of the Indians. The corn
is planted in the same spot each successive year, and the soil
is gradually brought up to the size of a little hill by the
annual additions*.”        But Mr. Lapham has also found traces
of-an earlier and more systematic cultivation.  These consist
“of low, parallel ridges, as if corn had been planted in
drills. They average four feet in width, twenty-five of them
having been counted in the space of a hundred feet; and
the depth of the walk between them is about six inches.

  * Lapham, |. c. p. 19.    See also    Report of the Regents of the Uni-
 Cheney, “On Ancient Monuments in       versity of the State   of New York,
 Western New York:      in the 13th     1860, p. 40.
                     ANTIQUITY   OF THE   REMAINS.                   283

These appearances, which are here denominated ‘ancient
garden-beds,’ indicate an earlier and more perfect system of
cultivation than that which now prevails; for the present
Indians do not appear to possess the ideas of taste and order
necessary to enable them to arrange objects in consecutive
rows. Traces of this kind of cultivation, though not very
abundant, are found in several other parts of the State (Wis-
consin). The garden-beds are of various sizes, covering,
generally, from twenty to one hundred acres.        Some of them
are reported to embrace even three hundred acres. As a
general fact, they exist in the richest soil, asit is found in the
prairies and bun oak plains. In the latter case, trees of the
largest kind are scattered over them.”
   In the “ Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley”
it is stated that no earthwork has ever been found on the first
or lowest terrace of any of the great rivers, and that “ this
observation is confirmed by all who have given attention to
the subject.”      If true, this would, indeed, have indicated a
great antiquity, but in his subsequent work Mr. Squier
informs us that “they occur indiscriminately upon the first
and upon the superior terraces, as also upon the islands of the
lakes and rivers.” Messrs. Squier and Davis* are of opinion
that the decayed state of the skeletons found in the mounds
may enable us to form “some approximate estimate of their
remote antiquity,” especially when we consider that the earth
round them “is wonderfully compact and dry, and that the
conditions for their preservation are exceedingly favourable.”
‘Tn the barrows      of the ancient Britons,” they add, “ entire
well-preserved: skeletons are found, although possessing an
undoubted antiquity of at least eighteen hundred years.”
Dr. Wilson+     also relies much    on    this fact, which,      in his
opinion, “ furnishes a stronger evidence of their great anti-
quity than any of the proofs that have been derived either
     TIC. Palos.                             + 1c. vol. i. p. 359.
284                      CONDITION        OF THE BONES.

from the age of a subsequent forest growth, or the changes
wrought on the river terraces where they most abound.” It
is true that the bones in Stone Age graves are often ex-
tremely well preserved; but it is equally true that those in
Saxon barrows have in many cases entirely perished. In
fact, the condition of ancient bones depends so much on the
circumstances in which they have been placed, that we must
not attribute much importance to this argument.
   The evidence derived from the forests is more reliable.
Thus Captain Peck * observed near the Ontonagon river, and
at a depth of twenty-five feet, some stone mauls and other
implements in contact with a vein of copper. Above these
was the fallen trunk of a large cedar, and “over all grew a
hemlock-tree, the roots of which spread entirely above the
fallen treet ae mr.               and indicated, in his estimation, a
growth of not less than three centuries, to which must then
be added the age of the cedar, which indicates.a still ‘longer
succession of centuries, subsequent to that protracted period
during which the deserted trench was slowly filled up with
accumulations of many winters.”
   The late President Harrison, in an address to the Historical
Society of Ohio, made some very interesting remarks on this
subject, which are quoted by Messrs. Squier and Davis +.
“The process,” he says, “ by which nature restores the forest
to its original state, after being once cleared, is extremely
slow.     The rich lands of the west are, indeed, soon covered
again, but the character of the growth is entirely different,
and continues so for a long period. In several places upon
the Ohio, and upon the farm which I occupy, clearings were
made in the first settlement of the country, and subsequently
abandoned and suffered to grow up. Some of these new
forests are now sure of fifty years’ growth, but they have
made so little progress towards attaining the appearance of
        * Wilson, |. c.,vol. i. p. 256.                   t lc. p. 806.
                           AMERICAN     FORESTS.                     285

the immediately contiguous forest, as to induce any man of
reflection to determine         that at least ten times fifty years
must elapse before their complete assimilation be effected.
We find in the ancient works all that variety of trees which
give such unrivalled beauty to our forests, in natural pro-
portions.     The first growth of the same kind of land, once
cleared and then abandoned to nature, on the contrary, is
nearly homogeneous, often stinted to one or two, at most
three kinds of timber. If the ground has been cultivated,
the yellow locust will quickly spring up; if not cultivated,
the black and white walnut will be the prevailing growth.
        . . Of what immense age, then, must be the works so
often referred to, covered as they are by at least the second
growth, after the primitive forest state was regained* ? ”
   We obtain another indication of antiquity in the “ garden-
beds,” which we have already described. This system of cul-
tivation has long been replaced by the irregular “ cornhills ;”’
and yet, according to Mr. Lapham+, the garden-beds are
much   more    recent than some         of the mounds, across which
they sometimes extend in the same manner as over the
adjoining grounds. If, therefore, these mounds belong to the
same area as those which are covered with wood, we get thus
indications of three periods; the first that of the mounds
themselves;    the second,      that of the garden-beds;     and the
third, that of the forests.
   But American agriculture was not imported from abroad ;
it resulted from, and in return rendered possible, the gradual
development of American semi-civilization.      This is proved
by the fact, that the grains of the Old World were entirely
absent, and that American agriculture was founded on the
maize, an American plant. Thus, therefore, we appear to
have indications of four long periods.
  1. That in which, from an original barbarism, the Ameri-
   * See also Arch. Amer., vol. i. p. 306.            ap dhe i LEE
286              INDICATIONS    OF FOUR PERIODS.

can tribes developed a knowledge of agriculture and a power
of combination.
  2. That in which for the first time mounds were erected,
and other great works undertaken.
   3. The age of the “ garden-beds,”’ which occupy some at
least of the mounds. Hence it is provable that these par-
ticular “‘garden-beds” were not in use until after the
mounds had lost their sacred character in the eyes of the
occupants of the soil; for it can hardly be supposed that
works executed with so much care would be thus desecrated
by their builders.
   4, The period in which man relapsed into partial bar-
barism, and the spots       which     had been first forest, then,
perhaps, sacred monuments, and thirdly, cultivated ground,
relapsed into forest once more.
   But even if we attribute to these changes all the import-
ance which has ever been claimed for them, they will not
require an antiquity of more than three thousand years. I
do not, of course, deny that the period may have been very
much greater, but, in my opinion at least, it need not be
greater. At the same time there are other observations,
which if they shall eventually prove to be correct, would
indicate a very much higher antiquity.
   One of these is an account* by Dr. A. C. Koch of a mas-
todon found in Gasconade County, Missouri, which had
apparently been stoned to death by the Indians, and then
partially consumed by fire. ‘The fire, he says, was evidently
“not an accidental      one, but, on the contrary,          it had been
kindled by human agency, and, according to all appearance,
with the design of killing the huge creature, which had been
found mired in the mud and in an entirely helpless condition.
                                              e




      * Trans. of the Academy of Science of St. Louis, 1857, p. 61.
                    MAN AND THE MASTODON.                           287

I found, also, among the ashes, bones and rocks, several
arrow-heads, a stone spear-head, and some stone axes.”
   In a second case the same writer assures us that he found
several stone arrow-heads mingled with the bones of a mas-
todon. ‘ One of the arrow-heads lay underneath the thigh-
bone of the skeleton, the bone actually resting in contact
upon it; so that it could not have been brought thither after
the deposit of the bone; a fact which I was careful tho-
roughly to investigate.” These statements, however, have
not generally been accepted by geologists.
   In the valley of the Mississippi, Dr. Dickeson, of Natchez,
found the os innominatum of a man with some bones of the
Mastodon ohioticus, which had fallen from the side of a cliff
undermined by a rivulet. Sir C. Lyell has suggested that
this bone may have been derived from one of the Indian
graves, which are very numerous in this locality. Dr. Usher,
on the contrary *, regards this bone as “ an undoubted fossil,”
belonging to the same period as the remains of the Mas-
todon with which it was discovered.       Again, Count Pour-
talis has found some human bones in a calcareous conglome-
rate, estimated by Agassiz to be ten thousand years old.
The last case to which I will refer is that recorded by Dr.
Douler, who obtained from an excavation near New Orleans
some charcoal and a human skeleton, to which he is inchned
to attribute an antiquity of no less than fifty thousand years.
  The plain on which the city of New Orleans is built, and
which rises only about ten feet above the sea level, consists
of alluvial soil, which has been proved by borings to have a
depth of more than five hundred feet, and which contains
several successive layers of cypresses. The river banks show
similar remains of ancient foresis, and Messrs. Dickeson and
Brown have found remains of no less than ten cypress forests

       Dr. Usher, in Nott and Gliddon’s Types of Mankind, p. 344.
288              ANTIQUITY    OF MAN    IN AMERICA.

at different levels below the present surface. These trees are
not unfrequently as much as ten feet in diameter, and there
are from 95 to 120 rings in an inch. The human skeleton
above referred to was found at a depth of sixteen feet, and
“beneath the roots of a cypress-tree belonging to the fourth
forest level below the surface*.””         Whether,     therefore, we
accept Dr. Douler’s calculation or not, it is obvious that, if
the statements are thoroughly trustworthy, this skeleton cer-
tainly must carry back the existence of man in America to a
very early period.
   Yet, until further evidence is obtained, the question can-
not, I think, be regarded as entirely decided; and even if,
on & priort grounds, the idea seems probable, there does not
as yet appear to be any conclusive proof that man co-existed
in America with the mammoth and mastodon.
      * Dr. Usher, in Nott and Gliddon’s Types of Mankind, p. 338.
                              289




