                          CHAPTER            XV.

                   MODERN     savacges—concluded.

  N reading almost any account of savages, it is impossible
    not to admire the skill with which they use their
weapons and implements, their ingenuity in hunting and
fishing, their close and accurate powers of observation.
Some savages even recognize individuals by their footsteps.
Thus Mr. Laing mentions * that one day while travelling
near Moreton Bay in Australia, he pointed to a footstep, and
asked whose it was.     The guide “glanced at it, without
stopping his horse, and at once answered, ‘ Whitefellow call
him Tiger”?    This turned out to be correct, which was the
more remarkable as the two men belonged to different tribes,
and had not met for two years. Among the Arabs, Burck-
hardt asserts+ that some men know every individual in the
tribe by his footstep. “Besides this, every Arab knows the
printed footsteps of his own camels, and of those belonging
to his immediate neighbours.      He knows by the depth or
slhightness of the impression whether a camel was pasturing,
and therefore not carrying any load, or mounted by one
person only, or heavily loaded.’?           The North American Indian
will send an arrow rigbt through a horse, or even a buffalo.
The African savage will kill the elephant, and the Chinook
fears not to attack even the whale. Captain Grey tells us
that he has often seen the Australians kill a pigeon with a
  * Aborigines of Australia, p. 24.         + Bedouins and Wahalys, p. 374,
                           SKILFULNESS   OF SAVAGES.                           545

Spear, at a distance of thirty paces*.   Speakime of the
Chamisso Island Esquimaux, Beechey says that one day a
Diver was swimming at a distance of thirty yards from the
beach, and a native was offered a reward if he could shoot it.
He immediately frightened it so that it dived, and directly it
reappeared, he transfixed both eyes with anarrow}. Speak-
ing of the Australians, Mr. Stanbridge asserts that “it is a
favourite feat on the Murray to dive into the river, spear in
hand, and come up with a fish upon it $.”” Woodes Rogers
says that the Californian Indians used to dive, and strike the
fish under water with wooden spears §, and Falkner] tells us
that some of the Patagonian tribes live chiefly on fish, “ which
they catch either by diving, or striking them with their darts.”
Tertre again says the same of the Caribs 4, and Wallace of
the Brazilian Indians **. The South Sea Islanders are par-
ticularly active in the water.     They dive after fish which
“takes refuge under the coval rock; thither the diver pur-
sues him, and brings him up with a finger in each eye t+.”
They are even more than a match for the shark, which they
attack fearlessly with a knife. If they are unarmed “they
all surround him and force him ashore, if they can but once
get him into the surf;” but even if he escapes they con-
tinue their bathing without the least feartt. Hillis more
cautiously says only, that “when armed they have some-
times been known to attack a shark in the water $$.” The
Andaman Islanders also are said to dive and catch fish under
water ||||; and Rutherford makes a similar statement as
regards the New Zealanders. Dobritzhoffer tells us that
   * Grey, l.c. vol. ii. p. 285.           q Hist. of the Carriby Is. p. 305.
   + Beechey’s Narrative, vol. ii. p.      ** Travels on the Amazon, p. 488.
574.                                       ++ Wilson, l.c. p. 385.
   t On the Aborigines of Victoria.         Seal WG Foy Bkelehs
Ethn. Trans. New Ser. vol.i. p. 293.        §§ Polynesian Researches,       vol. 1.
   § Callander’s Voyages, vol. iii. p.   p. 178.
331.                                       |||| _Mouat, 1c. pp. 310, 338.
   || Patagonia, p. 111.
                                                              Ne
546                    SKILFULNESS      OF SAVAGES.

the Payajuas and Vilelas            live principally on fish, using
a small net with which they dive, “and if they spy any
fish at the bottom, swim after it, catch it in the net,” and
so bring it to shore*.  The Esquimaux in his kayak will
actually turn somersaults in the water.   Skyring +tsaw a
Fuegian who “threw stones from each hand with astonish-
ing force and precision. His first stone struck the master
with much force, broke a powder-horn which hung round his
neck, and nearly knocked him backwards.” In his descrip-
tion of the Hottentots, Kolben says {, that their dexterity in
throwing the “hassagaye and rackum-stick, strikes every
witness of it with the highest admiration. .... If a Hot-
tentot, in the chase of a hare, deer, or wild goat, comes                  but
within thirty or forty yards of the creature, away flies the
rackum-stick and down falls the creature, generally pierced
quite through the body.” The death of Goliath is a well-
known instance of skill in the use of the sling; and we are
told also that in the tribe of Benjamin there was a corps of
“seven hundred chosen men lefthanded; every one could
sling stones at an hair-breadth, and not miss§.” The Bra-
zilian Indians kill turtles with bows and arrows; but if they
aimed direct at the animal, the arrow would glance off the
smooth hard shell, therefore they shoot up into the air, so
that the arrow falls nearly vertically on the shell, which it is
thus enabled to penetrate ||.
   What an amount of practice must be required to obtain
such skill as this! How true also must the weapons be!
Indeed, it is very evident that each distinct type of flint
implement must have been. designed for some distinct pur-
pose. Thus the different forms of arrowhead, of harpoon, or
of stone axe, cannot have been intended to be used in the

   * History of the Abipones, vol. i.     t Kolben, l.c. vol. i. p. 243.
p- 348.                                   § Judges xx. 16.
   t Fitzroy, 1. c. vol. i. p. 398,       || Wallace’s Amazon, p. 466.
                   VARIETIES OF IMPLEMENTS.                      547

same manner.    Among the North American Indians the
arrows used in hunting were so made that when the shaft
was drawn out of the wound the head came out also; while
in the war arrows the shaft tapered to the end, so that even
when it was withdrawn the head of the arrow remained in
the wound. Again, the different forms of harpoons are
illustrated by the barbed and unbarbed lances of the Esqui-
maux   (ante, p. 504).    Unfortunately, however, we have but
few details of this kind; travellers have generally thought it
unnecessary to observe or record these apparently unimpor-
tant details; and that our knowledge of flint implements is
most rudimentary, is well shown by the discussion between
Professors Steenstrup and Worsaae, whether the so-called
“axes”? of the shell-mounds were really axes, or whether
they were not rather used in fishing.
   We may hope, however, that in future those who have the
opportunity of observing stone implements among modern
savages will give us more detailed information both as to
the exact manner in which they are used, and also about
the way in which they are made; that they will collect not
only the well-made weapons, but also, and even more care-
fully, the humble implements of every-day life.
   Some archeologists have argued that the shell-mound
builders of Denmark must have possessed more formidable
weapons than any that have yet been found, because it was
considered   impossible   that they could have killed large
game, as, for instance, the bull and seal, with the simple
weapons of bone and stone, which alone have hitherto been
discovered.   Professor Worsaae*, even goes so far as to say,
“ Against birds and other small creatures these stone arrows
might prove effectual, but against larger animals, such as
the aurochs, the elk, the reindeer, the stag, and the wild
boar, they were     evidently    insufficient;   particularly   since
                            * Page 18.
                                Nn   2
548                           ART OF DRILLING.

these animals often become             furious as soon as they are
struck.” I can, however, by no means agree with Professor
Worsaae in this supposition; we know, on the contrary,
that modern savages are able to kill even the largest game
with arrows and spears tipped with stone. Knives, again,
of stone, are much more effective than might at first be ex-
pected, and many savage tribes readily cut flesh with pieces
of shell or of kard wood.
  The    neatness      with    which   the   Hottentots,     Hsquimaux,
North American Indians, etc., are able to sew is very re-
markable, although awls and sinews would in our hands be
but poor substitutes for needles and thread. As already
mentioned in p. 332, some cautious archeologists hesitated
to refer the reindeer caves of the Dordogne to the Stone
Age, on account of the bone needles and the works of art
which are found in them. The eyes of the needles especially,
 they thought, could only be made with metallic implements.
 Professor Lartet ingeniously removed these doubts by
making a similar needle for himself with the help of flint;
but he might have referred to the fact stated by Cook* in
his first voyage, that the New Zealanders succeeded in drill-
ing a hole through a piece of glass which he had given
them, using for this purpose, as he supposed, a piece of
jasper.
   The Brazilians also use ornaments of imperfectly crystal-
lized quartz, from four to eight inches long and about an
inch in diameter. Hard as it is, they contrive to drill a hole
at each end, using for that purpose the pointed leaf-shoot of
the large wild plantain, with sand and water.               The hole is
generally transverse, but the ornaments of the chiefs are
actually pierced       lengthways.      This, Mr.     Wallace     thinks,
must be a work of years +t.
  The works of art found in the Dordogne caves are little
      * Vol, il. p. 464.            + Travels on the Amazon, p. 278.
            IMPORTANT   WORKS      ERECTED        BY SAVAGES.        549

ruder than those of the Esquimaux or the North American
Indians. In fact, the appreciation of art is to be regarded
rather as an ethnological characteristic than as an indication
of any particular stage in civilization. We see, again, that
in many cases a certain knowledge of agriculture has pre-
ceded the use of metals; and the fortifications of New Zea-
land, as well as the large morais of the South Sea Islands,
are arguments in favour of the theory which ascribes some
of our camps, our great tumuli, and other Druidical remains,
to the later part of the Stone Age. The great morai of
Oberea, in Tahiti, has been already described (p. 483).
Again, the celebrated statues of Easter Island are really
colossal.   One   of them,    which has fallen down, measures
twenty-seven feet long, and others appear to be even larger.
The houses of the Ladrone Islanders, also, are very remark-
able. The larger ones were supported on strong pyramids
of stone. These were, according to Freycinet*, m one piece,
made of chalk, sand, or large stones, imbedded in a kind of
cement.    They were found in large numbers; in one case
they formed a stone row four hundred yards long. They
were first described by Anson, who saw many which were
thirteen feet in height; while one of those seen by Freycinet
measured as much as twenty feet.        They were square at
the base, and rested on the ground.                 On each pillar was a
hemisphere, with    the flat side upwards.              The South   Sea
Islanders afford, indeed, wonderful instances            of what can be
accomplished with stone implements.              Their houses are
large and often well built, and their canoes have excited the
wonder of all who have seen them.
    Although, then, the use of stone as the principal material
of implements and weapons may be regarded as charac-
terizing an early stage in the development of civilization,
still, it is evident that this stage is itself susceptible of much
                          FP Wollyea ion onltsy
550            DIFFERENCES   IN THE   STONE   AGE.

subdivision. The Mincopie or the Australian, for instance,
is not to be compared for an instant with the semi-civilized
native of the Society Islands. So also in the ancient Stone
Age of Europe, we find evidences of great difference. The
savage inhabitants of the South French caves had, according
to MM. Christy and Lartet, no domestic animals, and no
knowledge of pottery or agriculture.       The shell-mound
builders of Denmark had the dog; the Swiss Lake-dwellers
also possessed this animal, together with the ox, sheep, and
pig, perhaps even the horse; they had a certain knowledge
of agriculture, and were acquainted with the art of weaving.
Thus, then, even when we have satisfied ourselves that any
given remains belong to the Stone Age, we are still but on
the threshold of our inquiry.
   Travellers and naturalists have varied a good deal in
opinion as to the race of savages which is entitled to the
unenviable reputation of being the lowest im the scale of
civilization.  Cook, Darwin, Fitzroy, and Wallis were de-
cidedly in favour, if I may so say, of the Fuegian; Burchell
maintained that the Bushmen are the lowest; D’Urville
voted for the Australians and Tasmanians; Dampier thought
the Australians “the miserablest people in the world;’
Forster said that the people of Mallicollo “bordered the
nearest upon the tribe of monkeys;” Owen inclines to the
Andamaners; others have supported the North American
Root-diggers; and one French writer even insinuates that
monkeys are more human than Laplanders.
  The civilization, moreover, of the Stone Age differs not
only in degree, but also in kind, varying according to the
climate, vegetation, food, etc.; from which      it becomes   evi-
dent—at least to all those who believe in the unity of the
human race—that the present habits of savage races are not to
be regarded as representing exactly those which characterized
the first men, but as depending also on external conditions,
                 DIFFERENT    LINES   OF CIVILIZATION.                Bol

influenced indeed to a certain extent by national character,
which, however, is after all but the result of the external
conditions which have acted on previous generations.
   If we take a few of the things which are most generally
useful in savage life, and at the same time most easily ob-
tainable,   such, for instance, as      bows     and   arrows,    slings,
spear-casters, pottery, domestic animals, or a knowledge
of agriculture, we might perhaps have expected & priori that
the acquisition of them would have followed some regular
succession.    That this, however, was not the case is shown
by the annexed table, which will, I think, be found inte-
resting. It gives some idea of the progress made by various
savage tribes, at the time when they were first visited by
Kuropeans.
   Some of the differences exhibited in this table may indeed
be easily accounted for. The frozen soil and arctic climate
of the Esquimaux would not encourage, would not even
permit, any agriculture.   So, again, the absence of hogs in
New Zealand, of dogs in the Friendly Isles, and of all
mammalia in Easter Island, is probably due to the fact that
the original colonists did not possess these animals, and that
their isolated position prevented them afterwards from ob-
taining any. Moreover, we must remember that as a general
rule, the lowest savage can only use one or two weapons.
He is limited to those which he can carry about with him,
and naturally prefers those which are of most general utility *.
We cannot, however, in this manner, account for all the facts.
In Columbia, Australia, the Cape of Good Hope, and else-
where, agriculture was unknown before the advent of Euro-
peans.    Easter.Island, on the contrary, contained large
plantations   of sweet potatoes, yams, plantains, sugar-canes,
etc.   Yet the Chinooks of Columbia had bows and arrows,

  * Weapons of war depending very     probably more liable to change than
much on the caprice of chiefs, are    those used in hunting.
552                     DIFFERENT   LINES

fish-hooks, and nets; the Australians had throwing-sticks,
boomerang’, fish-hooks, and nets; the Hottentots had bows
and arrows, nets, fish-hooks, pottery, and at last even a
certain knowledge of iron; all of which seem to have been
unknown to the Easter Islanders, though they would have
been very useful, and, excepting the iron, might have been
invented and used by them.
  If the case of Haster Island stood alone, the absence of
bows and arrows might, perhaps, be plausibly accounted for
by the absence of game, the scarcity of birds, and the
isolation   of the little island, which rendered   war   almost
impossible. But such an argument cannot be applied to
other cases which are indicated in the table. Let us com-
pare, for instance, the Atlantic tribes of North American
Indians, the Australians, Caffres, Bushmen, New Zealanders,
and Society Islanders. All these were constantly at war,
and the two first lived very much on the produce of the
chase.   They at least had therefore similar wants. Yet
spears and perhaps clubs were the only weapons which they
had in common;     the North Americans had good bows and
arrows, the Society Islanders and Bushmen had bad ones—
in fact, those of the former were so weak as to be useless
in war—the Australians,    Caffres, and New   Zealanders, had
none.   On the other hand, the Australians had the throwing-
stick and the boomerang ; the Society Islanders used slings;
and the New Zealanders, besides very effective clubs, had
numerous and extensive fortifications. It is certainly most
remarkable that tribes so warlike,and in many respects so
advanced, as the New     Zealanders and Caffres, should have
been ignorant of bows and arrows, which were used by many
very low races, such as the Fuegians, the Chinooks, the
Andamaners, and Bushmen; particularly as it is impossible
to doubt that the New Zealanders at least would have found
bows of great use, and that any of their tribes, having in-
                                                                                 OF                   CIVILIZATION.                                                                                                                                        553
f
                                            yTOM                                                                                                  AIDS                                    (4S
               *SUAANVIS]T
               AIGNAlYY
                                                                                                                                                        poossax sox                                    805
                  se  40po
                                                aA,39
                                                                                                       :                         os      re
                                                                                                                                                    ipoosSX
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Toys
                                                                                                                                                                                        ouog osiey

                  |                                |                                                                                                     | |
                                                                                                                                                                                                 pur[peys


          ;       B   &
                                                   poo soq
                                                                                                                                 ce
                                                                                                                                         ae eypoos$0 sot ouog sox

                  |                                                                                    :
                                                                                                                                             i            |[joys|
                                                                                                                                                                                                 puv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       atmog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       suey

          °       gg  4                            *             os                                                                      wee OTe
                                                                                                                                               poo3sax    ouog ostery
                                                                                                                                                       Auryy


NVOMANY
                                                                                                                                                                                                 puv
                                                                                                                                                                   |                 |
                                                   poor sok                                                                              sot                       oziepy
                                                                                                                                                                                  on “A                 SOX

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          suyuny
                          ct

          ee
                  |                                                                                                                                     :

HLUON
          NIONT



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |'suyuny 2
                                                   poor)sot                                                                                                                              OX             80
                      : 4      |                                                                                                         :              -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘yqsnedp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           aoe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           eee




                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Moe 2

          *XAVWINDST
                  =                                .                                 d                 i:                        ;                      :          :                             sae
                  |


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 suyuny |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -Suyung |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                yy8nerp
                  §   S st n
                                                   poo 80K SOx
                                                                                                       Se                        sox sis poory                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                                  on aau
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Teumg

                                                                                                                                                    |                                                   |
          "'SNVITVUISAY                                                              LAS               so                                           peg                                  aN ywon
                      ‘ =< s                       Pe            =


                      7Nn                              es        = SPA                                 sox                                                                                       Ree
                          ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                =|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                LOT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                109]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                toy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                10.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                og
                                                                                                                                                                                                                aoe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                oom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HOT)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POCF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POOF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A)
                                    poor)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ‘Suyuny
          “SUATNVWVAINY
                                                                                                                                                                                                       poe)
                                    APIA
              *SLOLNALLOY

                                                                                                                                                                                                                suyuay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                        soy                                                            So       IO




                ‘NaEWHSAg            AL HEI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                saquny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                eee                                                                             10H




                                                                                                             Brsailechinecees
                                   AL U9


                                                                      sxng-Suraoay
                                                                       | *
               “SNVIOSOF                                                                                                                                                                                        LOT
                                                            SIX                                                                                                                         auvig

                                   | ISMOLIY
                                        “                                                                                                                                                                                                    (oysatmo0()
              “SUAONV IST
                                                                                                                                              srabtce       cree                      srocnoce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                eee
                UaALSVY


                                                                                         STuvtI sik
                                                                                                                                                                       SUOIFLOY

                                                                                                                                 Sano             “os
                                                                                                                                              gg9uR)    mMILay
                                                                                                                                                            ana                    -Ysty SOO
                                    saiog puv          SoUuL[S                                              svlog
                                                                                                                “ ae                                                                                                                       ssozy
                                                                                         MONG                                                                          TAO
                                                                      |
554                      ISOLATION OF SAVAGES.

vented them, would have had an immense advantage in the
“struggle for existence.” Other similar contrasts will strike
any one who examines the table; but perhaps it may be said
that some of these cases may be explained by the influence
of more civilized neighbours; that the comparison above-
made, for instance, might be regarded as unfair, because the
New Zealanders were an isolated race, while the Chinooks
might have derived their knowledge of bows and arrows
from the eastern tribes, and these again might have acquired
the art of making pottery from the semi-civilized nations of
the south. No one can deny that this may be true im some
instances, because we know that at the present day most
savages possess hatchets, knives, beads, etc., which they have
received from traders, and which they cannot yet manufac-
ture for themselves.
   It is certainly possible that the Chinooks may have derived
their knowledge of the bow from their northern neighbours ;
but we can hardly suppose that they did so from the Red
Indian tribes to the east, because in that case it is difficult to
understand why they should not also have learnt from these
the much simpler, and almost equally useful, art of making
pottery. Moreover there are some cases in which any such
idea is absolutely out of the question; thus, the spear-
caster is used by the Esquimaux,                 the Australians, the New
Caledonians,         and some Brazilian tribes, the bolas by the
Esquimaux and the Patagonians; the boomerang is peculiar
to the Anstralians*.     The “sumpitan” or blow-pipe of the
Malays occurs again in the valley of the Amazon.         Again,
different races of savages have but little peaceful intercourse
with one another. They are almost always at war. If their
habits are similar, they are deadly rivals, fighting for the

   * The negroes of Niam Niam have       But these do not appear to possess
iron crescents resembling boome-         the peculiar properties of the boome-
yangs, which   are    thrown   in war.   rang.
                     ISOLATION OF SAVAGES.                   555

best hunting-grounds or fisheries ; if their wants are different,
they fight for slaves, for women,     for ornaments;   or if they
do not care about any of these, for the mere love of fighting,
for scalps, heads, or some other recognized emblems of glory.
In this condition of society each tribe lives in a state either
of isolation from, or enmity with, its neighbours. Delenda
est Carthago is the universal motto, and savages can only
live in peace when they have a little world of their own.
Sometimes a broad sea, or a high range of mountains, at
others a wide “ march”’ or neutral territory supply the neces-
sary conditions, and keep them apart. They meet only to
fight, and are therefore not likely to learn much from one
another.  Moreover, there are cases in which some tribes
have weapons which are quite unknown to their neighbours.
Thus, among the Brazilian tribes we find the bow and arrow,
the blow-pipe, the lasso, and the throwing-stick. The first
is the most general, but the Barbados use only the blow-pipe,
the Moxos   have abandoned the bow and arrow for the lasso,
and the Purupurus are distinguished from all their neigh-
bours by using, not bows and arrows, but the “ palheta,”’ or
throwing-stick.     Again, the Caffres have not generally
adopted the bows and arrows of the Bushmen; the Esqui-
maux have not acquired the art of making pottery from the
North American Indians, nor the southern Columbian tribes
from the northern Mexicans.
   Many, again, of the ruder arts, as for instance the manu-
facture of pottery and of bows, are so useful, and at the same
time, however ingenious in idea, so simple in execution, as
to render it highly improbable that they would ever be lost,
when they had once been acquired. Yet we have seen that
the New Zealanders and Caffres had no bows, and that none
of the Polynesians bad any knowledge of pottery; though
it is evident from their skill in other manufactures, and their
general state of civilization, that they would have found no
556             DIFFERENCES    BETWEEN      SAVAGES.

difficulty in the matter, if the manner had once occurred to
them. Again, “bolas ” are a most effectual weapon, and there
is certainly no difficulty in making them, yet the knowledge
of them appears to be confined to the Patagonians and the
Esquimaux.      The art of pottery, on the contrary, sometimes
has been, I believe, communicated by one race to another.
Nevertheless, there are cases, even among existing races*, in
which we seem to find indications of an independent dis-
covery; at any rate, in which the art is in a rudimentary
stage.                                                 .
   On the whole, then, from a review of these, and other
similar facts which might have been mentioned, it seems to
me most probable that many of the simpler weapons, imple-
ments, etc., have been invented independently by various
savage tribes, although there are no doubt also cases in which
they have been borrowed by one tribe from another.
   The contrary opinion has been adopted by many writers
on account of the undeniable similarity existing between the
weapons used by savages in very different parts of the world.
But however paradoxical it may sound, though the imple-
ments and weapons of savages are remarkably similar, they
are at the same time curiously different. No doubt the
necessaries of life are simple and similar all over the world.
The materials also with which man has to deal are very much
alike; wood, bone, and to a certain extent stone, have every
where   the same   properties.      The obsidian       flakes   of the
Aztecs resemble the flint flakes of our ancestors, not so much
because the ancient Briton resembled the Aztec, as because
the fracture of flint is like that of obsidian. So also the
pointed bones used as awls are necessarily similar all over
the world.   Similarity exists, in fact, rather in the raw mate-
rial than in the manufactured article, and some even of the
simplest implements of stone are very different among dif-
                    * See, for instance, p. 494.
                      DIFFERENT     USES FOR THE DOG.                       557

ferent races.  The adze-like hatchets of the South Sea
Islanders are unlike those of the Australians or ancient
Britons ; the latter again differ very much from the type
which is characteristic of the Drift or Archeolithic period.
   Again, the habits and customs of savages while presenting
many remarkable similarities which, as it seems to me, go far
to prove the unity of the human race, still differ greatly, and
thus give strong evidence of independent development.
Many, indeed, of those differences which must have struck
any one in reading the preceding part of the chapter, follow
evidently and directly from the external conditions in which
different races are placed.   The habits of an Esquimaux and
a Hottentot could not possibly be similar. But let us take
some act which is common to many races, and is susceptible
of being accomplished in several ways. For instance, most
savages live in part on the flesh of birds; how is this
obtained?     Generally with bows and arrows ; but while the
Australians         catch birds     with   the hand, or kill them           with
the simple spear or the boomerang, the Fuegians have both
the sling and the bow, while the Esquimaux use a complex
spear with several points, or a projectile which consists of a
number of walrus teeth fastened together by short pieces of
string, and thus forming a kind of bolas. The northern
tribes visited by Kane practised a different method. They
caught large numbers of birds—especially little auks—in
small nets, resembling landing-nets, with long ivory handles.
Yet this very people were entirely ignorant of fishing*.
   Take, again, the use made of the dog. At first, probably,
the dog and the man hunted togethert- the cunning of the
one supplemented the speed of the other, and they shared
the produce of their joint exertions.     Gradually mind as-

  * Kane,    Arctic Explorations,   vol.   however,   used the dog rather   as a
ii. pp. 203. 243.                          watchdog than as a hound.
  + The low American
                  Wood Indians,
558               MODES     OF   OBTAINING     FIRE.

serted its pre-eminence over matter, and the man became
master. Then the dog was employed in other ways, less
congenial to his nature. The Esquimaux forced him to draw
the sledge; the Chinook kept him for the sake of his wool;
the South Sea Islanders, having no game, bred the dog for
food; the Chonos Indians taught him to fish; where tribes
became shepherds, their dogs became shepherds also ; finally,
it is recorded by Pliny that in ancient times troops of dogs
were trained to serve in war.      Hvyen the ox, though less
versatile than the dog, has been used for the first and the
two last of these purposes.
   Again, in obtaining fire, two totally different methods are
followed; some savages, as for instance the Fuegians, using
percussion, while others, as the South Sea Islanders, rub one
piece of wood against another.       Opinions are divided whether
we have any trustworthy record of a people without the
means of obtaining fire. It has been already mentioned
(pp. 445. 451) that some of the Australians and Tasmanians,
though acquainted with fire, did not know how to obtain it.
In his history of the Ladrone Islands, Father Gobien asserts
that fire, “an element of such universal use, was utterly un-
known to them, till Magellan, provoked by their repeated
thefts, burned one of their villages. When they saw their
wooden houses blazing, they first thought the fire a beast
which fed upon wood, and some of them who came too near,
being burnt, the rest stood afar off, lest they should be de-
voured, or poisoned, by the violent breathings of this terrible
animal.’ This fact is not mentioned in the original account
of Magellan’s Voyage. Freycinet believes that the assertion
of Father Gobien is entirely without foundation.      The lan-
guage, he says, of the inhabitants contains words for fire,
burning charcoal, oven, grilling, boiling, etc.; and even be-
fore the advent of the Europeans, pottery* was well known.
                       el   CavOluueromd oo:
                      MODES   OF   OBTAINING    FIRE.                  559

It is difficult, however,       to get over the distinct assertion
made by Gobien, which moreover derives some support from
similar statements made by other travellers.                Thus Alvaro
de Saavedra      states that the inhabitants            of certain    small
islands in the Pacific which he called “ Los Jardines,” but
which cannot now be satisfactorily determined, stood in
terror of fire because they had never seen it*. Again,
Wilkes    tells ust that on the island of Fakaafo, which he
calls “ Bowditch,” “ there was no sign of places for cooking,
nor any appearance of fire.” The natives also were very much
alarmed when they saw sparks struck from flint and steel.
Here, at least, we       might have thought, was a case beyond
question or suspicion; the presence of fire could hardly have
escaped observation; the marks it leaves are very con-
spicuous. If we cannot depend on such a statement as this,
made by an officer in the United States’ Navy, in the official
report of an expedition sent out especially for scientific
purposes, we may well be disheartened, and lose confidence
in Ethnological investigations. Yet the assertions of Wilkes
are questioned, and with much appearance of justice, by
Mr. Tylort. In the “ Ethnography of the United States’
Exploring Expedition,” Hale gives a list of Fakaafo words,
in which we find afi for “fire”      This is evidently the
same   word    as the New Zealand ahi; but as it denotes light
and heat, as well as fire, we might suppose that it thus found
its way into the Fakaafo vocabulary. I should not, there-
fore, attribute to this argument quite so much force as does
Mr. Tylor. It is, however, evident that Captain Wilkes did
not perceive the importance of the observation, or he would
certainly have taken steps to determine the question ; and as
Hale, in his special work on the Ethnology of the Expedition,
does not say a word on the subject, it is clear he had
* Hackluyt Soc. 1862, p.178.    + United States’ Expl. Exped. vol. v. p. 18.
                   { Harly History of Mankind, p. 230.
560                DIFFERENT    MODES    OF BURIAL.

no idea that the inhabitants of Fakaafo exhibited such an
interesting peculiarity. The fact, if established, would be
most important; but it cannot be said to be satisfactorily
proved that there is at present, or has been within historical
times, any race of men entirely ignorant of fire. It is at
least certain that as far back as the earliest Swiss lake-
villages, and Danish shell-mounds, the use of fire was well
known in Hnrope.
  On the other hand, as already mentioned,                 some   of the
Tasmanian and Australian tribes, though well acquainted
with the use of fire, knew no way of kindling it. Con-
sequently they take great pains to keep it always burn-
ing; and if by any mischance it should be extinguished, are
obliged to get a fresh light from some neighbouring tribe.
   There is, again, scarcely any conceivable way in which the
 dead could be disposed of, which has not been adopted in some
part of the world. Among some races the corpse is simply
buried; by others itis burned.    Some of the North American
Indians expose their dead on scaffolds in the branches of
trees. Some tribes deposit them in sacred rivers, others in
the sea. Among the Sea Dyaks the dead chief is placed in
his war canoe, with his favourite weapons and principal pro-
perty, and is thus turned adrift. Other tribes gave their
dead to be food for wild beasts; and others preferred to eat
them themselves.     Some Brazilian tribes drink the dead *.
The Tarianas    and Tucanos, and some          other tribes, about a
month after the funeral, disinter the corpse, which is then
much decomposed, and put it in a great pan or oven, over
the fire, till all the volatile parts are driven off with a most
horrible odour, leaving only a black carbonaceous mass,
which is pounded into a fine powder, and mixed in several
large conches of caxiri: this. is drunk by the assembled com-
pany, under the full belief that the virtues of the deceased
               * Wallace, Travels on the Amazon, p. 498.
                         DESCENT    OF PROPERTY.                        561

will thus be transmitted to the drinkers. The Cobeus also
drink the ashes of the dead in the same manner.
   Indeed, if there are two possible ways of doing a thing, we
may be sure that some tribes will prefer one, and some the
other.    It seems natural to us that descent should go in the
male line; but there are very many races in which it is
traced from the mother, not the father.    The husband or
father seems to us to be the natural head of the family ; in
Tahiti the reverse is the case, and the son enters at once
into the property and titles of his father, who then holds
them only as a guardian or trustee; so that among this extra-
ordinary people, not the father, but the son, is in reality the
head of the family.       So also in Australia, the father is called
after the son, not the son after the father. At Cape York
and in the neighbouring islands the youngest son has a
double share*.     Among the New Zealanders Mr. Brown
assures us that the youngest son succeeded to the property of
the fathert. Among the Wanyameuzi, property descends
not to the legitimate, but to the illegitimate childrenf.
There are many races in which those holding certain rela-
tionships are forbidden to talk to one another, an extraordi-
nary superstition which, as we have seen (p. 461), reaches
its climax among the Feegeeans.
  It seems     natural to us that after childbirth,           the woman
should keep her bed; and that as far as possible the husband
should relieve her for a time from the labours and cares of
life. In this, at least, one might have thought that all
nations would be alike. Yet it is not so. Among the
Caribs the father, on the birth of a child, took to his ham-
mock, and placed himself in the hands of the doctor, the
mother meanwhile going about her work as usual. A similar

         * McGillivray, Voyage of H.M.S. Rattlesnake, vol. ii. p. 28.
         + New Zealand and its Aborigines, p. 26.
         {~ Burton’s Lake Regions of Africa, p. 158.
562          DIFFERENCES      IN PREVALENT       SOUNDS.

custom has been observed on the mainland of South America,
among the Abipones, Mundrucus, Fuegians, etc.; among
the Arawaks of Surinam; in the Chinese province of West
Yunnan; among the Dyaks of Borneo, and the Esquimaux
of Greenland. It is mentioned by Xenophon as occurring in
Asia Minor, and by Strabo among the Iberians; is found
even in the present day among the Basques, among whom
we are told that in some of the valleys, the “women rise
immediately after childbirth, and attend to the duties of the
household, while the husband goes to bed, taking the baby
with him, and thus receives the neighbours’ compliments.”
The same habit has been noticed also in the South of France ;
according to Diodorus Siculus, it prevailed at his time in
 Corsica; and finally it ‘is said still to exist in some cantons
 of Bearn, where it is called faire la couvade.”
    Again, the love of life—the dread of death—are among
 the strongest of our feelings. “ Hvery thing that a man hath
he will give in exchange for his life.’ This is true, but by
no means universally so. According to Azara, the Indians
of Paraguay have a great mdifference to death; and we
have already seen that this is the case with the Feegeeans,
while Burton makes a similar statement as regards the
negroes of Dahomey.        Among the Chinese it is said that
a man condemned to death, if permitted to do so, may
always secure a substitute on payment of a moderate sum of
money, and a coffin is regarded as a most appropriate present
for an aged relative.
   Again, the sounds of which language is constituted differ
extremely in different parts of the world. The clicks of the
Hottentots are a striking illustration of this. The Hurons
did not use the labials; the Indians of Port au Francais in
Columbia, according to M. de Lamanon*, make no use of
the consonants b, f, z,j, d,p,orv.           The Peruvian language
               ** Voyage de la Perouse, vol. ii. p. 211.
                           DIFFERENCES      IN SIGNS.                            563

wanted the letters b, d, 7, g, s, and#*.                 The Australians did
not use the sound conveyed by our letter st. Many of the
negroes have no 7. The Feegeeans do not use the letter ¢,
the Somo-Somo           dialect has no k, that of Rakiraki and other
parts notj. The Society Islanders and Australians exclude
both sand c§. In representing the New Zealand language
the missionaries found themselves able to discard no less
than thirteen letters, namely, b, ¢, d, f, 9, j, 1, %, 8, v; % Y,
and z||.      Shotland asserts that whistling was unknown                         in
New Zealand¥.
   Even the symbols by which the feelings are expressed are
very different in different races. Kissing appears to us the
natural expression of affection.            “’Tis certain,” says Steele,
“nature was its author, and it began with the first courtship.”
On the contrary it was entirely unknown to the Tahitians,
the New Zealanders**, the Papouans +t, and the aborigines of
Australia, nor was it in use among the Somalstt, or the
Esquimaux §§. The Hill tribes of Chittagong do not say “Kiss
me,” but ‘Smell me||||.” The Malays (J, Feegeeans***,
Tongans, and many other Polynesians always sit down when
speaking to a superior; the inhabitants of Mallicollo testify
“ admiration by hissing like a goosettt,” the sound being per-
haps like our “hush,” a call for silence, and hence a mark of

  * Garcilasso de la Vega.        Mark-    age of the Novara, vol. iii. p.
ham’s Translation, Author’s Preface,       106.
p.=.                                          +t Freycinet, vol. ii. p. 56.
   + Freycinet, vol. ii. p. 757; D’Ur-        tt Burton’s    First   Footsteps    in
ville, vol. i. pp. 188. 199. 481.          Africa, p. 123.
   { Figi and the Figians, vol. i.p.v.       §§ Lyon’s Journal, p. 353.
257.                                          ||| Lewin, Hill Tribes of Chit-
    § Polynesian Researches, vol. i.       tagong, p. 46.
jon vile           .                         q 4 Memoirs ofa Malayan Family,
    || Brown, New Zealand and its          Marsden, p. 37.
Aborigines, p. 100.                           **k* Williams, Figi    and the Fi-
  { Traditions ofthe NewZealanders,        gians, vol. i. p. 88.
p. 134.                                       +++ Cook’s Second Voyage, vol. ii.
   ** TD)’Urville, vol. ii. p. 561; Voy-   p. 36.
                                       QO %
564                         IDEAS   OF DECENCY.

interest ; the mode of showing respect among the Todas of the
Neilgherry hills is by raising the open right hand to the face,
resting the thumb on the bridge of the nose; at Vatavulu*
it is respectful to turn one’s back on a superior, especially
in addressing him. The same custom occurs in Congot;
Denham found it in central Africa t; and Speke among the
Wahuma in the Hast §. According to Freycinet, tears were
regarded in the Sandwich Islands as a sign of happiness ||;
and some of the Esquimaux pull noses as a token of respect {.
Spix and Martius assure us that blushing was unknown
among the Brazilian Indians; and that only after long
intercourse with Europeans, does a change of colour become
in them any indication of mental emotion**,
   Again we find the most striking differences of feeling in
the matter of clothing. The Turk thinks it highly improper
for a woman to show her face. The sculptures on early
Indian temples show that a race may attain to a considerable
degree of civilization without perceiving any necessity what-
ever for clothing. This is the case with the women listening
to Buddha while preaching, and even Buddha’s wife and
Maya his mothert+ are habitually so represented; indeed Mr.
Fergusson does not hesitate to say that “before the Ma-
homedan conquest nudity in India conveyed no sense of
indecency.”
   The ideas of virtue also differ extremely. Neither faith,
hope, nor charity enters into the virtues of a savage.
The Sichuana language contaims no expression for thanks ;
the Algonquin had no word for love; the Tinné no word

   * Figi and the Figians, vol. i.       Nile, p. 206.
p. 154.                                     || le. vol. ii. pp. 542. 589.
   + Astley’s Voyage and Travels,           { Ross, Baffin’s Bay, p. 118.
vol. iii. p. 72.                           ** Vol. i. p. 376.
  { Travels and Discoveries in Africa,     +f See   for instance   Fergusson’s
vol. ii. p. 27; vol. iii. p. 15.         Tree and Serpent Worship.    Pl. Ixxiy.
   § Discovery of the Source of the      and passim,
                               IDEAS         OF VIRTUE.                        565

for beloved; mercy was with the North American Indians a
mistake, and peace an evil; theft, says Catlin, they “call
capturing ;” humility is an idea which they could not com-
prehend. Among the Koupouees the greatest misconduct,
says Major McCulloch, “is to forgive an enemy, the first
virtue is revenge *.”
   Among the ancient Greeks we see in Homer that the
deceitful cunning of Ulysses was looked upon with approval.
   “Ts a man to starve,” said an African, indignantly, to
Capt. Burton, “while his sister has children whom she might
sell?” This sentiment reads at first like the acme of selfish-
ness, but this impression would perhaps be unjust. Marsden
records a Sumatran Malay as saying, in admiration of an
European watch, “Is it not fitting that such as we should be
slaves to people who have the ingenuity to invent, and the
skill to construct, so wonderful a machine+?”
   Chastity before marriage was not reckoned as a virtue by
the New Zealanderst or Cree Indians§$; it was. disapproved
of, though for very different reasons, by some of the Bra-
zilian tribes, by the inhabitants of the Ladrones,.and by the
Andamaners.            On   the   other        hand, the Australians would
have been shocked at a man marrying a woman of his own
family name; the Abipones thought it a sin for a man to
pronounce his own name; the Tahitians thought it very
wrong to eat in company, and were horrified at an English
sailor, who carried some food in a basket on his head.                        ‘This
prejudice was also shared by the New Zealanders ||,while the
Feegeeans, who were habitual cannibals, who regarded mercy
as a weakness, and cruelty as a virtue, fully believed that a
woman who was not tattooed in an orthodox manner during

  * Selection   from    the Records    of      Aborigines, p. 35.
the Government of India.      By Major           § Franklin’s Journeys to the Polar
W. McCulloch, p. 75.                           Seas, vol. i. p. 182. Dunn’s Oregon
  + History of Sumatra, p. 205.                Territory, p. 92.
  + Brown, New Zealand and             its        || D’Urville, vol. ii. p. 533.
566                           IDEAS   OF VIRTUE.

life, could not possibly hope for happiness after death.                  This
curious idea is also found among the Esquimaux.   Hall tells
us that they tattoo “from principle, the theory being that
the lines thus made will be regarded in the next world as a
sign of goodness*.” It seems to the Veddahs the most
natural thing in the world that a man should marry his
younger sister, but marriage with an elder one is as repug-
nant to them as to us. Among the Friendly Islanders the
chief priest was considered too holy to be married; but he
had the right to take as many concubines as he pleased ; and
even the chiefs dared not refuse their daughters to him.
In Western Africa the women of the reigning families
might have as many lovers as they wished, but were for-
bidden to degrade themselves by marriage. Among the
natives of New South Wales, though the women wore no
clothes, it was         thought indecent       for young        girls to go
naked+.
   Many savage races think it wrong for a woman to have
twins; among the Ibos of Hastern Africa, for instance, in
such a case the children were exposed to wild beasts and the
mother was driven out of society t. There also it is thought
unlucky to cut the upper teeth before the lower ones, and
“You cut your top teeth first” is the bitterest of insults.
I cannot indeed but think that the differences observable in
savage tribes, are even more remarkable than the similarities.
  In endeavouring to estimate the moral character of savages,
we must remember not only that their standard of right and
wrong was, and is, in many cases, very different from ours,
but also that, according to the statements of travellers, some
of them can hardly be regarded as responsible beings, and

   * Life with the Esquimanx, vol. ii.      { Burton’s Lake Regions of Africa,
p. 315.                                  p. 90. See for other instances of this,
  + D’Urville, vol. i. p.471; Voyage     my Origin of Civilization, 2nd ed. p.
of the Rattlesnake, vol. i. p, 49.       2D.
                       DEIFICATION         OF WHITE   MEN.                     567

have not attaimed to any notions, however faulty and un-
defined, of moral rectitude*.                 But where       such notions do
exist they differ widely, as we have seen, from our own;
and it would open up too large a question to inquire
whether, in all cases, our standard is the correct one.
   In considering the character of women belonging to savage
or semi-savage races, we must also remember that savages
often regard the white men as beings of a superior order.
Thus M. du Chaillu tells us that some of the African
savages looked upon him as a superior being; and the South
Sea Islanders worshipped Captain Cook as a deity. Even
when they had killed him, and cut him into small pieces,
the inhabitants of Owhyhee fully expected him to re-appear,
and frequently asked ‘“‘what he would do to them on his
returnt.” However absurd and extravagant such a belief
may at first sight appear, it must be admitted that it is in
many respects very natural. Savages can only raise their
minds to the conception of a being a few degrees superior
to themselves, and Captain Cook was more powerful, wiser,
and, we may add, more virtuous, than most of their so-called
“ Deities.” Under these circumstances, although it must be
admitted that the chastity of the women is not, as a general
rule, much regarded among savages, we must not too severely
condemn them on this account. It is not surprising that
any connexion with white men is regarded rather as an
honour than asa disgrace: the Huropeans hold, in fact, almost
the same position in public estimation as did the amorous
deities of ancient mythology.
   Again, with savages, as with children, time appears longer
than it does to us, and a temporary marriage as natural and
honourable as one that is permanent. Hospitality, again, is

   * See, for instance, Burchell, vol.i.     Ocean.      By Capt. King, F.R.S. vol.
p. 461.                                      iii. p. 69.
   + Cook’s Voyage to the Pacific
568                     CURIOUS    CUSTOMS.

frequently carried so far that it is thought wrong to with-
hold from a guest any thing that might contribute to his
comfort, and unless therefore he was provided with a tem-
porary wife, hospitality would be regarded as incomplete.
This custom is found throughout North America and the
South Sea Islands, among the Abyssinians, Bedouins, Kaffirs,
Patagonians, and other races. Among the Hsquimaux it
is considered a great mark of friendship for two men to
exchange wives for a day or two. It has been already men-
tioned that a Kandyan chief, described by Mr. Bayley, was
quite scandalized at the idea of having only one wife. It
was, he said, “just like monkeys.”” When Captain Cook was
in New Zealand, his companions contracted many temporary
marriages with the Maori women; these were arranged in a
 formal and decent manner, and were regarded, by the New
 Zealanders at any rate, as perfectly regular and innocent*.
 Regnard+ assures us that the Lapps preferred to marry a
 girl that had had a child by a white man, thinking “that
 because a man whom they believe to be possessed of a better
taste than themselves has been anxious to give marks of his
love for a girl of their country, she must, therefore, be pos-
sessed of some secret merit.” Hvenat the present day, Lady
Duff Gordon tells us, in her paper on the Cape tf, that “ there
are no so-called ‘morals’ among the coloured people, and
how or why should there? It is an honour to one of these
girls to have a child by a white man.”               Taking all these
facts into consideration, the intercourse which has taken
place between Europeans and women of lower tribes must
not, I think, be too severely condemned, or rather the blame
ought to fall on us and not on them. But, even among
savages themselves, we must admit that female virtue is, in

           * Cook’s First Voyage, vol. iii. p. 450.
           + Pinkerton, Journey to Lapland, vol. i. p. 166.
           t Vacation Tourists, 1863, p. 178.
                     SOCIAL   POSITION     OF WOMEN.                     569

many cases, but slightly regarded; as, indeed, is but natural
when women themselves are looked upon as little better than
domestic animals. Among many tribes, for instance the
South Sea Islanders and the Esquimatix, indecent dances
are not only common, but are countenanced by women of the
highest rank, to whom it does not appear to occur that there
is any harm or impropriety in them. According to Ulloa*,
the Brazilians do not approve of chastity in an unmarried
woman, regarding it as a proof that she can have nothing
attractive   about    her.    The inhabitants         of the Ladrones +,
and of the Andaman Island}, come to the same conclusion ;
in the latter case, however, for a different reason, regarding
it asa proof of selfishness and pride. Judged by our stan-
dards these facts are very dreadful; but we must remember
they did not entail on savages the same fatal consequences
as with us; and before we condemn them too severely, let us
remember our own literature and our own morality, even in
the last century.
  The harsh, not to say cruel treatment of women, which is
almost universal among savages, is one of the deepest stains
upon their character. They regard the weaker sex as beings
of an inferior order, as mere domestic drudges.                Nor are the
labours and sufferings of the women sweetened by any great
affection on the part of those for whom they toil. We have
already seen that the Algongquins had no word for “ love”
in their language, and that the Tinné Indians had no equi-
valent for “ dear ” or “ beloved.”? Captain Lefroy§ says, “I
endeavoured to put this intelligibly to Nannette, by sup-
posing such an expression as ma chére femme; ma chére
fille. When at length she understood it, her reply was (with
great emphasis), ‘ I’ disent jamais ¢a ; 7’ disent ma femme, ma

 * Pinkerton, vol. xiv. p. 521.          vol. ii. p. 85.                 é
 + Freycinet, vol. ii. p. 370.              § Richardson’s Arctic Expedition,
 t Trans. Ethn. Soc.        New Ser.     vol. ii. p. 24.
570                     SAVAGES        AND CHILDREN.

fille’? Spix and Martius* tell us that among the Brazilian
tribes the father has scarcely any, the mother only an in-
stinctive affection for the child. There can be no doubt
that, as an almost universal rule, savages are cruel, but we
must remember that they are less sensitive to pain than those
who spend much of their time in-doors, and that in many cases
they inflict upon themselves also the most horrible tortures.
   Savages have often been likened to children, and the com-
parison is not only correct, but also highly instructive. Many
naturalists consider that the early condition of the individual
indicates that of the race,—that the best test of the affinities
of a species are the stages through which it passes.                  So also
it is in the case of man; the life of each individual is an
epitome of the history of the race, and the gradual develop-
ment of the child illustrates that of the species. Hence the
importance of the similarity between savages and children.
Savages, like children, have no steadiness of purpose. Speak-
ing of the Dogrib Indians, we found, says Richardson +, “ by
experience, that however high the reward they expected to
receive on reaching their destination, they could not be
depended on to carry letters. A slight difficulty, the prospect
of a banquet on venison, or a sudden impulse to visit some
friend, were     sufficient to turn them aside for an indefinite
length of time.” Hyen among the comparatively civilized
 South Sea Islanders this childishness was very apparent.
“Their tears indeed{, like those of children, were always
ready to express any passion that was strongly excited, and
like those of children they also appear to be forgotten as
soon as shed.” D’Urville also mentions that Tai-wanga, a
New   Zealand     chief, cried like a child, because the sailors
spoilt his favourite cloak by powdering it with flour$.                  It is

 * Reise, vol. i. p. 381.                    § D’Urville, vol. ii. p. 398. See
 + Arctic Expedition, vol. ii. p.23.      also Burton’s Lake Regions of Ccn-
 ft Cook’s First Voyage, p. 103.          tral Africa, p. 332.
                             SAVAGES AND CHILDREN.                       571

not, says Cook, “indeed strange that the sorrows of these
artless people should be transient, any more than that their
passions should be suddenly and strongly expressed ; what
they feel they have never been taught either to disguise or
suppress, and having no habits of thinking which perpetually
recall the past, and anticipate the future, they are affected by
all the changes of the passing hour, and reflect the colour of
the time, however frequently it may vary; they have no
project which is to be pursued from day to day, the subject
of unremitted anxiety and solicitude, that first rushes into
the mind when they awake in the morning, and is last dis-
missed when they sleep at night. Yet if we admit that they
are upon the whole happier than we, we must admit that the
child is happier than the man, and that we are losers by the
perfection of our nature, the increase of our knowledge, and
the enlargement of our views.”
  We know the difficulty which children find in pronouncing
certain sounds : 7 and J, for instance, they constantly confound.
This is the case also among the Sandwich Islanders and in
the Ladrones according to Freycinet*; in Vanikoro+; among
the Dammarast; and in the Tonga Islands§.    Mr. Darwin
observed that the Fuegians had great difficulty in com-
prehending an alternative: and every one must have noticed
the tendency among savages to form words by reduplication.
This also is characteristic of childhood among civilized
races.
   Again, some of the most brutal acts which have been
recorded against them are to be regarded less as instances of
deliberate cruelty, than of a childish thoughtlessness and im-
pulsiveness. A striking instance of this is recorded by Byron
in his narrative of the Loss of the Wager. A cacique of the

  * Vol. ii. pp. 260. 519.               p. 181.
  + Vol. v. p. 218.                         § Mariner’s Tonga Islands, vol. i.
  + Galton, Tropical South Africa,       p. 30.
572                MORAL    INFERIORITY     OF   SAVAGES.

Chonos, who was nominally a Christian, had been out with
his wife to fish for sea-egos, and having had little success,
returned in a bad humour. “A little boy of theirs, about
three years old, whom they appeared to be doatingly fond of,
watching for his father and mother’s return, ran into the
surf to meet them: the father handed a basket of eggs to
the child, which being too heavy for him to carry, he let it
fall, upon which the father jumped out of the canoe, and
catching the boy up in his arms, dashed him with the
utmost violence against the stones. The poor little creature
lay motionless and bleeding, and im that condition was
taken up by the mother, but died soon after*.”
   In fact, we may fairly sum up this part of the question in
a few words by saying, as the most general conclusion which
can be arrived at, that savages have the character of children
with the passions and strength of men. No doubt different
races of savages differ very much in character. An Hsqui-
maux     and a Feegeean, for instance, have little in common.
But after making every possible allowance for savages, it
must I think be admitted that they are inferior, morally as
well as in other respects, to the more civilized races. There
is indeed no atrocious crime, no vice recorded by any tra-
veller, which might not be paralleled in Europe. But that
which is with us the exception, is with them the rule; that
which with us is condemned by the general verdict of society,
and is confined to the uneducated and the vicious, is among
savages passed over almost without condemnation and treated
aS a mere matter         of course.       In Tahiti, for instance, the
Missionaries considered that “ not less than two-thirds of the
children were murdered by their parents.”
  If we now turn to the mental differences between civilized
and uncivilized       races,   we     shall find them        very    strongly

       * Byron’s Loss of the Wager.    Kerr’s Voyages, vol. xvii. p. 374,
                     INTELLECTUAL   INFERIORITY.                        573

marked.      Speaking of a Bushman tribe, Burchell observes
that “whether capable of reflection or not, these individuals
never exerted it*.” The Rey. T. Dove describes the Tas-
manians as distinguished “by the absence of all moral views
and impressions. Every idea bearing on our origin and
destination as rational beings seems to have been erased from
their breastst+.”” It would be easy to fill a volume with the
evidence of excessive stupidity recorded by different tra-
vellers. Jt may be perhaps thought that these were rather
instances of individual dulness, than any indication of a
national characteristic ;but in the nature and capacity of a
language we find atest and measure of the higher minds in a
nation.      Unfortunately,   however,    travellers    have found           it
difficult enough to obtain vocabularies of the words in use;
and it is far less easy to collect information as to those which
they do not possess. Yet there are not a few cases in which
this has been done. I have already mentioned the deficiency
of some North American languages in terms of endearment ;
this fact suggests a melancholy condition of the domestic
relations, but it may here be referred to again as an evidence
of a low mental, as well as moral, condition. What Spix
and Martius tell us about the Brazilian tribes{ appears also
to be true of many, if not of most, savage races. Their
vocabulary is rich, and they have separate names for the
different parts of the body, for all the different animals and
plants with which they are acquainted; for every thing, in
fact, which they can see and handle. Yet they are entirely
deficient in words for abstract ideas; they have no expres-
sions for colour, tone, sex, genus, spirit, etc.
  The Abipones have no such words as man, body, place,
time, never, ever, every where, etc.; nor such a verb as “to
be.”      They cannot say “I am an Abipon,” but only “I
  * |. c. vol. 1. p. 461.           Science, vol. i. p. 249.
  + Tasmanian Journal of Natural      { Reisein Brazilien, vol. i. p. 385.
574:                 POVERTY    OF SAVAGE     LANGUAGES.

Abipon*.”         The Malay language, also, according to Craw-
fard, is very deficient in abstract               terms.      It contains        a
word for each colour, but no term for colour itself.                        The
St. Petersburg Bible Society endeavoured some years ago
to translate the Lord’s Prayer and the Ten Command-
ments into the language of the T'schuktschi, but “ partly
from the language being entirely deficient in words to
express new and abstract ideas; and partly for want of
letters to convey the variety of strange and uncouth sounds
of which the language itself consists, the translation was
wholly unintelligible +.
   So, again, the Tasmanians had no word for a tree, though
they had a name for each species; nor could they express
“qualities, such as hard, soft, warm, cold, long, short, round,
etc.; for ‘hard’ they would say ‘like a stone;’ for ‘tall’
they would say ‘long legs, etc.; and for ‘round’ they said
‘like a ball,’ ‘like the moon,’ and so onf.”                   According to
 the missionaries $, Fuegians have “no abstract terms for ex-
 pressing the truths of our religion ;” and among the North
 American languages “a term sufficiently general to denote
an ‘oak tree’ is exceptional||.” Even the comparatively
civilized inhabitants of Tahiti had, according to Forster,
“no proper words for expressing abstract ideas J.”
   The names for numbers are, however, the best, or, at least,
the most easily applicable test of mental condition among
the lower races of man. We have seen that the Esquimaux
can only with difficulty count up to ten, and that some indi-
viduals cannot go beyond five. The Abipones** can only
express three numbers in proper words. The Dammaras
“in practice, whatever they may possess in their language,
   * Dobritzhoffer, vol. ii. p. 183.         § The Voice of Pity, vol. x. p. 152.
  t Wrangell’s Siberia and Polar             || Latham,    Varieties of Man,
Sea, p. 121.                              p. 375.
  t Miligan,    Proc.   Roy.   Society,     { 1. c. p. 408.
Tasmania, vol. iii. p. 281,                 ** Dobritzhoffer, vol, ii. p. 169,
                   DEFICIENCIES         IN NUMERATION.                        575

certainly use no numeral greater than three.                        When they
wish to express four, they take to their fingers, which are to
them as formidable instruments of calculation as a sliding
rule is to an English schoolboy. They puzzle very much
after five, because no spare hand remains to grasp and secure
the fingers that are required for units*.”’ Mr. Crawfurd,
to whom we are indebted for an interesting paper on this
subjectt, has examined no less than thirty Australian
languages,   and it appears that none of the tribes in that
vast continent can count beyond four. According to Mr.
Scott Nind, indeed, the numerals used by the natives of
King George’s Sound reach up to five; but the last is merely
the word “many.” The Brazilian Indians also count only up
to three; for any higher number they use the word “ many +.”
The Cape Yorkers          (Australia)           can hardly be said to go
beyond two; their numerals are as follows :—
     Grower       fie pees ifs   ace   Netot:
     ere         t ¥s8      > lies              Go         Ne!
     PVCOME      wan.       mie bes?       20   sors       WNaes=netat.
     icpre   se fo4 Aye    o h yakys     ve     SOs.       LN aesendes,
     ivewmksees       +    Wolo      See               0   Waesenaes-netat,
     Sree    were fouling, ti -al es     Naes-naes-naes.
  Again, in the state of their religious conceptions, still
more in the absence of religious conceptions, we get another
proof of extreme mental inferiority. The question has been
frequently discussed whether there is any race of men so
degraded as to be entirely without a religion—without some
idea of a deity. The conclusion to be arrived at depends, as
it seems to me, very much on the meaning which we ascribe
to the term “religion.”           Ifa mere fear of the unknown, if a
more or less vague belief in witchcraft is to be regarded as a
religion, it would, I think, be difficult to refute this assertion.

 % Galton’s Tropical Africa, p.183.         tions, New Series, vol. ii. p. 84.
 + Ethnological Society’s Transac-             t Spix and Martius, vol. i. p. 387.
576                        ABSENCE        OF RELIGION

But if a higher estimate of religion is adopted, then so far
from this being true, the very reverse is the case. Many,
we might almost say all, of the most savage races are,
according to the nearly universal testimony of travellers, in
this condition.
   According to Spix and Martius*, Bates, and Wallace, some
of the Brazilian Indians were entirely without religion.
Burmeister confirms this statement, and, in the list of the
principal tribes of the valley of the Amazons, published by
the Hakluyt Society, the Chunchos are stated “to have no
religion whatever,” and we are told that the Curetus “have
no idea of a Supreme Being.” The Toupinambas of Brazil
had no religion. The South American Indians of the Gran
 Chaco are said by the missionaries to have “no religious or
idolatrous belief or worship whatever; neither do they possess
 any idea of God, or of a Supreme Being. They make no
 distinction between right and wrong, and have, therefore,
 neither fear nor hope of any present or future punishment or
reward, nor any mysterious terror of some supernatural
power, whom they might seek to assuage by sacrifices cr
superstitious rites+.” Batest tells us “that none of the
tribes on the Upper Amazons have an idea of a Supreme
Being, and consequently have no word to express it in their
languages. 3) Azara also makes the same statement as regards
many of the South American tribes visited by him §.
   Father Baegert, who lived as a missionary among the
Indians of California for seventeen years, affirms that “idols,
temples, religious worship, or ceremonies, were                   unknown       to
them, and they neither believed in the true and only God,
nor adored false deities ||;” and M. de la Perouse also says
  * Reise in Brasilien, vol. i. p. 379.     vol. ii. pp. 8. 14, 33. 51. 60. 76. 80,
   + Voice of Pity, vol. ix. p. 220.        81. 84. 90. 138. 160. 164. 166.
   t Life in the Amazons, vol. ii.             ||See Mr. Rau’s translation. Smith-
p. 162,                                     sonian Contrib, 1863-64, p. 390,
   § Voyages dans lAmer. Mérid.
                    AMONG    VARIOUS    SAVAGE    RACES.                577

that they “had no knowledge of a God, or of a future state.”
Colden, who had ample means of judging, assures us that the
celebrated “five nations” of Canada “had no public worship
nor any word for God,” and Hearne, who lived amongst the
Northern American Indians for years, and was perfectly
acquainted with their habits and language, says the same of
some tribes on Hudson’s Bay.
   In the Voyage de l’Astrolabe, it is stated that the natives
of the Samoan and Solomon Islands, in the Pacific, had no
religion, and in the voyage of the Novara the same is said of
the Caroline Islanders.         The Samoans “have neither moraes,
nor temples, nor altars, nor offerings, and consequently none
of the sanguinary rites, observed at the other groups. In
consequence of this the Samoans were considered an impious
race; and their impiety became proverbial with the people of
Rarotonga, for, when upbraiding a person who neglected the
worship of the gods, they would call him “a godless Sa-
moan*.””      On Damood         Island, between     Australia and New
Guinea, Jukes could find no “ traces of any religious belief or
observance ¢.”” Duradawan, a sepoy who lived some time
with the Andaman Islanders, maintained that they had no
religion, and Dr. Mouatt believes his statements to be cor-
rect t. Some of the Australian tribes also are said to have
no religion §. In the Pellew Islands, Wilson found no reli-
gious buildings, nor any sign of religion.
   Mr. Wallace, who had excellent opportunities for judging,
and whose merits as an observer no one can question, tells
us that among the people of Wanumbai, in the Aru Islands,
he could find no trace of a religion ||; adding, however, that
he was but a short time among them,


   * Missionary Enterprises, p. 464.        § Collins’ English Colony in New
   + Jukes, Voyage of the “Fly,”        South Wales, p. 354.
vol. i. p. 164.                             || The Malayan Archipelago, vol.
   { Trans. Ethn. Soc. vol. i. p. 48.   ii. p. 280.
                                                            Pp
578                       ABSENCE        OF RELIGION

   The Yenadies and the Villees, according to Dr. Shortt, are
entirely without any belief in a future state *; and again,
Hooker tells us that the Lepchas of Northern India have no
religion. Captain Grant could find “no distinct form of
religion ” in some of the comparatively civilized tribes visited
by him+. According to Burchell, the Bachapins (Caffres)
had no form of worship or religiont. They thought “ that
every thing made itself, and that trees and herbage grew
by their own will.” They had no belief in a good deity, but
some vague idea of an evil being.                 Indeed the first idea of a
god is almost always as an evil spirit.
   Speaking of the Foulahs of Wassoulo, in Central Africa,
Caillié states, “I tried to discover whether they had any
religion of their own; whether they worshipped fetishes, or
the sun, moon,       or stars;      but        I could never       perceive any
religious ceremony amongst them §.” Again, he says of the
Bambaras that, “like the people of Wassoulo, they have no
religion ||,” adding, however, that they have great faith in
charms.
   Burton also states that some of the tribes in the Lake
districts of central Africa “admit neither God, nor angel,
nor devil§.”?       Speaking of Hottentots, Le Vaillant says **:
“Je n’y ai vu aucune trace de réligion, rien qui approche
méme de Vidée d’un étre vengeur et rémunérateur.      J’ai
vécu assez longtemps avec eux, chez eux aux sein de leurs
déserts   paisibles;     j’ai fait, avec          ces braves       humains,     des
voyages dans des régions fort eloignées; nulle part je n’ai
rencontré rien qui ressemble 4 la religion.” Livingstone
                                           x




  * Proceedings of Madras Govern-          pp. 303.
ment, Revenue Department.    May,              NIEcipts 70:
1864.                                           { Trans.   Ethn.   Soc.   New   Ser.
   + A Walk across Africa, p. 145.         vol. i. p. 323.
   t Travels in South Africa, vol. ii.        ** Voyages dans !’Afrique, vol, i-
p. 550.                                    Dadas
   § Travels to Timbuctoo, vol. i,
                  AMONG    VARIOUS    SAVAGE    RACES.               579

mentions that, on one occasion, after talking to a Bushman
for some time, as he supposed, about the Deity, he found that
the savage thought he was speaking about Sekomi, the
principal chief of the district.
   Speaking of the Esquimaux, Ross says: “ Ervick, being
the senior of the first party that came on board, was judged
to be the most proper person to question on the subject of
religion. I directed Sacheuse to ask him, if he had any
knowledge of a Supreme Being; bat after trying every word
used in his own language to express it, he could not make him
understand what he meant.       It was distinctly ascertained
that he did not worship the sun, moon, stars, or any image
or living creature. When asked what the sun or moon was
for, he said to give light.     He had no knowledge, or idea, how
he came into being, or of a future state; but said that when
he died he would be put into the ground. Having fully
ascertained that he had no idea of a beneficent Supreme Being,
I proceeded, through Sacheuse, to inquire if he believed in
an evil spirit; but he could not be made to understand what
it meant.             Eee FO re           Peay SA       alee,
He was positive that in this incantation he did not receive
assistance from any thing, nor could he be made to under-
stand what a good or an evil spirit meant *.”
   In some cases travellers have arrived at these views very
much to their own astonishment. Thus Father Dobritz-
hoffer says, “ Theologians agree in denying that any man in
possession of his reason can, without a crime, remain igno-
rant of God for any length of time. This opinion I warmly
defended in the University of Cordoba, where I finished the
four years’ course of theology begun at Gratz, in Styria. But
what was my astonishment, when, on removing from thence
toa colony of Abipones, I found that the whole language of
these savages does not contain a single word which expresses
        * Ross’ Voyage of Discovery to the Arctic Regions, p. 127.
                                 Pp 2
580                   RUDIMENTS       OF RELIGION.

God or a divinity. To instruct them in religion, it was
necessary to’ borrow the Spanish word for God, and insert
into the catechism ‘Dios ecnam caogerik,’ ‘God the creator
of things *,’ ”
   We have already observed a case of this kind in Kolben,
who, in spite of the assertions of the natives themselves, felt
quite sure that certain dances must be of a religious charac-
ter, “let the Hottentots         say what they will.”        Again, Mr.
Matthews, who went out to act as missionary among the
Fuegians, but was soon obliged to abandon the hopeless task,
observed only one act “which could be supposed devotional.”
He sometimes, we are told, “ heard a great howling or lamen-
tation, about sunrise in the morning; and upon asking
Jemmmy Button what occasioned the outcry, he could obtain
no satisfactory answer; the boy only saying, ‘ People very
sad, cry very much.’” This appears so natural and sufficient
an explanation, that why the outcry should be “supposed
devotional,” I must confess myself unable to sec. Once
more, Dr. Hooker states, that the Khasias, an Indian tribe,
had no religion. Col. Yule +, on the contrary, says that they
have, but he admits that breaking hen’s eggs is “ the prin-
cipal part of their religious practice.” But if most travellers
have expected to find a religion every where, and have been
convinced, almost against their will, that the reverse is the
case; itis quite possible that there may have been others
who have too hastily denied the existence of a religion among
the tribes they visited. However this may be, those who assert
that even the lowest savages believe in a Supreme Deity, affirm
that which is entirely contrary to the evidence. The direct
testimony of travellers on this point is indirectly corrobo-
rated by their other statements.               How,    for instance,   can
a people who are unable to count their own fingers, possibly
            * lic. vol. ii. p. 57.   See also p. G4.
            + Yule, On the Khasia Hills and People, p. 18.
                       LOW   IDEAS    OF THE DEITY.                      581

raise their mind so far as to admit even the rudiments of
a religion *? Fetich worship, which is so widely prevalent
in Africa, can hardly be called a religion; and even the
South      Sea Islanders, who were       in many respects         so highly
civilized, are said to have been seriously offended with their
deity if they thought that he treated them with undue
severity, or without proper consideration. According to
Kotzebue, the Kamtschatkans adored their deities “when
their wishes were fulfilled, and insulted them when their
affairs went amiss+.’?  When the missionaries introduced a
printing-press into Feegee “the heathen at once declared it
to be a god tf.”
    The natives of the Nicobar Islands put up scarecrows to
frighten away the deity §, and Burton once heard an old
Eesa woman, who was suffering from tooth-ache, offer up
the following prayer: “Oh Allah, may thy teeth ache like
mine; Oh Allah, may thy gums be as sore as mine are
now.”
    The savage is, however, almost universallya believer in
witchcraft.    Confusing together subjective and objective
relations, he is a prey to constant fears. Nor is the belief in
sorcery easily shaken off even by the most civilized nations.
James the First was under the impression that by melting
little images of wax “the persons that they bear the name
of may be continually melted or dried away by continual
sickness.”        As regards pictures, the most curious fancies
exist among savage races. They have a very general dishke
to be represented, thinking that the artist thereby acquires
some mysterious power over them. Kane on one occasion
freed himself from some importunate Indians, by threatening

  * See, for instance, Greg’s Creed       { Figi and the Figians, vol. ii.
of Christendom, p. 212.                 Pees.
  + New Voyage round the World,           § Voyage of the “ Novara,’’ vol. ii.
vol. ii. p. 18.                         p. 66.
582                       WITCHCRAFT.

to draw them if they did not go away. I have already men-
tioned (p. 529) the danger in which Catlin found himself
from sketching a chief in profile, and thereby, as it was sup-
posed, depriving him of half his face. So again a mysterious
connexion is supposed to exist between a cut lock of hair and
the person to whom it belonged. In various parts of the
world the-sorcerer gets clippings of the hair of his enemy,
parings of his nails, or leavings of his food, convinced that
whatever evil is done to these will react on their former
owner. Even a piece of clothing, or the ground on which a
person has trodden, will answer the purpose, and among
some tribes the mere knowledge of a person’s name is sup-
posed to give a mystcrious power. The Indians of British
Columbia have a great horror of telling theirnames. Among
the Aleonquins a person’s real name is communicated only
to his nearest relations and dearest friends: the outer world
address him by a kind of nickname.      Thus the true name of
La Beile Sauvage was not Pocahontas, but Matokes, which
they were afraid to communicate to the English. In some
tribes these name-fancies take a different form. According
to Ward, it is an unpardonable sin for a Hindoo woman to
mention the name of her husband.          The Kaffirs have a
similar custom, and so have some Hast African tribes. In
many parts of the world the names of the dead are avoided
with superstitious horror. ‘This is the case in great parts of
North and South America, in Siberia, among the Papuans
and Australians, and even _in Shetland, where it is said
that widows are very reluctant to mention their departed
husbands.
  Throughout Australia, among some of the Brazilian tribes,
in parts of Africa, and in various other countries, natural
death is regarded as an impossibility.   In the   New Hebrides
“ when a man fell ill, he knew that some sorcerer was burn-
ing his rubbish ; and shell-trumpets, which could be heard
               GENERAL WRETCHEDNESS        OF SAVAGES.                 583

for miles, were blown to signal to the sorcerers to stop, and
wait for the presents which would be sent next morning.
Night after night, Mr. Turner used to hear the melancholy
too-tooing of the shells, entreating the wizards to stop
plaguing their victims*.”  Savages never know but what
they may be placing themselves in the power of these terri-
ble enemies}, and it is not too much to say that the horrible
dread of unknown evil hangs like a thick cloud over savage
life, and embitters every pleasure.
    The mental sufferings which they thus undergo, the horri-
ble tortures which they sometimes inflict on themselves, and
the crimes which they are led to commit, are melancholy in
the extreme.      It must not be supposed that in the pre-
ceding chapter I have selected from various works all the
passages most unfavourable to savages, and that the picture
I have drawn of them is unfair. In reality the very reverse
is the case. Their real condition is even worse and more
abject than that which I have endeavoured to depict. I have
been careful to quote only from trustworthy authorities, but
there are many things stated by them which I have not
ventured to repeat; and there are other facts which the
travellers themselves were ashamed to publish.

  AID lor) loc. pa 1295. .urner’s      + See Brown, New      Zealand   and
Polynesia, pp. 18, 89. 424.         its Aborigines, p. 80.
                             084




                      CHAPTER XVI.

                  CONCLUDING       REMARKS.

    HAVE already expressed my belief that the simpler aris
     and implements have been independently invented by
various tribes, at different times, and in different parts of
the world. Even at the present day we may, I think,
obtain glimpses of the manner in which they were, or may
have been, invented. Elephants break off boughs and use
them   as fans.   Monkeys   use    clubs, and throw sticks   and
stones at those who intrude upon them. They also use
round stones for cracking nuts, and surely a very small step
would lead from that to the application of a sharp stone for
cutting. When the edge became blunt, it would be thrown
uway, and another chosen; but after a while, accident, if not
reflection, would show, that a round stone would crack other
stones, as well as nuts, and thus the savage would learn to
make sharp-edged stones for himself. At first, as we see in
the drift specimens, these would be coarse and rough, but
gradually the pieces chipped off would become smaller, the
blows would be more cautiously and thoughtfully given, and
at length it would be found that better work might be done
by pressure than by blows. From pressure to polishing
would again be but a small step. In making flint imple-
ments sparks would be produced; in polishing them it would
not fail ta be observed that they became hot, and in this
                          THE   HIGHER   ANIMALS.                        585

way it is easy to see how the two methods of obtaining fire
may have originated *.
  The chimpanzee builds himself a house or resting-place,
quite equal to that of some savages. Our earliest ancestors
therefore may have had this art; but even if not, when they
became hunters, and, as we find to be the case with all
hunting tribes, supplemented the inefficiency of their wea-
pons by an intimate acquaintance with the manners and
customs of the animals on which they preyed, they could not
fail to observe, and perhaps to copy, the houses which various
species of animals construct for themselves.
    The Esquimaux have no pottery; they use hollow stones
as a substitute, but we have seen how they sometimes im-
prove upon these bya rim of clay. To extend this rim,
diminish, and at last replace the stone, is an obvious process.
In hotter countries, vessels of wood, or the shells of fruit,
such as cocoa-nuts and gourds, are used for holding liquids.
These will not stand fire, but in some cases, by plastering
them on the outside with clay, they are enabled to do so.
There is some evidence that this obvious improvement has
been made by several separate tribes even in modern times.
Other similar cases might be mentioned, in which by a very
simple and apparently obvious process, an important im-
provement is secured. It seems very improbable that any
such advantage should ever be lost again. There is no
evidence, says Mr. Tylort, “of any tribe giving up the use
of the spindle to twist their thread by hand, or having been
in the habit of working the fire-drill with a thong, and going
back to the clumsier practice of working it without, and it is
even hard to fancy such a thing happening.” What follows
from this argument? Evidently that the lowest races of

   * The idea of using fire would        ning, and by the natural fires which
also have been suggested by vol-         occur in hot summers.
canoes, by trees set on fire by light-     t l.c. p. 364.
586            THE    PRIMITIVE   CONDITION   OF MAN.

existing savages must, always assuming the common origin
of the human race, be at least as far advanced as were our
ancestors when they spread over the earth’s surface.
   What, then, must have been their condition?    They were
ignorant of pottery, for the Esquimaux, the Polynesians, the
Australians, some North and South American tribes, and
many other savage races, have none even now, or at least
had none until quite lately. They had no bows and arrows,
for these weapons      were unknown       to the Australians        and
New Zealanders; their boats for the same         reason must have
been of the rudest possible character; they were naked, and
ignorant of the art of spinning; they had no knowledge of
agriculture, and probably no domestic animal but the dog,
though here the argument is weaker, inasmuch as experience
is more portable than property. It is, however, in my
opinion, most probable that the dog was long the only
domesticated animal. Of the more unusual weapons, such
as the boomerang, blowpipe, bolas, etc., they were certainly
ignorant. The sling and the throwing-stick were doubtless
unknown, and even the shield, as it is only used in war, had
probably not been invented. The spear, which is but a
development of the knife-point, and the club, which is but a
long hammer, are the only things left by this line of argu-
ment.   They   seem     to be the only natural          and   universal
weapons of man.
   We might be disposed to wonder how man was at first
able to kill game; but we must remember that if man was
unskilful, animals were unsuspicious. The tameness of the
birds on uninhabited islands is well known;         the wariness of
animals and the skill of man must have increased almost
Parr PUSS.
   The same argument may be applied to the mental con-
dition of savages.      That our earliest ancestors could have
counted to ten is very improbable, considering that so many
                      DIFFUSION   OF MAN.                  507

races now in existence    cannot get beyond four.       On the
other hand, it is very improbable that man can have existed
in a lower condition than that thus indicated.      So long,
indeed, as he was confined to the tropics, he may have found.
a succession of fruits, and have lived as the monkeys do now.
Indeed, according to Bates, this is still the case with some
of the Brazilian Indians,  ‘‘The monkeys,” he says, “lead
in fact a life similar to that of the Pardrauate Indians.”
Directly, however, our ancestors spread into temperate cli-
mates, this mode   of life would become impossible, and they
would be compelled to seek their nourishment, in part at
least, from the animal   kingdom.     Then, if not before, the
knife and the hammer would develope into the spear and
the club.
   It is too often supposed that the world was peopled by a
series of “migrations.” But migrations, properly so called,
are compatible only with a comparatively high state of
organization. Morcover, it has been observed that the geo-
graphical distribution of the various races of Man curiously
coincides with that of other races of animals: and there can
be no doubt that he originally crept over the earth’s sur-
face, little by little, year by year, just for instance as the
weeds of Europe are now gradually but surely creeping over
the surface of Australia.
   The preceding argument assumes, of course, the unity of
the human race. It would, however, be impossible for me
to end this volume without saying a few words on this great
question. It must be admitted that the principal varieties
of mankind are of great antiquity. We find on the earliest
Egyptian monuments, some of which are certainly as ancient
as 2400 B.c., “two   great distinct types, the Arab    on the
east and west of Egypt, the Negro on the south; and the
Egyptian type occupying a middle place between the two.
The representations of the monuments,       although   conven-
588                             EARLY   RACES    OF MAN,

tional, are so extremely characteristic that it is quite impos-
sible to mistake them.” These distinct types still predominate
in Egypt and the neighbouring countries. Thus, then, says
Mr. Poole, in this immense                 interval we do not find “the
least change in the Negro or the Arab; and even the type
which seems to be intermediate between them is virtually as
unaltered.  Those who consider that length of time can
change a type of man, will do well to consider the fact that
three thousand years give no ratio on which a calculation
could be founded *.” I am, however, not aware that it is
supposed by any school of Ethnologists that “time” alone,
without a change of external conditions, will produce an
alteration of type. Let us turn now to the instances relied
on by Mr. Orawfurd+.                    The millions, he says, “of African
Negroes that have during three centuries been transported
to the New World and its islands, are the same in colour as
the present inhabitants of the parent country of their fore-
fathers. The Creole Spaniards, who have for at least as loug
a time been settled in tropical America, are as fair as the
people of Arragon and Andalusia, with the same varicty of
colour in the hair and eye as their progenitors.   The pure
Dutch Creole colonists of the Cape of Good Hope, after
dwelling two centuries among black Caffres, and yellow Hot-
tentots, do not differ in colour from the people of Holland.”
Here, on the contrary, we have great change of circum-
stances, but a very insufficient lapse of time, and in fact
there is no well-authenticated case im which these two
requisites are united.              But Mr. Crawfurd went, I think, too
far when he denied altogether any change of type. In spite
of the comparatively short time which has clapsed, and of
the immense immigration which has been kept up, there is
already a marked difference between the English of Europe
  * Poole, Trans.       Ethn.   Soc. New        + Crawfurd, Trans. Ethn. Soc. New
Ser, vol. ii. p. 261.                       Ser. vol. ui. p. 262.
                TIE    PRIMITIVE     CONDITION     OF MAN.            589

and those of America, and it would be desirable to inquire
whether, in their own eyes, the Negroes of the New World
exactly resemble those of Africa.
  But there are some reasons which make it probable that
changes of external condition, or rather of country, produce
less effect   now     than   was    formerly the case.       At present,
when men migrate they carry with them the manners and
appliances of civilized life. They build houses more or less
like those to which they have been accustomed, carry with
them   flocks and herds, and introduce into their new country
the principal plants which served them for food in the old.
If their new abode is cold they increase their clothing, if
warm, they diminish it. In these and a hundred other ways
the effect which would otherwise be produced is greatly
diminished.
   But, as we have seen, this has not always been the case.
When man first spread over the earth, he had no domestic
animals, perhaps not even the dog; no knowledge of agricul-
ture: his weapons        were      of the rudest     character,   and his
houses scarccly worthy of the name. His food, habits, and
whole manner of life must then have varied as he passed
from one country to another; he must have been far more
subject to the influence of external circumstances, and in all
probability more susceptible of change. Moreover, his form,
which is now stereotyped by long ages of repetition, may
reasonably be supposed to have been itself more plastic than
is now the case.
  If there is any truth in this view of the subject, it will
necessarily follow that the principal varieties of man are of
great antiquity, and in fact go back almost to the very origin
of the human race. We may then cease to wonder that the
carliest paintings on Hgyptian tombs represent so accurately
several varictics     still existing in those regions, and that the
Engis skull, probably the most ancient yet found in Europe,
590                    NATURAL    SELECTION

so closely resembles many that may be seen even at the
present day.
   This argument has been carried still farther by Mr. Wal-
lace in an admirable memoir on “The Origin of Human
Races and the Antiquity of Man deduced from the Theory
of Natural Selection*.” He has attempted to reconcile the
two great schools of ethnologists who hold opinions “so
diametrically opposed to each other; the one party positively
maintaining that man is a species, and is essentially one—
that all differences are but local and temporary variations,
produced by the different physical and moral conditions by
which he is surrounded; the other party maintaining with
equal confidence that man is a genus of many species, each of
which is practically unchangeable, and has ever been as
distinct, or even more distinct, than we now behold them.”
Mr. Wallace    himself holds     the former     of these   theories,
although admitting that at present apparently “the best of
the argument is on the side of those who maintain the
primitive diversity of man,” and he shows that the true
solution of this difficulty lies in the theory of Natural Selec-
tion, which, with characteristic unselfishness, he ascribes un-
reservedly to Mr. Darwin, although, as is well known, he
struck   out the idea independently and published it, not
indeed with the same elaboration, at the same time.
  After explaining the true nature of the theory, which it
must be confessed, is even yet very much misunderstood,
he points out that as long as man led what may be called a
mere animal existence, he would be subject to the same laws,
and would vary in the same manner as the rest of his fellow-
creatures, but that at length “by the capacity of clothing
himself, and making weapons and tools (he) has taken away
from nature that power of changing the external form and
structure which she exercises over all other animals.
               * Anthropological Review, May, 1864.
                           APPLIED    TO MAN.                          591

From the time, then, when the social and sympathetic feel-
ings came into active operation, and the intellectual and
moral faculties became fairly developed, man would cease to
be influenced by natural selection in his physical form and
structure; as an animal he would remain almost stationary:
the changes of the surrounding universe would cease to have
upon him that powerful. modifying effect which it exercises
over other parts of the organic world. Butfrom the moment
that his body became stationary, his mind would become
subject to those very influences from which his body had
escaped; every slight variation in his mental and moral nature
which should enable him better to guard against adverse
circumstances, and combine for mutual comfort and protec-
tion, would be preserved and accumulated; the better and
higher specimens of our race would therefore increase and
spread, the lower and more brutal would give way and
successively die out, and that rapid advancement of mental
organization would occur, which has raised the very lowest
races of men so far above the brutes (although differing so
little from some of them in physical structure), and, in
conjunction with scarcely perceptible modifications of form,
has developed        the wonderful      intellect of the Germanic
races*.””
   Mr. Wallace appears to me, however, to press his argu-
ment a little too fur when he says that man is no longer
“influenced by natural selection,” and that his body has
“become stationary.”   Slow and gradual changes still take
place, although his “mere bodily structure” long ago be-
came of less importance to man than “that subtle force we
term mind.” ‘This, as Mr. Wallace eloquently says, “with
a naked and unprotected body, this gave him clothing against

  * M. Lartet hasattempted to show    compared with the rest of the body.
that even among animals there is a    Comptes Rendus, 1868, p. 1119.
gradual enlargement of the brain as
592                 THE   INFLUENCE   OF MIND.

the varying inclemencies of the seasons.         Though unable to
compete with the deer in swiftness, or with the wild bull
in strength, this gave him weapons wherewith to capture
or overcome both. Though less capable than most other
animals of living on the herbs and the fruits that unaided
nature supphes, this wonderful faculty taught him to govern
and direct nature to his own benefit, and make her produce
food for him when and where he pleased. From the mo-
ment when the first skin was used as a covering, when the
first rade spear was formed to assist in the chase, the first
seed sown or shoot planted, a grand revolution was effected
in nature, a revolution which in all the previous ages of the
 world’s history had had no parallel, for a being had arisen
 who was no longer necessarily subject to change with the
 changing universe,—a being who was in some degree
 superior to nature, inasmuch as he knew how to con-
 trol and regulate her action, and could keep himself in
 harmony with her, not by a change in body, but by an
 advance in nind.
    “Here, then, we see the true grandeur and dignity of
 man.    On this view of his special attributes, we may admit
 that even those who claim for him a position and an order, a
class, or a sub-kingdom by himself, have some reason on
their side. He is, indeed, a being apart, since he is not
influenced by the great laws which irresistibly modify all
other organic beings. Nay, more: this victory which he
has gained for himself gives him a directing influence over
other existences. Man has not only escaped ‘natural sclec-
tion’ himself, but he is actually able to take away some of
that power from nature which, before his appearance, she
universally exercised.    We can anticipate the time when the
earth will produce only cultivated plants and domestic ani-
mals; when man’s selection shall have        supplanted ‘ natural
selection ;? and when the ocean will be the only domain in
                          INCREASE    OF HAPPINESS.                           593

which that power can be exerted, which for countless cycles
of ages ruled supreme over the earth.”
   Thus, then, the great principle of Natural Selection, which
is to biology what the law of gravitation is for astronomy,
not only throws an unexpected light on the past, but
illuminates the future with hope; nor can I but feel sur-
prised that a theory which thus teaches us humility for the
past, faith im the present, and hope for the future, should
have been regarded as opposed to the principles of Chris-
tianity or the interests of true religion.
  But even if the theory of “natural selection” should
eventually prove to be untenable, and if those are right who
believe that neither our minds nor our bodies are susceptible
of any important change, any great improvement, still I
think we are justified in believing that the happiness of man
is greatly on the increase. It is generally admitted that if
any animal increases in numbers it must be because the con-
ditions are becoming more             favourable to it, in other words,
because it is happier and more comfortable. Now, how will
this test apply to man?    Schoolcraft estimates* that in a
population which lives on the produce of the chase, each
hunter requires on an average 50,000 acres, or 78 square
miles for his support.            Again, he tells us} that, excluding
Michigan      territory, west of Lake Michigan, and north of
Illinois, there were in the United States, in 1825, about
97,000 Indians, occupying 77,000,000 of acres, or 120,312
square miles.     This gives one inhabitant to every 1} square
miles.    In this case, however, the Indians lived partly on the
subsidies granted them by Government in exchange for
land, and the population was therefore greater than would
have been the case if they had lived entirely on the produce
of the chase. The same reason affects, though to a smaller
extent, the Indians in the Hudson’s Bay territory. These
  *: Indian Tribes, vol. i. p. 433.               t 1. ¢. vol. ili. p. 575.
                                                             Qq
594,                        SUFFERINGS    OF SAVAGES

tribes were estimated by Sir George Simpson, late Governor
of the territories belonging to the Hudson’s Bay Company,
in his evidence given before the Committee of the House
of Commons, in 1857, at 139,000, and the extent is supposed
to be more than 1,400,000 square miles, to which we must
add 18,000 more for Vancouver’s Island, making a total of
more than 900,000,000 of acres; about 6500 acres, or 10
square miles, to each individual. Again, the inhabitants of
Patagonia, south of 40°, and exclusive of Chiloe and Tierra
del Fuego, are estimated by Admiral Fitzroy at less than
4000, and the number of acres is 176,640,000, giving more
than 44,000 acres, or 68 square miles for each person.   A
writer in the “ Voice of Pity,’ however, thinks that their
numbers may, perhaps, amount to 14,000 or 15,000*. It
 would be difficult to form any census of the aborigines in
 Australia; Mr. Oldfield estimates that there is one native to
 every fifty square milest; and it is at least evident that,
since the introduction of civilization, the total population of
that continent has greatly increased.
   Indeed, population as a general rule increases with
civilization. Paraguay, with 100,000 square miles, has from
300,000 to 500,000 inhabitants, or about four to a square
mile. The uncivilized parts of Mexico contained 374,000
inhabitants Im 675,000 square miles; while Mexico proper,
with 833,600 square miles, had 6,691,000 inhabitants. Naples
had more than 183 inhabitants to each square mile; Venetia
more    than 200, Lombardy               280, England      280, Belgium          as
many as 3820.
   Finally, we cannot but observe that, under civilization,
the means of subsistence have increased, even more rapidly
than the population. Far from suffering for want of food,
the more densely peopled countries are exactly those in
which it is, not only absolutely, but even relatively most
  * 1, c. vol, ii. p. 93.       t Trans. Ethn. Soc. New Ser. vou. iii. p. 220.
               SHOWN     BY INCREASE      OF NUMBERS.                595

abundant.  It is said that any one who makes two blades of
grass grow where one grew before, is a benefactor to the
human race ; what, then, shall we say of that which enables
a thousand men to live in plenty, where one savage could
scarcely find a scanty and precarious subsistence?
  There are, indeed, many who doubt whether                    happiness
is increased by civilization, and who talk of the free and
noble savage.     But the true savage is neither free nor
noble; he is a slave to his own wants, his own passions;
imperfectly protected from the weather, he suffers from the
cold by night and the heat of the sun by day; ignorant of
agriculture, living by the chase, and improvident in success,
hunger always stares him in the face, and often drives him to
the dreadful alternative of cannibalism or death.
   Wild animals are always in danger. Mr. Galton, who is
so well qualified to form an opinion, believes that the life of
all beasts in their wild state is an exceedingly anxious one;
that “every antelope in South Africa has literally to run
for its life once in every one or two days upon an average,
and that he starts or gallops under the influence of a false
alarm many times in a day*.”       So it is with the savage ; he
is always suspicious, always in danger, always on the watch.
He can depend on no one, and no one can depend upon him.
He expects nothing from his neighbour, and does unto others
as ho believes that they would do unto him. Thus his life
is one prolonged scene of selfishness and fear. ven in his
religion, if he has any, he creates for himself a new source of
terror, and peoples the world with invisible enemies.       The
position of the female savage is even more wretched than
that of her master. She not only shares his sufferings, but
has to bear his ill-humour and ill-usage. She may truly be
said to be little better than his dog, little dearer than his
horse.   In Australia,    Mr.    Oldfield never       saw     a woman’s
             * Trans. Ethn. Soc. New Ser. vol. iii. p. 133.
                                Qq2
596            SUPERSTITIOUS     TERRORS   OF SAVAGES.

grave, and does not think that the natives took the trouble
to bury them. But, indeed, he believes that few of them
are so fortunate as to die a natural death, “they being
generally despatched ere they become old and emaciated,
that so much good food may not be lost. . . . . In fine, so
little importance is attached to them, either before or after
death, that it may be doubted whether the man does not
value his dog, when alive, quite as much as he does his
woman, and think of both quite as often and lovingly after
he has eaten them*.”
   Not content, moreover, with those incident to their mode
of life, savages appear to take a melancholy pleasure in self-
inflicted sufferings. Besides the very general practice of
tattooing, the most extraordinary methods of disfigurement
and self-torture are adopted; some cut off the little finger,
some make an immense hole in the under-lip, or pierce the
cartilage of the nose. The Haster Islanders enlarge their ears
till they come     down   to their shoulders ; the Chinooks, and
many other American tribes, alter the shape of their heads.
Some of the African tribes chip their teeth in various manners,
each community having a fashion of its own. The Nyambanas,
a division of the Caffres, are characterized by a row of artifi-
cial pimples or warts, about the size of a pea, and extending
from the upper part of the forehead to the tip of the nose.             Of
these they are very proud+.   Among the Bachapins, those
who have distinguished themselves in battle, are allowed the
privilege of marking “ their thigh with a long scar, which is
rendered indelible and of a bluish colour by means of wood
ashes rubbed into the fresh wound.’ In Australia Captain
King saw a native ornamented with horizontal scars which ex-
tended across the upper part of the chest. They were at least

   * Trans. Hthn. Soc. New Ser.      pedition, vol. i. p. 63.
vol. iii. p. 248.                       { Burchell, 1. o. vol. ii. pp. 478.
   y+ United States’ Exploring Hx-   £&85.
                       SELF-INFLICTED       SUFFERINGS.                      597

an inch in diameter, and protruded half an inch from the
body*. In some parts of Australia, and in Tasmania, all the
men have a tooth knocked out in a very clumsy and painful
mannert.       ‘‘The inhabitants           of Tanna have on their arms
and bellies elevated scars, representing plants, flowers, stars
and various other figures. They are made by first cutting the
skin with a sharp bamboo reed, and then applying a certain’
plant to the wound which raises the scar above the rest of
the skin. The inhabitants of Tazavan, or Formosa, by a very
painful operation, impress on their naked skins various figures
of trees, flowers, and animals. The great men in Guinea have
their skin flowered like damask; and in the Deccan the women
likewise have flowers cut into their flesh on the forehead, the
arms and the breast, and the elevated scars are painted in
colours, and exhibit the appearance of flowered damask t.”
The native women in New South Wales used to tie a string
tightly round the little finger and wear it until the finger
rotted off. Tew of them escaped the painful experience§.
The American Indians also inflicted the most horrible tor-
tures upon themselves||. These and many other curious prac-
tices are none the less painful because they are voluntary.
   If we turn to the bright side of the question, the whole
analogy of nature justifies us in concluding that the pleasures
of civilized man are greater than those of the savage. As
we descend in the scale of organization, we find that animals
become more and more vegetative in their characteristics;
with less susceptibility to pain, and consequently less eapa-
city for happiness. It may, indeed, be doubted whether
some of those beings, which from their anatomy we are com-
pelled to class.as animals, have much more consciousness of
   * Narrative of a Survey of the            { Forster, 1. ¢. p. 588.
Intertropical and Western Coasts of          § D’Urville, vol. i. p. 406.
Australia, p. 42.   Seo also      Hyre’s     || See, for instance, Catlin’s North
account, quoted in p. 435.                 American Indians, vol. i. p. 170,
  + Freycinet, vol. ii. p. 705.            Azara, vol. ii. p. 136.
598            THE BLESSINGS    OF CIVILIZATION.

enjoyment, or even of existence, than a tree or a seaweed.
But even to animals which possess a clearly defined nervous
system, we must ascribe very different degrees of sensibility.
The study of the sensory organs in the lower animals offers
great difficulties; but at least we know that they are, in
many cases, few in number, and capable of conveying only
general impressions. Every one will admit that the posses-
sion of a new sense, or the improvement of an old one, is a
fresh source of possible happiness ; but how, it may be asked,
does this affect the present question? There are no just
grounds for expecting man to be ever endued with a sixth
sense ; so far from being able to improve the organization of
the eye or the ear, we cannot make one hair black or white,
nor add one cubit to our stature. But on the other hand,
the invention of the telescope and microscope is equivalent
in its results to an immense improvement of the eye, and
opens up to us new worlds, fresh sources of interest and
happiness. Again we cannot alter the physical structure of
the ear, but we can train it, we can invent new musical instru-
ments, compose new melodies. The music of savages is rude
and melancholy in comparison with ours; and thus, though
the ear of man may not have appreciably altered, the pleasure
which we may derive from it has been immensely increased.
Moreover, the savage is like a child who sees and hears only
that which is brought directly before him, but the civilized
man questions nature, and by the various processes of chem-
istry, by electricity, and magnetism, by a thousand ingenious
contrivances, he forces nature to throw light upon herself,
discovers hidden uses and unsuspected beauties, almost as if
he were endowed with some entirely new organ of sense,
   The love of travel is deeply implanted in the human
breast ; it is an immense   pleasure to visit other countries,
and see new races of men.      Again, the discovery of printing
brings all who choose into communion         with the greatest
                   THE   DIMINUTION   OF    SUFFERING.            599

minds.    The thoughts of a Shakespeare or a Tennyson, the
discoveries     of a Newton     or    a Darwin,     become   thus the
common    property of mankind.             Already the results of this
all-important,    though simple, process have been equivalent
to an immense improvement of our mental faculties; and day
by day, as books become cheaper, schools are established, and
education is improved, a greater and greater effect will be
produced.
   The well-known proverb against looking a gift horse in
the mouth does not apply to the gifts of nature; they will
bear the closest inspection, and the more we examine, the
more we shall find to admire. Nor are these new sources of
happiness accompanied by any new lability to suffering; on
the contrary, while our pleasures are increased, our pains are
lessened ; in a thousand ways we can avoid or diminish evils
which to our ancestors were great and inevitable. How
much misery, for instance, has been spared to the human
race by the single discovery of chloroform? The capacity
for pain, so far as it can serve as a warning, remains in full
force, but the necessity for endurance has been greatly
diminished.   With increased knowledge of, and attention
to, the laws of health, disease will become less and less fre-
quent. Those tendencies thereto which we have derived
from our ancestors, will gradually die out; and if fresh seeds
are not sown,      our race may one day enjoy the inestimable
advantages of health.
  Thus, then, with the increasing influence of science, we
may confidently look to a great improvement in the condition
of man.       But it may be said that our present sufferings and
sorrows arise principally from sin, and that any moral im-
provement must be due to religion, not to science.    This
separation of the two mighty agents of improvement is the
great misfortune of humanity, and has done more than any
thing else to retard the progress of civilization.        But even if
600                THE   DIMINUTION   OF SIN.

for the moment we admit that science will not render us
more virtuous, it must certainly make us more innocent.
Out of 130,000 persons committed to prison in England and
Wales during the year 1867, only 4137 could read and write
well. In fact, our criminal population are mere savages, and
most of their crimes are but injudicious and desperate
attempts to live as a savage in the midst, and at the expense,
of a civilized community.
   Men do not sin for the sake of sinning; they yield to
temptation. Most of our sufferings arise from a mistaken
pursuit of pleasure; from a misapprehension of that which
 constitutes true happiness. Men do wrong either from igno-
 rance or in the hope, unexpressed perhaps even to themselves,
 that they may enjoy the pleasure, and yet avoid the penalty
 of sin. In this respect there can be no doubt that religious
 teaching 1s much misapprehended.      Repentance is too often
 regarded as a substitute for punishment.     Sin it is thought
 is followed ecther by the one or the other.  So far, however,
as our world is concerned,    this is not the case; repentance
may enable a man to avoid sim in future, but has no effect on
the consequences of the past.      The laws of nature are
just, and salutary, but they are also mexorable. All men
admit that “the wages of sin is death,’ but they seem to
think that this is a general rule to which there may be many
exceptions,—that some sins may possibly tend to happiness,
that some thorns may grow grapes, some thistles produce
figs. That suffering is the inevitable consequence of sin, as
surely as night follows day, is, however, the stern yet
salutary teaching of Science. And surely if this lesson were
thoroughly impressed upon our minds, if we really believed in
the certainty of punishment, and that sin could not conduce
to happiness; temptation, which is at the very root of crime,
would be cut away, and mankind must necessarily become
more innocent.
                   THE   ADVANTAGES      OF SCIENCE.               601

  May we not, however,           go cven farther than this, and say
that science will also render man more virtuous. “To pass
our time,” says Lord Brougham*, “in the study of the
sciences, in learning what others have discovered, and in
extending   the bounds       of human knowledge has, in all ages,
been reckoned the most dignified and happy of human oceu-
pations.   ..... No man until he has studied philosophy,
can have a just idea of the great things for which Providence
has fitted his understanding; the extraordinary dispropor-
tion which there is between his natural strength and the
powers   of lis mind, and the force he derives from them.”
Finally, he concludes that science would not only “make our
lives more agrecable, but better ; and that a rational being is
bound by every motive of interest and duty, to direct his
mind towards pursuits which are found to be the sure path
of virtue as well as of happiness.”
   We are in reality but on the threshold of civilization. Far
from showing any indication of having come to an end, the
tendency to improvement scems latterly to have proceeded
with auginented impetus and accelerated rapidity. Why,
then, should we suppose that it must now cease? Man has
surely not reached the limits of his intellectual development,
and it is certain that he has not exhausted the infinite capa-
bilities of nature. There are many things which are not as
yet dreamt of in our philosophy; many discoveries which
will immortalize those who make them, and confer upon the
human race advantages which as yet, perhaps, we are not
in a condition to appreciate.      We may still say with our
grcat countryman, Sir Isaac Newton, that we have beon
but liko children, playing on the sea-shore, and pickmg up
here and there a smoother pebble or aprettier shell than
ordinary, while the great ocean of truth lies all undiscovered
before us.
         * Objects, Advantages, and Pleasures of Science, p. 39.
602                               THE   FUTURE.

   Thus, then, the most sanguine hopes for the future are
justified by the whole experience of the past. It is surely
unreasonable to suppose that a process which has been going
on for so many thousand years, should have now suddenly
ceased; and he must be blind indeed who imagines that our
civilization is unsusceptible of improvement, or that we our-
selves are in the highest state attainable by man.
   If we turn from experience to theory, the same conclusion
forces itself upon us. The great principle of natural selection,
which in animals affects the body and seems to have little
influence on the mind, in man                affects the mind    and has
little influence on the body. In the first it tends mainly to
the preservation of life; in the second to the improvement of
the mind, and consequently to the increase of happiness. It
ensures, in the words of Mr. Herbert Spencer, “a constant
progress towards a higher degree of skill, intelligence, and
self-regulation—a better co-ordination of actions—a more
complete life*.’? Even            those,   however, who are dissatisfied
‘with the reasoning of Mr. Darwin, and believe that neither
our mental nor our material organization is susceptible of any
considerable change, may still look forward to the future with
hope. The tendency of recent improvements and discoveries
is less to effect any rapid change in man himself, than to
bring him into harmony with nature; less to confer upon
him new powers, than to teach him how to apply the old.
   It will, I think, be admitted that of the evils under which
we suffer, nearly all may be attributed either to ignorance or
sin. That ignorance will be diminished by the progress of
science is of course self-evident,—that the same will be the
case with sin, seems little less so.              Thus, then, both theory
and experience point to the same conclusion.    The future
happiness of our race, which poets hardly ventured to hope

  * Herbert Spencer, A Theory of Population deduced fiom the General
Law of Animal Fertility, p. 34.
                        THE   FUTURE.                      6038

for, science boldly predicts. Utopia, which we have long
looked upon as synonymous with an evident impossibility,
which we have ungratefully regarded as “ too good to be
true,” turns out on the contrary to be the necessary con-
sequence of natural laws, and once more      we find that the
simple truth excecds the most brilliant flights of the imagi-
nation.
   Even in our own time we may hope to see some improve-
ment; but the unselfish mind will find its highest gratifica-
tion in the bclicf that, whatever may be the case with
ourselves, our descendants will understand many things
which are hidden from us now, will better appreciate the
beautiful world in which we   live, avoid much of that suffer-
ing to which we are subject, enjoy many blessings of which
we are not yet worthy, and escape many of those temptations
which we deplore, but cannot wholly resist.
                                 604




                      AUP PEN           DDX:

                               Page \1.

We do not yet know at what time the use of Runes commenced.
The examples found at Thorsbjerg and Nydam carry them back
to the second or third century, but they may have begun much
earlier. They remained partially in use in out-of-the-way dis-
tricts of Scandinavia down to the close of the last century.
Runic monuments occur in Norway, Sweden, Denmark, England,
and, though rarely, in Ireland; but are more abundant in Sweden
than any where else. Prof. Stephens * states that there are
three times as many in Sweden as in all other northern countries
together, and he estimates the total number in Sweden at not less
than two thousand.
   The Runic Alphabet, or Futhore, is as follows :—
     PO N2p. ae Re Ve ee                  ler        Bake Vas
     EUS th-O RK          HN         AS      hee oe va
  There are, however, several varieties, thus #, sometimes stands
for 0, 4, for n, h, for s, #, for t, 4. for d, and }. for e.   There is
also a class of letters known as tree-runes, which are entirely un-
like the rest. The letters given above are those gencrally used
in the engravings on stones in the great tumulus known 4s
Maeshowe, near the Stones of Stennis, in the Orkneys f, and are
supposed to have been the work of a party of Northmen who
broke into the Howe in the ninth century.           The numerous
variations in the forms of the letters, and the fact that they are
sometimes read from left to right, sometimes from right to left,
make them at times somewhat difficult to decipher, but it fortu-
nately happens that we possess no less than 61 Runice Futhores,
so that any inscription which is at all perfect, and not too much
abbreviated, can be read with tolerable certainty.

      * The Old-Northern Runic Monuments of Scandinavia, p. 134.
                + Maeshowe.    By. J. Farrar, Esq., M.P.
                                    APPENDIX.                                                            605

                                     OGHANS.

   The origin of the Ogham alphabet is as uncertain as that of the
Runic. While, however, the Runes occur principally in Scandi-
navia, and but rarcly in Groat Britain, Oghams on the other hand,
have their head-quarters in Ireland, though some few have been
discovered in Scotland and even in Shetland.                           They are generally
                Fie. 227.                                        Fre, 228,




                                                                                     enna
                                                                                      PR
                                                                                      canmeneiennen
                                                                                      SSOtReAtonnnnnnnntfor

                                                                                     neRia




                                                                                     NARS
                                                                                     NAAN
                                                                                      NEARER
                                                                                      IES SNK

                                                                                        oeageasiis




                                                     rn
                                                     Cum
                                                     on
                                                     OOD
                                                     y
                                                     ;
                                                     BA
                                                      a
                                                      5
                                                      SEM
                                                       oye
                                                        es
                                                         %
                                                             e




                                                    RE
                                                    Ar
                                                     ceraanectenrnnanayiagrepeenpe
                                                    wg


                            ' Ogham Stones found in Kerry,



intended to be read from below upwards, and the letters consist
of mere   straight strokes, arranged in groups along a line.                                            This
line is very often the edge of the stone, but sometimes a line is
606                            APPENDIX.

cut.     In other cases an imaginary line is supposed to run through
the inscription.   Short lines, or notches, stand for the vowels,
a, 0, U, e, i; one notch denoting a, two o, three u, and so on.
Lines on the left of the base line stand for b, 1, f, s, and n, accord-
ing as they are 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 in number; lines on the right of
the base line stand in the same manner for h, d, t, c, and q; while
those crossing the line denote m, g, ng, st, or z,andr.   There are
some few other characters, which, however, seldom occur.
   Almost all the Ogham inscriptions which have yet been read are
mere patronymics, containing the name of the person in whose
honour the stone was erected. Thus the above figure (fig. 227)
of an Ogham stone found in Kerry reads thus : Nocati maqi maqi
ret(ti), i.e. (The Stone) of Nocat, the son of Macreith; the inscrip-
tion on fig. 228 is, Maqi Mucoi Uddami, i.e. (The Stone) of Uddam
Mae Mucoi.


                                Page 56.

       Staigue Fort, in the County of Kerry, is ‘an enclosure, nearly
circular,    114 feet in diameter,   88    feet from   east to west, and
87 from north to south.         The stones are put together without
any description of mortar or cement; the wall is 13 fect thick
at the bottom, and 5 feet 2 inches broad at top at the highest
part, where some of the old coping stones still remain, and
which is there 17 feet 6 inches high upon the inside.             It
has one square doorway in the s.s.w. side, 5 feet 9 inches
high, with sloping sides, 4 feet 2 inches wide at top, and 5 feet at
bottom. In’the substance of this massive wall, and opening in-
wards, are two small chambers; the one on the west side is 12 feet
long, 4 feet 7 inches wide, and 6 feet 6 inches high; the northern
chamber is 7 feet 4 inches long, 4 feet 9 inches wide,        and 7 fect
high. They formed a part of the original plan, and were not, like
other apertures in some similar structures, filled-up gateways.
Around the interior of the wall are arranged ten sets of stairs,....
the highest reaching very nearly to the full height of the wall, and
the secondary flights being about half that much; each step is
2 feet wide; and the lower flights project within the circle of the
higher. They lead to narrow platforms, from 8 to 48 fect in
length, on which its wardens or defenders stood.” (Catalogue of
the Royal Irish Academy, p. 120.)
                                APPENDIX.                                   607

                                    Page 57.
   On this subject Lappend three letters, one from Dr. Percy, F.R.S.,
ani the other two from Messrs, Jenkin and Lefeaux, the highly
experienced arsayers to Messrs. P. Grenfell and Sons :—

                                                          November 11, 1868.
  My pear Sir Joun Lussocg,
        I have paid considerable attention to the subject of ancient
bronze, and all the information I have gathered respecting it is
directly opposed to Mr. Wibel’s view.    The remarkable uniformity
in the composition of ancient bronze is in itself sufficient to refute
that view. When I speak of uniformity, I should add that there
is some variation in the composition according to the uses for which
bronze implements were intended.      Thus, where greater hardness
was necded more tin was added. It is impossible to conceive that
any thing approximating to uniformity in the composition of ancient
bronze could haye been produced from the smelting of accidental
mixtures of copper and tin ore. Moreover, in remains of ancient
bronze foundries, blocks of copper have been found which were,
doubtless, used in making the alloy by the direct fusion of the two
metals together. J could enter at greater length into the subject
if necessary.   Mr. W.’s views have, so far as my knowledge ex-
tends, nothing to stand upon.                  Yours very faithfully,

  Sir Johw Lubbock, Bart., F.R.S.                           JOHN PERCY.

                                                      London, 28rd December.
   DEAR Srr,
        In answer to Sir John Lubbock’s inquiry, I beg to say
that I do not think bronze can ever have been produced for com-
mercial purposes by fusing a mixture of copper ore and tin ore.
Thave not much doubt that this could be accomplished in the
laboratory, but not, I think, in the usual mode of smelting on a
large scale. Ores containing naturally both copper and tin are
extremely unusual.                         Yours truly,
  C. 8. Grenfell, Bsq.                                JoHN LEFEAUX.

                                           Redruth, 11th Month, 14, 1868.
   ReEspECTED FRIEND,
         I have received thy favour of the 12th inst., and in reply
I beg to inform thee that I do not think there are any Cornish
ores which can be so smelted as to produce a mixed metal consist-
608                             APPENDIX.

ing only of copper and tin, and in such proportions as to form
bronze ; and for this reason, that, although the ores may contain a
sufficient proportion of tin, yet, as they also contain other metallic
ingredients, it would, I think, be impossible to get rid of all such
ingredients without at the same time getting rid of the tin also.
I have, however, directed our assayer to make some experiments
with reference to this subject.
                                I am, respectfully, thy friend,
   C. Seymour Grenfelt,                            ALFRED    JENKIN.
      Copper Office,
27, Upper Thames Street, London, £.C.

  In a subsequent letter, Mr. Jenkin states that the experiments
made by the assayer confirmed him in the opinion above expressed.

                                Page 61.

   The passage from Avienus is as follows :—
            Que Himileo Poenus mensibus vix quatuor,
             Ut ipse semet re probasse retulit
             Enavigantem, posse transmitti adserit :
              Sic nulla late flabra propellunt ratem,
              Sic segnis humor equoris pigri stupet.
             Adjicit et illud, plurimum inter gurgites
             Extare fucum, et spe virgulti vice
             Retinere puppim dicit hic nihilominus
             Non in profundum terga demitti maris,
             Parvoque aquarum vix supertexti solum :
             Obire semper hue et hue ponti feras,
             Navigia lenta et languide repentia
             Internatare belluas.


                               Page 69.

   Rougemont, in the L’Age du Bronze, coneludes that, though
tin was in ancient times obtained from Spain, the quantity was
always inconsiderable. Don G. Schulz, the Director of the Spanish
School of Mines, has, on the contrary, in his Descripcion
Geognostica de Gallicia, expressed the opposite opinion. It is
much to be wished that we had more information with reference
to this interesting question.
                              APPENDIX.                                 609

                              Page 356.
   There are, indeed, one or two eases on record in which polished
axes are asserted to have been found in gravel-beds.    They rest,
however, on the authority of uneducated labourers, whose atten-
tion would not be at the time directed to this point, and who would
uot appreciate its importance.    Without then imputing to them
any want of honesty, we may, I think, safely conclude either that
these exceptional specimens were derived from interments, or that
they had fallen in from the surface. In one or other of these ways
I should account for the following case :—“In June, 1867, a
labourer named Mercer, in the employment of the Messrs. Slater,
of the Malton Nurscries, was digging gravel from the beds in
question.   Ata depth of 9 fect, and below a band of undisturbed
clay, he noticed a “ dark-coloured stone” in the gravel. This was
so firmly embedded (the gravel, though seemingly loose, is very
firmly set), that he could not get it out without using the pickaxe.
The shape and colour of the stone induced him to take care of it,
but he washed off most of its inerustation of lime in a pool of water
in a eart-rut.   Much   of the inerustation,   however,    still adheres
(1869). After carrying the axe in his pocket for some days, he,
at the end of the week, gave it to his masters for “a rockery orna-
ment.” Mr. M. B. Slater at once recognized it as being a small
stone axe, and after showing it to several friends, eventually gave
it to Mr. W. C. Copperthwaite, the Lodge, Malton, Earl Fitz-
william’s agent, in whose possession it now is (January, 1869).”
Mr. Monkman himself, from whose paper I quote the above ex-
tract, considered that the axe was not really contemporaneous with
the beds in which it was found*.


                              Page 581.

  Perhaps the lowest form of religion may be considered to be that
presented by the Australians, which consists of a mere unreasoning
belief in the existence of mysterious beings. The native who has
a nightmare, or a dream, does not doubt the reality of that which
passes, and as the beings by whom he is visited in his sleep are
unscen by his friends and relations, he regards them as invisible.

    * Monkman.   Yorkshire Archaol. and Topogr. Journal.   Jan. 1869.
                                                            Rr
610                               APPENDIX.

  In Fetichism this feeling is more methodized.              The Negro en-
deavours to make a slave of his deity. Thus Fetichism is almost
the opposite of Religion; it stands towards it in the same relation
as Alchemy to Chemistry, or Astrology to Astronomy.
   A further stage is that in which the superiority of the higher
deities is more fully recognized.    Every thing is worshipped in-
discriminately—animals, plants, and even inanimate objects. In
endeavouring to account for the worship of animals, we must
remember that names are very frequently taken from them.         The
children and followers of a man called the Bear or the Lion would
make that a tribal name.    Hence the animal itself would be first
respected, at last worshipped.
   “The Totem,” says Schooleraft, “is a symbol of the name of the
progenitor,—generally some quadruped, or bird, or other object in
the animal kingdom, which stands, if we may so express it, as the
surname of the family. Its significant importance is derived from
the fact that individuals unhesitatingly trace their lineage from it.”
Totemism,         however,   is by no   means    confined   to America,     but
occurs also in India, Africa, and in fact almost every where*, often
in connexion with marriage prohibitions.
   Mr. Fergusson has recently attempted to show the special pre-
valence of Tree and Serpent worship.              He might, I believe, have
made out as strong a case for many other objects.           It must
be remembered that the savage accounts for all action and
movement by life; inanimate objects, therefore, have spirits
as well as men; hence when the wives and slaves are slain, the
weapons also are broken in the grave, so that the spirits of the
latter, as well as of the former, may accompany their master to the
other world.
   The gradually increasing power of chiefs and priests led to
Anthropomorphism and idolatry, which must by no means be
regarded as the lowest stage of religion.   Solomonf, indeed, long
ago pointed out its connexion with Monarchical power.
   It is important to observe that cach stage of religion is super-
imposed on the preceding, and that bygone belicfs linger on among
the children and the ignorant. Thus witcheraft is still believed in
by the ignorant, and fairy tales flourish in the nursery.

  * Trans. Ethnol. Soc. N.S. vol. vi. p.36.     Lafitau, Moours des Sauy. Amér.
vol. i. p. 464.
   + Wisd. xiv. 17.
                                            APPENDIX,                                          611


                                            Page 600.
Degree of instruction of persons committed to the different County,
      Borough, and Liberty Prisons in England and Wales.
                   JUDICIAL                 STATISTICS—1870.
                                                                    Males.   Females.
Neither read nor write         .        .            .       .     87,254    16,011     151,747
Read or write andread imperfectly                                  74,240    24,242        ;
Read and write well.          .         .        .       .          4,286       661       5.198
Superior instruction .         .        .        .       .            3X33       13        d

                                                                 116,013     40,932     156,945
Instruction not ascertained.                     .       .           Pyeag        Bil       278

                 Oa      ce        Us        e           a LIE ZA0           40,983     157,223
                                    INDEX.

Aarhuus, coast-find at, 106.                    Alphabets, peculiarities of, 562.
Abbeville, primitive remains        at, 175,         is    alleged American, 2/79,
   342, ete.                                         A     Runie, 604.
Abbot’s Langley, flint from, 317.                    5     Ogham, 605.
Abipones have vo name for God, 579.             Altar Mounds, American, how formed,
Absalom, stone heap raised over him,               269.
   116.                                         Alyattes, tomb of, 116.
Abury, ancient monument at, 113,119,            Amazon Indians, funeral rites of, 133.
   124.                                         Amber found at Hallstadt, 24.
Abyssinian notions ofimissionary power,            »    found at Meilen, 191.
  425,                                             »    tound at Méen, 159, 160, 161.
Acerotherium, 421.                                 »»   found in the Treenhoie, 49.
Achan, stone heap raised over him, 115.            »    its source and value, 71. -
Acheul, St., autiquities at, 364.              America, supposed       traces of Phoeni-
Adams County animal mound, 277.                  clans in, 71.
    »        Dr., on Haginr Kem, 72.           American agriculture, periods of, 285.
    »         Mr., on mammoth, 294.                 ye    antiquities classified, 252.
Adhémar, M., on climate, 311, 404.             American    (North) Archwology,        250,
      35     on changes of sea level,                       286.
                414.                                      Bibliography of, 250.
Adze of New Zealanders, 97, 99.                           Indian funeral rites, 180,
Aeppli, M., his observations, 173.                        Indians, 329, 515, ete.
African axe, 27, 28, 92.                                  stone implements, 107, 348.
    »        Golmens, 111,131.                            Indians, their use of copper,
    »        ormunents, 42, 44.                              4,
Agassiz, opinion of, 287.                                pottery, 257.
Age of barrows, difficulty of deciding,             »    tribes, religious ideas of, 577.
   151.                                        Amiens, primitive remains at, 343.
Agriculture, carly American, 282.              Amravati, stone circles there, 126.
        >»      of Americun Indians, 526.      Andaman Islanders, notices of, 429,
        rs      Feegeeans, 455.                  436.
        “       of Lakemen, 212.               Andergon, Mr., 305.
Ai, ae of, buried under stone heap,            Andergon’s Sumatra, 188, note.
   116.                                        Angas, G. F., quoted, 445.
Albano, hut-urns found near, 51.               Anglesea, but circles in, 53.
Albertus Magnus refers to the elk, 207.        Anglo-Saxon interments, 156, 157.
Aldus MeGaldus, 94.                            Anholt, coast-find at, 105.
Algeria, tumuli and stone circlesin, 127.      Animal mounds of Wisconsin;          gigan-
    »,   stove implementsfound in,108,           tic representations   of various     ani-
Algonguins had no word for love, 520.            mals, 274,
614                                                        INDEX.

Animal remains at Lake villages, 194-                           Arts and objects peculiar to certain
                                        210.                      races, 554,
      a                  sy          in drift, 367, 368, 377.   Aschersleben, hut-urn found near, 52.
    2?                   35          in tumuli, 169.            Ass, 321.
Animals,                consumption          of, in savage          >> remains of, recent in Lake-dwell-
                          nations, 358.                                   ings, 199.
          Bs            of oldest England, 309.                 Assyria, stone implements found             in,
          ¥             of primeval France, 309.                   108, 348.
                        domestic, of lakemen, 201.              Atlantis, probable origin of the belief
          33
          wild and domestic, 202, 203.                              in, 63.
          ~ » sacrificed, 170.                                  Atwater, Mr., his researches, 250, 268.
          a5
          ingenuity of, 584.                                           s      on Grave-creek mound,
          wild, their perils, 595.                                                268.
Annals of the Four Masters, 177.                                Aubrey quoted, 119.
Anson, on buildings of Ladrone                            Is-   Audierne, M., 323, note.
  landers,                    549.                              Aurelius Ambrosius, 121.
Antiquity of American remains, 283.                             Aurignac, bone cave at, 319.
     .    of Man, 385, etc.                                     Aurillac, relics from, 422.
Apples found in Lake-dwellings, 212..                           Aurochs, 206,.209, 234, 289, 305, 321,
Arabia, stone monuments in, 113.                                  377.
Arab phrases and Old Testament style,                           Australia, stone circles in, 114.
                   425.                                         Australian flint flake, 89, 107.
   »»          Tace, early traces of, 587-                      Australians, notices of, 429, 438.
Arbor Low, pottery from, 166.                                   Auvernier, relics from, 43.
   nA               »          stone circle at, 113.            Ava, what, 481.
                    »           tumulus at, 150.                Avienus noticed, 61-68, 608.
Arcelin, M. A., his researches, 33, 107.                        Awls of flint, 99.
Archiac, M. a, quoted on Oise Valley,                             » of bone, 104; of bronze, 167.
             367, 368.                                          Axes, American, in stone, 252.
     »    on quaternary climate, 310.                              » stone, 91, 95, 608.
Archezolithic, or Paleolithic Period, 2,                            3»   Swiss, in stone, 189.
   75, 414.                                                         »    of ceremony, 472.
Archeological evidence, its nature, 12,                         Aymard, M., on sacred Jakes, 217.
   427.                                                         Azara on Indians of Paraguay, 530.
Archeology, pre-historic, its four ages                         Aztalan in Wisconsin, remains at, 264.
   —the Drift, or Paleolithic,                            the   Aztecs, 89.
   Newer Stone, or Neolithic,                             the
   Bronze, and the Iron, 2, 3.                                                          B.
Archeology and savage tribes, 428.
Architecture of Bronze Age, 50.                                 Baal, symbols of,.’71.
Ardoch, bronze sword said to have                                 », worship in Norway, 71.
    been found there, 18.                                                »    evidence of, 72.
 Aristotle, 63,                                                 Bachapins, 428, 482.
Arreoy, a society in Tahiti, 487.                               Badger, 207, 320.
Arrow-heads, American, 252, 253.                                Baegert on Californian Indians, 576.
               7               of five kinds—triangular,        Baer, Von, on the Aurochs, 306.
              indented, stemmed, barb-                          Bailey on Veddahs, 435.
              ed, and leaf-shaped, 102.                         Baillon,
                                                                       M., on          rhinoceros   remains at
      3      similarity of, in different                          Menchecourt, 361.
              countries, 102.                                   Baines, Mr., his sketch of Australians
Arrows, bronze, 31.                                               making flint flakes, 88.
   » __ Esquimaux, 10, 11.                                      Baker on Arab phraseology, 425.
   =     warks on, 8, note, 10, 11.                             Bakie’s voyage referred to, 360.
Arrow-makers among Snake Indians,                               Baldersbal, 72.
   5238.                                                        Bark cloth, 473.
Art, American Indian, 528.                                      Barley found in Lake-villages, 211.
Articles                buried       with   the   dead,   not   Barrow.       See Mound, Tumulus.
   always for actual use, 139-151, 153.                         Bate, Mr. Spence, researches of, 230.
                                                   INDEX.                                                615
Bateman, Mr., his labours, 247.                         Blandford, Mr., his opinion of Silbury
     a   statistics from, 77, 140-145,                     Hill, 121, note.
                         153, 154, 170.                 Bleek, Dr., on Bushmen, 43-4.
              ¥        his classification of pottery,   Blumenhach and fossil rhinoceros, 297.
                          165.                          Boar, the, 200, 234, 320.
              »        opinion of “ drinking cups,”     Bont, ancient, 8, 19, 181.
                          167.                          Boats of Esquimaus, etc., 506, 523,
                       on interments, 50,135,171.       Bohemia, forts in, 112.
Bayley on Kandyan opinion, 568.                         Boiling-stones, 4:79,
Bates on tribes of upper Amazons, 576.                  Bolas, 584.
Beaches, raised, examples of, 382.                      Bone implements in Copenhagen Mu-
Beads, 49, 159-161, 163, 164.                                       suem, 76.
Bear, 207, 209.                                             »    caves, evidence from, 78, 312.
   » the Cave, 289, 293, 317, 320, 377.                     a       >    in France and Belgium,
Beaumont, M. Elie de, 344.                                                        313.
Beaver, 207.                                                »      »         in Devon, 315.
Beccles, Mr., 236.                                          »      9         in Sicily, 318.
Beckhampton, 119.                                           ”      »         in Gibraltar, 319.
Beckwith, Licut.,               on   manufacture   of       ”      ”         in Spain, ibid.
  stone weapons by Indians, 91.                             i      s»        in France, 820, etc.
Bedford, relics froin, 348.                                 *f     »         near Wells, 323.
Becchey, on Esquimaux skill with the                        ”                in Italy, 340.
             arrow, 545.                                    aS   implements, 104, 163, 239.
     »    referred to, 294, 509.                            ”           ”>          sundry kinds of, 104.
Beech-trees in Denmark, 2:8, 389.                           »           »    of America like those
Bechive houses of Scotland, 54.                                                of other countries,
Belcher on manufacture of stone im-                                            252.
                       plements by the Esquimaux,           x          ny    from caves, 382.
                       91.                                  »    pits in North America, 268.
          »         on Esquimaux      winter   store,   Bones consumed by African tribes and
                      4Y5.                                      other peoples, 327.
    >»              on Andamaners,
                         436.                               »    from drift, 358.
Belgium, bone-caves in, 313.                                »    fossil, 236.
Beneden, M. Van, 315.                                       »    pounded by Australians, 439,
Benjamite slingers, 546.                                    »        >        Esquimaux, 496.
Bertrand, M., referred to, 119.                                  of animals in tumuli, 169.
     sf    on hnmanremains at Clichy,                            of wild and domestic animals
              360.                                                  differ, 202.
Beyer, Dr., discovers a hut-urn, 51.                             found in shell-mounds, etc., 232,
Bible references to flax, 214.                                      283, 284.
   ”       2”      to the ass, 199.                              around Msquimaux huts, 404,
   ”       ”       to the horse, 199.                   Bonstatten, M., referred to, 113.
   ”       3       to corn, etc., 214.                  Boomerang, 442, 444,
  =   ,           testimony to early use of bronze,     Borlase referred to, 6.
                    68.                                 Bornou, funerals in, 134.
  >»              for “brass”? in our version, we       Borreby tumulus, 139.
                     should read “ bronze,” 69.         Bos primigenius. See Urus.
Bienne, animal remains, 197.                            Boscawen, stone circles at, 113.
Bilidt, shell-mound at, 226, 230.                       Boucher de Perthes, M., his labours,
Birch, Mr., an opinion of his, 166.                                               206, 342, etc.
Birds caught by dogs, 507.                                                   a suggestion of, 345.
  9      »    in various ways, 557.                                          on     lake   habitations    in
   » in shell-mounds, 233, 235.                                                   Somme Valley, 378.
  » of Swiss Lake-dwellings, 198.                                            on    remains     in   Somme
Bison or aurochs, 305. See Aurochs.                                            Valley, 175.
Blackmore,               Dr.,   finds the lemming                            on cataclysms, 372.
  near Salisbury, 307.                                                       on Paleolithic stone axe,
Blackwood’s Magazine referred to, 352.                                         842.
616                                                   INDEX,          J

Bourgeois, Abbé, discoveries of, 421.                      Bronze         articles,             their differences of
Bourguignet, M., 340.                                                                            detail, 60.
Bourneville            in Ohio, fortification        at,       >              o>              cast      in   various
  259.                                                                                          countries, 60.
Bow] of wood from Jutland, 49.                                 is             a               inventory of, 43.
Bows, Indian, 528, 524.                                        »,    celt at Rome with inscription
Boyd-Dawkinson descent of oxen, 205.                                         not decipherable, 44.
                          account        of      Wokey         Ks       , found in Kent, 38.
                             Hole, 328, 331.                   »,    different composition of, 20.
                          on cave-bear in river                »     in Central America, 253, 429.
                   drift, 292.                                 »»    Opinions upon its original manu-
           %    on cave-lion, 293.                                        facture, 607.
           $3   on fossil rhinoceros,                          »     bracelets, 34, 49, 218.
                  297.                                         »     brooches, 35, 49, 50.
Boye, on a Danish tumulus, 157.                                BARLOW                     SsoLs
Bracelet of bronze, 49.                                        »     daggers, 32, 40.
Brandon, flint implements at, 81.                              »     javelins, 31.
Brandt on cave-bear, 292.                                      5,    sickles, 32.
    >»   on bison, 306.                                        »,    knives, 33, 49.
    »    fossil rhinoceros in Scandi-                          >     Celts, 25-29.
            navia, 298.                                        »,    swords, 29-31, 48, 49, 53.
     »,  on wild horse, 301, note.                             »>    spears, 31.
     >,   ouvreindeer, 308.                                    »     fish-hooks, 32.
Brantome, rock chapel at, 325.                                 »>    hammers, 37.
Brass       in English           Bible    should      be       a     joreck Geb albire
   bronze, 68.                                                 3)    ornaments, 33.
Bread found in Lake-villages, 211.                             5,    tweezers, 49.
Breunus, his soldiers had iron swords, 6.                      y>    weapons,     their   geographical
Briant, M., 82.                                                         distribution, 20.
Bridlington, flint finds, 107.                                  »    found in Denmark and Ireland,
Brighton, 364.                                                               20, 21.
British coinage, how early, 7.                                  ”         »             Norway, ‘71.
    >   Museum, New Zealand adze in, |                         33       » Italy, 20.
          98.                                                  »     ¢elts not found at Pompei, 20.
      »         tumuli, their general plan, 135.               3        ”        39  with Roman re-
      »         Association, its exploration of |                                      mains, 21.
                  Kent’s cavern, 316.                          »”»        > not of Roman times, 17,
      »         Museum contains stone wea-                                                ie
                 pon     found    with        elephant’s       is         »             but     earlier,     before     iron,
         tooth, 345.                                                                      22.
Brittany tumuli, 118, 125, 163.                                »     how introduced, 4, 60, 69.
Britons did not eat hare, 197.                                 »     probably   not                        discovered      in
Brixham cave, remains from, 291, 817.                                  Europe, 59.
Broch.          See Burgh.                                     »     moulds for casting, 60.
Bronze Age, 3, 74, 170, 249.                                   »     and stone implements                              found
            dwellings of, 62.                                             together, 77.
                       theories concerning, 57.                »     pin trom                  Scotch       shell-mound,
                       and Pheenician commerce,                        229.
                         60.                                   »»    probably                  imported        from      the
      2          »     metallurgy of, 37-41, 57.                       Vast, 60.
      35         >     burial in, 151.                         »»    remains at pileworks, 216.
      -          »     Clothing in, 45; pottery                »     Weapons,                 when     discontinued in
                         of, 217-219.                                                         the North, 12.
      nf         x      architecture, 50.                      55                  »,     Dot found with relies of
      »    and stone used at the same                                                          Roman         origin,     14%,
              time, 77.                                                                        ths al
      »    articles,    their general re-                      Ps                 »       not     found       with      iron,
              semblances, 59.                                                                  7-12,
                                                            INDEX.                                                          617
Bronze, alleged examples of, discussed,                          Caledonian wall, 123.
                                                                 Cahokia, gigantic mound at, 273, 281.
Brooch, ancieutly mended, 40.                                    Calvert, Mr., 458, 461.
Brooches of bronze, 35, 43.                                      Campagna, bronze celt found in the, 44.
Brooke referred to, 132.                                         Candolle, M. de, cited, 211.
Brougham, Lord, quoted, 601.                                     Cancto, M. de, 86.
Brown, Mr., on New Zealand inherit-                              Cannibalism of Feegeeans, 459.
                ance, 561.                                            ”     ”  Fuegians, 541.
   »         his discoveries, 287.                                    5     »     Maories, 467.
Buch,        L.        von, on            midsummer     night         os      in Tahiti, 429.
  fires of Norway, 72.                                           Canoe Indians, 532.
Buckland, Dr., remark of, 300.                                   Canoes, 429, 440, 453, 465, 476, 523,
Buddha’s wife and mother, 564.                                     532, 542.
Buffon on Reindeer in France, 303.                               Cape of Good Hope flint flake, 89.
Bunbury,   Sir C., on remains near                                                »  flint-finds at, 107,
                                                                                                be)
  Thetford, 17+.                                                                        108.
Bunsen on autiquity of man, 386.                                 Carnac, temple of, 124.
Buracts, custoin of, 271.                                                 »                tumulus at, 163.
Burchell               on      custom        of Bachapins,       Carthage, when built, 68.
             428, 482, note.                                                  *
                                                                            voyage from, to North-
     53   on Bushman tribe, 573.                                              western Europe, 61.
Burckhardt, 5-14.                                                Carpenter, Dr., 398.
Burdett Coutts, Baroness, 317.                                   Carvings on bones, 333, 509.
Burgh, dwellings so culled, 55, 305.                                  »   on stones, 118, 278, 439, 440.
Burial, ancient modes                       of, 130, e¢ seq.     Cat not found in Lake-dwellings, 199;
    >                   22          », during the Bronze                           nor in Danish shell-mounds, 199.
                                          Age, 49, 50.               5. wild, 207, 320.
    3                   +           », in Aimerica, 268.             », when brought into Europe, 234.
    »        forms of, umong savages, 457,                       Cataclysms                    would      not     account    for
               465, 483, 511, 528, 560.                             river drift, 372, ete.
Burnes, Travels quoted, 176.                                     Catlin, anecdote of, 529.
Burnet ou Comanches, 519.                                            »    on defence of Mandan Village,
Burning of Lake-villages, 220.                                                            261.
Burton on     Arab prejudice against                                      »            remark of, 191, 529.
                                    hare, 198.                   Cave-men, 312-341.
   %              »,         African opinion, 565.                   »                5,    their remains, 337.
Bushmen noticed, 434, 5738.                                          5,           bear, 289-293.
Busk, Dr., visits Denmark, 226.                                      »»           hyena, 289, 293,
     os    referred to, 139, 343.                                    »»           lion, 289, 2938.
     “p    on cave-bear, 291, 298.                               Celtic Lake-dwellers, supposed, 219.
     33    on Neanderthal skull, 338.                            Celts, 25, 189.
     5S    visit to Somme Valley, 316.                               ”?           of various           forms and materials
        Ss             on Hyena, 319.                                                ficured, 25-29.
        »               his flint-finds at the Cape of               »,           kinds of stone used for, 78.
                           Good Hope, 107.                           »,           felstone, 78.
Buttons or studs of bronze, 37, 49.                                  »,           basalt, 79.
     9       »   of tin, 49.                                         »            jade, 79, 163.
Byron on Fuegians, 537, 542.                                         »            hint, 80.
        3              their dogs, 539.                          Ceylon, 64.
        BS             anecdote of Indian             cruelty,   Chaillu, M. du, 567.
                             571.                                Chambered     tumuli,                      131;     rare    in
                                                                      England and France, 135.
                                     C.                              hamois, 326.
                                                                 Changes of human type, 588.
Cwsar referred to, 207, 306, 307.                                Charlemagne, a regulation of, 164.
Caillié, M., 578.                                                Charlevoix on                        etymology    of Hsqui-
Caithness “ burghs,” 55.                                           maux, 495.
Caledonian swords of iron, 7.                                    Chavannes, remains of ass at, 199.
618                                                     INDEX,

Cheney on ancient                     monuments,      282,    Codex Diplomaticus, 117.
  note.                                                       Codrington, Mr., finds flint implement
Chert, how fashioned by the Esqui-                               on Foreland Clift Sole
  maux, 91.                                                   Coffins of wood found in Jutland, 46.
Childbirth, curious customs at, 561.                              »   their contents, 46-49.
Children and savages compared, 570.                               »   at St, Acheul, 376.
Chillingham wild cattle, 307.                                     »   not used in Stone Age, 180.
Chimpanzee, dwellings of, 585.                                       »        of Stone, 94.
China, its pre-historic archeology not                               »
                                                                     given by the Chinese                       as pre-
                    yet known, 8.                                      sents, 562.
   >,           burial custom, 151.                           Coin found at Vimose, 11.
Chisels of flint, 98, 159, 160.                               Coins absent from bronze-finds, 11,16.
Chonos Indians, 539.                                             »,      found in Roman towns, 17.
Christo],          M.       de, on     rhinoceros    relic,      »       miscellaneous, 221.
                     297.                                        »       found at Pigquigny, 19.
    3     referred to, 313.                                      2?                 »?     Heilly, 18.
Christy, Mr., on ancient climate of                              -                  »         ‘inidre, 391.
          south of France, 336, 343.                             »,          not found in ages of stone and
      » his collection, 507.                                               bronze, 7.
      » & Lartet, MM., their researches                          »       found at Nydam, 8, 9.
                                   in the        Dordogne,       >?            >              Thorsbjerg, 10.
                                     323, etc.                   ss                           Tiefenau, 7, 221.
           os           )        on condition of cave-                         5              la Tene, 7.
                                   men     of   South         Coinage, early British and Gaulish, 7.
                    France, 550.                              Colden on Canadian Indians, 95, 519,
Chronological data, 281.                                         577.
      .      problems, 221, 248, 248,                         Comb from Jutland, 46, 48.
                            385, etc.                         Concise, relics trom, 92, 189, 197, 198.
Chronology of the Tiniére cone, 390.                              PA    hog found at, 201.
                            »,       Thiéle valley, 393.      Confolens, cromlech at, 126.
Chunk--yards described, 266.                                  Congreve, reference to, 126, note.
Cicero, 217.                                                  Conwell, his discoveries in Meath, 169.
Circleville, Ohio, remains at, 263.                           Cook, Capt., on Australian notions of
Circumcision in Australia, 447.                                                               trade, 445.
Civilization gradual in Lake-villages,                           >             2?        on      Ksquimaux        repast,
  220.                                                                                        496.
Civilization, its advantages, 594.                                                       on Nootka Sound Indians,
       a3     in its infancy, 551, 584.                                                       525.
Clarence, bone-pit at, 269.                                                              on Fuegians, 542.
Clark’s work, Obio, fortification at,                                                    on houses at Botany Bay,
   260.                                                                                    436.
Clemens, Dr. O. W., 279.                                                                 examples of New Zealand
Clichy, human remains at, 360.                                                             skill, 332, 548.
Climate and astronomical changes, 405.                                                   Kamskatchadale “yourt,”
       »         9» geographical features, 403.                                            492.
       »         Of quaternary period, various                                           on Tahitians, 428, 470,
                    opinions entertained, 310.                                             480, &e.
       »          of reindeer period, 336.                                               on asmanians, 450.,
       »»Of Western Europe, dates in-                            %             »,        on Maories, 462.
           dicated by, 401, 419.                                                         on temporary marriages
« Cloghauns,” 78.                                                                          in New Zealand, 568.
Cloth found in Lake-dwellings, 194.                                                      on winter-habitations in
  »,            found at Aztalan, 266.                                                     North-east Asia, 132.
  »             ‘Manufacture in Tahiti, 473.                                   »         worshipped, 567.
Clothing, ideas concerning, 564,                              Cookery ainong Esquimaux, 495.
     »    of Bronze Age, 46.                                  Copenhagen Museum, 223, 225-6.
Coast-finds in Denmark described, 105.                                   ?                    o>     stone implements
Cochet, the Abbé, quoted, 348,                                                                         in, 75, 95,
                                                       INDEX.                                          619
Copenhagen Museum,                     bronze     imple-     Customs of Savages, 433.
                           ments in, 27, 31, 32, 44.         Cuvier, M., names Rhinoceros lepto-
      ;    Academy of Sciences, 226.                                           rhinus, 297.
Copper Age in Ireland doubtful, 58.                              »         On reindeer, 3038.
Copper, its early use, 3, 60.
      »          Where procured by the Pho-
                   nicians, 69.                                                       D.
       »         implements, 28; rare in Enu-
                       rope, 57.                             Dacotahs boiling           animals   in skins,
       »         in North         America,     253, 429,       512,
                    521.                                     Daggers, bronze, 32.
       >»         mines, American, 254.                          »          of flint, 100.
Coppersmiths, American, 256.                                 Dale, Mr., his flint-finds at Cape of
Coral found at Concise, 191.                                    Good Hope, 107.
Corcelettes, 13, 15, 43.                                     Dale County, animal-mounds, 275.
Cork, Mr., 433.                                              Dalton, Col., on Kols, 425.
Corn not found in shell-mounds, 231.                         Dampier, reference to, 176, 438, 442.
   » of Lake-men, 211, 231.                                       »»   Shell-mounds, 280,
Corn-crushers, 190.                                          Damour, M., 79, note.
Cornet, M. 82.                                               Dana, Professor, 254.
Corn-hills, 282.                                             Dances, indecent, 569.
Cornwall, atin producing district in                         Danish coast-finds described, 105.
              carly times, 61, 69.                               »         flint implements, 237.
     op     shell-mounds, 230.                                   »         Museums, stone implements
                                                                                                   in,
Cortaillod, 13, 15, 43.                                                       223, 225.
Crannoges in Ircland, 176.                                       »         Sagas mention tumuli, 117.
Crantz            on      Esquimaux         repast,   195,      »    tumuli, 33, 223.
                        498.                                 D’Archiac, M., 298, note. See Archiac.
       -           on killing seals, 503.                    Dartmoor, remains on, 53.
       i           on    Esqnimaux          religious no-    Darwin’s theory referred to, 308.
                        tions, 511.                          Darwin, Mr., on descent of oxen, 205.
       oS          on the hare among Green-                     Pe   remark on glaciers, 310.
           landers, 198.                                         a          observations of, 230, 241, 571.
Crawfurd on Australian Minerals, 448,                            +5         on Fuegian dress, 542.
                        57-4.                                Dasent, G. W., 38, 304.
       y           on changes of type, 588.                  David, Lucas, refers to wild horse, 301.
       o           on Malay language, 573.                   Davis, Dr. B., on Neanderthal skull,
Cremation in the Bronze Age, 50, 156.                           340.
Crescents of earthenware, 218.                               Davy on Veddahs, 435.
Crofts, Professor, 256.                                      Dawkins         and Sandford,      opinions       of,
Croll, Mr., on trade-winds, 402.                                298.
   »   onexcentricity of carth’s orbit,                      Dawkins         and the Machairodus           lati-
         410,                                                                  dens, 307.
  »             on change of sea-level, 414.                          »,     on wild oxen, 205.
  >»            on change of climate, 311.                            o      on reindeer, 303.
Cromlech at Confolens, 126.                                  Dead, how interred in the Bronze Age,
            i          sense and etymology of the               49.
             word, 109, note.                                Death, indifference to, 562.
Cromlechs, 113.                                              Decency, ideas of, 564.
Cronkstone Hill, 150.                                        Decker, on Fuegians, 536.
Cruelty of Savages, 521, 571.                                Deerhorn picks, etc., 81, 82.                 ‘
Crustacen in shell-mounds, 232.                              Degradation of savage tribes denied,
Cumberland tumuli, contents of, 149.                            585.
Cunningham,                     Mr.,   on     Australian     Delacourt,        M., discovery at Précy,
  sketches, 439.                                               345.
Customs of mound-builders, 237, 240.                         Delaunay, M., 422.
       »          and habits apparently similar,             Denham, reference to African custom,
                        but yet different, 557.                564.
620                                                   INDEX.

Denmark, its place in history, 223.                        Dress in the Bronze Age, 45.
       ry            its antiquities, 8, 9, 223.               »          Of savages, 431, 435, 437, 446,
       -             its vegetation, 389.                                       456, 462,        516,   530,   538,
       i             not entered by the Ro-                                     536, 542,
                        mans, 20.                              3,         Of Tabitians, 474.
       op            See Kjokkenméddings,                      »          of Esquimaux, 507.
             shell-mounds, etc.                                3          of the Lake-men, 193.
Derbyshire tumuli, contents of, 142-                                      of Patagonians, 533.
  145, 154.                                                Drift Age, what, 2, 75, 342.
Dercennus, mound of, 116.                                      »,        beds characteristics of, 2638, etc.
Design of implements, 72.                                      >»         33        bow formed, 366.
Desnoyers, M., on bone-caves, 312.                             » scarcity of human remains in, 357.
       =       on marks upon bones,                            33              7)    vegetable remains in, 366.
                               420.                            nA              A     anivoal remains in, 366.
Desor, Prof., on bronze objects, 216.                         », implements considered, 352-357.
   »   true nature of lake-villages,                       Drilling, savage skill in, 524.
          216.                                             Drinking-cups, 167.
  >         on human remains not found in                  Druidical monuments, so-called, 119.
               the Stone Age, 215.                         Dublin Museum, bronze implement,
  »    on Swiss Lake-dwellings, 178,                         ete., in, 20, 27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 38,
          183, 221.                                          58, 76.
De Soto, 424, 522.                                         Dun of Dornadilla, 55.
Devil’s Dyke, 118.                                         Dupont, Dr., on Belgian caves, 314.
Devon, shell-mounds, 230.                                  Duty, curious ideas of, 564.
Dickeson, Dr., finds together bones of                     Dwellings of American Indians, 525.
  mastodon and man, 287.                                        5    of ancient Gauls, 179.
Differences           among       contemporary sa-                   “o             of the Lake-men, 173-180.
   vages, 551.                                                       si             of Bronze Age, 50.
Diffusion of the human race, 588.                                    x              of Esquimaux, 491.
Dighton Rock carvings, 278.                                          my             in Paraguay, 530.
Dille, Mr., on American tumuli, 268.                                 5              Patagonians, 533.
Dinotherium, 422.                                                    Puegi:ans, 536.
Diodorus Siculus cited, 116, 562.                          Dyaks, dwellings of, 176.
Dobritzhoffer             on     religious ideas      of   Dykes, 113.
                               Abipones, 579.
             a            skill of savages, 545.                                           BE.
Dog, first domestic animal, 586.
Dogs of shell-mounds, 235.                                 Earle, Mr., observation of, 230.
  »,        trained to help in fishing, 589.                     .    on New Zealand cruelty, 467.
  »         used for different            purposes,        Hartheuware spindle-whorls, 190.
               505, 557.                                   Earth’s axis, alteration of, 401.
Dolmen, sense and etymology of the                         Earthworks in North America, 25, note.
  word, 109, note, 126, 128.                               Kaster Island statues, 5-19.
Domestic             animals,      remains of not          Eccard referred to, 6
                                  found in French          Education and crime, 609.
                                  bone-caves, 326.         Edinburgh, bronze implements at, 27.
                 3             of Lake-men, 208.           egypt, early civilization of, 587.
                 a             nope    in earliest              >,        formation of, 39-4.
                                  times, 589.              Egyptian bronzes, 33.
                 »             of early     ages,     9-             »         tombs, 151.
                                  tera                               »          knowledge of the horse, 200.
Doorways in tumuli, 159.                                             »          barley, 211.
D’Orbigny, quotation from, 372.                            Ekkehard quoted, 301.
Dordogne, bone-caves in, 323, 548.                         Elephant, 289, 296, 377.
Dovler, Dy., human relics found by,                        Elephants use boughs us fans, 58L.
  287.                                                     Elfin arrows, 427.
Dove, Mr., on Tasmanians, 450, 573.                        Elk, 207.
Drawings of Esquimaus, 509.                                 » Lrish fossil, 289, 299, 321.
                                                       INDEX.                                                 621
Elk, Norway, 307.                                              Evans, Mr., reference to, 351, 358.
Ellis, on opinions in Tahiti, 470, 484.                        Excentricity of earth’s orbit, 410,
   », on dress of queen, 475.                                  Exploration of shell--nounds, 223,
  »            on Tahitian slingstones, 477.                    Eyre, on Australian dwellings                   and
  a                     on           surgery, 482.                customs, 438, 442, 449.
             *       morals, 488.
      on Maories, 4.67.
   »   on feats of Polynesians, 545.                                                       F.
Ellon, flint-finds near, 107.
Enclosures in America, 259.                                    Fables, or myths, widespread, 64.
Engelhardt, on discoveries in Slesvick,                         Pakaafo, whether its natives were ig-
   8, 118.                                                        norant of fire, 559.
Engis, skull from, 337.                                         Falconer, Dr., on bone cave in Sicily,
England, shell-mounds in, 230.                                                   318.
English Channel once narrower, 363.                           |
                                                                           +       Gibraltar, 319,
Engraving by Hsquimanx, 509.                                               a       on the mammoth           period,
          %            by cave-men,        333.                                      295.
Equinoxes, precession of, 405.                                             oy      on the species of rhinoceros,
Erman on “ Yurt,” 131.                                                               297.
      »             reference to, 271.                                             on Brixham cave, 317.
Erskine, Capt., on Peegcean gods, 453.                                     r       remarks of, 236.
    »”     on Feegeean character, 455,                                     5       visits Abbeville, 343.
                             460.                                          xD      finds lagomys among bones
Esquimaux funeral rite, 171.                                                 from Brixham cave, 307.
          2             burial places, 150.                                on cave-bear, 291.
          ”             sometimes cat foxes, 195.               Falkner on Patagonians, 532-536, 545.
          >             notions of Englishmen, 425.             Fancies of uncivilized peoples, 425.
          ay            notices of, 327, 329, 491, ete.         Fanunerup, shell-mound at, 226, 228,
          3             stone monuments among,                       i     flint-flake from, 86, 245.
                           aioe                                Fauna affected by change of climate,
          35            stone implements, 91, 97,                      415.
                              99,                                     »,        Of bone-caves, 311.
          >             without pottery, 49-4.                        »         of Lake-dwellings, 194-210.
          os            without religious ideas,       511.           »         of Stone Age, 195-210.
            engravings on bone, 509.                                  »         of drift period, 377.
Estavaycr, 12- 45; 33, 3-4, 43, 45.                                             of the shell-mounds, 231.
Uthnological problems, 387.                                    Feogeean funerals, 171.
Etiquette, Feegecan, 460.                                      Feegecans, notices of, 218, 451.
          5            Savayre, 561, 563, 566.                 Fellenberg, 79, note.
Etowah river mound, 280.                                       Felstone used for celts, 78.
Etruscan jewellery, 151.                                       Fergusson on Stonehenge and Abury,
Rurope, time of man’s first appearance                                     120.
                        in, unknown, 1.                                    Ps      Silbury Hill, 120.
          »          whether         truly described   by                          on Buddhist Topes, 125.
                        Pytheas, 63.                                               on ancient Indian notions
Furopeans anong savages, 567.                                                         of decency, 564.
Evans, Mr., on early British coinage, 7.                       Ferrum (iron) as synonym for sword,
               fe       on drift implements, 343.
               35       notes on flint implements,             Ferry, H. de, and A. Arcelin, on flint
                              345.                                implements, near Macon, 107.
               op       researches of, 230, 316.               Festival of the Dead, 269.
               5        visits Abbeville, 3-£3.                Vilhol, M., 340.
                        addresses the Academy of               Finns, skulls of, 188.
                           Sciences, 344.                      Fire, whether known to all races, 558.
               .        finds hatchet near Abbot’s               be
                                                                           used in felling and shaping tim-
               3           Langley, 347.                                     ber, 93.
                        on certain forms of flint                »
                                                                           how obtained in Tahiti, 478.
                             implements, 353.                    ”                  ”
                                                                                            in Australia, 445.
622                                                INDEX,

Fire, how obtained by Indians, 524.                     Floating dwellings, 188.
  "          i     by savages, 558.                     Flora of Lake-dwellings, 178, 211.
      among Tasmanians, 451.                                »,            of shell-mounds, 231.
  os          »,         Maories, 462.                  Florence, in Alabama,                earthwork      at,
            how    used      by the      Esquimaux,        280.
              498-500.                                  Florida Indians’ buildings, 273.
Fischer, M.,79, note.                                   Flourens, M., 235.
Fish in shell-mounds, 231, 233.                         Flower, Mr., 343, 353.
  », at Isthmus of Panama, 402.                             »   on drift gravels, 350.
Fish-hooks, bronze, 32.                                       »   on Grime’s Graves, 81.
Fish-spears, 523.                                       Fodisch, Dr., cited, 112.
Fishing, peculiar modes                  of, 73, 523,   Food of the mound-builders, 241.
   527, 539.                                               »» how taken in Tahiti, 480.
Fitzroy on Fuegians, 537,                                  ”»   of savages, 431, 439, 452, 4.62,
        »      on Patagonian huts, 533.                         478, 496, 535, 538.
        »      on Tahitian cruelty, 488.                   yy stores in Arctic regions, 495.
Fitz-Stephen refers to wild bulls, 307.                 Foote, Mr., on Indian stone imple-
Flax mentioned in the Pentateuch and                        ments, 348.
       Homer, 214.                                      Forchhammer, Prof. 225, 231.
  3» Known to Lake-men, 213.                            Forel, M., discoveries at Morges, 13.
Flaxdale Barrow, urn from, 165, 166.                    Forests in Wisconsin, 281, 284.
Flensborg, implements at, 33, 76.                       Forged flint implements, 354.
Flinders, 446.                                          Forks of Feegeeans, 454,
Flint implement manufactories, 80-83.                   Forskey,  M., 398.
   27              >>        how formed, 352.           Forster on Fuegians, 537.
   2?              22        antiquity, 354.                »   on Tahitians, 429, 473, 485.
  bod              39        characteristics, 355.      Fort-hill, Ohio, fortification at, 260.
   33              >     from drift, 356.               Fortifications of earth, 112, 259.
                 », from various sources, 357.                 i"      of Maories, 464.
   5,       used for Celts, 80.                         Forts, ancient, 112.
            how manufactured, 80, 84, 89.               Foster, Mr., 255
  »,        flake of large size, 86.                    Fowl, domestic, not found                     in Swiss
  ;,        flakes, North American, 88, 252.                and Danish ancient remains, 199.
  22          29        Australian, 89.                 Fox, 207, 320.
  »>          22        from Cape of Good Hope,           » eaten by Hsquimaux, and in the
                          89, 108.                             stone period, 195.
                        New Caledonian, 89,             France, bone-caves in, 312, 341.
                        Mexican, 89.                             »          primeval, 379.
                        Kertch, 153.                             »           Ssbell-mounds in, 230.
                        Long Barrow, 163,               Franks, on supposed Phanician relies
                        Moen, 160.                                            found in America, 71.
  3S               Swiss, 190.                                   »          On Etruscan jewellery, 151.
            implements of Denmark, 87, 91.                       »          Ona bronze pin from slicll-
  33            a2      Switzerland, 91, 189,                                 mound, 229.
                           190.                                  »          referred to, 441.
                        how used, 84.                   Frankland,              Prof,    on glacial     epoch,
                        of bone-caves, 327.                 400.
                        in shell-mounds, 227,           Franklin, opinion of fox as food,.195.
                          237-240.                      Frere, Mr., his finds at Hoxne, 3-45.
                            of tumuli      compared     Freshwater origin of gravels, 366.
                     with those of shell-               Freycinet, M., buildings of Ladrone
                     mounds, 243,                                                  Islanders, 549.                —

Flint-finds, 107, 342, ete.                                          Ke          opinion of, 558, 571,
      m     in England, 107, 342.                                                referred to, 5G4.
      5     in Scotland, 107.                           Friendly Islanders, 489.
      -     in France, 107, 342, etc.                   Froélund, coast- find at, 106.
      ep    in other countries, 107.                    Fruit of Lake-men, 212.
      .     questions at issue, 352.                    Fuegians, account of, 536.
                                                INDEX.                                                     623
Fuegians and Danish mound-builders,                  Geology, its principles, 2.
               513.                                      »    of Dordogne, 328.
    Bs    habits of, 2-L1.                           Gervais, M., and remains of urns, 306.
Funeral feasts, 170.                                 Gesner’s reference to the elk, 207.
    »    Yrites im Australia, 448.                   Giant’s Dance, what, 121.
   »           »       Feegee, 457.                  Gibraltar, relics from the Genista
   »      of American Indians, 528.                     cave, 319.
   »       Tites among savages, 560.                 Gigantic figures of animals, 274.
Funerals in Tabiti, 483.                                          »             earthworks, 280.
   =      of Esquimaus, 511.                         Gilgal, stones of, 115.
    58       of Maori, 465.                          Gilliéron, M., on                      lake-habitation    at
    5        of Patagonians, 535.                                                     Pont de Thiéle, 178, 193,
   See also Burial, Interment.                                                          393.
Parse, M., 72., note.                                                 .          pottery, found by, 193.
Future full of hope, 599.                            Gillingham, penpits at, 53.
                                                     Giraldus Cambrensis, his story about
                          G.                             Stonehenge, 121.
                                                     Gjershéi, shell-mounds at, 228.
Gades, when founded, 68.                             Glacial epoch, astronomically                            ac-
Galeed of Jacob aud Laban, 115, 130.                             ”                >          counted   for, 311,
Galena in American mounds, 253.                                                              404.
Galles, M., referred to, 163, 164.                               Py               %
                                                                        dates for, 412.
Galton, Mr., on African custo, 327.                              5                5
                                                                        its phenomena                         ex-
   He     ondanger of wild «animals,                                      plained, 416.
           SOD:                                      Glaciers and moraines, 388.
   3    referred to, 3-43.                           Glass found at Hallstadt, 24.
Gane obtained in various ways, 557.                          3              »      in America, 71.
Games of Australians, 41’7.                                  »            beads in Bronze Age, 37.
   »  Of Msqnimaux, 509.                             Glutton or wolverine, 289, 305.
   »  Of Feegeeuns, 154,                             Gobien                 on ignorance of fire in La-
   »  Of Maories, S66.                                 drones, 558.
   »  Of Tahitinns, 477.                             God, no name                   for, among Abipones,
Ganggraben, 131, 135, 163.                                                  579.
Garden-beds of Wisconsin, 282, 283.                      »                uatious who know not, 437.
Garrigou, M., 340.                                   Godalming, flint from, 346.
Gastaldi, M., on early Italian remains,              Godwin Austen, 315, 343,
   175.                                              Goguet, referred to, 6.
Gaston de Poix und reindeer in France,               Gold, probably first metal noticed by
   303.                                                                    man, 3.
Gaudry, M., his researches, 344.                         ”»ornaments at Kouloba, 153.
Ganlish coinage, how early, 7.                         a        Ps    from Ireland, 41, 42.
Gebelin, Count de, on Dighton Rock,                  Goldhaven tumulus, 131.
   278.                                              Gordon, Dr., on Scotch shell-mounds,
Geikie, Mr., on denudation in pro-                                               229.
  press, 412.                                                    ay
                                                                           Lady Duff, on African morals,
Geninus cited, 67.                                                               568.
“(Genesis of the Warth and of Man,”                  Gorm tumulus, 116.
  quoted, 386.                                       Gosse, M., discovery in valley of Seine,
Genista Cave, 319.                                       345.
Gentlemanw’s Magazine referred to, 8,                Gouges of bronze, 37.
  note.                        é                     Grant, Captain, 578.
Geographical distribution of weapons,                Granville animal-mound, 276.
  cle, 692.                                          Grave Creek mound, 259, 260, 268,
Geological         changes         in   quaternary      272, 278.
  period, 416.                                       Gravel. See Drift.
Geology and time, 418.                               Gray, Dr., referred to, 205.
        and zoology, parallel processes                  »                Mr., oncustom in Hebrides, 130.
               in, 420,                              Gray’s Thurrock, 292.
624                                              INDEX.

Greek and Roman writers refer to                      Hazlewood on Feegeean gods, 453.
  burials under mounds of stone or of                 Hearne’s  Journey to Coppermine
  earth, 116.                                                                     River, 254.
Greenlanders, skulls of, 138.                                      Hy        on      North American             In-
       3        object to eat hare, 198.                                          dians, 519, 577.
Greenstone axe, 95.                                   Hébert, M., 345.
Greenwell, Mr., referred to, 24'7.                    Heceataus referred to, 123.
     a      statistics of funeral rites,              Hector’s barrow, 116.
                     from, 50, 189, 146-150.          Heer, Prof., reference to, 214.
                 finds    traces     of wood     in     »   statistics from, 213.
                      tumuli, 130.                      5,  on ancient flora, 178.
       5        his      account of      Grime’s      Heilly,             alleged        example     of bronze
                      Graves, 80.                         Roman sword foand there, 18.
Gregory of Tours quoted, 117, 217.                    Hemp, 214.
Grenelle, discoveries at, 345.                        Henslow, Prof., 343, 353.
Grey, Capt., 544.                                     Herberstein on the urus, 206, 301, 307.
  »,   on Australian shell-mounds, etc.,                    $5    refers to wild horse, 301.
              438.                                    Herbst, K., 226.
  >,       on Australian customs, 438, 443,                =              on Jutland tumuli, 45.
              449.                                         e              his list of stone implements
  »,       on Australian        skill with   spear,                         in Copenhagen Museum, 75.
         545.                                         Hernandez, 89.
Grime’s Graves, 80, 93.                               Herne Bay, 347.
Guldhoi, what, 46.                                    Herodotus              on Psonian            custom,     174,
Gulf Stream, influence of, 101.                                                   186.
Gunn, Rey. J., on mammoth remains,                                  %        cited, 63, 66, 298.
   295.                                               Herschell,             Sir     J., on     change       of cli-
Gunther, Dr., observation of, 402.                        mate, 409.
                                                      Hesiod, date of, 68.
                          16.                              »              Says iron was discovered after
                                                                             copper and tin, 5.
Habits of Cave-dwellers, 335.                                  »          stecl known in his time, 5.
Haeckel on Bushmen, 434.                                  »    reference to, 199.
Hagiar Kem, 72.                                       Hibbert, Dr., 303.
Haigh on Runic inseription, 11.                       Hill Tribes, traditions of, 425.
Hains, Dr., and the cave-lion, 293.                   Himilco, voyage of, 61.
Hairpins, 36,                                            ne    criticism of Sir G. C. Lewis
Hale on Fakaafo language, 559.                                    upon, 61.
Haligenes, where found, 404,                          Hints to explorers, 171.
Halitherium, 422.                                     Hippopotamus, fossil, 289, 298, 377.
Hall on Esquimaux, 327, 514,                          His, Prof., on skull from Meilen, 215.
Hallstadt, cemetery at, 22.                           Hisely, M., 394.
     af    table of discoveries at, 23.               Hoare, Sir R. C., on position of ditch
Hammers of bronze, 37,                                           in earthworks, 261,
        as   flint, 104.                                 »,   tumuli examined by him, 123.
Handles of stone implements, 92, 104.                      »            on the blue stones           of     Stone-
Happiness on the increase, 593, 597.                                      henge, 124.
Harald, burial of, 117.                                  »               on incense enps, 166.
Hare seldom traceable, 197.                              >»              referred to, 6, 85, 151, 24:7.
  »        opinions concerning, 197, 198.                »               statistics from, 50, 139, 15-4.
Harny, M., 422.                 ;                     Hog,              domestic, 200, 209, 877; its
Harpoons of flint, 104.                                   origin, 201, 234.
Harrison, Pres., on growth of forests,                Homer, date of, 68.
  284.                                                   ie  refers to flax, 214.
Haughton, Rev. §., 78.                                    »              on decoration of shiclds, 73.
Havelse, shell-mound at, 226.                             ay             on use of iron, ctc., 5.
Haven on antiquities of the United                                       referred to,         109,   115,     118,
  States, 250, 251, 273.                                                    199, 565.
                                                        INDEX.                                            625
Hooker, Dr., hissketch of Carnac, 125.                       Hyena, the Cave-, 289, 293, 317, 320
        »           oufuneral rites of the Khasias,
                                                                                                                ?
                                                               377.
                           127.                              Hyer, Mr., discovers Aztalan, 264.
        re          on Fuegian hardiness, 543.
        en          on Indian dolimens, 128.
                    referred to, 126, note.
Hopkins               on       changes   of climate     in
    furope,399.                                              Ibex, 207, 326.
Horn from shell-mounds, 239.                                 Ice at the South Pole, 407.
Horner, Mr., Researches in Egypt, 394.                        »> boulders in, 871.
Horse fossil, 200, 289, 317, 320, 377.                           » Sludge, 64.
  »    wild, 300.                                            Icklingham, flint from, 347.
  »    found in Lake-dwellings, 200,                         Ignorance and crime, 599.
                    209.                                            -      misery, 600.
   >»             sacrificed, 170, 171.                      Iford, 292.
   »              Indians, 532.                              Imitative art, 548.
 Hospitality among savages, 567.                             Implements of Esquimaux, 500.
Hottentots, 429.                                                       53        made of flint, 87.
             i         prejudice against hare, 198.                    Pe,       of stone, various, 75, ete.
             Rs        skill, 5-16.                                    re        of bone and wood, 189.
             a         without religion, 578.                                    Indian, 521.
Houses of Feegcans, 453.                                               rs        of savages, 546.
   »    Of Maories, 463.                                                         in bone- beds, 349.
   »    of Tahitians, 476.                                   Incense cups, 166.
Houzeau, M., 82.                                             Independent inventions, 556.
Hoxne, relics from, 345, 366.                                India, Megalithic remains in, 125.
Hudson’s               Bay        Company,   skins    re-       aS   stone implements found in, 108,
                           ceived by, 359.                               348.
        oe            territory, population of, 359.            >»,   suttee, 171.
            593.                                             Indian corn-hills, 282.
Hughes, Mr., his finds in Kent, 38.                               »   customs in America, 269.
Human               bones not found in shell-                     »    dolmens, 127, 128, 129, 181.
                      mounds, 240.                           Indians, diminution of, 529.
        .           remains rare in pileworks,                     »    of North America, 515.
                                      214,                         »         of Paraguay,      some   account
        nD                 >       very rare in drift,                         of, 580.
                                      357, 300s              Infanticide in ancient Britain, 171.
       st                or        of Denmark, 240,                    3        among     Esquimaux,     171,
       5             sacrifices, 170, 459, 467.                                   512,
       9?                  »        of Feegeans, 457.                           of American Indians, 521.
                  of Muories, 467.                                     Ps       of Hottentots, 434.
Humphr cy and Abbott on Mississippi                                            in Paraguay, 531.
  drift, 398.                                                          .  of Maories, 466.
Hungary copper implements, 58.                                            Polynesian, 466.
Hunt, Mr., on F ecgecan custom, 457.                                      in Tahiti, 487.
Hunting among the KWsquimaux, 503.                           Inhabitants of Lake- villages, 218.
        a2          and fishing of Indians, 527,             Inheritance and succession, 561.
                       539.                                  Inscriptions, Runic, 8, note, 11.
        »           in primitive period, 586.                                    not found iin Bronze Age,
Hnut-urns, 51.                                                                     alae
     3     found in Italy, 51.                                         .         Roman, 11.
     ”»        39   Germany, 51, 52.                                   os       on celt at Rome, 45.
                                    Denmark, 52.                       -        doubtful, in America,
Hut- ‘circles, 78.                                             278.
Huxley, Prof., on geographical distri-                       Intellect in primitive period, 586.
                      bution of man, 387.                    Intellectual estimate of savages, 572.
   Fr              on Engis skull, 337, 340.                 Interment, modes of, 49, 268.
    BS             on N. eanderthal skull, 338.                 Sce also Burial, Funeral.
                                                                                          ss
626                                                         INDEX.

Inventions sometimes independent and                             Jobson, his map of 1591, 177.
   sometimes borrowed, 586.                                      Jones, R., 343.
Ireland, celts from, 25, 27.                                     Judicial statistics, 609.
       55                 copper implements in, 58.              Jukes, 440, 577.
       Bs not certain that Romans en-                            Justin, 217.
             tered it, 58.                                       Jutland, contents of coffins found in,
Trish elk, 299, 321.                                                                  45-49,
   » gold ornaments, 41.                                                 3          shell-mounds of, 228.
Tron Age, what, 3.
  s.                99        burials in, 157.
  », among the                        Gauls      and   Caledo-                                IK
                    nians, 6.
  »,            its early use, 4, 6, 7, 74.                      Kajak and Umiak, 506.
  »             epithets, applied to, by poets, 4.               Kamskatchadale yourt, 492.
  »,            use of, general, in Northern Bu-                 Kandyans, 436.
                    rope, before invasion of Julius              Kane on Cree Indian swearing, 521.
                    Cesar, 22.                                       » on Redskins and portraits, 528,
  5             use of, in Mexico, 77.                                   581.
  »»            weapons not found with bronze,                     »,  on Hsquimaux bird-catching,
                     12.                                           »»  quoted or referred to, 495, 498,
  »             unknown to early Americans, 252.                         500, 505, 557.
  »             how smelted by Hottentots, 432.                  Kattegat, tides of, 230.
                relics at Tiefenau, 7, 221.                      Kattinge            and     Kattinge Verk           shell-
Isolation of savages, 554.                                          mounds, 228.
Italy, bone-caves in,                                            Keller, Dr., on ancient pottery, 192.
Ivory found at Hallstadt, 24.                                            Pa        on primitive Swiss, 219.
       3                  a         Kouloba, 153.                        a         on human remains in Lake-
                                                                                     villages, 215.
                                                                         5         remarks of, 44, 180.
                                       J.                                33        discovery of Lake-dwellings,
                                                                                     173.
Jade used fot celts, '79, 163, 189.                                      r         Memoirs       on        Lake-dwellings,
  » uot found in Europe, 79.                                                         nly Bye asy
Jabn and Uhlmann on Swiss Lake-                                  Kemble, referred to, 117.
  dwellings, 178.                                                Kennet, 119.
Jahn on discoveries at Tiefenau, 7.                              Kent, flint implements from, 38, 3:7.
James,                    expedition to Rocky           Moun-    Kent’s Hole, a bone-cave, 315.
                              tains, 93.                         Kertch, tumulus near, 153.
           a              on American tumuli, 130.               Keston, its etymology, 122.
Jamieson, T. F., on flint-find in Scot-                          Keyserling, opinion of mammoth, 295.
  land, 107.                                                     Khasias, funeral rites of, 127.
Japan, stone implements found in,                                Kiel, stone implements at, 76.
           »,            burial custom, 151.                     Kimmerirge, shale bead, 163.
       »                 its pre-historic archeology not         King, M., on Mammoth,                        295.
                            yet known, 3.                                     Aa     referred to, 3-48, 440.
Javelins, bronze, 31.                                            ISingsley, Mr., 298.
Jefferson, Mr., on skeletons in a tumu-                          Kireudbrightshire, cairn in, 9-4.
   lus in Virginia, 269.                                         Kissing, not universal, 563.
Jeffreys, Mr., on mollusca of Somme                              Kistvacn, 136.
      Valley, 367.                                               Kit’s Coty House, view of, 112.
Jelalabad tumuli, 111.                                           Ijékkemmébddings                     or    shell-mounds,
Jellinge, 116.                                                     76, 78, 98, 223, ete.
Jenkin, A., letter to the author, 608.                           Knapp, Mr., 255.
Jensen, M.;-157.                                                 Knives, bronze, 33.
Jewellery in Etruscan tombs, 151.                                        »          tound at Thebes, 33.
                a
           at Kouloba, 153.                                              >         flint, 88) 523.
Jews refused to eat hare, 198.                                           »         stone, 189.
Joass, Mr., 304.                                                 Ixnox’s “Ceylon” quoted, 64, 435.
                                                 INDEX.                                                             627
Koeh, Dr., account of Mastodon, 286.                      Lake-men, their character, 219, 220.
KXohen, on stone circles in Arabia, 113.                  Lamanon, M. de, on Columbian Indian
Kolben, on Hottentots, 480, 4383, 546,                      Alphabet, 562.
   580.                                                   Land, level of, affected by rivers, 412.
Kols, modern tradition among, 425                         Lang, Mr., on Australian customs, 450.
Kongehoi, what, 46.                                       Language of Australians, etc., 448, 451,
      eS   contents of, 49.                                                           452.
Korsér, coast-find at, 105.                                             Gs        and sounds, 386, 562, 571,
Kotzebue, 294, 487, 581.                                                            573.
Kouloba tumulus, contents of, 1538.                       Lapham                discovers and describes ani-
                                                                                    mal-mounds, 274.
                     L.                                                 os       on  Wisconsin     antiquities,
                                                                                    250, 251, 255, 264.
Ladrone Islanders, whether once igno-                                  fe        on Wisconsin forests, 281,
   rant of fire, 558.                                                              285.
Tadrones, houses in, 519.                                               os       on corn-hills, 282.
Lafitan, M., cited, 114.                                                as       on Wisconsin            garden-beds,
Lagomys, or tailless hare, 307, 317.                                 285.
Laing, Mr., 305, 514,                                     Lapland “jamme,” 182.
Lains, cairn of, 116.                                              5            skulls, 138.
Lake-hamlet,     ancient      model      of,     at                Gs           customs, 327, 568.
          Munich, 52.                                     Laplanders                  retreating      from civiliza-
  »    habitations   of Switzerland,            12,           tion, 302.
                       173, 178-222.                      Lartet, M., on bone-cave at Aurignac,
                     mentioned by Hero-                                                 319-322.
                          dotus, 17-4.                        “5                   on     Paleontological          chro-
  as        3        in England, 17-4.                                                  nology, 289.
  “p        i        in      Mecklenburg,                     5;                   on     caves     in      Dordogne,
                        175.                                                            323, ete.
  i.        re       in Ireland, 167.                         ¥                    finds no traces of reindeer
  Py        Ps       in Scotland, 174.                                               in Spanish caves, 302.
  nf        rr       in Italy, 175.                           of                   opinion of, 805, 591, note.
  ee        "a       in France, 175.                          a                    discovery   among     bones
  a         A        none in Denmark,                                               from caye near Madrid,
                       106.                                                         319.
  35        *s       modern, 175.                             iy                  experiment made by, 332.
  e         Fe       ee         of,        174,               ”                    on drawings           in cave     of
                      175, 178.                                                         Savigné, 333.
  PF        i        their age, 179, 208,                     “                   on Rhinoceros leptorhinus,
                         220,                                                           297, 298.
  an        55        structure, 179,181,                     6                    on quaternary climate,310.
                         185.                                 of                   on    marked    rhinoceros
            a         fauna of, 194.                                                    bones, 362.
  e         iS        flora of, 211.                          y                   makes flint needle, 548.
  ip        33        statistics, 179.                                reference to, 345, 361.
  »         9         position, 181.                      Lastie, Vicomte de, his collection from’
  as        aa        indications, 182.                     Bruniquel, 327.
  *         2         relics of, 181, 183,                La Tene, metal implements found at, 7.
                         185.                             Lead not found in Bronze Age, 20, 37.
  ry        sg        at Wauwyl,         182.                 »              used in Iron Age, 16.
  A                  of Bronze Age, 215.                      »»             perhaps known to ancient Ame-
  op   Superior, antiquities near, 273.                           ricans, 253.
       villages, decreased gradually in                   Leech, Mr., finds flint implements near
          number, 220.                                        Herne Bay, 347.
   »» worshippers, 217.                                   Leems on custom of Danish Lapland-
TLake-men, their food, ete. 191, 193,                        ers, 327.
                     212, 214.                            Lee’s translation   of                      Dr.     IJeller’s
     »          By remains, 214,                             «‘Memoirs,” 178.
                                                      8   9
628                                            INDEX.

Lefeaux, Mr., letter to the author, 607.            Lyell on ancient site of Brighton, 364.
Lefebore, M., 164, note.                                »        00 chronological problems,            420.
Lefroy, M., quoted, 569.                                »        on antiquity of man, 422.
Leidy, Dr., and Felis atrow, 293.                       },       on changes of climate, 409.
Lemming, 307, 378.                                      ;,       table of excentricity       of earth’s
Leopard, fossil, where found, 294.                                 orbit, 411.
Lepsius, M., 395.                                       »,       on duration of glacial epoch, 416.
Leslie, Col., 129, note.                                »        quoted, 396.
Letourneaux, M., 127, note.                             ,        on age of Mississippi delta, 397.
Letters on American antiquities of                       »       mentioned, 316, 371.
   doubtful character, 2'78-280.                    Lyux, fossil, found in England, 294.
Le Vaillant on Hottentots, 578.                     Lyon, Capt., on Esquimaux, 497, 508.
Leveillé, Dr., on a flint-find at Pres-                 55              3            »     sledges, 505.
   signy, 83, 107.                                      »»       opinion of foxes as food, 195.
Lewis, Sir G. C., on the transport of                   »        oD formation of ice, 65.
                            tin to the East, 61.
           "           on     the   voyage     of
                         Himileo, 61.                                           M.
           rs          on the voyage           of
                         Pytheas, 63.               Maccagnone cave, 318.
           %           on ancient supply of         McEnery, Mr., 307.
                         tin, 61, 70.                        5        his     researches     in    Kent’s
Lichtenstein, 435.                                                          cavern, 315.
Liége, bone-caves near, 64.                         Machairodus latidens, 307.
Life, indifference to, 457, 562.                    Mackenzie on Esquimaux                        opinions
Linen used for dress in Bronze               Age,     about Englishmen, 425.
  45.                                               Macon, flint-finds near, 107.
Lion, the cave, 289, 293, 317, 320, 377.            Madrid, relies from, 362.
 Lipari, what Pytheas says of it, 63.               Magellan on stature                  of Patagonian
 Lisch, Dr., on hut-urns, 51, 52. -                                     tribes, 532.
      rs     on pile-dwellings in Meck-                      »       referred to, 558.
                    lenburg, 175.                   Madagascar, custom in, 125.
Literature, its uses, 598.                          Maize grown in North America, 526.
Livingstone, Dr., 111, note, 578.                   Malay language, 574.
‘¢ Livres de beurre,” 83.                           Mallet, Mr., his discovery of tin in a
Loch Resort, beehive houses near, 54.                  so-called copper celt, 58.
Loch Spynie, shell-mounds at, 229.                  Malta, ruin in, 72.
Locke, Prof., describes animal mounds,                 »    its ornaments, 169.
   274.                                             Malton, stone axe found there, 609.
Loess, 390,                                         Mammalia of drift, 377.
Liéhle, M., on piles used at Wangen,                      :      in shell-mounds, 233.
             186, 357.                                  a    in Lake-dwellings, 195.
     5     on find at Wangen, 13.                   Mammoth, 289, 294, 817, 320, 361,
London, flint weapon, found in, 345.                            377.
Long Barrow, tumulus at, 161.                                A         near Madrid, 362.
Long Island, remains at, 54.                        Man, his antiquity, 1, 287, 288, 361,
Longlow, 136.                                               379, 385, etc.
Los Jardines, islands mentioned, 559.                   »>       his primitive condition, 585.
Lovaine,        Lord, on     lake-dwelling    in        »        his diffusion, 587.
  south of Scotland, 174,                               »>       and his intellect, 591.
Lubbock, Sir J. W., on alteration of                Mandan wigwains, 280.
  earth’s axis, 401.                                Mauné-er-H’rock tumulus, 163.
Lucretius mentions the Stone, Bronze,               Maories, notices of, 461, 568,570.                Sce
   and Iron Ages, 6,                                    New Zealanders.
Lukis, on sepulchral tumuli, 16,                    Marco Polo, 151.
Lycus, mound of, 116.                               Mare di Sargasso, 63.
Lyell, Sir C., 287, 343,                            Marmots, 307, 326.
  »,   on change of river courses, 382.             Marriage umong Maories, 466,
                                                    INDEX.                                            629
Marriage          customs       of American In-           Meyer, EF. von, fossil ox found by, 204.
                                 dians, 520.              Michaelis, 385.
       22           2         other nations, 436,         Michel, Mont St., tumulus, 163.
                                437, 419, 455, 466,       Migration, facts connected with, 587.
                               518, 567.                  Millet found in Lake-villages, 211,
Marrow,          ancient      love    of, illustrated >   Milwaukie animal-mounds, 277.
  236, 241.                                               Mincopies, 436.
Marsden, Mr., 466, 565.                                   Mind and its influences, 591.
Marseilles, when founded, 68.                             Mineralogy of Drift, 361.
Masson quoted, 111.                                       Mines, ancient American, 254.
Mastodon in Missouri, 286.                                Mississippi, man and mastodon in, 287
       3          »» Mississippi, 287.                         33      delta, age of, 397.
       7A         » France, 422.                                  A        valley,   relics   from,    79,
Materials preterred for stone imple-                                    357, note.
  ments, 77.                                              Missouri, mastodon found in, 286.
Mather, Prof., quoted, 256.                               Moab, stone monuments in, 125.
Matthews, Mr., on Fuegians, 580.                          Model of Lake-hamlet at Munich, 52.
Maurice, Mr., alludes                to stone   monu-     Models buried with the dead, 150.
  ments in India, 125.                                    Modern earthworks in America, 268.
McGillivray on Australian canoes, 429,                    Moen, tumulus at, 157,
           re       referred to, 13-4.                       ss       spear-head from, 100.
Means of subsistence increasing, 594,                     Meerigen bronze relics, 43.
Meath, sculptured stones in, 169.                         Mollusca in drift, 308, 377.
Mecklenburg, 60.                                          Monaghan, stone axe from, 92.
             -          brooch, 10.                       Mongez, M., on sword found at Heilly,
Megalithic monuments                  called Druidi-
                                    eal, 119.             Monkeys crack nuts with stones, 584.
       Bs                 3      how constructed,         Monkman, Mr., extract from, 609.
                                   16.                    Mont St. Michel, tumulus, 183.
        ee                3      how     decorated,       Montperieux, reference to, 129.
                                     167.                 Monzie,inPerthshire, “ weem”’ at, 53.
        By                5      remains in India,        Moore, Mr., 410.
                         125, 129.                        Moosseedorf, 13, 14, 189,195, 197-199.
Meilen, remains at, 197,                                  Morai, 483, 549.
Meilgaard, shell-inound at, 224, 226-                     Moral estimate of savages, 567, 572.
  228.                                                    Morges, finds at, 13, 15, 32-34, 45,
Mela,Pomponius, on founders of Gades,                        180.
                                                          Morlot, M., work of, referred to, 24, 37.
Men, which most barbarous, 550.                               >?  on age of the cone of Tiniére,
  »  early varieties of, 240.                                            389.
Menchecourt, 342.                                                     on sbell-mounds, 226.
Mendip Hills, £elis spelea from, 293.                                 observations of, 24, 39, 419.
Menhirs, 109, 112, 128.                                       »        on glacial periods, 311.
Mental powers of savages, 572.                                         on lake-dwellings, 178.
Merlin, 122.                                                           on Phoenicians in America, 71.
Merry, Mr., on use of boomerang, 44:4.                                 on twofold character of glacial
Metal, where not used till recently,                                     epoch, 414.
                  4:29,                                       »     onchronological schemes, 414.
   »   unknown in Tahiti, 469,                            Mortillet, M. de, referred to, 119.
   »    uwnknown to cave-men, 3385.                           As      an opinion of, 314.
   »   not found in certain tumuli,                       Morton, Dr., 279.
          161, 163, 164.                                  Mouatt on Andamaners, 436, 577.
   >»  not found in shell-mounds, 241.                    Moulds for casting celts found at
Mexicans used both stone and metal,                         Morges, etc., 45, 60.
  77, 80, St.                                             Mound-builders of America, 280.
Mexican flint implements, 89-91.                             ”
                                                                 City, tumuli at, 270.
   a             paintings referred to, 253.                 2?
                                                                  burial, its early prevalence,
   BS            temple, 429,                                        116.
630                                           INDEX.

Mounds         among the Esquimaux, 512.           Nilsson, Prof., his services in Arch«o-
  See also Barrow, Tumulus.                                   logical science, 6.
Mourcin, M., collection of relics from                 »   his theory of the Bronze Age,
  Perigueux, 332.                                                    61.
Mouse not traced in Lake-dwellings,                            his     remarks on Voyage           of
   ASS):                                                             Pytheas, 65-67.
Moussa, Burgh of, 54, 55.                                     his arguments         for Phienician
Munich, model of Lake-hamlet in the                                  copnexions with Norway
  Museum there, 52.                                                  analyzed   and estimated,
Marchison, Sir R., 343, 375, note.                                   71-73.
       a       opinion of mammoth,                      >»    on descent of oxen, 205.
                        295.                            >»    on “Ganggraben,” 134.
Muscoda, animal-mound, 275.                                referred to, 50, 138, 271, 306,
Museum of Royal Irish Academy, 76.                            425,
Music, 455, 465, 476, 509, 598.                    Nind, Mr. §., 448, 575.
Musk         ox, or musk     sheep, fossil, 289,   Ninus buried           under mound      of earth,
       298, 377.                                      116.
Mylne, Mr., 343.                                   Nonville, M. de, 281.
Myths, their uses, 427.                            Nordmann on the Aurochs, 306.
                                                   Norman, Mr. H. J., Discovery of flint
                                                       implements in Kent, 348.
                        N.                         North American flint flake, 91.
                                                       ”             ”      archeology, 250.
Nagelflue, 79.                                         e             mA     antiquities      classed,
Nails of tin, 49.                                                             ASE


Natchez, Indian houses, 2738.                                aA   Indians, 424.
 Natural History Review referred to,               Northumberland tumuli, contents of,
             8, note,                                149.
     ss   selection anong men, 590.                Norway,       supposed traces          of Phuni-
Navigators, ancient, 61.                               cians in, 71.
Neanderthal skull, 337.                            Nott, Mr., 483.
Needles of bronze, 37.                                 »,    and Gliddon, 287, note.
Negro, aucient origin of, 386.                     Noville, remains of ass at, 199.
Neolithic Age, 3, 75.                              Nudity not always thought indecent,
   a>       22   burial in, 151, 156.                564.
    »?      >?   few interments       of,          Numbers and numerals, 57-4.
                    known, 165.                    Numeration of Anstraliaus, 48, 575.
New Caledonian flint flake, 89.                           7   of the Esquimaux, 513,
New Orleans, ancient relics from, 287.                             574.
New York State, archeology of, 250.                      %      of the Paraguayans, 531.
New Zealand adze, 97, 99.                          Nurhags, 56.
New Zealanders,332, 424. See Maorics.              Nydam, discoveries at, 8, 9.
  33           49      funeral     rites,   133,
                        465.
Newark         in America, earthworks        at,
                                                                            O.
   262, 280.                                       Oak-tree in Denmark, 248.
Newton, Mr., on remains near Thet-                 Oats known in Bronze Age, 211.
             ford, 174.                            Oberea’s mound in Tahiti, 164, 483.
     re    on zoology of ancient Eu-               Objects buried with the dead, 139, 161.
                    rope, 293, note.               Obsidian weapons and implements
         »    Sir Isaac, reference to, 601.                          of Snake Indians, 523,      See
Nia niam, iron crescent of, 554.                                Flint Flake.
Nicobar Islanders’ religion, 581.                        »   in Mexico, 89.
Nidau, 12-15, 32-35, 43.                           Offa’s Dyke, 113.
eee                 Lied, quoted, 206, 300,        Ogham Alphabet, 605.
  80                                               Ohio, ancient works in, 258, ote.
Niederwyl, pile-dwellings, 186.                    Old Testament style avd Arab speech,
Nile valley, elevation of, 394.                      425.
                                                       INDEX.                                        631
Oldfield, Mr., quoted, 440, 445.                             Paleontological Chronologyof Lartet,
      _                 yy On     native population of          20
                                Australia, 594.              Palestine, stone circles, etc., in, 115.
     a      » Deathsin Australia, 595.                            me    stone implements found in,
Oliver, Lieut., on Madagascar cus-                                        108.
   tom, 125.                                                 Palgrave on antiquity of man, 1.
Olsen, M., his care of the Meilgaard                         * Pulheta,” or throwing-stick, 555.
              shell-mound, 227.                              Pallas refers to reindeer in Eastern
   s     » Collections, 247,                                    Europe, 801.
“‘Ooloo” of Esquimaux, 99.                                   Paraguay Indians, account of, 530.
       »  Danish counterpart of, 98.                         Parchim, hut-urn found near, 51.
Orduance Map referred to, 120.                               Parkyns on Abyssinian notions, 425.
Orkney, stone circles in, 114,                               Parricide of Hottentots, 434.
      je                DErchs— In, 5d.                           »     of Feegeeans, 457.
Ormond, Mr., on stone circles in Aus-                             »     in Tahiti, 488.
  tralia, 114.                                               Parry, Capt., on Esquimaux dwellings,
Ornaniental devices on bronze, 41.
Ornameutation                    of bronze produced in          »     on Esquimaux habits, 494, 498.
                                 the custing, -10, 44.         » on Hsquimaux dress, 507.
                   rs           later by hammering,    41.      » On Esquimauxsuperstitions, 512.
Ornaments of ancient Americans, 258.                           5, On Hsquimaux character, 514.
     Af   of bronze, 33.                                     Passage graves. See Ganggraben.
              a          of Esquimaux, 508.                  Patagonians, notices of, 531.
              _          of savages, 446, 463, 4/75,         Paterculus, Vell., on founders of Gades,
                            516, 53-1.                          68.
Osborn, Capt., on Esquimaux lamps,                           Patroclus, his tomb, 116, 118.
  499.                                                       Pauilhaic, large flint flakes found at, 86.
Ossturies of American Indians, 267.                          Pausanias cited, 116.
Otahcite, mound in, 16-4,                                    Pease found in Lake-dwellings, 212.
Otter, 207.                                                  Peat-bogs, antiquities in, 224.
Oval tool-stones, 102.                                       Peat of Somme valley, 378.
Owen, Prof., finds the Zagomys among                         Peck,    Captain,   relics   found   by him
               bones from Kent’s Ca-                           near Ontonagon river, 284.
               vern, 307.                                    Pengelly, Mr., his researches, 230, 291,
              ‘i          on fossil horse, 200, 300.            316, 317.
              3           rhinoceros from Clacton,           Penn’s Treaty with Indians, 279.
                             PAShe                           Penpits, 53, 78.
              5           skull from Bruniquel, 340.         Pentatetich, its mention of bronze and
              PA           Trish elk, 299.                      iron, 5.
              3            on Andamaners, 436, 550.          Percy, Dr., letter to the author, 607.
Owl, snowy, 307.                                             Perils of wild animals and men, 695.
Ox used for different purposes, 558.                         Periods of American history, 285.
Oxen of the Lake-dwellings, 204.                             Perv, stone circles in, 114.
  »               Chillingham       and   Lyme      Park,    Petavius, 386.
                    204.                                     Petrie, Mr., on early references to
Oysters in Denmark, 231, 232.                                   Orkney circles, 114.
                                                             Pewankee animal-mounds, 276.
                                                             Pfahlbauten or Lake-villages, 14, ete.
                                   Iu                        Phillips, Prof., 316.
                                                             Pheenician art imperfectly represented
Paalstab or Paulstave, 29.                                                  in our museums, 72.
Pacific Islanders, religion of, 577.                                      colonies and commerce, 68.
Prvonians, their lake-dwellings, 174.                                     sources of copper and tin,
Pain, relief of, 587.
Palvolithie               or     Archmolithic     Age, 2,                 commerce and Bronze Age,
                            75, 414.                                         60.
          ”              Age,      its interments     un-                 trade with Britain and
                            known, 151.                                      Spain, 70.
6382                                       INDEX.

Pheenician       supposed   knowledge      of   Pottery of Feegeeans, 454.
                   America, 71, 278.                 ie          of the “Stone Age, 192.
        55       supposed knowledge        of        »            Yrudimental, 585.
                   Norway, 71                        on          hut-urns of, 51, 52.
Physical geography and ethnology,                    5           from Wauwy), 189.
   387.                                              »,        - substitute for, among Esqui-
Picts’ houses described, 58, 78, 135.                              maux, 494.
Picture-writing, 279.                                be         unknown to cave-men, 333,
Pigorini, Prof., 51.                                                          835, 550.
     »     on early Jtalian remains,                 ”            ”         theVeddahs,43d.
             175.                                    ”            ”         Andamaners,4:37.
Piles for lake-dwellings, 93.                        9             ”?                  Australians, 441.
Pileworks, chronological place of, 208.              »              &         Maories, 462.
Pillows of earthenware, 218.                         ”              o      in Tahiti, 477.
Pine-tree in Denmark, 233, 248.                      »           wnoused by Patagonians, 533.
Pins of bronze, 34-37, 229.                                             »         Fuegians, 542.
Pipes in American tumuli, 270.                  Pouchet, M., 345.
Piquigny, find at, 19; alleged example          Pourtales, Count, finds human bones in
   of bronze Roman sword found there,               calcareous conglomerate, 287.
   19.                                          Prado, M. de, discovery near Madrid,
Plants of Lake-men, 212,                          362.
Plato, 63.                                      Précy, discovery at, 345.
Pliny, on foundation of Utica, 68.              Precession of Equinoxes, 405.
   »   on bison, 305.                           Pre-historic races of men, 170.
   >»  mentions sacred lakes, 217.                    op     relics, 109, and passim.
 Pliocene period, man supposed to have                 a     times, Palgrave on, 1.
   lived in, 421.                               Pressigny le Grand, flint implements
 Polecat, 320.                                    made there, 83.
 Polybius on voyage of Pytheas, 63.             Prestwich, Mr., researches of, 230, 317,
 Polygainy of Australians, 449.                                             Soomoole
 Polynesian infanticide, 466.                                      visits Abbeville, 3.13.
 Pompei, no bronze    swords or celts                              on    geoloey    of Somme
   found at, 20.                                                      Valley, 363.
Pond-barrows, 135, note.                                  o        on action of ice, 371.
Pont de Thitle, find at, 14, 178, 393.                    5        table of mammualia                from
Pontlevoy, find at, 421.                                                    Bedford,       Abbeville,
Ponzi, and remains of reindeer from                                         Amiens, and Paris, 377.
   Campagna, 302.                                         Pr       on         relation      of   loéss     to
 Poole, Mr., quoted, 588.                                            gravel, 380.
Population of hunting countries, 358.                     "        on hippopotamus, 310.
     -p   increases with the ciyili-                      S        on         flint implement            seen
                 zation of peoples, 594.                                in situ, 353.
        3   scanty in primitive times,                    -        English river-heds, 369.
                     357;                                          on composition of marl, 375.
     ”»        9   barbarous countries,         Prichard, Dr., on common chronology
                     359.                         385.
Portraits, odd notions about, 528, 581,         Primitive condition of man, 589.
Pottery from shell-mounds, 229, 230,            Problems to be solved, 352.
                239, 240.                       Progress of happiness of men, 593.
   es        from Méen, 159, 160, 161.          Property, descent of, 561.
   3         from West Kennet, 162, 163.        Pyramidal           structures           in Wisconsin,
   .         sepulchral, 165.                       265, 281.
   5         in ancient times, 257.             Pyranids of Egypt, 111.
   +         general occurrence of, 257.        Pytheas, voyage of, 350 B.c., 63.
   ~         characteristics of, 257.                »    eriticism of Sir G. C. Lewis
   ny)       of Bronze Age, 198, 217.                       upon, 63.
   vr        of Americans, 257, 258.
   .         of different ages, 16,
                                                            INDEX.                                                 633
                                Q.                               Rhinoceros, fossil, 289, 296, 317, 320,
                                                                               377.
Quarterly Review, 120.                                           Ribe, tumuli near, 46.
Quaternary mammalia, 289.                                        Richardson, on peculiar form of ice, 66.
             OS            period, geological changes                         a»           on Dogrib Indians, 570.
                in, 416.                                                        i           cheek studs, 508.
Quatrefages, M. de, on descent of oxen,                          Richborough, coins found at, 17.
                                205.                             Riddle, Dr., his experiments, 397.
             ae             referred to, 345.                    Rigollot, M., his researches, 343.
                                                                 Rivers, action of, on land, 364, etc.
                                                                 River-courses changing, 381.
                                 R.                                »   rift gravel-beds, 342, etc.
                                                                   »   levels, alteration of, 365, etc.
Races of men, 587.                                               Robenhausen, tissue found at, 46.
Rae, Dr., on Esquimaux, 496, 513.                                      =       Animal remains,197-199.
     »,   Yeferred to, 360.                                      Robinson, Mr., 451.
Ramorino, Prof., on marked bones, 421.                           Rochebrune, M., on cromlech at Con-
Ramsauer,              cemetery discovered by, 22.                   folens, 127.
 Ramsay, Prof., referred to, 317, 343,                           Rock carvings, 167.
  352.                                                                                          in Australia.
                                                                     »               »          in England, Scotland,
                                                                     ”               >
Ransom, Dr., finds lynx in Derbyshire,
  294.                                                                                            Ireland,  Brittany,
Rat not found in Lake-dwellings, 199.                                                             167-169.
Razor knives of bronze, 33, 35, 48.                                       o     in Scandinavia, 169.
Reaping, peculiar mode of, 71.                                   Roe, 317, 321.
Red deer, 208, 305.                                              Roedeer, 208.
Regnard,              a notion among the Lapps,                  Rogers, Prof., 343.
  568.                                                                   »          W.,       on Californian    Indians’
Regnoli, M., 291, 302, 340.                                                               skill, 545.
Reigate, fluid finds at, 107.                                    Rollrich stones, 113.
Reindeer, 289, 301-305, 321, 377.                                Roman and other coins at Tiefenau,
     3     not found with Neolithic                                                      221.
              remains, 206.                                              »          inscriptions, 11.
Relics in American tumuli, 268,                                          %)         swords, 18.
   »”             in bone-caves, 312, 341.                       Ross, Sir J., on Esquimaux funeral
   »,             from sacrificial mounds, 270-272.                                  custom, 512.
Religion, absence of, among Paraguay-                                »          on musk-sheep hunt, 502.
                     aus, 531.                                       »           onsledge, 505.
                   anong Putagonians, 536.                                      on ignorance of boats, 506.
        ”             7         Fuegians, 541.                           on winter stores, 495.
        a3            Ss        Greenland Esquimaux,                 »   on religious ideas, 579.
                             611.                                  bP)
                                                                         on opinions and character, 492,
        ~            rey   Northern Indians, 519.                          512, 514.
        »          and science, 593, 600.                        Rougemont on date of round towers,
                   nations without, 575.                                              50.
                   none mnong the Andamaners,                          7           sources of tin, 608.
                                              437.               Royal Ivish Academy,                    stone imple-
        2                  2?        PED   Australians,            ments at, 76.
                                              447.               Runes, note on the invention, and the
        »          Of Feegeeans, 453, 457, 459.                      characters employed, 604.
        »          of Hottentots, 433.       ‘                   Runic inscriptions, 8; note, 11.
        »,         Of Lalemen, 217.                                 »     aphabet, 604.
        »          ot Maories; 466.                              Rutherford on feat of New Zealanders,
        »          Of Tahiti, 484.                                 545.
        »          lowest forms of, 581.                         Riitimeyer, his researches, 169, 178.
Religious ideas among savages,                       575.              3)
                                                                              on fauna of Lake-dwell-
Responsibility of savages, 566.                                                   ings, 194, 195-197, 199-
Rhinoceros at Abbeville, 361.                                                     205, 210, 358.
634                                                      INDEX.

Riitimeyer on connecting links be-                            Saws of bronze, 37.
                           tween        certain species,      Saxon weapons of iron, 21.
                           309.                               Scandinavian tumuli, 131.
          6           on human            remains     from                 opinions, 134.
                           Lake-dwellings, 215.               Schlegel on Chinese prejudice against
                      on    horse        and    reindeer          hare, 198.
                         bones from Dordogne                  Schmerling, Dr., finds hnman relics in
                         caves, 326.                                                 caves at Liege, 313.
          hs          summary of bones from                              $s       on Engis skull, 337.
                                                                                                                3)
                         Veyrier cave, 326.                                3      “ Ossements        fossiles
          ne          on the bison, 306.                                             quoted, 64.
          P           on Sus palustris, 200.                  Schoolcraft on American funerals, 129,
          ms          on fossil oxen, 204,                                                         130.
          A           bones       of wild      and    tame          3                   x5      Indians, 515,
                           animals, 200,                                                           519, 525.
                                                                       i         on Dighton Rock, 278.
                              S.                                       i on Sandstone relic, 278.
                                                                       Bistatistical calculations, 593.
Saadvedra, on ignorance of fire among                                  2 history of Indian tribes,
   inhabitants of “ Los Jardines,” 559.                                     250, 252, 254, 424.
Sacred enclosures of America, 262.                            Schulz, Don G., on sources of tin, 608.
Sacrifices at funerals, 170.                                  Schiitz, M., on Sus palustris, 261.
Sacrificial mounds deseribed, 269.                            Schwab, Col., his collection from
      29       2?    fheory concerning,                                           Nidan, 18.
                                       271.                        ”            finds pottery at Nidau, 218.
Sagas, tumulus mentioned in, 117.                                 op      on lake-villages burned, 220,
Sahara, 387, 404.                                                 ss      his collections, 215, 216
Salmon          abundant              in Boothia     Felix,   Science and virtue, 600.
  505.                                                        Scientific inventions, their utility, 599.
Salutations, diversity of, 563.                               Scioto river embaukment, 281.
Samoans, 453, 577                                             Scotland, shell-mounds in, 229.
Sanchee, monument at, 126.                                          dp         Lake-dwellings in, 174.
Sandstone in river-gravel, 370.                                                reindeer in, 303.
Sandwich Islanders, 483, note; 489.                           Scrapers, what, and where found, 95,
Sanford, Mr., 293,                                                           328.
Sarcens, 122.                                                      on    of modern Hsquimaux, 96,
Sardinian “‘ Nurhags,” 56.                                                  507.
Sargasso, Mare di, 61.                                        Sculptured stones, 167-169.
Sauley,        M. de, on Moabite                     monu-    Seylax, 63.
  ments,         125.                                         Sea-level in Denmark,2
Savage nations, comparative table of                               »    Change of, 382, ie
          implements, weapons, etc.,                          Secondary interments, 140, 164.
                 553.             :                           Seeds of Lake-:nen, 212.
      »        tribes, comparisons              between,      Selserstown mound, 281.
                              548.                            Semilunar implements, 98.
      »          Bs         their         exclusiveness       Semitic ornamentation, 72.
                              554.                            Seneca on ancient oxen, 305.
Savages and children compared, 570,                           Sepulchral mounds in America, 267.
   =           of modern times, 424.                                A.          pottery classified, 165. .
      »        knowledge of, important                  to          acs         urns of British tumuli, 165.
                  archeologists, 428.                               %           incense eupsof      ,,   166.
      »        not degenerate, 428, 585.                            “           food vases of       oy   Lowe
   >           their perils, 594.                                   5           drinking-cups of ,,      167.
   »           their self-inflicted sufferings,                                 feasts, 170, yals
                  596.                                        Sewing, savage skillj in, 648.
      »        their skill, 544,                              Shelley, Mr., his flint-finds near Rei-
      -        a        weapons, remarks upon,                    gate, 107.
                       2.                                     Shell-fish, 206, 308.
                                               INDEX.                                                    635
Shell-mound axes, 96.                               Society of Antiquaries, flintimplements
Shell-mounds in Australia, 488.                                possessed by, 315.
      Fe     in New Zealand, 462.                   Solar radiation, variation of, 399.
      a      of Denmark, 223-229.                   Soldering unknown in Bronze andearly
          as          of other countries, 229,        Tron Age, 41,
                           230.                     Solomon, 68.
                      how related to tumuli,        Somme                    river-bed    gradually formed,
                         2d.                             373, ete.
          °F          their antiquity, 229-230,     Somme valley alluvium,                      age of, 175,
                 218.                                                                  383.
Shetland isles,    burghs” in, 55.                           0               »      section of, 363.
Ship or boat found in Slesvick, 8.                                           »      visited, 343.
              its contents, 9.                      Sottais, 64, note.
Shirley quoted, 177.                                South Sea tumuli, 114.
Shortland quoted, 563.                              Spain, tin from, 69, 70.
Shortt, Dr., 578.                                      »   rock carvings in, 168.
Shrub Hill gravel, remains in, 350.                 Sparrman, M., 433.
Siberia, wxe used in, 26, 27.                       Spear- heads of flint, 100.
Siberian Yurts, 181.                                Spears, bronze, 31.
Sickles, bronze, 32.                                Species, succession of, in Hurope, 290.
Silbury Lill, 112, 118.                                      3,          transitions of, 308.
Silver abundant in Denmark, 11.                     Speke on East African custom, 56-1.
   y»  anongancient Americans, 253.                     sy              ON       opinions of African   tribes,
  »        not found in Bronze Age, 3, 20,                                   425.
              37.                                   Spencer, Herbert, on progress, 602.
  »     used in Tron Age, 16.                       Spiennes, flint works at, 82, 107.
        when. first noticwed, 3.                    Spindle whorl, 190.
Siinilaritie sand differences of weapons            Spix and Martius,                     reference to, 564,
  and other objects, 556.                             570, 573.
Shnupson,          Sir G., statistical   calcula-   Squier and Davis, on varied contents
  tions, 59-1.                                                   of Mississippi tumuli, 79.
Simpson, Sir J. Y., on rock carvings,                    »     on Mississippi valley monu-
             119, 167.                                                          ments, 250, 283.
     »     stone circles in Australia,                            ”           on early American art, 253,
                    LLL.                                                        258.
Simpson’s Discoveries quoted, 499.                                            Indian population, 281.
Sin, why committed, 600.                                          an          on Bourneville Enclosure,
Skin-scrapers, 95, 97, 191, 507.                                                259.
Skins of animals uscd for dress in                                an          on Fort Hill, 260.
   Bronze Age, 1d.                                                            opinion on earthworks, 261.
Skulls from Scandinavia, 136, 2:L0.                               rf          on animal-mounds, 274.
   6a     »    English tumuli, 136.                               Fy)         on sacrificial mounds, 268.
   »   Classified, 137.                                           *           on temple-mounds, 272.
   yy  various, 138, 337.                                         ")          on Scioto valley works, 270.
   »   moulded in ancient and modern                          ee           on Aztalan, 264.
            thnes, 517.                                       »,        Mr., on bone-pits, 268.
       from Switzerland,2                                                  on stonecireles in Peru, 114.
Skyrings on Tfuegian skill, 31a.                                           references to, 188, 250, 255,
Sledges of Bsquimaus, 505.                                        264.
Slesvick, finds in, of Iron Age, 8.                 Staffordshire tumuli, 155.
Slingstones, 189, 190, 477.                         Stag, 321, 377.
      on     of flint, LOO.                         Stanbridge, illustration of Australian
Smith, Dr., of Camborne, on the Cas-                    skill, 545.
        siterides, 67 ; ou tin mines, 70.           Stanley, Dr., on stone circle near Tyre,
   »           Rev. A. C., reference to, 121,                    113;
                 note.                                  fa    Hon. W. 0O., 53.
      »        J. A. on reindeer, 303, 304.         Stanton Drew, remains at, 82, 107.
Socicty Islands, 482,                               St. Acheul, 343, 364.
636                                                INDEX.

Staigue Fort, Kerry, 56, 606.                           Stoae Implements                      at Flensborg, Keil,
Statistics of archeological evidence, 15.                                                      and    Museum         of
       ”
                   interments, 142-149, 154-                                                   Royal Ivish Aca-
                     156.                                                                    demy, 76.
                   bronze objects, 43.                      )                      ”
                                                                                           in Stockholm, 76.
      AS    stone implements, 357.                          a                      .,      in Copenhagen mu-
Steel unknown to bronze workers, 40.                                                         seum classified, 75.
   ;, known to Greeks, 5.                                   Fi                     sp      similar     in different
Steele on kissing, 563.                                                                        countries, 59.
Steenstrup, Prof., his researches, 169,                     »,             used for implements very geuc-
                     225, 226, 389.                                          rally, 75.
       Ee)
                   Discoveries at Froélund,                 »,             where found, 105.
                     106.                                   »              Work of savages, 549.
       D           on bone     fragments         from   Stonehenge, 113, 119, 121-124.
                       shell-mounds, 232.                                  =       tumuli near, 123, 155.
       ss          his opinions on small flint          Strabo on ancient supply of tin, 70.
                      axes, 97.                             »                  on voyage of Pytheas, 63.
       ‘i          on slingstones, 101.                     s,                 on foundation of Utica, 68.
       of          on peculiar        fracture     of       »,                 on Lake near Toulouse, 217.
                       skulls, 421.                         »                  on Iberian custom, 562.
       »           opinions, 224.                       Strobel, M., on early Italian remains,
       os          on shell-mounds, 244.                   175.
Steinbergs, 181.                                        Stuart, Mr., monuments described                         by
Stennis, stone circle at, 118,122.                                     him, 112, 168.
St. John, Lieut., 487.                                                BS               on Australian knowledge
Stockholm, stone implements at, 76.                                    of fire, 445.
Stephens, Prof., on Runic alphabets,                    Studs or buttons of bronze, 37.
   604.                                                 Stukeley on Silbury Hill and Abury,
Stiles, Rev. Dr., on Dighton Rock, 278.                     UNG) PAL,
Stoliczka, Dr., observation of, 230.                    Suflerings, voluntary, 596.
Stone Age civilization considered, 550.                 “ Sumpitan,” or blow-pipe, 55 t.
        ms        finds belonging to, in Sles-          Superstition of savages, 581, 595.
                     vick, 8.                           Surgery, wonderful, in Tahiti, 482.
       as         sources of our knowledge              Suter, on the Lake-village of Wau-
                     of it, 78.                            wyl, 186.
       on         its divisions, 243.                   Suttee in ancient Britain, 171.
       Sa         its recent continuance           in   Switzerland, antiquities in, 7.
                    some places, 3.                                       .
                                                                     chronology of, 389.
       5          what, 2, '25.                                           nA
                                                                     lake-habitations, 12, 33,
       3          has been denied, 76.                                  178, 178.
       Ss         doubts of Mr. Wright, 77.             Swords, bronze, 29-381, 49, 50.
       %          tumuli of, 118, 137.
Stone and bronze in use at same                  time
                both in Burope and in Ame-                                                   ans
                 Ns WU
  »          axes with holes for handles,               Tables                 of interments,        142-149,   154-
                   95.                                                           156.
  4,         axes, how re-sharpened, 94.                         »             Of animal remains,          197-199,
  »          circles, their size, 118.                                           210, 377.                       ‘
  ?             ”?    in India, 114.                             »             of vegetable remains, 213.
  3             »     in Algeria, 127.                     »   Of statistics, 15,23, 43.
  »          coffin, 94.                                   »   illustrative of savage life, 553.
  »,        hammers, American, 256.                         »  of earth’s excentricity, 411.
  »,        luoplements of America      and             Tacitus on Caledonian swords          of
                        thoseof other coun-                                        iron, 7.
                             tries, 252.                             y»          refers to saered lakes, 217.
  ”                ”       80,000     in   Danish                    “a          allusion to, 300.
                             museums, 76.               Tahiti, notices of, 128, 469, ete.
                                                   INDEX.                                            637
Tahiti, tumulus in, 16-4.                               Tin button, 49.
Tankerville Park wild cattle , 206.                       sy sources of,45, 61, 69.
Tardy, M., discovery by, 42x.                               »        quantity produced in Spain li-
Tasmanians, notices of, 450, 574.                                mited, 70,
Tasman’s visit to New Zealand, 424.                         3 nails, 49.
Tate on rock carvings, 167.                                 » Chiefly from Cornwall, 69.
Tattooing a title to heaven, 565.                           »» its early use, 4.
          oa       in Australia, 446.                       » in Hallstadt bronze, 24.
          =F       in Feegee, 456.                          », bar of, found at Estavayer, 45.
          re       in New Zealand, 463.                   », implements not found in Hurope,
     a      in Tahiti, 475.                                    57.
Taylor, Meadows, on Indian dolmens,                     Tinder from Lake-villages, 192.
          129.                                          Tinieére, coin of, 390.
   »   referred to, 126, note.                          Tinné language has no word for be-
   »    K.C., describes animal-mounds,                          loved, 521.
                  274.                                  Tobacco pipes of ancient Americans,
      »         Rev. R., his adze        from New           258.
                  Zealand, 98.                          Tomahawk, one use of, 93.
      >         9, describes   animal-mounds,                               as a weapon, 95.
                  274,                                  Tonga Islanders, 489.
      »         on Maori      opinions    of Deity,     Tools of Tabitians, 470.
                  466.                                  Tool-stones, 102.
   »            on New       Zealand   funeral   cus-   Torfeeus, his mention of Moussa, 55.
                  tom, 134, 465.                            3»    quoted, 304.
      »         on Aztalan, 26-4.                       Torquemada quoted, 89.
Temple mounds in America, 272.                          Torres Straits, dead houses, 134.
Temples of Feegeeans, 453.                              Tournal and Christol, MM., their dis-
Tennant’s, Sir J. E., “Ceylon,” 64,                         covery of human relics among those
  435.                                                    of extinct animals, 313.
Ten thousand, mound of the, 130.                        Trade winds, 402.
Teocallis of Mexico, 273.                               Tradition 1mperfect, 424.
Tertre on Carib skill, 545.                                          f    important, 427.
Thebes, bronze knife from, 33.                          Transition period from bronze to iron,
Thetford, ancient remains at, 174.                          22.
Thidle, valley of, 14.                                  Travel, its pleasures, 598.
Thomas, Capt., on Beehive houses, re-                   Treenhoi, 46.
  ferred to, 54.                                        Tristram, Dr., on the Sahara, 404,
Thomsen, his services in archeological                  Trojan war, when it occurred, 5.
  science, 6, 224, 226.                                 Troyon, on Bronze Age, 176.
Thorshjerg, find at, 9.                                     »   census of Lake-villages, 180.
Throwing-stick, 442.                                        »   on ancient pottery, 192, 218.
Thule, 65.                                                  »   On population of Pfahlbauten,
Thunberg on Hottentots, 431, 433.                                          357.
Thunderbolt, 427.                                                3
                                                                 ‘Habitations lacustres,” 178.
Thurnam on Megalithic circles, 113.                             observations, 179, 184, 217,
          »        on types of skull, 136.                         218, 220.
          oF       on     est Kennet tumulus,           Truth and fiction combined, 60.
                      161.                              Tschutski, winter dwellings of, 132.
Thyra, tumulus of, 116.                                 Tumuli, abundance of, in Britain, 110.
Tides of Danish coast, 230, 231.                            »     in Algeria, 127.
Tiefenau, coins found at, 7.                                             jn America, 79, 111, 267.
    -     relies from, 7, 221.                                   »       in Brittany, 163.
Tierra del Fuego, customs in, 241.                                       of Denmark, 46, 110, 223.
Tilhuggersteens, 102.                                                    in United States, 268.
Time, its influence on physical features                                 in the Orkneys, 110.
                  of man, 588.                                           in India, 111, 125.
  »,           slow among savages, 567.                                  in other countries, 111, 116,
  »            and geology, 418.                                            168, 528.
638                                             INDEX.

Tumuli, mostly pre-historic, 116.                    Varieties of men, of very                   ancient
    9   of various periods, 151.                        ovigin, 587.
               of uncertain dates, 152.              Veddahs, notices of, 64, 435.
               should be preserved, 172.             Vega, G. de la, quoted, 273.
               how related to shell-mounds,          Vegetable remains in drift, 366.
                  244.                               Vegetables of Lake-men, 212.
               of the Stone Age, 118.                Verneuil, De, opinion of Mammoth,
               near Stonehenge, 123.                                   295.
        7
               chambered, 181.                                     Pr           reference to, 345.
        »      long, 136.                            Verstegan, referred to, 363.
   See also Barrow, Mound,                           Vibraye, Marquis de, 340.
Turner’s Polynesia, 588.                             Vimose, discoveries at the, 11.
Twine found, 213.                                    Virchow referred to, 112, 138.
Tydeus, mound of, 116.                               Virgil cited, 116, 217.
Tylor, Mr., his “ Anahuac,” 89.                      Virginia, temple in, 114.
   >»         ou recent formations, 382.             Virtue, various notions of, 564.
   >»         on supposed degeneracy of sa-          Visconti, Signor, work by him referred
                 vages, 585.                             to, 51.
   »          on Tahitian boiling-stones, 479,       Vitrified walls, 265.
   >,         references to, 559.                    Vivian, Mr., 315, 316.
Tyndall, Prof., visits Silbury Hill, 120.            Vocabularies of savages, 571.
        >       on formation of glaciers, 399.       Vogt, on cave-bear, 292.
Tyrian mechanical                arts in time   of     »   referred to, 139, 218.
   Solomon, 68.                                      Von Sacken’s “* Leitfaden” referred to,
                                                          164, note.
                            Uz                                                    W.
 Uhimann, M., 178, 392.
                                                     Wace quoted, 122.
 Uig, remains at, 54.                                Wallace on Brazilian skill, 545, 548.
 Ulloa, on Brazilian ideas of chastity,                 ss    remark of, 577.
    569.                                                a     varicties of the human races,
Umiak and Kajak, 506.                                                      590.
United States archeology, 250.                            3             Fuegians, 537.
Unity of human race, 586, 587.
                                                          a             on Tahitian ideas of cookery,
Urn-burial in America, 268.                                               477.
Ursus spelaus, or cave-bear, 289.
                                                     Wallis quoted, 481.
Urus or Bos primigenius, 209, 289,                   Wampum, 279.
          306, 377.
                                                     Wangen, finds at, 138-15, 92, 192.
   »    how far extinct, 206.
                                                         x    Lake-dwellings at, 1'79, 186,
Urville, Dumont @’, on city of Ton-
                                                                 189.
                  dano, 176.
                                                               e
                                                              animal remains from, 197-
       Fy      dress in New        South Wales,
                                                                199.
                  446.
                                                     Wansdyke, pre-historic, 113.
        »  mousic of Maories, 465.
                                                     Waukesha animal-mounds, 275.
        »,on Mausoleum in the Friendly
                                                     Warren, Mr., finds flint hatchet                near
              Islands, 483, note.                      Icklingham, 3.17.
Usher, Dr., 287.
                                                     Water held sacred, 217.
Usher’s chronology inadequate, 385.                  Wauwyl, find at, I, 190.                        :
Utica, when built, 68.
                                                           A            Lake-dwellings at, 182, 186.
                                                     Wayland Smith, his myth, 6
                         Vv.                               5S           similar inyth in Ceylon, 6-1.
                                                           3)              >           >    Lipari, Gt.
Vaillant, M. le, referred to, 198, note.                   "1               3          »    Belgiuin,
Vallency, Colonel, on Dighton Rock,                                                           64, note.
   278.                                              Wealden formation, 418.
Vancouver’s Voyage quoted, 508.                      Weapous of savages, 481, 412,                   452,
         aA        Island, 516.                          464, 477, 500, 522, 53.b, 537.
                                                 INDEX,                                             639
Weasel, 207.                                            Wilson, quoted, 114.
Weaving iu the Stone Age, 190.                             », veterred to, 95, note; 255, 261 >
Weems, 53, 78.                                                    489, 517.
West Kennet tumulus, 161.                               Wiltshire tumuli, 123, 155, 161.
Westmoreland               tumuli,   contents     of,   Wisconsin, ancient remains in, 251.
  149.                                                  Witcheraft among savages, 581.
Wheat       found in Lake-villages,             211,    Wokey Hole, 323.
  231.                                                  Wolf, 207, 320, 326.
Whetstone from West Kennet, 163.                        Wolverine, or glutton, 305.
          ss    Switzerland, 189,190.                   Women, lot of, in Australia, 449,
Whitaker, Mr., finds implements, 348.                             aS        -      Feegee, 455.
Whitburn, My., his finds near Guild-                              »     Maori, 466.
  ford, 3.16.                                                     5     North American, 519.
White men worshipped, 567.                                        »,    Tahitian, 487.
Whittesley, Col., 255.                                      »   treatment of, 569.
Whittlesey, on Mound-builders, 261.                     Wood, Colonel, his discoveries of rein-
Wibel on Bronze Age, 57.                                   deer horns, 302.
Wiberg, theory of, 60.                                  Wooden relics in North America, 256.
Wigs of Feegecans, 456.                                 pee              garments found in Jutland,
Wilde, Sir W. R., opinions of, 28.                         46.
   »        on rarity of copper in Bronze               Worsaae,          Prof., his division     of the
              Age, 58.                                                       Stone Age, 243.
   9        his classification of flint arrow-                   a       various opinions and re-
              heads, 102.                                                   marks on shell-mounds,
   »        on stone celts of Dublin Mu-                                    225, 244-247.
              scum, 78.                                           »       ongraves of different periods,
   »        on “Craimoges,” 176.                                            151, 152.
Wilkes, Capt., on Australian funeral,                             »
                                                                 on Jutland tumuli, 45.
               418.                                               »,
                                                                 on efficiency of ancient wea-
   »    quoted, 456, 458, 559.                                      pons, 547,
Wilkinson, Sir G., 33.                                  Worship, tribes without, 575.      See
Williams, on Foegeean towns, 452.                          Religion.
                               agricultural     im-     Wretchedness of savages, 583.
       S              y         “plements, 455.         Wright, Mr., on similarity of bronze
       op             aS       customs, 171,453,                   weapons in different coun-
                                 460.                                      tries, 59.
Wilson, Dr., on carly allusions to the                       ,,         his opinions considered, 17.
          CaledonianWall and Abury,                          ry         his doubts of the Stone Age,
          123.                                                             76.
            on bones from earthworks, 283.                   »          essays on archeology, ete.,
            skill of Polynesians, 515.                                     16, 18, 64, 122.
            on enrly American Metallurgy,                               Homer quoted, 118.
              256.                                      Writing, art of, in ancient America,
            European decorative art, 257.                   279,
            on sandstone relic, 278.                      Wyatt on flint implements near Bed-
            plan of Scioto           valley earth-                        ford, 348.
       works, 262.                                          ,,         referred to, 343, 358.
   OD.      American                 — sepulchral       Wyeth, Mr., on            Indian   implements,
       mounds, 268.                                                       522.
            remains of man, 283.                            ,,         their lack of provisions, 528.
            on sacrificial mounds,              269,    Wylie on lake- dwellings, 217, note.
              272.                                      “ Wummera,” 443,
            on Dighton Rock inscription,
              278,
            on Tahitian costume, 475.                                             2G
            on Kumbecephalic skulls, 186.
            on ancient belief in a future               Xenophon, allusions to, 116, 562.
              state, 139.
640                                          INDEX.

                         %G                          Yule, Colonel, referred to, 125, 127, |
                                                       580.
Yorkshire       tumuli, contents       of, 146-                           Z
  149.                                                                        i
Young,      Dr.,    on    Hieroglyphics,    61, | Zealanders. See New Zealanders.
  note.                                           Zine unknown in Bronze Age, 37.
Yourt, or Yurt, what, 131, 492.                   | Zippe, Prof., 112.




      GILBERT      AND    RIVINGTON,     PRINTERS,     ST.    JOUN’S   SQUALL,    LONDON.
||
 ||| till
        | ill||    Printed in Great Britain
   3607091R00375
                   by Amazon.co.uk, Ltd.,
                       Marston Gate.
oy              SSaca   <     BRST           z


     pi                       Lae    <   3




          ISBN 1-4212-7039-
