                        CHAPTER            XIII.

                          MODERN SAVAGES.

     LTHOUGH our knowledge of ancient times has of late
       years greatly increased, it is still very imperfect, and
we cannot afford to neglect any possible source of informa-
tion. It igs evident that history cannot throw much lght
on the early condition of man, because the discovery—or, to
speak more correctly, the use—of metal has in all cases pre-
ceded that of writing.       Hven as regards the Age of Bronze
 we derive little information from History, and although,
 as we have seen, the Age of Stone is vaguely alluded to in
 the earliest European writers, their statements have gene-
-rally been looked upon as imaginative rather than historical ;
and contain, indeed, little more than the bare statement that
there was a time when metal was unknown.
   Nor will tradition supply the place of history. At best
it 1s untrustworthy and short-lived.  Thus in 1770 the New
Zealanders had no recollection of Tasman’s visit*. Yet this
took place in 1643, less than 130 years before, and must
have been to them an event of the greatest possible impor-
tance and interest. In the same way the North American
Indians soon lost all tradition of De Soto’s expedition,
although “by its striking incidents it was so well suited to
impress the Indian mind +.”
   Even as regards events which are contemporary, or nearly
so, we    find that the accounts           given by savages become
  * Cook’s First Voyage round the World.    Hawkesworth’s Voyages, vol. il.
p. 388.                      + Schoolcraft’s Indian Tribes, vol. ii. p. 12.
                THE     UNTRUSTWORTHINESS        OF TRADITION.                 425

 rapidly distorted.           Thus Nilsson* quotes the account given
 by Mackenzie, that the Esquimaux described the English
 to him as being giants, with wings, who could kill with a
 glance of their eye, and swallow a whole beaver at a mouth-
 fal.    So also Colonel Dalton tells us that “ though the Kols
 have known the English for little more than half a cen-
 tury, they assign to them a most honourable place in their
 genesis. The Assam Abors and Garrows do the samet.”
    The Bungogees and Pankhos (Hill tribes of Chittagong)
 believe that their ancestors came out of a cave in the earth,
 under the guidance of a chief named Tlandrokpah, who was
 so powerful that he married the daughter of the Deity, to
 whom he presented his gun.       “You can still hear the
 gun, the thunder is the sound of itt.”               In this case the men-
 tion of the gun shows that the tradition must be of modern
 origin. Again, Speke says, “I found that the Waganda
 have the same absurd notion here as the Wanyambo have in
 Karagté, of Kamrasi’s supernatural power in being able to
 divide the waters of the Nile in the same manner as Moses
 did the Red Sea§.”
    Mansfield Parkyns relates how it was firmly believed in
the remote parts of Abyssinia, that the German missionaries
had, “in the course of only a few days, perforated a tunnel
all the way (from Adowa) to Massowa, on the coast of the
Red Sea, a distance of above a hundred and fifty miles,
whence they were to obtain large supplies of arms, ammu-
nition, ete. ||.”
   Baker        also,in his Nile Tributaries, says: “ The conver-
   * The Stone Age. English edition,         { Capt. Lewin, The Hill Tribes of
p. 209.                                    Chittagong.  Calcutta, 1869, p. 95.
  + Trang. Eth. Soc.       New Ser. vol.   See also Lichtenstein’s Travels, vol. i.
vi. p. 38.    See also Juichtenstein’s     p. 290.
Travels, vol. i. p. 290; James’ Expe-         § Speke, p. 438. See also p. 504.
dition to the Rocky Mountains, vol.           || Life in Abyssinia, p. 151.
iii. p. 247;   and    Campbell,   Trars.     q Le. p. 129, 130,
Ethn. Soc. 1870, p. 335.
426        THE UNTRUSTWORTHINESS      OF TRADITION.

sation of the Arabs is in the exact style of the Old Testa-
ment. The name of God is coupled with every trifling
incident in life, and they believe in the continual        action
of Divine special interference. Should a famine afflict the
country, it is expressed in the stern language of the Bible,
‘The Lord has sent a grievous famine upon the land ;’ or,
‘The Lord called for a famine, and it came upon the land.’
Should their cattle fall sick, it is considered to be an afflic-
tion by Divine command; or should the flocks prosper and
multiply particularly during one season, the prosperity is
attributed to special interference. Nothing can happen in
the usual routine of daily life, without a direct connexion
with the hand of God, in the Arab’s belief.
    “This striking similarity to the description of the Old
 Testament is exceedingly interesting to a traveller when
 residing among these curious and original people. With
the Bible in one hand, and these unchanged tribes before
the eyes, there is a thrilling illustration of the sacred record :
the past becomes the present, the veil of three thousand
years is raised, and the living picture is a witness to the
exactness of the historical description. At the same time,
there is a light thrown upon many obscure passages in the
Old Testament by the experience of the present customs and
figures of speech of the Arabs, which are precisely those
that were practised at the periods described. I do not
attempt to enter upon a theological treatise, therefore it
is unnecessary to allude specially to these particular points.
The sudden and desolating arrival of a flight of locusts, the
plague, or any other unforeseen calamity, is attributed to
the anger of God, and is believed to be an infliction of
punishment upon the people thus visited, precisely as the
plagues of Egypt were specially inflicted upon Pharaoh and
the Egyptians.  Should the present history of the country
be written by an Arab scribe, the style of the description
                 TENDENCY   TO   THE   MARVELLOUS.             427

would be purely that of the Old Testament, and the various
calamities or the good fortunes that have in the course of
nature befallen both the tribes and individuals, would be
recounted either as special visitations of Divine wrath, or
blessings for good deeds performed.          If in a dream a par-
ticular course of action is suggested, the Arab believes that
God has spoken and directed him. The Arab scribe, or
historian would describe the event as the ‘voice of the Lord’
(Kallam el Allah) having spoken unto the person; or, that
God appeared to him in a dream and ‘said’ Thus much
allowance would be necessary on the part of a European
reader for the figurative ideas and expressions of the people.’
   Although, then, traditions and myths are of great im-
portance, and indirectly throw much light on the condition
of man in ancient times, we must not expect to learn
much directly from them. At any rate, as regards the
Stone Age in Europe both history and tradition are silent,
and here, as in all long civilized countries, stone weapons
and arrow-heads are regarded as thunderbolts or “ Elfin”
arrows.
   Deprived, therefore, as regards this period, of any assistance
from history, but relieved at the same time from the em-
barrassing interference of tradition, the archeologist is free
to follow the methods which have been so successfully pursued
in geology—the rude bone and stone implements of bygone
ages being to the one what the remains of extinct animals
are to the other. The analogy may be pursued even farther
than this. Many mammalia which are extinct in Europe
have representatives still living in other countries. Much
light is thrown on our fossil pachyderms, for instance,
by the species which        still inhabit some       parts of Asia
and Africa; the secondary marsupials are illustrated by
their existing representatives in Australia and South
America; and in the same manner, if we wish clearly to
428             NO EVIDENCE   OF DEGRADATION.

understand the antiquities of Hurope, we must compare them
with the rude implements and weapons still, or until lately,
used by the savage races in other parts of the world. In
fact, the Van   Diemaner   and   South American    are   to the
antiquary what the opossum and the sloth are to the geo-
logist.
   A certain space, therefore, devoted to the consideration of
the modern savages will not be out of place in this work ;
and though it would require volumes to do justice to the
subject, still it may be possible to bring together a certain
number of facts which will throw light on the ancient re-
mains found in Hurope, and on the condition of the early
races which inhabited our continent.      In order, however,
to limit the subject as much as possible, I propose, with one
 exception, to describe only the “ non-metallic savages” (if
 such an expression may. be permitted) and even of these,
 only some of the most instructive, or of those which have
been most carefully observed by travellers.
   It is a common opinion, that savages are, as a general
rule, only the miserable remnants of nations once more
civilized; but although there are some well-established cases
of national decay, there is no scientific evidence which would
justify us in asserting that this applies to savages in general.
No doubt there are instances in which nations, once pro-
gressive, have not only ceased to advance in civilization, but
have even fallen back. Still, if we compare the accounts of
early travellers with the state of things now existing, we
shall find no evidence of any general degradation. The
Australians, Bushmen, and Fuegians lived when first observed
almost exactly as they do now.      In some savage tribes we
even find traces of improvement ; the Bachapins, when visited
by Burchell, had just introduced the art of working in iron;
the largest erection in Tahiti was constructed by the genera-
tion living at the time of Captain Cook’s visit, and the prac-
                       PROGRESS AMONG SAVAGES.                              42.9
                                                                              “a



tice   of cannibalism       had    been      recently       abandoned* ; the
largest Mexican temple was built only six years before the
discovery of America; in the north of Australia, McGillivray
tells us that the rude bark canoes which were formerly in
general use, have been quite superseded by those dug out of
the trunk of a tree; again, outriggers are said to have been
recently adopted by the Andaman Islanders; and if certain
races, as for instance some of the American tribes, have
fallen back, this has, I think, been due, less to any inherent
tendency than to the injurious effect of European influence.
Moreover,     if the Cape of Good Hope, Australia, New Zea-
land, etc., had ever been inhabited by a race of men more
advanced than those whom we are in the habit of regarding
as the aborigines, some evidence of this would surely have
remained ; and this not being the case, none of our travellers
having observed any ruins, or other traces of a more advanced
civilization, there does not appear to be any sufficient reason
for supposing that these miserable beings are at all inferior
to the ancestors from whom they are descended.

                              The Hottentots.

   Speaking generally, we may say that the use of metal
has been long known throughout Hurope, Asia, and Africa,
while in America, in Australia, and in the Oceanic Islands,
all implements and weapons were, until within the last three
hundred years, made of wood, bone, stone, or other similar
materials.
   The    semi-civilized nations          of Central America          formed,
indeed, a striking exception to the rule, since they were
acquainted with the use of bronze. The North American
Indians also had copper hatchets, but these were simply

  * Forster, Observations made dur-       Seealso Hillis, Polynesian Researches,
ing a Voyage round the World, p. 327.     vol. ii. p. 29.
430                       YHE   HOTTENTOTS.

hammered into shape, without the assistance of heat.                Here,
therefore, we seem to get a glimpse of the manner in which
our ancestors may have acquired the knowledge of metal.
No doubt the possession of iron generally marks a great
advance in civilization; still the process is very gradual,
and there are some nations which, though provided with
metal implements, are nevertheless but little removed from a
state of barbarism.
  Thus the Hottentots, who were not only acquainted with
the use, but even with the manufacture,             of iron, and who
possessed large numbers of sheep and cattle, were yet in
many respects among the most disgusting of savages.         Even
 Kolben, who generally takes a favourable view of them,
 admits that they are, in his opinion, the filthiest people in
 the world*. We might go farther, and say the filthiest
 animals; I think no species of mammal could be fairly
 compared with them in this respect. Their bodies were
 covered with grease, their clothes were never washed, and
 their hair was loaded “from day to day with such a quantity
of soot and fat, and it gathers so much dust and other filth,
which they leave to clot and harden in it, for they never
cleanse it, that it looks like a crust or cap.of black mortar+.”
They wore a skin over the back, fastened in front. They
carried this as long as they lived, and were buried in it
when they died. Their only other garment was a square
piece of skin, tied round the waist by a string, and left to
hang down in front. In winter, however, they sometimes
used acap. For ornaments they wore rings of iron, copper,
ivory, or leather. The latter had the advantage of serving
for food m bad times.
   Their huts were generally oval, about fourteen feet by
ten in diameter, and seldom more than four or five in

      * Kolben’s History of the Cape of Good Hope, vol. i. p. 47.
                         + Kolben, l.c. p. 188.
                        DRESS.        FOOD.      WEAPONS.                        431

height. They were made of sticks and mats. The sticks
were fastened into the ground at both ends, or, if not long
enough, two were placed opposite to one another, and secured
together at the top. One end of the hut was left open to
form the door. The mats were made of bulrushes and flags
dried in the sun, and so.closely fitted together that only the
heaviest rain could penetrate them*.        “ With respect to
household furniture,” says Thunberg?+, “they have little or
none. The same dress that covers a part of their body by
day, serves them also for bedding at night.”                       Their victuals
are boiled in leathern sacs and water, by means of heated
stones, but sometimes in earthen potst. Milk is kept in
leathern     sacs, bladders         of animals, and baskets               made     of
platted rushes, perfectly watertight. These, a tobacco pouch
of skin, a tobacco pipe of stone or wood, and their weapons,
constitute the whole catalogue of their effects. According
to Kolben,       they sometimes             broiled their meat, sometimes
boiled it in blood, to which they often added milk; “ this
they look on as a glorious dish.” They were, however,
both filthy and careless about their cookery, and the meat
was often eaten half putrid, and more than half ray.
   Their weapons consisted of bows and poisoned arrows,
spears, javelins       or assagais,         stones, and       darting-sticks       or
“kirris,””? about three feet long and an inch thick. With
these weapons they were very skilful, and feared not to
attack the elephant, the rhinoceros, or even the lion. Large
animals were also sometimes killed in pitfalls, from six to
eight feet deep, and about four feet in diameter.       They
fixed a strong pointed stake in the middle. “Into this hole
an elephant falling with his fore-feet (it is not of dimensions
to receive his whole body), he is pierced in the neck and
  * Thunberg,    Pinkerton’s Travels,           t This, however,   they appear     to
vol. xvi., p. 38; Kolben,    l.c. p. 221;     have learnt from the Huropeans.
Sparrman, vol. i., p. 196.                               p.
                                                § Thunberg,         141;Kolben,p.203;
  + Page 141.                                 Harris, Wild Sports of Africa, p. 142.
432                       METALLURGY.

breast with the stake and there held securely *,” for the
more he struggled the farther it penetrated. They caught
fish both with hooks and in nets.   They also ate wild fruits
and roots of various kinds, which, however, they did not
take the trouble to cultivate.
   For domestic animals the Hottentots had oxen, sheep, and
dogs. It might have naturally been supposed that oxen
were used in the same manner all over the world. They
seem evidently adapted either for draught or for food.
With the dog the case is different; we ourselves use him
in various ways, aud one feels therefore the less surprise at
the different services which he performs for different races
of savages. But even with regard to cattle the same was
the case; besides what we may call their normal uses, the
Veddahs, or wild inhabitants of Ceylon, used oxen in hunt-
ing; and the Hottentots trained some to serve as what we
may call sheep-oxen, or cow-oxen,—that is to say, to guard
and manage the flocks and herds,—and others as war-oxen,
a function which might have been considered as opposed to
the whole character of the beast, but in which, heverthe-
less, they appear to have been very useful.
   The Hottentots of late years not only used iron weapons,
but even made such for themselves. The ore was smelted
in the following mannert: “They make a hole in a raised
ground, large enough to contain a good quantity of iron-
stones, which are found here and there in plenty in the
Hottentot countries. In this hole they melt out the iron
from the ore. About a foot and a half from this hole, upon
the descent, they make another, something less. This is the
receiver of the melted iron, which runs into it by a narrow
channel they cut from one hole to the other. Before they
put the ironstones into the hole where the iron is to be
smelted out of them, they make a fire in the hole, quite up
      * Kolben, p. 250.                 t+ Kolben, l.c. p. 239.
                          CUSTOMS.        CHARACTER.                             433

to the mouth of it, in order to make the earth about it
thoroughly hot. When they suppose the earth about it ig
well heated, they fill the hole almost up with ironstones,
They then make a large fire over the stones, which they
supply from time to time with fuel, till the iron is melted and
all of it is ran into the receiver. As soon as the iron in the
receiver is cold, they take it out, and break it to pieces with
stones. These pieces the Hottentots, as they have occasion,
heat in other fires, and with stones beat ’em out and shape
’em to weapons.          ‘They rarely make any thing else of iron.”
   The Hottentot          customs, some            of which        are extremely
curious, are fully described by Thunberg*, Kolben+, Corkt,
Sparrman§, and other travellers.                    Whether the Hottentots
can be said to have had any religion||, depends upon the
exact meaning we attach to the word. Though they seem to
have had some notion of a Deity, even Kolben admits that they
had not “any institution of worship.” The older writers,
indeed, consider certain dances as being religious ceremonies.
This was stoutly denied by the natives themselves, in spite
of which Kolben assures us that they were “acts of religion,”
adding candidly, “let the Hottentots say what they will.”
They are very fond of smoking, and are great drunkards.
It is only fair to say that Kolben gives them a good character
for integrity, chastity, fidelity, and liberality, assurmg                        us
that they “are certainly the most friendly, the most liberal,
and the most benevolent people to one another that ever
appeared      upon    earth**.”          Other      travellers     also speak of
them in very high terms}+.                At the same time it is difficult
  * |. c. pp. 141, 142.                     ton’s Voyages, vol. ii. p.153 so also,
  + Pp. 118, 115, 118, 121, 153, 252.       Harris, Wild Sports of Africa, p. 160;
  { Hawkesworth’s Voyages, vol.             Sparrman, vol. i. p. 207.
ale, Peo Le                                    { Sparrman, vol. i. p. 212; Kol-
  § Vol. i. p. 357.                         ben, 1. c.
  || Thunberg, 1. c. p.141, etc.; Kol-           #* Lo. p. 834.
ben, pp. 37, 93, etc. Beeckman thought           ++ See, for instance, Philips’ South
they had no religion at all.   Pinker-      Africa, pp. 4, 5, 6.
                                                                    et
434                           THE BUSHMEN.

to see how these statements can be reconciled with the ad-
mitted fact that, as soon as any man or woman is so enfeebled
by old age that he or she is unable to work, and can “no
longer ”—-I am quoting from Kolben himself—“ be of any
manner of service in any thing, they are thrust out of the
society and confined to a solitary hut at a considerable
distance from         the kraal, there, with a small stock          of pro-
visions placed within their reach, but without any one to
comfort or assist ’em, to die either of age or hunger, or be
devoured by some wild beast*.”’ This, it must be remem-
bered, was         no exceptional atrocity, but a general custom,
and applied to the rich as well as the poor, for if an old
man had property it was taken away from him. (Infanticide,
 again, was very common among them, and was not regarded
 as a crime. Gurls were generally the victims, and if a
 woman had twins, the ugliest of them was almost always
 exposed or buried alive. This was done with the consent of
 “the whole kraal, which generally allows it without taking
 much pains to look into itt.’ The poverty and the hard-
 ships which they had to undergo may perhaps plead as some
excuse for these two unnatural customs.
    The Bushmen resembled the Hottentots in many things,
but were even more uncivilized. They had no knowledge
of metallurgy, no domestic animals, and no canoes. They
frequently stole the cattle of their more advanced neigh-
bours, but always killed and ate them as quickly as possible.
Their principal weapons were bows and poisoned arrows.
Lichtenstein asserts that they had no namest, but this was
probably an error. Bleek regards them as the lowest of
human races, and Haeckel even goes so far as to assert that
they seem “to the unprejudiced comparative student of


 * 1c. p. 321.                          t Lichtenstein’s Travels in South-
 t+ lic. p. 144.                      ern Africa, vol. i. p. 192.
                              THE VEDDAHS.                              435
nature, to manifest a closer connexion with the gorilla and
chimpanzee than with a Kant or a Goéthe*.”’

                              The Veddahs.

   The Veddahs, or wild tribes who inhabit the interior of
Ceylon, have been described by Knox+, Tennantt, and
Bailey§. They live in huts very rudely formed of boughs
and bark, and cultivate small patches of chena, but subsist
principally on honey and the produce of the chase. Their
weapons consist of axes and bows and arrows. With the
latter they are not very skilful, as they pursue only the
larger game, and the art of hunting consists in creeping
close up to their prey and taking it unawares.    They are
very good deer-stalkers, and, besides excellent dogs, have
also hunting buffaloes.        These are so trained that they are
easily guided by a string tied round the horn, and are used
at night. The buffalo feeds, the man crouches behind him,
and thus, unseen and unsuspected, steals upon his prey.
   They have no pottery, and their cooking is very primitive.
They wear scarcely any clothes, nothing in fact but a scrap
of dirty rag, supported in front by a string tied round the
waist. Perhaps the women’s cloth is a trifle larger than the
men’s, but that appears to be the only difference. They are
very dirty, and very small; the ordinary height of the men
being from four feet six to five feet one, and of the women
from four feet four to four feet eight.             Mr. Bailey thinks
that it would be impossible to conceive more barbarous
specimens of the human race. Davy even asserts that they
have no names, and do not bury the dead.

  * On the Origin of Language, by         t Ceylon.
W. H. J. Bleek. Edited by Dr. H.          § Transactions of the Ethnological
Haeckel, pp. 4, 5.                     Society. New Ser. Vol. ii. p. 278.
  + An Historical Relationof Ceylon.   See also Davy’s Ceylon.
1681,
                                   rfi2
A36                    THE ANDAMAN          ISLANDERS.

   They have, however, one remarkable peculiarity which it
would be unfair to omit.                They are kind, affectionate, and
constant to their wives; abhor polygamy, and have a proverb
that “ Death alone can separate husband and wife.” In this
they are very unlike their more civilized neighbours*. An
intelligent Kandyan chief, with whom Mr. Bailey visited
these Veddahs, was “ perfectly scandalized at the utter bar-
barism of living with only one wife, and never parting until
separated by death.” It was, he said, “just like the wan-
deroos”’ (monkeys).          Even in their marriage relations, how-
ever, the Veddahs cannot altogether be commended, as it is
—or was until lately—very usual with them for a man to
marry his younger sister. This is the more remarkable, as
marriage with an elder sister seemed to them as horrible as
it does to us.


                      The Andaman          Islanders.

   The Mincopies, or inhabitants of the Andaman                        Islands,
have been described         by Dr. Mouatt+, Sir H. Belchert, and
Prof. Owen||, who considers that they “are, perhaps, the
most primitive, or lowest          in the scale of civilization, of the
human race.” Their huts consist of four posts, the two
front ones six to eight feet high, the back ones only one or
two feet. They are open at the sides, and covered with a
roof of bamboo, or a few palm-leaves bound tightly together.
The Mincopies live chiefly on fruit, mangroves, and shell-
fish.   Sometimes, however, they kill the small pigs, which
run wild in the jungle.
   They have single-tree canoes, hollowed out with a p-shaped
  * It ig only fair to add that the          t Belcher, Trans. Ethn. Soc. New
Kandyans are said to have much im- __ Ser. vol. v. p. 40.
proved in this respect of late years.         || Transactions of the Hthnological
  t Adventures     and    Researches       Society. New Ser. vol. ii. p. 34.
among the Andaman Islanders,
                        THE ANDAMAN     ISLANDERS.                    437

axe, assisted probably by the action of fire. They are ac-
quainted with the use of outriggers, which, however, appear
to have been of recent introduction, as they are not alluded
to by the earlier writers*.        Their arrows and spears are now
generally tipped with iron and glass, which they obtain from
wrecks, and which have replaced bone. Their harpoons, like
those of so many other savages, have a movable head, and
a long cord by which this may be held when fixed in the
vietimt.   They are very skilful with the bow, and “make
practice at forty or fifty yards with unerring certainty
                                                      t,”
though their arrows have no feathers. Their nets are made
with great ingenuity and neatness. They have no pottery,
but use either shells or pieces of bamboo to hold water.
They kill fish by harpoons, or with small hand-nets they take
any that are left by the tide, and it is even said that they are
able to dive and catch them with their hands§.
   They cover themselves with mud, and also tattoo, but wear
no clothes. Indeed they appear to be entirely without any
sense of shame, and many of their habits are like those of
beasts. They are stated to have no idea of a Supreme Being,
no religion, nor any belief ina future state of existence. After
death, the corpse is buried in a sitting posture. When it is
supposed to be entirely decayed, the skeleton is dug up, and
each of the relations appropriates a bone. In the case of a
married man, the widow takes the skull and wears it sus-
pended by a cord round her neck||. It forms a very con-
venient box for small articles.        Marriage, however, only lasts
until the child is born and weaned, when, according to Lieut.
St. John, as quoted by Sir EH. Belcher, the man and woman
generally separate, each seeking a new partner 4.

  * Monatt, 1. c. p. 317.                § M ouatt, 1. c. pp. 310, 333.
  + Mouatt, I. c. p. 326.                || Mouatt, 1. c. p. 327. Beleher,
  t Belcher, Trans. Ethn. Soc.   New   l.c. p.
Ser. vol. v. p. 49.                       q 1.
438                             THE AUSTRALIANS.

  They have no dogs, nor any domestic animals,                               unless,
indeed, their poultry may be regarded as such.


                                 The Australians.

   Throughout the whole continent of Australia the aborigines
were remarkably similar in physical appearance, im character,
and in general habits. They were, in some respects, scarcely,
if at all, farther advanced than those of the Andaman Islands.
The “houses” observed by Captain Cook “at Botany Bay,
where they were best, were just high enough for a man to sit
upright in; but not large enough for him to extend himself
in his whole length in any direction; they were built with
pliable rods about as thick as a man’s finger, in the form of |
an oven, by sticking the two ends into the ground, and then
covering them with palm leaves and broad pieces of bark ; the
door is nothing but a large hole at one end.” Eyre also gives
a very similar description of those observed by him*. Further
north, where the climate was warmer, the dwellings were
even less substantial, and being comparatively open on one
side, scarcely deserve even the name of huts, and were little
more than a protection against the wind. Finally, the natives
observed by Dampier near C. Levéque, on the north-west
coast,       seem   to have had no houses               at all.     Round        their
dwelling-places Captain Cook observed “ vast heaps of shells,
the fish of which we suppose had been their food+.” Captain
Grey also describes similar shell moundst, some of which
covered quite half an acre, and were as much as ten feet
high. They seem, however, to have been first noticed by
Dampier§.

   * Discoveries
         in Central Australia,                  tlc.    vol. i. p. 110.      See also
 vol. ii. p. 800.                             King’s Australia, vol. i. p. 87.
   + First     Voyage,   vol.     ii.   Dp.     § Pinkerton’s     Voyages,    vol.   i
 598.                                         p. 478.
                             HOUSES.     FOOD.                          439

   The food of the Australian savages differs much in dif-
ferent parts of the continent. Speaking generally, it may be
said to consist of various roots, fruits, fungi, shell-fish, frogs,
snakes, honey, grubs, moths, birds, birds’ eggs, fish, turtles,
dog, kangaroo, and sometimes of seal and whale*.               The
kangaroo, however, forms.only an occasional luxury, nor are
the natives, so far as lam aware, able to kill whales for them-
selves, but when one is washed on shore it is a real godsend
to them.    Fires are immediately lit to give notice of the joyful
event.     Then they rub themselves all over with blubber, and
anoint their favourite wives in the same way; after which
they cut down through the blubber to the beef, which they
sometimes eat raw and sometimes broil on pointed sticks.
As other natives arrive they “fairly eat their way into the
whale, and you see them climbing in and about the stinking
carcase, choosing titbits.” For days “they remain by the
carcase, rubbed from head to foot with stinking blubber,
gorged to repletion with putrid meat—out of temper from
indigestion, and therefore engaged in constant frays—suffer-
ing from a cutaneous disorder by high feeding—and alto-
gether a disgusting spectacle. There is no sight in the
world,” Captain Grey adds, “‘ more revolting than to see a
young and gracefully-formed native girl stepping out of the
carcase of a putrid whale.” The Australians also mash up
bones and suck out the fat contained in them. Like other
savages, they are excessively fond of fatty substances.
   In a cave on the north-eastern coast, Mr. Cunningham
observed certain “tolerable. figures of sharks, porpoises,
turtles, lizards, trepang, starfish, clubs, canoes, water-gourds,
and some quadrupeds which were probably intended to
represent kangaroos and dogs.”            The natives round Sydney

  * Grey’s Explorations in North-      Voyage of H.M.S. Rattlesnake, vol. i.
West and Western Australia, p. 263;    p. 148.
Eyre, vol. ii. p. 251; McGillivray’s
440                     ROCK ENGRAVINGS.           CANOES.

also frequently drew upon the rocks                    “various figures of
fish, clubs, swords, animals, and branches of trees, not con-
temptibly represented*.”             Other tribes are very deficient in
art, and according to Mr. Oldfield are “quite unable to
realize the most vivid artistic representations. On bemg
shown a large coloured engraving of an aboriginal New
Hollander, one declared it to be a ship, another a kangaroo,
and so on; not one of a dozen identifying the portrait as
having any connexion with himself+.”                    It is not, however,
quite clear to me that they were not poking fun at Mr.
Oldfield.
   On the north-eastern coasts they use canoes made from the
trunks of trees, each canoe being formed from a single trunk,
probably hollowed by fire. “They are about fourteen feet
long, and being very narrow, are fitted with an outriggert.”
Farther south the canoes were nothing but a piece of bark,
tied together at the ends and kept open in the middle by
small bows of wood.            The western tribes had no canoes$,
owing, according to King'||, to the absence of large timber].
Instead ofa boat they used a log of wood, on which they sat
astride, with a bit of bark in each hand, which served as a
paddle. Some tribes fasten four or five mangrove stems
together so as to make a small float or raft. The natives
observed by Dampier were even worse off in this respect;
they had “no boats, canoes, or bark logs.” Yet they
dwelt on the shore, lived principally on fish, and swam about
from island to island. The Western Australians, according
to Jukes, had neither boats nor rafts, “and the islands close
  * King, vol. ii. p. 26; Grey, vol.i.     § Cook’s     First   Voyage,   vol. iii.
p. 259; Collings, p. 381.                p. 643.
  + Oldfield   on the Aborigines    of     | 1. c. vol. i. pp. 38. 48. 49; vol. ii.
Australia. Transactions of the Hth-      pp. 66. 69.
nological Society. New Ser. vol. iti.       4 In his view, however, of Careen-
   } Freycinet, Voyage autour du         ing Bay, the country appears to be
Monde, vol. ii. p. 705; Jukes, Voy-      well wooded.
age of H.M.S. Fly, ii. 243.
                              IMPLEMENTS.                                4A]

to the mainland had never been visited by them previously
to the founding of our colonies.”           So also the natives near
Sydney are said to have been unable to swim*. The absence
of canoes is very remarkable in a people whose habits were
so littoral, and whose food was derived almost entirely from
the sea.                       :
   The impiements of the Australians are very simple. They
have no knowledge of pottery, and carry water in skins or in
vessels made of bark. They are quite ignorant of warm
water, which strikes them with great amazement}.                        Some
of them carry “a small bag, about the size of a moderate
cabbage-net, which is made by laying threads loop within
loop, somewhat in the manner of knitting used by our ladies
to make purses. This bag the man carries loose upon his
back by a small string, which passes over his head; it gene-
rally contains a lump or two of paint and resin, some fish-
hooks and lines, a shell or two, out of which their hooks
are made, a few points of darts, and their usual ornaments,
which includes the whole worldly treasure of the richest
man among them.”
   A very similar inventory is given by Capt. Grey, who
adds, however, a flat stone to pound roots witht. They
have also stone hatchets, hammers, knives, pieces of flint,
and sticks to dig up roots.           The hammer is used for killing
seals or other animals, and for breaking open shell-fish.
The handle is from twelve to fifteen inches long, pomted at
one end, and having on each side at the other a hard stone
attached to the handle by a mass of gum. The knives (fig.
205, which represents a specimen presented to me by A. W.
Franks, Esq.) have a similar handle, and at the end a few
splinters of quartz or flint, arranged in a row and fastened
into a slit with gum in the same manner.
  * Voyage of the Novara.   English      + D’Urville, vol. i. p. 461.
Trans. vol. iii. p. 36.                  tlc. p. 266.
442,                            CLUBS.       SPEARS.

 Fic. 205.   Fie. 266.   Fic. 207,
                                       The natives of Botany Bay had
                                     fish-hooks, but no nets; on the con-
                                     trary, Capt.           Grey,   in   describing
                                     those of Western Australia, men-
                                     tions nets, but not hooks; Hyre also
                                     states that hooks were unknown in
                                     South     Australia,       while    nets   were
                                     used in hunting and as bags; lastly,
                                     the natives of the north-west, accord-
                                     ing to Dampier, had “no instru-
                                     ments to catch great fish.’ Those
                                     seen by King were also without
                                     hooks or nets*. Throughout the
                                     continent they were ignorant both
                                     of slings and bows and arrows. On
                                     the other hand they had spears,
                                     clubs (fig. 206), shields, and two
                                     very peculiar instruments, namely,
                                     the throwing-stick (fig. 207), and the
                                     boomerang (fig. 208). The spear,
                                     however, is their national weapon.
                                     These are about ten feet long, and
                                     very slender, made of cane or wood,
                                     tapering to a point, which is barbed.
                                     They are light, and one would scarcely
                                     be inclined to believe that they could
                                     be darted with any force: this, how-
                                     ever, is effected by the aid of the
                                     wummera, a straight flat stick, three
                                     feet in length, terminating                in a
  3             .                    socket of bone or hide, into which
 eirmaarie ie                        the end of the spear is fixed. The
                                     wummera is grasped in the right
                                 * 1. c. vol. ii. p. 187.
                             THROWING-STICKS.                             443
hand by three fingers (fig. 207), the spear lying between the
fore-finger and thumb.          Previous to throwing it, a tremulous
or vibratory motion is given to it,
                                                             Ere. 208,
which is supposed to add to the accu-
racy of the aim:            in projecting the
spear, the wummera is retained in the
hand, and the use of this simple con-
trivance adds greatly to the projectile
force given to the spear. They are
well practised in the use of these
weapons*.     Indeed, Capt. Grey tells
us that he has often seen them killa
pigeon with a spear at a distance of
thirty yards, and Captain Cook says
that “at a distance of fifty yards these
Indians were more sure of their mark
than we could be with asingle bullet+.”
The very long Australian spears are
not thrown with the wummera, but by
the strength of the arm alone. They
are of several kinds; those          used for
striking     turtle    or    dugong, have     a
movable,      barbed blade, which is at-
tached by a string to the butt-end of
the spear; when the turtle is struck,                        Boomerang.
the shaft becomes detached from the
point, which remains fixed in the body, while the shaft serves
partly to impede the motions, and partly as a float to indicate
the position of the turtlet.’ A similar weapon is used by
the Esquimaux, the Mincopies, the Fuegians, the Brazilian
Indians, and other savages. But the most extraordinary wea-

  * United States Explor. Exped.         + Hawkesworth’s Voyages, vol. iil,
volun p: 191:                         p. 636. See also Eyre, vol. il. p. 805.
  t Cook, 1. c. 642.                  McGillivray, vol. i. p. 147.
AAA                     THE   BOOMBRANG.

pon, and one quite peculiar to Australia, is the boomerang.
This is a curved stick, generally rounded on one side, flatter
on the other, about three feet long and two inches wide, by
three-quarters of an inch thick. At first sight it looks some-
thing like a very rude wooden sword. It was used both in
the chase and in war. “It is grasped at one end in the
right hand, and is thrown sickle-wise, either upwards into
the air, or downwards so as to strike the ground at some
distance from the thrower. In the first case it flies with a
rotatory motion, as its shape would indicate; after ascending
to a great height in the air, it suddenly returns in an ellipti-
cal orbit to a spot near its starting-point.           On throwing it
downwards on the ground, it rebounds in a straight line,
pursuing a ricochet motion untilit strikes the object at which
it is thrown.   Birds and small animals are killed with it, and
it is also used in killing ducks. The most singular curve
described by it is when thrown into the air, above the angle
of 45°; its flight is always then backwards, and the native
who throws it stands with his back, instead of his face, to
the object he is desirous of hitting*.” Mr. Merry, a gentle-
man who resided for some time in Australia, informs me that
on one occasion, m order to test the skill with which the
boomerang could be thrown, he offered a reward of sixpence
for every time the boomerang was made to return to the spot
from which it was thrown. He drew a circle of five or six
feet on the sand, and although the boomerang was thrown
with much force, the native succeeded in making it fall
within the circle five times out of twelve. Hyre also says
that this weapon is particularly useful in war, “as it is
almost impossible, even when it is seen in the air, to tell
which way it will go, or where descend. I once nearly had
my arm broken by a wangno, whilst standing within a yard
of the native who threw it, and looking out purposely for
                * United States Explor. Exped. 1. c.
                                         FIRE.                              445


 it*.”    Mr.    Oldfield+,     on   the         contrary,   speaks much    less
 favourably of the boomerang.     It is, he says, but little used
 in war, nor do the natives “ever attempt to kill a solitary
 bird or beast by means of” it. On the other hand, in
 swampy localities, where waterfowl “ congregate largely, the
 boomerang is of essential use; for a great number of them
 being simultaneously hurled into a large flock of waterfowl,
 ensures the capture of considerable numbers.”
    The Australians obtain fire by rubbing together two pieces’
 of wood. ‘The process, however, beg one of considerable
 labour, particularly in damp weather, great care is taken to
 prevent the fire, when once lighted, from becoming extin-
 guished. For this reason they often carry with them a cone
 of banksia, which burns slowly like amadou t.
   Mr. Stuart informs me that some of the northern tribes
had no means of relighting their fires, but if they ever be-
came simultaneously extinguished, used to go to a neigh-
bouring tribe for a fresh light. So also, according to M.
Angas, some of the western tribes “ have no means of kind-
ling fire. They say that it formerly came down from the
north,” and if it happens to go out they procure it again
from some neighbouring encampment §.
  According to Captain Cook, the Australians had “no idea
of traffic, nor,” he says,           “could        we    communicate   any to
them: they received the things which we gave them, but
never appeared to understand our signs when we required a
return. The same indifference which prevented them from
buying what we had; prevented them also from attempting
to steal: if they had         coveted       more,       they would have    been
less honest ||.”      In other parts, however, they are more ad-

   * 1. c. vol. ii. p. 308.                    § Savage Life and Scenes, vol. i.
   + Trans. Ethn. Soc. N. S. vol. iti,      p. 112.
p. 264.                                        || 1. c. p. 635.
   £ D’Urville, vol. i. p. 194,
446                  CLOTHES.     ORNAMENTS.      TATTOOING.

vanced in this respect. Various kinds of pigments, feathers,
shells, implements, and especially flints, are the principal
articles of barter.
   The Australians observed by Cook, Dampier, and Flinders
were entirely destitute of clothing, and their principal orna-
ment consisted of a bone, five or six inches long, and half an
inch thick, thrust through the cartilage of the nose. They
did not tattoo.     On the north-west coast, King observed
some of the natives with a very peculiar decoration. At
every three inches between the upper part of the chest and
the navel, the body was             scarified in horizontal bands, the
cicatrices of which were            at least an inch in diameter, and
raised half an inch from the body*.                Some of them fastened
to their hair, by means            of gum, teeth of kangaroos             or of
men, dogs’ tails, fish-bones, bits of wood, and other objects
which they regarded as ornamental. Frequently they wore
pieces of opossum, or kangaroo-skin—not for decency, how-
ever, but for warmth, and while hunting, as a protection from
thorns.         According       to D’Urville, however,        the natives        of
New South Wales did not think it decent that young chil-
dren should go quite naked +. McGillivray also mentions a
very similar idea at Moreton Bay. In many parts of Aus-
tralia the natives also paint themselves, red and white being
the favourite, or at least the commonest colours.                     The red
is laid on in broad patches, the white generally in stripes or
spots, a circle often being drawn round                   each eye.       Some
tribes, but not all, tattoo themselves            on the back and breast
In rows, rings, and semicircles. Among the females on the
Murray, the only ceremony of importance with which Eyre
was acquainted was that of scarring the back. Hyre indeed
calls it tattooing, but “ crimping” would, I think, be a more
correct expression. It takes place at the age of puberty, and
is extremely painful. The young woman kneels down and
  oP 1, © tah, 2D,                    + Voyage de l’Astralabe, vol. i. p. 471.
                    INITIATION    CEREMONIES.       GAMES.                447

places her head between the knees of a strong old woman,
and the operator, who is always a man, cuts the back with a
piece of shell or flint in rows of long, deep gashes from left
to right quite across the back, and completely up to the
shoulders.    The whole scene is most revolting, the blood
gushes out in torrents, and saturates the ground, while the
cries of the poor victim gradually rise into screams of agony.
Still the girls submit voluntarily, as a well-carved back is
much admired. The lads also generally have to undergo a
ceremony of initiation before they are permitted to rank as
men.   This sometimes consists in circumcision *, sometimes
in another almost incredible ceremonial+, or frequently in
punching out one of the front teeth.                   Other tribes have
peculiar and        distinctive    incisions, such as scars running
across the chest, circles on the shoulders, or various com-
binations of small dots.
   In the Adelaide district, according to Mr. Moorhouse,
there are five distinct stages of initiation, before the native
is admitted to all the privileges of aman. Yet the Austra-
lians cannot be said to have any form of government, nor
have any distinctions of rank, or recognized chiefs, ever been
found amongst them.
   The children have a game with string something like our
cat’s-cradle, but their principal amusements consist in learn-
ing to hunt, fish, etc. The elder people are fond of dances,
which may be divided into war-dances, hunting-dances, and
love-dances,—the two latter being most common. These gene-
rally take place when tribes meet, andare heldatnight. Their
songs are rude, with simple and generally extempore words.
   They have no systematized religion, nor any worship or
prayer ; but most of them believe in evil spirits, and all have
a great dread of the dark, and of witchcraft. In fact, they
believe that no one ever dies a natural death.
* Eyre, vol. ii. p. 332.   + Funditur usque ad urethram 4 parte infera penis.
4.4.8      SUPERSTITION.       MODES     OF BURIAL.      LANGUAGE.

   Captain Wilkes * describes an Australian funeral as fol-
lows. Almost immediately after death the corpse was ar-
ranged in a sitting posture, the knees bent up close to the
body, the head pressed forwards, and the whole body closely
tied up in a blanket. An oval grave was then dug, about six
feet long, three wide, and five deep. At the bottom was a
bed of leaves, covered with an opossum-skin cloak, and with
a stuffed bag of kangaroo-skin for a pillow ; on this the body
was laid with its implements and weapons.        Above the
corpse were strewn leaves and branches, and the hole was
then filled up with stones.   Finally, the earth which had
been removed was put over the whole, making a mound
eight or nine feet high. According to D’Urville the natives
of New South Wales bury the young, and burn the oldt.
Other tribes dispose of their dead in other ways; but none
of them were addicted to cannibalism as a matter of habit or
choice, although they were not unfrequently driven to it by
the scarcity of other food.
   No single fact, perhaps, gives us a more vivid idea of the
mental condition of these miserable savages, than the obser-
vation that they cannot count their own fingers—not even
those of one hand. Mr. Orawfurd + has examined the nume-
rals of thirty Australian languages, “and in no instance do
they appear to go beyond the number four.”        Mr. Scott
Nind, indeed, has given an account of the Australians of
King George’s Sound, to which a vocabulary is annexed,
containing the numerals, which are made to reach the num-
ber five. The term for this last unit, however, turns out to
be only the word “many.                In fact, the word “ five” con-
veys to them the idea of a great number, as a “hundred”
or a “thousand” does to us.
   Their language, moreover, contains “no generic terms as
* l.c. vol. ii. p. 195. Fitzroy, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 628.        + Vol. i. p. 472.
            t Transactions of Ethn. Soc. New Series, vol. ii. p. 84.
                              MARRIAGE.                         4.49

tree, fish, bird, etc., but only specific ones, as applied to each
particular variety *.’
   Polygamy is permitted; but a man who takes more than
two wives is generally looked upon as a selfish and unreason-
able person, nor is any man allowed to marry a woman of
his own name.    If a married man dies, his brother inherits
the wife, who “ goes to her second husband’s hut three days
after the death of her first.”
   Though they are apparently fond of their children, even
Eyre admits that there is little affection between husband
and wife. “After a long absence,” he says, ‘I have seen
natives upon their return, go to their camp, exhibiting the
most stoical indifference, never take the least notice of their
wives, but sit down, and act and look as if they had never
been out of the encampment +.”            Women, in fact, are re-
garded as mere property. There is no ceremony of mar-
riage, and chastity is entirely disregarded, wives being valued
principally for their services as slaves, and terribly ill-treated.
“No one,” says Eyre, “ever attempts to take the part
of a femalet.” Beauty only makes matters worse. “The
early life,” says Captain Grey, “of a young woman at all
celebrated for beauty is generally one continued series of
captivity to different masters, of ghastly wounds, rapid flights,
and bad treatment from other females§$,” jealous of her supe-
rior attractions.    Few women     in Australia, it is said, live to
thirty. Yet with all this lawlessness, and tyranny, marriage
is regulated by certain very curious prohibitions. Thus a man
may steal another man’s wife if he can, but, as already men-
tioned, he may not under any circumstances marry a woman of
the same family name, even though not related in the remotest
degree. There are certain great families, such as the Ballaroke,
Tdondarup, Ngotak, Nagarnook, Nogonyuk, Mongalmy, and
 * Hyre, vol. ii. p. 392.             t lc. vol. ii. p. 387.
 + lic. pp. 2.215. See also 320.      § lc. vol. ii. p. 249.
                                                         Gs
450                           THE    TASMANIANS.

Narrangur, which occur over a great portion of the Conti-
nent, and within which marriage is not permitted *. There
are many other cases of prohibitions; “indeed,” says Mr.
Lang +, “instead of enjoying perfect personal freedom, as it
would at first appear, they are governed by a code of rules
and a set of customs which form one of the most cruel tyran-
nies that has ever, perhaps, existed on the face of the earth,
subjecting not only the will, but the property and life of the
weak to the dominion of the strong. The whole tendency of
the system is to give every thing to the strong and old, to
the prejudice of the weak and young, and more particularly
to the detriment of the women.    They have rules by which
the best food, the best pieces, the best animals, etc., are pro-
hibited to the women and young men, and reserved for the
old. The women are generally appropriated to the old and
powerful, some of whom possess from four to seven wives ;
while wives are altogether denied to young men, unless
they have sisters to give in exchange, and are strong and
courageous enough to prevent their sisters from being
taken without exchange.”

                              The Tasmanians.

   The inhabitants of Van Dieman’s Land belonged to quite
a different race, but were just as wretched as those of
Australia. According to Captain Cook’s account they had
no houses, no clothes, no canoes, no instrument to catch
large fish, no nets, no hooks; they lived on mussels, cockles,
and periwinkles, and their only weapon was a straight pole,
sharpened at one end{. Mr. Dove informs us that they are
entirely without any ‘‘moral views and impressions.’ In-
deed; he scarcely appears to regard them as rational beings§.
  * Kyre, vol. ii. p. 329.                   { Third Voyage, vol. i. p. 100.
  + The Aborigines of        Australia.      § Tasmanian Jour. of Nat. Sci.
G. S. Lang, p. 7.                         vol. i. p. 249.
                         FEEGEE     ISLANDERS.                451

Like the Australians, they have no means of expressing
abstract ideas; they have not even a word for a “tree.”
Although fire was well known to them, some tribes, at least,
appear to have been ignorant whence it was originally ob-
tained, or how, if extinguished, it could be re-lighted. “In
all their wanderings,” says Mr. Dove, “ they were particu-
larly careful to bear in their hands the materials for kindling
a fire. Their memory supplies them with no instances of
a period in which they were obliged to draw on their in-
ventive powers for the means of resuscitating an element so
essential to their health and comfort as flame. How it came
originally into their possession is unknown. Whether it
may be viewed as a gift of nature, or the product of art
                               Fic. 209.




                         Tasmanian Firesticks,


and sagacity, they cannot recollect a period when it was
a desideratum.     . . . It was the part of the females
especially to carry a firebrand in their hands, which was
studiously refreshed from time to time as it became dull
and evanescent*.”     Fig. 209 represents a pair of Tasmanian
firesticks, presented to me by Mr. Robinson.


                        Feegee Islanders.

   The islands of the Pacific contain two very distinct races
of men—the Negrito and the Polynesian. My space does
not permit me to enter into the interesting question of their
relationships and affinities.
           * Tasmanian Journal of Nat. Sci. vol. i. p. 250.
                               ég 2
452                      FOOD.     WEAPONS.

  The Feegeeans belong to the former category, and in
many respects resemble negroes. They are darker than the
Polynesians. The jaws are larger, and the hair, though not
exactly woolly, is frizzled. They are a powerful race, but
not so graceful as the Polynesians.              Their language is,
however, more Polynesian than Negrito. ‘Their institutions,
customs, and manners, were partly Polynesian, partly Ne-
grito*, It is remarkable that they did not use the con-
sonants “bj? “dor “o./* withont. plac sy“ mor “ny
before them, as for instance Mbau, Nduandua, Ngata.               It is
well known how frequent these sounds are in Negro names,
   The food of the Feegee Islanders consisted of fish, turtle,
shell-fish, crabs, human flesh whenever it could be obtained,
taro, yams, mandrai, bananas, and cocoa-nuts, in addition to
which the higher classes occasionally indulged in pigs and
fowls. They drank ava habitually, and at all their cere~
monies.
  Their weapons consisted of spears, slings, clubs, bows and
arrows.   ‘The spears were from ten to fifteen feet long, and
were generally made of cocoa-nut wood ; the end was pointed
and charred ; sometimes, though not often, a sharp bone was
used for the point. They had several kinds of clubs, all
made of iron wood. That most esteemed was about three
feet long with a heavy knob at the end. Another kind
was somewhat shovel-shaped, and might rather be called
a short sword.     The   wla was     a short     heavy   elub,   about
eighteen inches long, with a large and heavy knob. It was
used as a missile, and the natives threw it with great ac-
curacy and force. These were their principal weapons,.the
bows and arrows being weak and light. They were, how-
ever, used in war, as well as in killing fish. The fortified
towns of the Feegeeans had an earthen “rampart, about six
feet thick, faced with large stones, surmounted by a reed
                 * Latham.   Varieties of Man, p. 226.
                   HOUSES.     TEMPLES.     RELIGION.                  453

fence of cocoa-nut       trunks, and surrounded            by a muddy
moat*.”
  Their houses were oblong, from twenty to thirty feet long,
and fifteen feet high. They were made of cocoa-nut wood
and tree fern, and were sometimes very well built.                    They
had two doorways on opposite sides, from three to four feet
high and four feet wide.              The sides were made of posts
about three feet apart, and filled in with wickerwork. The
roof had a steep pitch; the rafters were generally of palm
wood, thatched with wild sugar cane, under which they
placed fern leaves.       A mat       served as a door, and a few flat
stones near the middle of the house served as the fireplace.
The houses were seldom divided by partitions, but the two
ends were raised about a foot, and were covered with layers
of mats on which the natives slept.
   Their temples were pyramidal in form and were often
erected on terraced mounds, like those of Central Americat.
They also venerated certain upright stones}, resembling
those which we call Druidical.      ‘The Feegeeans,” says
Mr. Hazlewood, “‘ consider the gods as beings of like passions
with themselves. They love and hate; they are proud and
revengeful,   and make       war,     and kill and eat each other ;
and are, in fact, savages             and canibals like themselves.”
“Cruelty,”     says   Captain Erskine§, “a craving for blood,
and especially for human flesh as food, are characteristic of
the gods.” Yet the Feegeeans looked upon the Samoans
with horror, regarding them as having no religion, because
they had no belief in any such deities, nor any of the san-
guinary rites which prevailed in other islands.
   The Feegee canoes were very well constructed. They

  * Williams, Figi and the Figians,       t Figi and    the Figians, vol. i.
vol. i. p. 48.                          p. 220.                  ee
   + B. Seemann, in the Vacation           § Jounal of a Cruise in      the
Tourist for 1861, p. 269.               Western Pacific, p. 247.
454,             CANOES.    POTTERY.   GAMES.

were generally double, of unequal size, the smaller         one
serving as an outrigger.     The larger ones were sometimes
more than a hundred feet in length. The two canoes were
connected by a platform, generally about fifteen feet wide
and projecting two or three feet beyond the sides.        The
bottom of each consisted of a single plank; the sides were
fitted by dovetailing, and closely united by lashings passed
through flanges left on each of the pieces. The joints were
closed by the gum of the bread-fruit tree. The sails were
large and made of mats. The mast was generally about
half the length of the canoe, and the yard and boom usually
twice as long as the mast. Their principal tool was an adze,
formerly of stone, but now generally of iron. For boring
holes they used the long spines of the echina, pointed bones,
and, when they could get them, nails.     Small teeth, such
as those of rats and mice, were used for carving; and their
knives were made of the outside of a piece of bamboo, shaped
into form while green. After being dried it was charred,
and thus became very hard and sharp, so that it might even
be used in surgical operations. They differed from the Poly-
nesians in using earthenware pots for cooking. These were
graceful and well made, though the potter’s wheel was un-
known.     The pottery was all made by women.      ‘Their tools
were very simple, consisting of a small round flat stone
to fashion the inside, and a flat mallet or spatula for the
surface, which they made almost as round as if it had been
turned in a lathe. Forks appear to have been long in use
among the Feegeeans; a remarkable fact, if we remember
that they were unknown in Northern Europe until the seven-
teenth century.
   The Feegeeans have several kinds of games.        They are
fond of swinging, and of throwing stones or fruits at a mark.
They have also a game resembling skittles. Their dances,
like those of so many other nations, are any thing but
                     AGRICULTURE.        WOMEN.                       455

decorous.   Their musical       instruments       are     the conch-shell,
the nose-flute, pipes, a Jew’s-harp made of a strip of bamboo,
and several sorts of drums.     They are also fond of poetry.
   Their agricultural implements have been described by
Mr. Wiliams.      The digging-sticks are made of a young
mangrove-tree.     They are about the size of an ordinary hay-
fork, and the lower end ‘‘is tapered off on one side, after the
shape of a quill toothpick. In digging, this flattened side is
kept downwards.      When preparing a piece of ground for
yams, a number of men are employed, divided into groups of
three or four. Hach man being furnished with a digging-
stick, they drive them into the ground so as-to enclose a
circle of about two feet in diameter. When, by repeated
strokes, the sticks reach the depth of eighteen inches, they
are used as levers, and the mass of soil between them is thus
loosened and raised*.”       The clods are then broken up by
boys with short sticks. Weeding “is accomplished by means
of a tool used like a Dutch hoe, the workmen squatting so as
to bring the handle nearly level with the ground. The blade
used formerly to be made of a bone from the back of a turtle,
or a plate of tortoise-shell, or the valve of a large oyster, or
large kind of pimna. In the Windward Islands they use a
large dibble, eight feet long, about eighteen inches in cir-
cumference, and tapering to a point. They had also pruning
knives of ” tortoise-shell lashed to the end of a rod ten feet
long. They are skilful in basket-making, and have good
strong nets made of creepers or of sinnet.
   The women are kept in great subjection. “The men
frequently tie them up and flog them. Like other property,
wives might be sold at pleasure, and the usual price is a
musket.   Those who purchase them may do with them as
they please, even to knocking them on the head.” Erskine,
however, gives a more satisfactory account of the position
                 * Figi and the Figians, vol. i. p. 63.
456                       DRESS.     TATTOOING.

held by the women;             and it appears that they are on the
whole more chaste than is the case in some of the other
Pacific Islands, which is saying something for them, but
certainly not much. Although so lax in some things, they
were very strict in others, and it was thought improper in
some of these islands for husband and wife to spend the night
under the same roof.                  ;
   Although but scantily clothed, the Feegeeans were very
particular about       their    garments     and    their paint.        They
were specially proud of their hair, and if it was short
they wore a wig as a substitute.    Some of these wigs
were      most elaborate.       The men wore        “ tapa,” which is a
kind of cloth obtained from the inner bark of the paper-
mulberry, and made into a sash, from three to one hundred
yards in length. Six or ten yards is, however, the usual
quantity, and it is passed between the legs and round the
waist*. The women are not permitted to use “‘tapa,” and
their dress is more scanty than that of the men, consisting,
indeed, only of the “liku,” a kind of band, made of the bark
of hibiscus, and fastened round the waist.      It ends in a
fringe, which is worn short by the girls, but longer after
marriage.       Nevertheless, though almost naked, the Feegeeans
are said to have been very modest, and if any one were found
entirely without clothes, Captain Wilkes thinks that the
offender would be immediately put to death.
   Tattooing is confined to the women, who are ornamented
in this manner on the fingers, the corners of the mouth, and,
oddly enough, on those parts of the body which are covered
by the “liku.” The process is very painful, but submission
to it is regarded as a religious duty+, any neglect of which
will assuredly be punished after deatht.
   The graves of the common people are only marked by a
  * FWigi and    the Figians, vol. i.      t+ Ibid. p.160; Wilkes, l.c. p. 355.
p. 156.                                    t A Mission to Viti, p. 112.
                                   BURIAL.                             457

few stones, but over those of chiefs they build small houses,
from two to six feet high, or in some cases erect large cairns
of stone; these also are sometimes “ set up to mark the spot
where a man has died*.”      The body is buried in a sitting
posture.     The usual sign of mourning is to crop the hair or
beard, or both.        Very often, also, they burn the skin into
blisters, and cut off the end-joints of the small toe and little
finger.                     :
   Among the Feegeeans, parricide is not a crime, but a cus-
tom. Parents are generally killed by their children. Some-
times the aged people make up their minds that it is time
to die; sometimes it is the children who give notice to their
parents that they are a burden to them. In either case, the
friends and relatives are summoned, a consultation takes
place, and a day is fixed for the ceremony, which commences
with a great feast. The missionaries have often witnessed
these horrible tragedies.     On one occasion, a young man
invited Mr. Hunt        to attend his mother’s funeral, which was
just going to take place. Mr. Hunt accepted the invitation,
but when the funeral procession started, he was surprised
to see no corpse, and accordingly made inquiries, when the
young savage “pointed out his mother+, who was walking
along with them, as gay and lively as any of them present,
and apparently as much pleased. . . . He added that it
was from love for his mother that he had done so; that in
consequence of the same love, they were now going to bury
her, and that none but themselves could or ought to do so
sacred an office. . . . . She was their mother, and they
were her children, and they ought to put her to death.”                 In
such cases the grave is dug about four feet deep, the relatives
and friends begin their lamentations,           take an affectionate
parting, and bury the poor victim alive.             It is surprising
after this to hear that Mr. Hunt             regarded the Feegeeans
  * Figi and the Figians, vol. i. p. 192.          t Wilkes, 1. c. p. 95.
458                         CUSTOMS.              PARRICIDE.

as being kind and affectionate to their parents; but in fact
“they consider this custom so great a proof of affection,
that none but children could be found to perform it.”” The
fact is that they not only believe in a future state, but are
persuaded that as they leave this life so they will rise again*,
They have, therefore, a powerful motive for quitting this
world before they are weakened by old age; and so general
was this belief, so powerful the influence which it had upon
them, that in one town, containing several hundred inha-
tants, Capt. Wilkes did not see one man over forty years
of age; and, on asking for the old people, he was informed
that they were all buried. Again, during the first year of
Mr. Hunt’s residence at Somo-somo, there was only one
instance of natural death; all the aged and diseased having
been strangled or buried alive.
   When a chief died it was usual to “send with him” some
of his women and some slaves. At the death of Ngavindi,
Mr. Calvert went to Mbau, hoping “ to prevent the strangling
of women,         but was        too      late.     Three had been             murdered.
Thakombau         proposed to strangle his sister, the chief wife
of the deceased, as was            the usual custom;               but the Lasakau
people begged that she might be spared, and that her child
might become their chief. Ngavindi’s mother offered herself
as a substitute, and was strangled. The dead chief lay in
state, with a dead wife by his side, on a raised platform; the
corpse of his mother on a bier at his feet, and a murdered
servant on a mat in the midst of the house. A large grave
was dug in the foundation of a house near by, in which the
servant was laid first, and upon her the other three corpses,
wrapped and wound up together+.” In these cases the
wives generally die voluntarily, believing that thus only can
they hope to go to heaven.    Horrible as are these facts, they

   * Wigi   and   the Figians,     vol.    i.       } Ibid. vol. ii. p. 301.
p. 183.
                          HORRIBLE     RITES.                           459

at least show how strong must be the belief felt in a future
state of existence.
   Still, though we may allow the goodness of the motive to
extenuate some of these atrocities, it must be allowed that
human life was but little regarded in Feegee. Not only
infanticide, but also human sacrifices, were very common,
and, in fact, scarcely any thing was undertaken without the
latter. When the king launched a canoe, ten or more men
were slaughtered on the deck, in order that it might be
washed with human blood. But there is even worse to be
told. The Feegeeans were most inveterate cannibals, and
so fond were they of human flesh, that “the greatest praise
they can bestow on any delicacy is to say that it is as tender
as a dead man.”      Nay, they were even so fastidious as to
dislike the taste of white men*, to prefer the flesh of women
to that of men, and to consider the arm above the elbow,
and the thigh as the best jomts; and so greedy, that human
flesh was reserved for the men, being considered too good to
be wasted upon the women.       When the king gave a feast
human flesh always formed one of the dishes, and though
the bodies of enemies slain in battle were always eaten, they
did not afford a sufficient supply, but slaves were fattened
up for the market.   Sometimes they roasted them alive and
ate them at once, while at others they kept bodies until they
were far gone in decay. Ra Undre-undre, Chief of Rakiraki,
was said to have eaten nine hundred persons himself, permit-
ting no one to share them with him.
   It was not from any want of food that the Feegeeans were
cannibals. On one occasion they offered to the God of War
“ten thousand yams (weighing from six to twelve pounds
each), thirty turtles, forty roots of yaquona (some very large),
many hundreds of native puddings (two tons), one hundred
  * So also did the Australians, the Tongans, and the New Zealanders.
  + Figi and the Figians, vol. i. p. 213.
                                                &
460                             CANNIBALISM.

and fifty giant oysters, fifteen water-melons, cocoa-nuts, a
large number of violet land-crabs, taro, and ripe bananas*.”
At a public feast Mr. Williams once saw “two hundred men
employed for nearly six hours in collecting and piling cooked
food.    There were six mounds of yams, taro, vakalolo, pigs,
and turtles: these contained about fifty tons of cooked yams
and taro, fifteen tons of sweet pudding, seventy turtles, five
cartloads of yaquona, and about two hundred tons of un-
cooked yams. One pudding, at a Lakemba feast, measured
twenty-one feet in circumference.”                  Yet        so habitual      has
cannibalism become, that they have no word for a corpse
which does not include the idea of something edible.
Human flesh is known as “puaka balava,” or “long
pigt.” “On contemplating the character of this extraor-
dinary people,” says Erskine}, “the mind is struck with
wonder and awe at the mixture of a complicated and
carefully-conducted political system, highly finished man-
ners, and ceremonious politeness, with a ferocity and prac-
tice of savage vices which is probably unparalleled in any
other part of the world.’     “ Murder,” says Mr. Williams,
“is not an occasional thing in Figi, but habitual, systematic,
and classed among ordinary transactions§.”” Hlsewhere he
tells us that no Feegeean ever feels safe with a stranger
at his heels||, and that to be “an acknowledged murderer
is the object of the Figian’s restless ambition].”?    On the
island of Vanua Levu, even among the women, there were
“few who had not in some way been murderers**.”             To
this they are trained up from infancy. “One of the first
  * Wigi andthe Figians, vol.ip.44.      “hog with teeth on its forehead”
  t+ Erskine, 1. c. p. 260.   Other      (Forster, 1. ¢. p. 384).
mammalia, when introduced into the          ft Erskine, 1. c. p. 272.
South Sea Islands, received names           § Figi and the Figians,          vol.   1.
indicative of their similarity to this   op. 134.
their principal quadruped: thus the          I} ts @s tas Sy
horse was called the “man-carrying           Sle. ple
pig” in Tahiti, the sheep was the           uit Noh 58), ASO)
                    CHARACTER     OF    THE    FEEGERANS.                     461

lessons taught the infant is to strike its mother.”                   At Somo-
somo, Mr. Williams saw mothers leading their children “to
kick and tread upon the dead bodies of enemies*.         No
wonder that under these circumstances “a happy and united
household is most rare.” Indeed it is nearly impossible, for
by an arrangement, which seems almost incredible, “ brothers
and sisters, first cousins, fathers and sons-in-law, mothers
and daughters-in-law, and brothers and sisters-in-law, are
severally forbidden to speak to each other, or to eat from
the same disht.” Yet amid so much that is horrible,
there is still something in the Feegeean which redeems his
character from utter atrocity. If he hates deeply, he also
loves truly ; if his revenge never dies, his fidelity and loyalty
are strong and enduring.        Thakombau was a thorough
Feegeean. Almost to the last he opposed the missionaries.
He was not only heathen, but anti-Christian.                         At length
bemg converted, he called his people together, and, says
Mr. Calvert, “What          a congregation he had!— husbands
whose wives he had dishonoured! widows whose husbands
he had slain! sisters whose relatives had been strangled by
his orders! relatives whose friends he had eaten! and
children, the       descendants    of those he had murdered,                  and
who had vowed to avenge the wrongs inflicted on their
fatherst!’? Yet even this man—an adulterer, a parricide,
and a cannibal, whose       hands       were      stained with a hundred
murders—had still something noble and lovable about him;
so much so indeed that, in spite of his crimes, he secured the
affection, the friendship, even the respect, of a man so
excellent as Mr. Calvert.

                             The       Maories.

  The New Zealanders are the southernmost representatives
   Flac mp ely fs                            t Figi and the Figians, l. c. vol. ti.
   f lc. p. 186.                          p. 357.
462                           THE      MAORIES.

of the great Polynesian family.               Their principal food con-
sisted of fern roots, which they scorched over the fire, and
then beat with a stick, till the bark and dry outside fell off ;
the remainder being a soft substance, rather clammy and
sweet, not unpleasant to the taste, but mixed with numerous
stringy fibres which are very disagreeable*.          In the
northern districts were large plantations of yams and sweet
potatoes. They also cultivated gourds, which were used for
vessels, as they had no pottery. Their only instrument for
tillage was “a long narrow stake sharpened to an edge at
one end, with a short piece fastened transversely at a little
distance above it, for the convenience of pressing it down
with the foot.” Their animal food consisted principally of
 fish and shell-fish, and Captain Cook observed large shell-
 mounds near their houses. They sometimes, also, though
rarely, killed rails, penguins, shags, and other birds.                    They
 obtain fire from two pieces of wood, in the usval mannerf.
 A New Zealand stone adze is represented in figs. 111-113,
 ere.
   The only quadrupeds in the islands were dogs and rats.
 They had no hogs, and the dogs were kept entirely for food.
They were skilful in fishing, having excellent lines, hooks
made of bone and shell, and very large nets, which were
made of the leaves of a kind of flax, split into strips of the
proper breadth and tied together.     In making the lines the
leaves are “scraped by a shell, which removes the upper
or green part, and leaves the strong white fibres, that run
longitudinally along the under side{.” This kind of cordage
has even been preferred to that made of Huropean hemp.
   Of these leaves also they made most of their clothes, for
though acquainted         with the manufacture of bark-cloth, it

   * Dieffenbach’s New Zealand, vol.        t Fitzroy’s Voyage of the “Advyen-
ae oy ditt                                ture” and “ Beagle,’’ vol. ii. p. 599.
   + D’Urville, vol. ii. p. 479.
              ORNAMENTS.      TATTOOING.        HOUSES.          463

was very scarce, and worn only as an ornament.            The leaves
were split into three or four slips, which were interwoven
into a kind of stuff, something between netting and cloth.
Dog’s wool was also used for the same purpose*. The dress
was alike in both sexes, and consisted of two parts; one
piece of their rude cloth (if so it may be called) was tied
over the shoulders and reached to the knees, being fastened
in front by a piece of string or a bone bodkin; the other
piece was wrapped round the waist, and reached nearly to
the ground. This garment, however, was worn by the men
only on particular occasions
   For ornament they wors combs of wood or bone, feathers,
necklaces, bracelets, and anklets of bones and shells, and
ear-rings of jade or albatross-down.  Many of them had also
small grotesque figures of jade, which were suspended from
the neck and were regarded as very precious. The New
Zealanders were also tattooed with great dexterity and ele-
gance; not only on the body, but even on the face, the gene-
ral effect of which was in many cases far from unpleasant.
The process, however, was extremely painful, so much so, in-
deed, that it could not be supported all at once, but was some-
times spread over several months, or even years. The lips and
the corners of the eyes were the part that hurt most. To have
shrunk from it would, however, have been a great disgrace.
   Their houses were about eighteen or twenty feet long,
eight or ten broad, and five or six high. The sides sloped
quite down to the ground, differing in this respect from those
of Tahiti, which are left open at the sides.          This was done,
however, not for the sake of privacy, but to keep out the
wind and rain. The sides were made of sticks, closely
thatched with grass and hay, and the door was at one end,
just high enough to admit a man on all fours. Another hole
served both for window and chimney. The roof was often
                     * D’Urville, vol. ii. p. 500.
464                   FORTIFICATIONS.   WEAPONS.

carved, and they frequently attached to the end of the ridge
pole a monstrous representation of the proprietor*.
   Their villages were all fortified. They chose the strongest
natural situations, and surrounded the houses with a palisade
about ten feet high. The weaker sides were also defended
“by a double ditch, the innermost of which has a bank, and
an additional palisade.” The stakes were driven obliquely
into the ground, so that they projected over the ditch,
which “from the bottom to the top or crown of the bank
is four-and-twenty feet.        Close within the innermost pali-
sade is a stage, twenty feet high, forty feet long, and six
broad; it is supported by strong posts, and is intended as
a station for those who defend the place, from which they
may annoy the assailants by darts and stones, heaps of
which lay ready for use. Another stage of
                                                           Fie. 210.
the same kind commands the steep avenue
from the back, and stands also within the
palisadet+.”” Within the palisades they had
reduced the ground ‘not to one level, but
to several, rising in stages one above the
other, ike an amphitheatre, each of which is
enclosed within its separate palisade.” These
different platforms communicated only by
narrow passages, so that each one was
capable of separate defence ; and they were
provided with large stores of dried fish,
fern-roots, etc. As the natives, when first
discovered, had no bows and arrows, nor
even slings, in fact no “missile weapon
except the lance, which was thrown by
hand,’’ such positions as these must have
                                                Patoo Patoo,
been almost impregnable. Their principal
patoo patoo (fig. 210) which was fastened to the wrist by a
 * Dieffenbach, 1. c. p. 69.            + Cook’s First Voyage, p. 343.
                         CANOES.       BURIAL.     MUSIC.                      465

strong strap, lest it should be wrenched from them. They
had no defensive armour, but besides their weapons the
chiefs carried a “‘ staff of distinction.’’
   Their canoes were well built, and resemble those of the
other islands.  Many of them, however, were broad enough
to sail without an outrigger.                The two ends were often in-
geniously carved*.                ;
  The dead were wrapped in native cloth, and either buried
in a contracted posture, or exposed for a while on small
square     platforms;      when       the   flesh had     decayed      away,   the
bones were washed, and finally deposited in a small covered
box, which was generally elevated on a column in or near
the villaget+. In some districts, however, they were usually
thrown into the sea, except indeed those that were killed in
battle. These were generally eaten by their enemies. None
of the objects used by the dead during his last illness were
ever employed againt; they were generally broken or buried
with the deceased. In one case a moa’s egg has been found
in the hands of a dead Maori, who was buried in the usual
sitting posture. The egg was perfect§, and may have been
intended to serve as food for the dead.
   In the Taranaki district, according to Taylor, the natives
were buried in their houses, the door was tied up and painted
with ochre to show that it was “taboo.” In most of the
Pahs or fortified villages half the houses belonged to the
dead, and these being never repaired gave the village a
very neglected appearance ||.
  ‘Their principal musical instrament was the flute, of which
they had three or four varieties. D’Urville{ also observed
among them a kind of lyre, with three or four strings. They
   * Forster’s   Observations, 1. c.           § Zoologist, February, 1865, p.
p. 326.                                     9454.
   t Dieffenbach, 1. c. p. 63; Fitzroy,        || New Zealand and its Inhabitants.
1c. p. 579.                                 Taylor. p. 101.
  { D’Urville, vol. ii. p. 536.               G 1c. vol. ii. p. 501.
                                                                Hh
466                     CHARACTER.      RELIGION.

used large shells, too, as a kind of trumpet.         They were very
fond of singing, of poetry, and of dances.            The latter were
of two kinds, warlike and amorous.
  In character the New              Zealanders were   proud, jealous,
irritable, cruel, and implacable; but at the same time sen-
sible, generous, sincere, hospitable, and affectionate. Like
other Polynesians the Maories were much given to infanti-
cide*.   The girls before marriage were allowed great
freedom.    When       once married, however, the women              were
faithful and affectionate to their husbands, by whom, on the
other hand, they were generally treated with both kindness
and respect. On the whole, it must be admitted that the
position of the women among the New Zealanders was far
from unsatisfactory. The Maories were perpetually at war
during life, and hoped to continue so after death. Heaven
they regarded as a place where there would be continual
feasts of fish and sweet potatoes; where they would be
always fighting, and always victorious.      Whether they can
be said to have had a religion, or not, depends upon the
meaning we attach to the word.       They believe in the sur-
vival of the soul, but not in the resurrection of the body, an
article of faith which, as Mr. Marsden tells us, the mission-
aries could not induce them to accept. They had no idca of an
Almighty Deity. Speaking to Mr. Taylor, Te Heuheu, chief
of Taupo, ridiculed the idea.           “Is there,” he asked, “ one
maker of all thmgs amongst             you Europeans?      Is not one
a carpenter, another a blacksmith,           another a ship-builder,
and another      a house-builder?         So it was     in the begin-
ning; one God made this, another that: Tane made trees,
Ru mountains, Tangaroa fish, and so forth.    Your re-
ligion is of to-day, ours from remote antiquity. Do not
think then to destroy our ancient faith with your freshborn
religion+.”
      * Dieffenbach, l. c. p. 16.                     TlaCa peels:
                    RELIGION.        CANNIBALISM.         467

   Their principal deity was known as the Atoua, who was
a cruel cannibal like themselves. When any one was ill,
Atoua was supposed to be devouring his inside, and they
endeavoured to frighten him away by curses and threats*.
This we may regard as a kind of negative worship; but
on other occasions they certainly offered human and other
sacrifices, in the vain hope of appeasing his wrath. They
did not worship idols, but many of the priests seem to have
really thought that they had been in actual communication
with the Atoua; and some of the early missionaries were
inclined to believe that Satan might have been permitted to
practise a deception upon them in order to strengthen his
power! However extraordinary this may appear, the same
was the case in Tahiti. “In addition,” says Mr. Ellis, “to
the firm belief which many who were sorcerers, or agents of
the infernal powers, and others who were the victims of
incantation, still maintain, some of the early missionaries
are disposed to think this was the fact+.” Even Mr. Ellis
himself was of the same opinion. With such low ideas of the
Divinity, it is perhaps not surprising that some of the chiefs
were looked upon as gods even during life. Watches and
white men also were at first regarded as deities; the latter
not, perhaps, unnaturally, their firearms being regarded as
thunder and lightning.
   The New Zealanders had but little regard for human life.
Karle relates that a young chief named Atoi, who is described
as having “a handsome open countenance,’’ on one occasion
recognized a pretty girl of about 16, who had been working
for Mr. Earle, and claiming her as a runaway slave, took her
back with him ‘to his village, where he killed and ate her.
The next day he showed Mr. Harle “the post to which she
had been tied, and laughed to think how he had cheated her.”
              * Missionary Register, Nov. 1819.
              t+ Polynesian Researches, vol. i. p. 226.
                                wh     2
468                          CANNIBALISM.

“For,” said he, “I told her I only intended             to give her a
flogging; but I fired, and shot her through the heart.”
“Yet,”    adds Mr. Harle, “I again affirm, that he was                 not
only a handsome young man, but mild and genteel in his
demeanour, and a general favourite with us all*.’’
   Although the New Zealanders were addicted to cannibalism,
it was with them a very different habit from that of the
Feegeean. No doubt the Maori enjoyed his meals of human
flesh; all people appear to have done so, who have once
overcome the natural horror which must, one would suppose,
have been at first experienced. But the cannibalism of a
New Zealander, though often a mere meal, was also some-
times a ceremony; in these cases the object was something
very different from mere sensual gratification; it must be
regarded as a part of his religion, as a sort of unholy sacra-
ment. This is proved by the fact that, after a battle, the
bodies which they preferred were not those of plump young
men, or tender damsels, but of the most            celebrated      chiefs,
however old and dry they might bet. In fact, they believed
that it was not only the material substance which they thus
appropriated, but also the spirit, the ability, and the glory of
him whom they devoured. The greater the number of corpses
they had eaten, the higher they thought would be their
position in the world to come. Under sucha creed there is a
certain diabolical nobility about the habit, which is, at any
rate, far removed from the sensuality of ordinary cannibalism.
To be eaten was, on the other hand, the greatest misfortune
that could happen to a New Zealander ; since he believed that
the soul was thus destroyed as well as the body.              The chief
who could both kill and devour his enemy had nothing more
to fear from him either in this world or the next; on the con-
trary, the strength, ability, ahd prestige against which


  * Residences in New Zealand, p. 117.      + D'Urville, vol. ii. p. 547.
                                 TAHITI.                             469


he had had to contend, were         not only conquered, but, by
this dreadful     process, incorporated with, and added to his
own.
  In other cases slaves were killed and eaten in honour of
the gods. The New Zealanders declared that criminals alone
were thus treated. Even if this was the case, the custom was
horrible enough; but religious persecutions have scarcely
ceased in Europe even now, nor is it so very long since the
fire and the stake were regarded as necessary for the pre-
servation of Christianity itself. F’hongui evidently con-
sidered that the whole analogy of nature was in favour of
cannibalism.   He was surprised at the horror of it felt by
D’Urville.   Big fish, he said, eat little fish; insects devour
insects; large birds feed upon small ones; it is in accord-
ance with the whole analogy of nature that men should eat
their enemies*,

                                 Tahiti.

   Tahiti, the Queen of Islands, has excited the wonder and
admiration of almost all those by whom it has been visited.
In some respects the Tahitians were surpassed by other
South Sea Islanders; the Feegeeans,              for instance, being, as
we have seen, acquainted with pottery,—but on the whole
they may be taken as representing the highest stage in
civilization to which man has in any country raised himself
before the discovery or introduction of metallic implements.
It is not, indeed, at all probable that any inhabitants of the
great continents were so far advanced in civilization during
their Stone Age.       Doubtless, the Society Islanders would
not have remained without metal, if the country had afforded
them the means       of obtaining it.         On the other hand, the
ancient inhabitants of Europe were confined to the use of
                       * D’Urville, vol. ii. p. 548.
470                            IMPLEMENTS.

stone weapons only until they became acquainted with the
superiority of, and acquired the art of working in, copper,
bronze, or iron; and it is evident that a nation would in all
probability discover the use of metal before attaining the
highest pitch of civilization which, without such aid, it would
be possible for it to attain.
                Bra, 211.
                                         The tools of the Ta-
                                      hitians when first dis-
                                      covered were made of
                                             stone,     bone,         shell,     or
                                             wood.    Of metal they
                                             had no idea. When they
                                             first obtained nails, they
                                             mistook them               for the
                                             young shoots              of some
                                             very     hard        wood,        and,
                                             hoping that life might
                                             not be quite extinct,
                                             planted a number of them
                                             carefully in their gar-
                                             dens*.
                                                In a very short time,
                                             however,           the     earlier
                                             weapons      were          entirely
                                             replaced        by       those      of
                                             iron; and in his last voy-
                                             age Captain Cook tells
                                             ust that      “a stone hat-
                                             chet is, at present, as rare
                                             a thing amongst them as
      Stone Axe with Wooden Handle.
                                             an iron one was eight
years ago; and a chisel of bone or stone is not to be seen.”
              * Ellis, Polynesian Researches, p. 298.
              t Voyage to the Pacific Ocean, vol. ii. p. 137.
                            FISH-HOOKS.                              471


The stone axes, or rather adzes, were of various sizes; those
intended for cutting down trees weigh six or seven pounds,
the little ones, which were used for carving, only a few
ounces.     All of them   required     continual   sharpening, and a
stone was always kept in readiness for this purpose. The
natives were very skilful in the use of their adzes; neverthe-
less, to fell a tree was a work of several days.           Some of the
South Sea axes have beautifully carved handles, as in fig.
212, representing a specimen in my collection. These were
axes of state. The chisels, or gouges, were of bone, gene-
rally that of a man’s arm between the wrist and elbow.
Pieces    of coral were used as rasps, and splinters of bamboo
for knives. For cultivating the ground they had instruments
of hard wood, about five feet long, narrow, with sharp
edges and pointed. These they used as spades or hoes*.
They had fish-hooks made of mother-of-pearl, and every
fisherman made them for himself.             They generally served
for the double purpose of hook and bait. “The shell is
first cut into square pieces, by the edge of another shell, and
wrought into a form corresponding with the outline of the
hook by pieces of coral, which are sufficiently rough to per-
form the office of a file; a hole is then bored in the
middle, the drill being no other than the first stone they
pick up that has a sharp corner; this they fix into the end
of a piece of bamboo, and turn it between the hands like a
chocolate mill; when the shell is perforated and the hole
sufficiently wide, a small file of coral is introduced, by the
application of which the hook is in a short time completed,
few costing the artificer more time than a quarter of an
hour. From the bark of the Poerou, a species of Hibis-
cus, they made ropes and lines, from the thickness of
an inch to the size of a small packthread; with these they

   * Wilson, Missionary Voyage   to      + Cook’s Voyage round the World:
the South Pacific, p. 245.            vol. i. p. 483; vol. ii. p. 218.
é2
bord
                              MODES    OF FISHING.

                           Fie. 212.
                                                     make nets for
                                                     fishing.” They
                                                     hadalsoakindof
                                                     seine net, made
                                                     “of a coarse
                                                     broad grass, the
                                                     blades of which
                                                     are like flags:
                                                     these they twist
                                                     and tie together
                                                     in a loose man-
                                                     ner, till the net,
                                                     which is about
                                                     aS wide as a
                                                     large sack, is
                                                     from sixty to
                                                     eighty fathoms
                                                     long; this they
                                                     haul in shoal-
                                                     smooth     water,
                                                     and    its   own
                                                     weight keeps it
                                                     so close to the
                                                     ground that
                                                     scarcelya single
                                                     fish can escape.”
                                                     They also used
                                                     certain    leaves
                                                     and fruit which,
                                                     when     thrown
                                                     into the water,
                                                     inebriated the
                                                     fish to such a
                                                     degree,     that
       South Sea Axe of Ceremony,
                                                     they might be
                     BASKETS.     MATS.   BARK-CLOTH.               478

caught by the hands*.              Their fishing-lines were made of
the bark of the Hrowa, a kind of nettle which grows in
the mountains, and were described as “ the best fishing-lines
in the world,” better even than our strongest silk lines.
They also used the fibres of the cocoa-nut for making threads,
with which they fastened together the various parts of their
canoes.   They were very dexterous in            Fie. 213.
making basket and wicker-work, “of a                 (
thousand different patterns, many of them            ;
exceedingly neat; they also made many                 ‘
sorts of mats from rushes, grass, and
bark, which were woven with great neat-
ness and regularity, although entirely by
hand and without any loom or machinery +.
But their principal manufacture was a
kind of cloth, made from bark, and of
which there were three varieties, obtained
respectively     from     the     paper-mulberry,
which was the best, the bread-fruit tree,
and a kind of fig.       This last, though less
ornamental,    was    more      useful than either
of the others, because          it resisted water,
which they did not.          All three kinds of
cloth were made in the same way, the
difference between them being only in the
material. When the trees were of aproper          ‘uth Sea Fish-hook.
size, that is to say, about six or eight feet high, and somewhat
thicker than a man’s thumb, they were pulled up and the roots
and branches were cut off. The bark being slit up longitudi-
nally, it peeled off readily, and was then soaked for some time
in running water. After this the green outside bark was care-
fully scraped off with a shell, and the strips were laid out in the
   * Forster, Observations made during a Voyage round the World, p. 443;
Ellis, vol. ii. p. 288.               + Ellis, vol. ii. pp. 179, 180.-
A474                        DRESS.

evening to dry, being placed one by the side of another “ till
they are about a foot broad, and two or three layers are also
laid one upon the other.” By the morning a great part of
the water had drained off or evaporated, and “ the several
fibres adhere together, so as that the whole may be raised
from the ground in one piece.” It was then placed on the
smooth side of a long piece of wood, and beaten by the
women-servants with a wooden instrument, shaped lke a
square razor-strap, and about a foot long. The four sides of
this instrument were “‘ marked lengthways, with small grooves
or furrows, of different degrees of fineness; those on one
side being of a width and depth sufficient to receive a small
packthread, and the others finer in a regular gradation, so
that the last are not more than equal to sewing silk.”
 They beat the cloth first with the coarsest side and after-
 wards with the others, ending with the finest: under this
 treatment it expanded greatly, and might be made almost as
thin as a muslin. The different pieces of bark by this treat-
ment were so closely fastened together, that the cloth might
be washed and wrung out without any fear of tearing ; but
even if it were accidentally broken, it was repaired without
difficulty, by pasting on a patch with a gluten prepared from
the root of the pea: this was done so nicely that it could
not be discovered. This cloth was cool and agreeable to
the touch, being even softer than our broadcloth.        It is
hardly necessary to say that the fineness was regulated
according to the purpose for which it was intended. The two
first kinds were easily bleached, and then dyed of various
colours, generally red and yellow. Both of these were
vegetable colours, and not very fast.
   They had various strange and complicated dresses for great
occasions, but their ordinary clothes were very simple, and
consisted of two parts. One of them was a piece of cloth
with a hole “in the middle to put the head through,” and
                                    DRESS.                              AT

long enough to reach from the shoulder to the knee.                     The
other was wrapped round the waist so as to hang down like
a petticoat as low as the knee; this was called the Parou.
Frequently also they wore a piece of cloth tied round the
head like a turban. The dress of the Queen is thus described
by Hllis*: “She was attired in a light, loose, and flowing
dress of beautifully white native cloth, tastefully fastened on
the left shoulder, and reaching to the ankle; her hair was
rather lighter than       that of the natives in general; and on
her head she wore a light and elegant native bonnet, of
green and yellow cocoa-nut leaves; each ear was perforated,
and in the perforation            two    or three flowers of the fragrant
Cape jessamine were inserted.”                 The dress of the men was
very similar, but instead of the petticoat, they brought the
cloth between the legs; this was called the Maro. In hot
weather+, and at noon, both sexes went almost naked, wear-
ing only the cloth round the waist. Besides the turbans
and head-dresses of leaves, they sometimes wore long plaits
of human hair, which they wound about the head in such
a manner as to produce a very pretty effect. They were
very clean both in their persons and their clothes; constantly
washing three times a day. Ornaments were worn by the
men as much as by the women, and consisted of feathers,
flowers, pieces of shells, and pearls. Tattooing also was
almost universal; and a person not properly tattooed would
“be as much reproached and shunned, as if with us he
should go about the streets nakedt.” They anointed their
heads frequently with perfumed cocoa-nut oil, but had no
combs, which in so hot a country must have been much
wanted.      Notwithstanding this, the hair of the grown-up
people was very neatly dressed.

  * J.c. p. 148.                           work, with handles of the same or
  + The    Sandwich   Islanders    had     of wood.
small square fans of mat or wicker-          { Wilson, l.c. p. 350.
4.76                     CANOES.   MUSIC.

   Their houses were used principally as dormitories. They
were made of wood, and were generally about twenty-four
feet long, eleven wide, and nine feet high. They had no
side walls, but the roof       reached       to within      about      three
feet and a half of the ground. Palm leaves took the place
of thatch, and the floor was generally covered with soft
hay.
   The canoes resembled those of the Feegeeans, but are said
to have been scarcely so well built. To prepare the planks
was no easy task, but the great difficulty was to fasten them
together. This was effected by “strong thongs of plaiting,
which are passed several times through holes that are bored
with a gouge or auger of bone*.”         The length of the canoes
varied from ten up to ninety feet, “ but the breadth is by no
means in proportion; for those of ten feet are about a foot
wide, and those of more than seventy are scarcely twot.”
These larger ones were not, however, used singly, but were
fastened together side by side, in the manner already de-
scribed. A canoe without an outrigger seemed to them an
impossibilityt. The labour of constructing these canoes must
have been very great; nevertheless, the South Sea Islanders
possessed large numbers of them.     On one occasion Captain
Cook saw more than three hundred in one place; and,
without counting the smaller vessels, he estimated the whole
naval force of the Society Islands at one thousand seven
hundred war canoes, manned by sixty-eight thousand men§.
   Their principal musical instrument was the drum; it was
made from a piece of solid wood, hollowed out, and covered
over with shark’s skin. They had also a kind of trumpet
made of a large shell, with a hole at the small end into
which they fastened a bamboo cane about three feet long.
Their flutes were of bamboo, and were blown with the nose.
  * Cook’s First Voyage, p. 225;     ft Ellis, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 55.
Forster, l.c. p. 459.                § Cook’s Second Voyage,           vol. i.
  + Cook’s First Voyage, p. 221.   p. 849.
                     GAMES.        FURNITURE.          WEAPONS.                        477

They had various kinds of games, some of which appear to
have resembled our hockey and football. They were also
very fond of dancing.
   They were quite ignorant of pottery, but had large dishes
made of polished wood.    The shells of cocoa-nuts were used
as water-bottles and cups. They were scraped thin, polished,
often very ingeniously carved, and kept extremely clean.
Generally the natives of Tahiti sat cross-legged on mats
spread on the floor; but the chiefs had often four-legged
stools.     Chairs and tables were unknown.                         They slept also
on mats and used a wooden pillow, very much resembling
a small stool. The upper side was curved like the seat
of the stool, to admit the neck.                   Each house also contained
a light post, planted in the floor, and with several pro-
jections, from which the various dishes, calabashes of water,
baskets of food, etc., were hung *.
   Their weapons were formidable, though simple. They
consisted of slings, pikes headed with stone, and long clubs
made of hard, heavy wood. With the former they were
very skilful. Their slingstones were of two kinds, “either
smooth, being polished by friction in the bed of ariver, or
sharp, angular and rugged ; these were called ofai ara—faced
or edged stonest+.” We have already mentioned (p. 101)
that two sorts of slingstones, closely corresponding to these,
were used by the ancient inhabitants of Europe. It would
be interesting to know the relative advantage of the two
classes, which surely cannot have been used for exactly the
same purposes.  They had also bows and arrows, which,
however, were not sufficiently strong to be used in warfare.
The bow-strings were made of Roava bark}.                               The Society
Islanders are said to have been cruel in war, but according
to Captain Cook             “they are seldom disturbed by either
    * Hilis, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 184.            |      + Hillis, l.c. vol. ii. p. 49.
                                { Wilson, 1. c. p. 368.
478                          FOOD.      FIRE.

foreign or domestic troubles.’ Though not cowards, they
regard it as “much less disgraceful to run away from an
enemy with whole bones, than to fight and be wounded*.”
   “ Of tame animals they had only hogs, dogs, and poultryf;
neither was there a wild animal in the island, except ducks,
pigeons, parroquets, with a few other birds, and rats, there
being no other quadruped, nor any serpent}.” The dogs
were kept entirely for food, and Captain Cook assures us
that “a South Sea dog was little inferior to an English
lamb ; their excellence is probably owing to their being kept
up, and fed wholly on vegetables.”      The natives preferred
dog to pork. From the sea they obtained excellent fish and
shell-fish. They had also bread-fruit, bananas, plantains,
yams, cocoa-nuts, potatoes, the sugar cane, a fruit not unlike
an apple, and several other plants which served for fruit, and
required very little culture. The bread-fruit tree supplied
them with abundance           of fresh fruit for eight months, and
during the other four they used “mahie,” which is a kind
of sour paste, prepared from the fermented ripe fruit. It is
probable that nine-tenths of their diet consisted of vegetable
food; and the common people scarcely ever tasted either
pork or dog, although the hogs appear to have been very
abundant.
   They obtained fire by friction. When the wood was quite
dry the process did not take longer than two minutes, but in
wet weather it was very tedious.     Having no pottery, they
did not boil their food. “It is impossible,” says Wallis, “ to
describe the astonishment they expressed when they saw the
gunner,    who, while he kept the market,                used to dine on
shore, dress his pork and poultry by boiling them in a pot ;
haying, as I have before observed, no vessel that would bear

  * Wilson, I. ¢. p. 363.                     ft Cook’s Voyage round the World,
  + Wallis’ Voyage roundtheWorld;         pp. 187,
Hawkesworth’s Voyages, vol. i.p. 482.
                                 COOKERY.                                4:79

the fire, they had no idea of hot water *.”’ Captain Cook
also expressly states that “they have but two ways of apply-
ing fire to dress their food, broiling and baking+.’       Mr.
Tylor, however, has pointed out} that they were acquainted
with the use of boiling-stones, and that they could not there-
fore have been entirely ignorant of hot water.     In order to
bake a hog, they made a small pit in the ground, which they
payed with large stones, over which they then lighted a fire.
When the stones were hot enough, they took out the embers,
raked away the ashes, and covered the stones with green
cocoa-nut    leaves.     The    animal     which was     to be dressed,
haying been cleaned and prepared, was wrapped up in plan-
tain leaves, and covered with the hot embers, on which again
they placed bread-fruit and yams, which also were wrapped
up in plantain leaves.   Over these they spread the rest of
the embers, and some hot stones, finally covermg the whole
with earth. The meat thus cooked is described as being
tender and full of gravy; in fact, both Wallis and Cook
considered that it was “better i every respect than when it
is dressed in any other way.’ For sauce they used salt
water,   without which no meal was ever eaten, and a kind
of thick paste made from the kernels of cocoa-nuts.                       At
their meals they drank either water or cocoa-nut juice. The
Sandwich Islanders were very fond of salt meat, and had
regular salt-pans on the sea-shore§.
   The only intoxicating liquor was the ava, an infusion made
from the root, stalks, and leaves of a kind of pepper, which,
however, fortunately for them, was entirely forbidden to the
women, and seldom permitted to the lower classes.                   In some
of the other islands this liquid is prepared in a very disgusting
way. The roots were broken in pieces, cleaned, chewed, and

 * lc. vol. i. p. 484.                     § Cook’s Third Voyage,    vol. iii.
 + Second Voyage, vol. ii. p. 197.       p- 151.
 { Harly History of Mankind, p. 266.
480                    AVA.     <A CHIEF'S DINNER.

then placed in a wooden bowl, mixed with a certain quantity
of water, and stirred up with the hands.                  In Tahiti, how-
ever, the chewing was dispensed with.                  The wooden bowls
out of which      the chiefs drank         their ava     were    often very
fair specimens of carving. In the Sandwich Islands they
are described as having been “usually about eight or ten
inches in diameter, perfectly round, and beautifully polished.
They are supported by three, and sometimes four, small
human figures, in various             attitudes.   Some      of them       rest
on the hands of their supporters, extended over tke head ;
others   on the head and hands; and some               on the shoulders.”
These figures are said to have been “accurately propor-
tioned and neatly finished, and even the anatomy of the
muscles, in supporting the weight, well expressed*.””
    Captain Cook+ gives an interesting description of the
manner in which the chiefs dined. They had no table, and
each person ate alone and in silence.        Some leaves were
spread on the ground to serve as a table-cloth, and a basket
was set by the chief containing his provision, which, if fish
or flesh, was ready dressed and wrapped in leaves. Two
cocoa-nut shells were put by the side, one containing salt
water and the other fresh. He first washed his hands and
mouth thoroughly with the fresh water, and this he repeated
almost continually through the meal. He then took part of
his provision out of the basket, which generally consisted
of a small fish or two, two or three bread-fruits, fourteen or
fifteen ripe bananas, or six or seven apples. He began by
eating some bread-fruit, at the same time breaking one of
the fishes into the salt water. He then took up the bits of
fish in his fingers, in such a manner as to get with it as much
salt water as possible, and very frequently he took a mouth-
ful of the salt water, either out of the cocoa-nut or in his
hand. Sometimes, also, he drank the juice of a cocoa-nut.
  * Third Voyage, vol. iii. p. 148.          t First Voyage, vol. ii. p. 200.
                          SOLITARY   MEALS.                          48]

When he had done his bread-fruit and fish, he began his
plantains or apples, after which he ate some more bread-
fruit, beaten into a sort of paste, and generally flavoured with
banana or some other fruit. For a knife he used either a
shell or a piece of split bamboo,     and in conclusion he again
washed his hands and mouth. They were quite unacquainted
with forks, and Captain Wallis* tells us that, during his
visit, one of the natives who “tried to feed himself with
that instrument, could not guide it, but by the mere force of
habit his hand came to his mouth and the victuals at the end
of the fork went away to his ear.” Nor did they use plates.
Poulaho, Chief of the Friendly Islands, dining one day on
board the ship, was so much struck by the pewter plates
that Captain Cook gave him one. He did not, however,
intend to employ it in the usual manner, but said that “ when-
ever he should have occasion to visit any of the other islands,
he would leave this plate behind him at Tongataboo, as a
sort of representative in his absencet.”
   Captain Cook was much surprised to find that a people
who were so sociable, and who enjoyed so much the society
of women, never made their meals together.              Even brothers
and sisters had each their own basket, and when they wished
to eat would go out, “sit down upon the ground, at two or
three yards’ distance from each other, and turning their faces
different ways, take their repast without interchanging a
single word.”    They ate alone, they said, “because it was
right,” but why it was right they were unable to explain.
We   must, however,      remember     that    these    islanders   were
together much     more    than we     are.    We      enjoy a sociable
meal, because the nature of our       occupations keeps us apart
so much at other times; but among a people whose wants
were supplied with so little exertion on their part, who were
all day long together, and had no rooms into which they
 * Voyage round the World, p. 482.      + Third Voyage, vol. i. p. 326.
                                                          yo)
4.82                                  SURGERY.

could retire and be alone, it must have been a great thing to
have some way of escaping from their friends and being
quiet, without giving offence. As there were no stated times
for meals, a man who wished to be alone need only to take
out his basket of provisions, and he might be sure that he
would not be disturbed.                This custom, therefore, seems            to
have been both ingenious and conyenient*.
   Although they usually went to bed soon after dark, still
the natives of Tahiti were not entirely without candles; for
which they used the “kernels of a kind of oily nut, which
they stick one over another upon a skewer that is thrust
through the middle of them.”    These candles burned a con-
siderable time, and are said to have given a pretty good
light. The Society Islanders had no knowledge of medicine
as distinct from witchcraft; but some wonderful stories are
told of their skill in surgery. Iwill give perhaps the most
extraordinary. “Tt is related,” says Mr. Ellis, “although,”
he adds, with perfect gravity, “I                   confess I can scarcely
believe it, that on some occasions, when the brain has been
injured as well as the bone, they have opened the skull,
taken out the injured portion of the brain, and, having a pig
ready, have killed it, taken out the pig’s brains, put them in
the man’s head, and covered them upt+.”
   The nostrils of the female infants were often pressed or
spread out during infancy, because they looked on a flat
nose as a mark of beauty. In the same way the boys some-
times had their forehead and the back of their head pressed
upwards, so that the upper part of the skull appeared in the

  * Since the above was written, I          moment my dinner or breakfast was
haye met with the following passage         brought tome,   This gave me a few
in Burchell: “I had sufficient reason       moments’ relief from the fatigue of
for admiring one of the customs of          incessant conversation.’    Travels in
the Bachapins; that, notwithstand-          Southern Africa, vol. u. p. 408.
ing they never at any other time left         Tolcy Ola wa py 277s
me     alone, they   always retired   the
                 MODES     OF BURIAL.      OBEREA’S      MORAT.                483
shape of awedge. This was supposed to make them look
more formidable in war*.
  The dead were not buried at once, but were placed on a
platform raised several feet above the ground, and neatly
railed in with bamboo.  The body was covered with a cloth,
and sheltered by a roof, By the side were deposited the
weapons of the deceased, and a supply of food and water.
When the body had entirely decayed, the bones were col-
lected, carefully cleaned and buried, according to the rank
of the deceased, either within or without a “morait.” The
largest morai seen by Captain Cook was the one prepared
for Oamo and Oberea, who were the then reigning sovereigns.
This was indeed the “principal piece of architecture in the
island. It was a pile of stonework, raised pyramidically,
upon an oblong base, or square, two hundred and sixty-seven
feet long, and eighty-seven wide. It was built like the small
pyramidal mounts upon which we sometimes fix the pillar
of a sun-dial, where             each side is a flight of steps; the
steps, however, at the sides, were broader than those at the
ends, so that it terminated not in a square of the same figure
with the base, but in a ridge, like the roof of a house: there
were eleven of these steps, each of which was four feet high,
so that the height of the pile was forty-four feet; each step
was formed of one course               of white coral stone, which was
neatly squared and polished; the rest of the mass, for there
was no hollow within, consisted of round pebbles, which,
from the regularity of their figure, seemed to have been
wrought}.” A very similar account of this structure has
  * Bll, 1. c. vol. i. p. 343.            vol. iii. p. 6). In the Friendly Islands,
  + In some   cases   the head is not     D’Urville saw a similar mausoleum
buried with the other bones, but is       built with blocks of stone, some       of
deposited in a kind of box.               which were twenty feet long, six or
  t Cook’s Voyage round the World,        eight broad, and two in height. They
vol. ii. p.166. Similar but somewhat      were neatly squared. 1. c. vol. iv.
smaller morais were observed in the       p. 106.
Sandwich   Islands    (Third Voyage,
                                    ri 2
4.84                          RELIGION.

been more recently given by Wilson*, who makes the size
and height a little greater; and when it is considered that
this was raised without the assistance of iron tools to shape
the stones, or of mortar to fasten them together, it is im-
possible not to be struck with admiration at the magnitude
of the enterprise, and the skill with which it appears to
have been carried out. It is, perhaps, the most important
monument which is positively known to have been con-
structed with stone tools only, and renders it the less
unlikely that some of the large tumuli and other ancient
monuments of Europe may belong to the Stone Age. When
a chief died, his relations and attendants cut and mangled
themselves in a dreadful manner. They ran spears through
their thighs, arms, and cheeks, and beat themselves about
the head with clubs “till the blood ran down in streams.”
They also frequently cut off the little finger on these
occasions; a curious custom, which is common                 also in the
Friendly Islands.
   In Tiarrabou, Captain Cook saw a rude figure of a man,
made of basket-work and about seven feet high. This was
intended as a representation of one of the inferior gods, but
was said to be the only one on the island; for the natives,
when first discovered,     though they worshipped numerous
deities, to whom also human sacrifices were sometimes offered,
yet were not idolaters.  Atalater period, however, Ellis saw
among them many rude idolst. Captain Cook found their
religion, “like that of most other countries, involved in
mystery, and perplexed with apparent inconsistencies       +t.”
They believed in the survival of the soul, and in “ two
situations of different degrees of happiness, somewhat analo-
gous to our heaven and hell;”’ but, far from regarding them
as places of reward and punishment, thought that the hap-
  *    caps 207.       + Ellis, l.c. vol. i. p. 526; Wilson, l.c. p. 242.
                   } See also Forster, l.c. p. 539.
                                   GOVERNMENT.                                 485


piest lot was of course intended for the chiefs and superior
classes, the other for the people of inferior rank*.                   Indeed,
they did not suppose that their actions here in the least
influenced their future state; so that their religion did
not act upon them by promises or threats, and “their ex-
pressions of adoration and reverence, whether by words or
actions, arise only from a humble sense of their own infe-
riority, and the ineffable excellence of divine perfection.”
However       mistaken        they may have       been        on many points,
however wrong many of their customs doubtless appear to
us, surely under such a creed as this, good actions become
doubly virtuous, and virtue itself shines the brighter.
  They had no laws, nor courts of justice. Personal security
and the rights of private property were but little regarded
among them. The chiefs and priests exercised an authority
founded on fear and superstition. They were, in fact, governed
by custom rather than by law, for which, indeed, they had no
word in the languaget.              It is only fair to the chiefs to add
that they were above being idle, and thought it a disgrace if
they did not excel in all departments of labourt. In charac-
ter the inhabitants of Tahiti, according to Captain Cook,
“were liberal, brave, open, and candid, without either suspi-
cion or treachery, cruelty or revenge§.”                      They were very
anxious for education. The women were affectionate, tender,
and obedient; the men mild, generous, slow to take offence,
and easily satisfied. Both sexes were very healthy. “I
never saw any one,” says Forster||, “of a morose, peevish,
discontented disposition in the whole nation; they all join
to their cheerful temper a politeness and elegance which is
happily blended with the most innocent simplicity of man-
ners.’ Murders were very rare among them ; and though

   * Cook’s First Voyage, vol. ii.p.289;    { Ellis, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 178.
Ellis, vol. i. p. 518.                      § First Voyage, vol. ii. p. 188.
  t Ellis, l.c. vol. ii. p. 427.            || lee. p. 582.
486              IDEAS OF RIGHT AND WRONG.

much licence was permitted to the young women before
marriage, the married women, according to Captain Cook*,
were as well behaved “as in any other country whatever.”
They were very thievish; but we must consider the immense
temptations to which they were subjected, and the, to them,
inestimable value of the articles which             they stole.   Like
other savages, they resembled children in many respects,
their sorrows were transient, their passions suddenly and
strongly expressed. On one occasion, Oberea, the queen,
who was then about forty years old, took a particular fancy
to a large doll, which was accordingly presented to her.
Shortly afterwards they met Tootahah, one of the principal
chiefs, who became so jealous of Oberea’s doll, that they
were obliged to give him one also.
   There are scarcely any nations, whether barbarous or
civilized, in which the relations of the two sexes are on the
whole satisfactory.   Savages, almost without exception, treat
their women as slaves, and civilized nations too often avoid
this error only to fall into others.
   The inhabitants of Tahiti are said to have been absolutely
without any ideas of decency, or rather as Captain Cook puts
it, perhaps more correctly, “of indecency.” This no doubt
arose in part from their large open houses, which were not
divided into separate rooms. However this may be, where
there was no sin, they saw no shame, and it must be con-
fessed that in many points their idea of sin was very different
from ours. Before, however, we condemn them, let us re-
member that a dinner-party would have seemed as wrong
to them as many of their customs do to us. If the freedom,
both in language and in action, which they permitted to
themselves, seems to us in many respects objectionable, we
must not forget that our ideas of delicacy shut out from
general conversation numerous subjects of great interest and
              * Voyage to the South Pole, vol. i. p. 187.
                       THE   ARREOY     SOCIETY.                    487

importance, and throw round many matters of the utmost
importance an air of mystery which is not without serious
disadvantages.
   A considerable number of the principal people of both
sexes in Tahiti were formed into an association called the
“Arreoy,” all the members of which were regarded as being
married to one another. If any of the women of the society
had a child, it was     almost invariably killed: but if it was
allowed to live, the father and mother were regarded as
haying definitively engaged themselves to one another, and
were ejected from the association; the woman being known
from that time as a “bearer of children,’ which was among
this extraordinary people a term of reproach. The existence
of such a society shows how fundamentally the idea of virtue
may differ in different countries. Yet the married women
were faithful to their husbands, and beautifully modest. It
is impossible, indeed, to acquit even them of the charge of
infanticide, for which we may find a cause, though not an
excuse.    I do not allude to the curious custom, that a child,
as soon as it was     born, inherited the titles, rank, and pro-
perty of its father, so that a man who was yesterday a chief
might be thus at once reduced to the condition of a private
person; nor to the fact that any Arreoy who spared her
infant was at once excluded from that society. We cannot
suppose that such customs were without their effect; but a
more powerful reason may perhaps be found in the fact, that
their numbers were already large, the means of subsistence
limited, and that, as but few were carried off either by
disease or in war, the population would soon have outgrown
their supplies, if some means were not taken to check the
natural increase of numbers*.         However this may be, infan-
ticide appears to have been dreadfully prevalent amongst
them. It has been estimated that two-thirds of the children
      * See, for instance, Kotzebue’s New Voyage, vol. 1. p. 308.
488                           GENERAL   CHARACTER.

were destroyed by their own parents*, and both Mr. Nott
and Mr. Ellis agree that, during the whole of their residence
in the island, until the adoption of Christianity, they did
not know a single case of a mother who had not been guilty
of this crime.
   According to Wilson+, their language contained no word
for “thanks,” and even Cook admits that they had no respect
for old age. Fitzroy goes still farther, and assures us that
“ they scrupled not to destroy their aged or sick—yes, even
their parents, if disabled by age or sicknesst.” No such
accusation is, however, brought against them by earlier
writers, so that such actions are probably very rare, and
the result, as among the Feegeeans, of misdirected affection
rather than of deliberate cruelty.
   They had no money; and though it was easy to obtain
the necessaries of life, to accumulate property was almost
impossible.    Again, the absence of spirituous liquors, and
the relations between the sexes (however unsatisfactory in
other respects), took away from them some of the principal
incentives to crime. On the whole, then, if we judge them
by a South Sea standard, the natives of the Society Islands
appear to have been very free from crime.
   In spite of the differences which sometimes arose in con-
sequence of their thievish disposition, and also perhaps in
great measure from their not being able perfectly to under-
stand each other, Captain Cook and his officers lived with the
natives “in the most cordial friendship,” and took leave of
them with great regret.             Mr. Ellis, on the contrary, assures
us that “no portion of the human race was ever perhaps
sunk lower in brutal licentiousness and moral degradation
than this isolated people§.” Such a statement is surely quite
inconsistent with the account he gives of their anxiety to
  * Hilis, vol. i. pp. 3384. 336,           Pterroleu pyool:
  mf ES 595 Ghiby                           § Ellis, lc. vol. ii. p. 25.
                                   THE TONGANS.                               489

possess copies of the Bible when it was translated into their
language. ‘They were,” he says, “deemed by them more
precious than gold—yea, than much fine gold,” and “ became
at once the constant companion of their possessors, and the
source of their highest enjoyment*.”’
   The inhabitants of the Friendly, or Tonga, and of the
Sandwich Islands, are also very well described by Captain
Cook, but they belonged to the same race as those of Tahiti
and New Zealand, and resembled them in religion, language,
canoes, houses, weapons,                 food, habits, etc.      It is somewhat
remarkable that the Sandwich Islanders, in many respects,
as     for instance       in their        dances,   houses,      tattooing,   etc.,
resembled the New Zealanders even more than their nearer
neighbours in the Society and Friendly Islands.         In the
Friendly Islands Captain Cook observed a very singular
luxury in which the chiefs indulged themselves. When one
of them wished to go to sleep, two women came and sat
by him, “beating briskly on his body and legs with both
fists, as on a drum, till he fell asleep, and continuing it the
whole      night, with some            short intervals.”         When   the chief
is sound asleep they sometimes rest themselves a little,
“but resume it if they observe any appearance of his
waking+.” A similar statement is made by Wilson in his
Missionary Voyage}. In all the islands the chiefs appear
to have been treated with respect, none the less profound
because shown in ways which seem to us peculiar. One
of them was to uncover the body from the waist, and
it seems to have been a matter of indifference, or rather
of convenience, whether this was done upwards or down-
wards§.    In the Friendly Islands it was accounted a
striking mark of rudeness to speak to the king while
standing up.
     * Bilis,1.c. vol. i. pp. 393-408.           {l.c. p. 287.
     + Third Voyage, vol. i. p. 323.             § Cook’s First Voyage,vol.
                                                                         ii.p.12.
490                   THE TONGANS.

   There was also a certain amount of commerce between
the different islands.  Bora-bora and Otahaw produced
abundance of cocoa-nut oil, which was exchanged at Tahiti
for cloth. The Low Islands, again, could not successfully
grow the paper-mulberry; but they had a breed of dogs
with long silky hair, which was much prized in the other
islands.
                                 49]




                        CHAPTER         XIV.

                 MODERN     SAVAGES—continued.

                           Esquimauz.

    HE Esquimaux, and the Esquimaux alone among savage
       races, occupy both the Old and the New World.
They inhabit the shores of the Arctic Ocean from Siberia
to Greenland; and throughout this great extent of country
the language, appearance, habits, occupations, and weapons
of the natives are very similar, and it must be added that
the latter are most ingenious. The language of the Innuit,
or Esquimaux, is akin to that of the North American Indians
in structure, while their appearance has a decided likeness,
particularly about the eyes, to the Chinese and Tartars.
  Their dwellings are of two kinds.         The summer they pass
in tents or wigwams, with the entrance to the south or
south-east. In those observed by Captain Parry, the tent-
poles were, in the absence of wood, formed of stags’ horns,
or bones lashed together. The lower borders of the skins
were held down by large stones. These were sometimes
built up into regular circles, eight or nine feet in diameter
and four or five feet high*. These circles were at first sup-
posed to be the remains of winter-houses ; but it was sub-
sequently ascertained that they were exclusively used for
extending the skins of the summer-tents.     Near these “hut
circles” long rows of standing stones were several times
               * Parry’s Voyage, 1821-23, pp. 17. 51.
4,92                         TENTS.    HOUSES.

observed*, The winter-houses in the southern districts are
constructed of earth or drift-timber, which is very abundant
in some places. In the north, however, wood becomes
extremely rare. The Hsquimaux at the northern end of
Baffin’s Bay+, who had no wood, excepting twigs of a
dwarfish heath, were so little acquainted with the nature of
timber that several of them successively seized on the spare
top-mast of the “Isabella,” evidently with the intention of
stealing it, and quite unconscious of its weight. In the
absence    of wood      their houses    were     built of ice and snow;
those of ice are beautiful, and almost transparent, so that
even at some little distance itis possible to see every thing
that takes place in them.       ‘They are, however, much colder
than those of snow, which therefore are generally preferred.
West of the Rocky Mountains, the winter houses were usually
underground. A Kamskatchadale “yourt” is thus described
by Captain Cookt: “An oblong square, of dimensions pro-
portionate to the number of persons for whom it is intended
 (for it is proper to observe that several families live together
in the same jourt), is dug into the earth to the depth of about
six feet. Within this space strong posts, or wooden pillars,
are fastened in the ground, at proper distances from each
other, on which are extended the beams for the support of
the roof, which is formed by joists resting on the ground
with one end, and on the beams with the other.                     The in-
terstices between the joists are filled up with a strong wicker-
work, and the whole covered with turf; so that a jourt has
externally the appearance of a low round hillock. A hole is
lefé in the centre, which serves for chimney, window, and
entrance, and the inhabitants pass in and out by means of a
strong pole (instead of a ladder) notched               deep enough to

  * lc. pp. 62, 285, 363.              Ocean, vol. iii. p. 3874.   See   also
  + Ross, Baffin’s Bay, p. 122.        vol. iii. p. 450.
  t+ Cook’s Voyages   to the Pacific
              INTERIOR    OF AN ESQUIMAUX        HOUSE.          493

afford a little holding for the toe, as in fig. 141 (p. 182).”
More often, however, the entrance consisted of a sunken
passage, as in fig. 141* (p. 133) or fig. 143 (p. 158).
   As a general rule we may say that the western yourts are
subterranean, while those of the tribes who live east of the
Rocky Mountains are generally above ground. The manner
in which the Esquimaux construct their snow igloos has
been well described by Captain Parry.  They choose* a
drift of hard and compact snow, and from this they cut
oblong slabs, six or seven inches thick and about two feet in
length.   With   these    they build a circular wall, inclining
inwards   so as to form a dome, which is sometimes as much
as nine or ten feet high and from eight to fifteen feet in
diameter. A small door is then cut on the south side. It is
about three feet high, two and a half wide at the bottom, and
leads into a passage about ten feet long, and with a step in
the middle, the half next the hut being lower than either
the floor of the hut or the outer passage. For the admission
of light a round hole is cut on one side of the roof and a
circular plate of ice, three or four inches thick and two feet
in diameter, is let into it.      If several families intend to live
together, other chambers are constructed which open into the
first, and then after a quantity of snow has been shovelled
up on the outside, the shell of the building is regarded as
finished. The next thing is to raise a bank of snow two and
a half feet high all round the interior of the building, except
on the side next the door. This bank forms the bed. Over
it is laid some gravel, upon that again paddles, tent-poles,
pieces of whalebone, twigs of birch and of andromeda, etc.,
and finally a number of deer-skins, which form a soft and
Juxurious couch. They have no fireplace, properly so called,
that is to say, no hearth, but each family has a separate lamp

                         * Parry, l.c. p. 500.
494,            LAMPS.   ABSENCE   OF CLEANLINESS.

or shallow vessel generally made of lapis ollaris, in which
they burn seal’s-oil, with a wick made of dry moss.
   Although they had no knowledge of pottery, Captain Cook
saw at Unalashka vessels “ ofa flat stone, with sides of clay,
not unlike a standing pye*.” We here obtain an idea of
the manner in which the knowledge of pottery may have
been developed. After using clay to raise the sides of their
stone vessels, it would naturally occur to them that the same
substance   would serve for the bottom also, and thus the use
of stone might be replaced by a more convenient material.
   The natives of the Lower Murray cook their food in a
hollow in the ground, which they line with clay, and in
other cases gourds and wooden vessels are coated with clay
in order to enable them to stand heat. ‘Thus we see three
ways in which pottery may have been invented.
   The snow-houses melt away every spring; but in some
places the Hsquimaux construct their dwellings on a similar
plan, but with the bones of whales and walruses on a founda-
tion of stones, and with a covering        of earth.     The    snow-
houses are of course pretty clean at first, but they gradually
become very filthy. The bone-huts are even dirtier, because
more durable. “In every direction round the huts,” says
Captain Parry, “were lying innumerable bones of walruses
and seals, together with skulls of dogs, bears, and foxes, on
many   of which a part of the putrid flesh still remaining
sent forth the most offensive effuviat.”       He even      observed
a number of human bones lying about among the restt.
The inside of the huts, “from their extreme closeness and
accumulated filth, emitted an almost insupportable stench,
to which an abundant supply of raw and half-putrid walrus
flesh in no small degree contributed
                                  §.”

  * Cook’s Voyage to the Pacific    +t See also Lyon’s Journal, p. 236.
Ocean, vol. ii. p. 510.             § Parry, l. c. p. 358.
  + Parry, 1. c. p. 280,
                            STORES       OF FOOD.                           495

   On the north-western coast of America the natives find
plenty of drift-wood, and the floors of their yourts are, ac-
cording to Belcher, made of split timber, nicely smoothed
and carefully caulked with moss. Underneath is often a
large store-room,  for in summer they kill many reindeer,
whales, walrus, seals, swans, ducks, etc., the greater part of
which are laid by for winter use. One of these winter stores
is thus expressively, though somewhat hastily, described by
Sir E. Belcher*: “It was frozen into a solid mass beneath,
but loose from those on the surface, and seemed to be in-
corporated, by some unexplained process, into a gelatinous
snow, which they scraped up easily with the hand and ate
with satisfaction—fish oil predominating.    It was not offen-
sive nor putrid. How many years the lower mass may have
remained there I could not determine; but estimating the
supply im one yourt as proportioned for ten people—the
allowance of inhabitants for each yourt—the daily propor-
tion for the complete store would allow for three hundred
days, or about twenty-four pounds per soul.” He estimates
the quantity of solid meat in this storehouse alone at 71,424
pounds.    Captain Ross also mentionst+ the large stores of
food laid up by the Esquimaux of Boothia Felix during the
summer for winter use.          The habit does not, however, appear
to be general among the Esquimaux, though they all of
them make “ caches ” of meat under stone cairns.
   Charlevoix derives the name Esquimaux from the Indian
word Fskimantsik, which means “eaters of raw food ;’? many
of these northern tribes being in the habit of eating their
meat uncooked. We must in justice to them remember
that several of our Arctic Expeditions have adopted                         the

   * Trans. Hthn.   Soc., New    Ser.,    aiso Hall’s Life with the Esquimaux,
vol. i. p. 132.                           vol. ii. p. 8311; Kane’s Arctic Explo-
  + Narrative of a Second Voyage,         rations, vol. ii. p. 133.
p. 251; and Appendix,  p. 21. See
4.96                        COOKERY.        FOOD.

same   custom, which seems             indeed in those latitudes highly
conducive to health *.
  Their food if cooked at all is broiled or boiled.                        Their
vessels being of stone or wood cannot, indeed, be put on the
fire; but heated stones are thrown in until the water becomes
hot enough, and the food is cooked.                 Of course, the result is
a mess of soot, dirt, and ashes, which would, according to
our ideas, be almost intolerable; but if the stench of their
houses does not take away a man’sappetite, nothing else would
be likely to do so.        They never wash their pots or kettles ;
the dogs save them this trouble. Those who have arrived at
a dim consciousness of their dirtiness, do generally but make
matters worse, for if they wish to treat a guest “ genteelly,
they first lick the piece of meat he is to eat clean from the
blood and scum it has contracted in the kettle, with their
tongue; and should any one not kindly accept it, he would
be looked upon as an unmannerly man for despising their
civilityt.” The Hsquimaux observed by Dr. Rae at Repulse
Bay were, however, much cleaner in their habits.
   Their food consists principally of reindeer, musk ox, walrus,
seals, birds, and salmon. They will, however, eat any kind
of animal food. They are very fond of fat and marrow,
to get at which they pound the bones with a stone.     The
southern tribes get a few berries in summer, but those who
live in the north have scarcely any vegetable food except
that which they obtain in a half-digested form from the
stomach of the reindeer, and this they regard as a great
delicacy {; the northernmost of all, bemg unable to kill
reindeer, are entirely deprived of vegetable food.
   “IT was once present§,’”’ says Captain Cook, “when the
chief of Oonalashka made his dinner of the raw head of a
  * See, for instance, Kane’s Arctic        t Ross,   Narrative   of   a   Second
Explorations, vol. ii. p. 14.             Voyage, p. 352.
  + Crantz, p. 168; Parry, Second             § Cook’s Third   Voyage,     vol. ii.
Voyage, p.293; Lyon’s Journal,p.142.      ip. S11.
                                  FOOD.                            497

large halibut, just caught.          Before any was given to the
chief, two of his servants eat the gills, without any other
dressing besides squeezing out the slime. This done, one of
them cut off the head of the fish, took it to the sea and
washed it, then came with it and sat down by the chief:
first pulling up some grass, upon a part of which the head
was laid, and the rest was strewed before the chief. He
then cut large pieces off the cheeks, and laid these within
the reach of the great man, who swallowed them with as
much satisfaction as we should do raw oysters. When he
had done, the remains of the head were cut in pieces, and
given to the attendants, who tore off the meat with their
teeth, and gnawed the bones like so many dogs.”
    Captain Lyon gives an even more disgusting account
of an EKsquimaux meal.       “ From Kooilittuck*,” he says, “I
learnt a new Esquimaux luxury: he had eaten till he was
drunk, and every moment fell asleep, with a flushed and
burning face, and his mouth open: by his side sat Arnalooa
 (bis wife), who was attending her cooking-pot, and at short
intervals awakened her spouse, in order to cram as much as
was possible of a large piece of half-boiled flesh into his
mouth with the assistance of her forefinger, and having
filled it quite full, cut off the morsel close to his lips. This
he slowly chewed, and as soon as a syall vacancy became
perceptible, this was filled again by a lump of raw blubber.
During this operation the happy man moved no part of him
but his jaws, not even opening his eyes; but his extreme
satisfaction was occasionally shown by a most expressive
grunt, whenever he enjoyed sufficient room for the passage
of sound. The drippings of the savory repast had so plen-
tifully covered ‘his face and neck, that I had no hesitation
in determining that a man may look more like a beast by
over-eating than by drinking to excess. The women having
          * Lyon’s Journal, p. 181; see also Ross, 1. c. p. 448.
                                                            Kk
498               DIFFICULTY     OF OBTAINING      WATER.

fed all their better halves to sleep, and not having neglected
themselves, had now nothing to do but to talk and beg as
usual.
   A feast among some of the more civilized Esquimaux of
Greenland is thus described by Crantz*. “A factor being
invited to a great entertainment with several topping Green-
landers, counted the following dishes: 1. Dried herrings.
2. Dried seal’s flesh. 3. Boiled ditto. 4. Half raw and
rotten ditto, called Mikiak. 5. Boiled willocks. 6. A piece
of a half rotten whale’s tail: this was the dainty dish
or haunch of venison to which the guests were properly
invited. 7%. Dried salmon. 8. Dried remdeer venison.
9. A dessert of crowberries mixed with the chyle out of
the maw     of a reindeer.           10. The same, enriched with train
onl.”
   Their drink consists of blood or water: during the greater
part of the year they have considerable difficulty in obtaining
sufficient water to satisfy their thirst, and it is much too pre-
cious to be used for washing. It may seem surprising that
people who are surrounded by snow and ice should suffer
from want of water, but the amount of heat required to melt
snow is so great, that a man without the means of obtaining
fire might die of thirst in these arctic regions as easily as in
the sandy deserts of Africa. Any direct “resort to snow,”
says Kane, “ for the purpose of allaying thirst, was followed
by bloody lips and tongue; it burnt like caustic+.”        When
the Hsquimaux visited Captain Parry, they were always
anxious for water, which they drank in such quantities “that
it was impossible to furnish them with half as much as they
desired}.”” In the extreme north one of the principal duties
of the women in the winter is to thaw snow over their lamps,
feeding the wick with oil, if it does not rise well of its own
   * History of   Greenland,   vol    i.   + Arctic Explorations, vol.i.p. 190.
p. 172.                                    tl. p. 188.
                                     FIRE,                                    499

accord*; the natural heat of the room                    is not sufficient to
melt snow, as the temperature of the huts is always kept, if
possible, below the freezing-point. In South Greenland,
however, the huts are built of turf, etc., and are very warmt.
But we must remember that coolness, rather than heat, is
required by the Hsquimaux who live in snow dwellings,
because if the temperature rises to thirty-two degrees, the
continual dripping from the roof produces extreme incon-
venience, and, in fact, the most unhealthy season is the
spring, when the weather is too warm for snow huts, and too
cold for tents.  Thus, therefore, the Esquimaux, though
living in a climate so extremely rigorous, would be debarred
from the use of fires by the very nature of their dwellings,
even if they were able to obtain the necessary materials.
They never, says Simpson, “seem to think of fire as a means
of imparting warmth {;” their lamps are used for cooking,
for light, and for melting snow and drying clothes, rather
than to warm       the air §, and as, nevertheless, the body tem-
perature of the Esquimaux is almost the same as ours, it is
evident that they must require a large amount of animal food.
The quantity of meat which they consume is astonishing;
and it is worthy of remark that, from the scarcity of wood
in the far north, they use the same substance for food and
fuel; the calorific material being the same—namely, blubber
—whether the heat is to be obtained by digestion or com-
bustion ; whether the material is to be placed in a lamp and
burnt, or to be eaten and digested.                  In summer, however,
when it is less necessary to keep down the general tempera-
ture, they sometimes burn bones well saturated with oil.
For obtaining fire the Esquimaux generally use lumps of
iron pyrites and quartz, from which they strike sparks on to

 * Osborn’s Arctic Journal, p. 17.       p. 346.
 + HEgede, 1. c. p. 116.                     § Kane, }. c. vol. ii. p. 202.
 % Discoveries in North America,
                               Kok 2
500                   IMPLEMENTS        AND     WEAPONS.

moss which has been well dried and rubbed between the
hands*. They are also acquainted with the method of
obtaining it by friction+, which is a slower and more labo-
rious process. It appears, however, to be the one generally
pursued by the Greenland Esquimanxft.
   Tt has been generally assumed that man could scarcely
live in temperate climates, and certainly not in the arctic
regions, without the advantage of fire. From the above
facts, however, as well as from others which will presently
be recorded, it may be doubted whether this is really the
case. Hsquimaux do not use fire to warm their dwellings,
and cookery is with them a refinement. In fact, those Hsqui-
maux who live on reideer, more than on seal, having little
blubber, make hardly any use of fire.
   In the South the men have bows and arrows, harpoons,
spears, lines, fish-hooks, knives, snow-knives, ice-chisels,
snow-shovels, groovers, drill-bows, drills, etc. The women
have lamps and stone-kettles, lamp moss, pieces of iron-
pyrites, bone-needles, pieces of sinew, scrapers (figs. 105-107),
horn spoons, sealskin vessels, pointed bones, marrow-spoons,
and knives (figs. 214-216).      They have generally also, ac-
cording to Dr. Rae, a small piece of stone, bone, or ivory,
about six inches long and half an inch thick; this is used
for arranging the wicks of the lamps.
   Kane gives the following inventory of an Esquimaux hut
visited by him; a sealskin cup, for gathering and holding
water; the shoulder-blade of a walrus, to serve as a lamp; a
large flat stone to support it; another large, thin, fat stone
to support the melting snow; a lance-head, with a long coil
of walrus lme; a stand for clothes; and the clothes them-
selves completed the whole worldly goods of this poor family§.

  * Kane, l.c. vol. i. p. 379; Parry,           {t Egede, 1. c. p. 188.
lec. p. 504; Ross, lc. p. 518.                  § Kane’s Arctic Explorations, vo].
  + Liyon’s Journal, p. 290.                  i. p. 381.
                     IMPLEMENTS     AND WEAPONS.                          501

On their travelling expeditions eyen            less than this is neceg-
sary; raw meat and a fur bag are all that they require.

              Fig, 214,




                                        Fie. 215.           Fre. 216.




                                               Esquimaux Knife.




        Esquimaux Knife.

   The implements of the Esquimaux are very ingenious.
Besides knives resembling those figured above, the women
use others of a semicircular form, and very similar to the
curious semilunar knives (pl. 1., fig. 3) which are so com-
mon in Denmark.            They are, however, now made              of metal,
which the Southern Esquimaux have been enabled to obtain,
though in small quantities, from the Europeans.     Some
few of them     also      break   off bits of meteoric            iron, which
502                              HUNTING.

they hammer to an edge, and then fix in a handle of
horn or bone. The arrow-heads are of several kinds and
shapes.    Those of stone        (fig. 217) are made, not by blows,
but by pressure, for which purpose                 they use the point
of reindeer’s    horn,     set in bone;- bone          itself would      not
be tough enough. Other arrow-heads are of horn; these
often bear ‘‘owners’ marks” as may be seen by fig. 2
(p. 10). The shafts of the arrows are short,     Fra, 217,
straightened by steam, and provided with             .
feathers at the butt end. These are fastened
on by deer sinews. The bows are generally
of wood, either made of one piece steamed
into the right form, or of three parts most in-
geniously fastened together, and strengthened
by pieces of bone or sinew. When wood can-
not be obtained, they use bone or horn.
                                                       ie

They do not appear to be particularly good ners
shots: but Captain Parry* thinks that they would generally
hit a deer from forty to forty-five yards, if the animal
stood stillt. Moreover against large game they are, after
all, not very effective.        Sir J. C. Ross gives an interesting
account of a musk-sheep hunt which he witnessed. At
length becoming impatient, as the Esquimaux “ continued
to shoot without apparent effect, finding his opportunities
for an aim with much difficulty, and losing much time after-
wards in recovering his arrows, Sir James fired, and broke
the animal’s shoulder-blade, to the immense astonishment of
his companion  f.”
   The spears are made like the arrows, but are larger; the
heads also are frequently barbed, and in many cases fit loosely
  ENG feb jah Bulle                     their ancient habits have been modi-
  + The Esquimaux     of Greenland      fied, and their condition greatly im-
have long abandoned   ths bow    and _ proved, by this intercourse.
arrow, using guns obtained from the       t Sir J. Ross’ Arctic Expedition.
Danes. In many other respects also      1829-33, p. 350.
                   MODES    OF HUNTING        AND FISHING.                  5038

into the shaft, but are securely fastened to a long leathern
thong, which is tied to the butt end of the       Fe Bs
spear. For throwing the harpoon they use a
short handle or throwing stick, about two feet
long, narrow below, four inches wide above,
and with a notch on each side for the thumb
and forefinger. With these weapons they
attack not only seals and walruses, but even
whales. They strike the whale, if possible,
at the same time with many harpoons, “ to
which bladders are hung, made of great seal-
skins, several of which so encumber and stop
the whale, that it cannot sink deep. When
he is tired out, they despatch him guite with
their little lances.” Kane gives the figure of
a lance, the blade of which closely resembles
one of the longer “axes” from the Danish-
shell-mounds*.
   The Esquimaux have three principal ways
of killing seals. The commonest is with the
harpoon and bladder. When an Esquimaux
in his kayak “spies a seal, he tries to sur-
prise it unawares with the wind and sun in
his back, that he may not be heard or seen
by it. He tries to conceal himself behind                       beipa
a   wave, and      makes      hastily    but softly up to it till he
comes   within     four,    five, or six fathoms of it; meanwhile
he takes the utmost care that the harpoon, line, and bladder
lie in proper ordert.” As soon as the seal is struck the
point of the spear detaches             itself from the shatt,       and at
the same      moment       the Esquimaux          throws     the large air
bladder on to the water. This is often dragged under
water a little way, but it is so great an impediment, that
    * Arctic Explorations, vol. il. p. 129.             + Crantz, p. 154.
504                MODES     OF HUNTING       AND    FISHING.

the seal is soon obliged to come up. “The Greenlander
hastens to the spot where he sees the bladder rise up, and
smites the seal as soon as it appears” with the great lance,
or “angovigak.” This is not barbed, and does not there-
fore remain in the seal’s body, but can be used again and
                                       Eire, 219,




                                     Bone Harpoon,

again until the animal is exhausted.                 The second way is the
“clapper-hunt.” If the Esquimaux find, or can drive any
seals into the creeks or inlets, they frighten them by shout-
ing, clapping, and throwing stones every time they come up
to breathe, until at last they are exhausted and easily killed.
In winter, when the sea is frozen, the seals, which are obliged
to come up from time to time for the sake of air, keep open
certain breathing-holes for this purpose, and the Esquimaux,
when hehas found one of these, waits patiently till the seal makes
its appearance, when he kills it instantly with his harpoon.
      The Esquimaux        are   excellent     deerstalkers, and are much
assisted by the skill with which they can imitate the cry of
the remdeer.    Fish are caught sometimes with the hook and
line, sometimes by means of small nets when they come
to the shore in shoals to spawn, or finally with the spear.
The nets are made of “small hoops or rings of whalebone,
firmly lashed together with rings of the same material*.”
The fishing-lines also are made of whalebone+.   Salmon are
sometimes so abundant, that in Boothia Felix, Captain Ross
bought a ton weight for a single knife. For killing birds
they use an instrument in some respects like the “ bolas” of
South America:           a number     of stones or walrus teeth being
fastened to short pieces of string, and all the strings then
        * Parry, I. ¢, p. 100;                        + Egede, 1. c. p. 107.
                                  SLEDGES.                                 505

tied together at the other end*.              The spears, which are in-
tended    to be thrown at birds or other small animals, have a
double fork at the extremity, and three other barbed points
near the middle.    These diverge in different directions, so
that if the end pair should miss, one of the central trio might
strike the victim. Aquatic birds are also caught in whale-
bone nooses; but “the moulting season is the great bird-
harvest, as a few persons wading into the shallow lakes, can
soon tire out and catch the birds by handt.’’
   The so-called “ Arctic Highlanders,” however, are said to
have no means of killing the reindeer, though it abounds in
their country ; nor have they the art of fishing, although,
curiously enough, they catch large numbers of birds in small
hand-nets.       Seals, bears, walrus, and birds constitute almost
the whole of their diet{. Neither the American nor Green-
land Hsquimaux have succeeded in taming the reindeer.
Dogs are their only domestic animals, and are sometimes
used in hunting, but principally to draw the sledges.
   The sledges vary much both in materials and form: ac-
cording to Captain Lyon the best are made of the jaw-bones
of the whale, sawn to about two inches in thickness, and
from six inches to a foot in depth. These are the runners,
and are shod with a thin plank of the same material. The
sides are connected by pieces of bone, horn, or wood, firmly
lashed together. In Boothia, Captain Ross saw sledges in
which the runners were made of salmon, packed into a
cylinder, rolled up in skins, and frozen together. In spring
the skins are made into bags, and the fish are eaten§.
Altogether these sledges are well constructed, when it is
considered with what simple tools they are made.
  The dogs by which these sledges are drawn are by no
  = Simpson, l. c. p. 156.               Arctic Expedition,
                                                         vol. ii. p.25 ;Simp-
  7 Lyon’s Journal, p. 338.              son’s Discoveries   in North America,
   t Kane,Arctic Explorations,vol. ii.   p. 847; Ross, 1. c. p. 585.
pp. 208, 210.  See also Richardson’s        § 1. c. Appendix, p. 24.
506                                BOATS.

means easy to manage. Lach has a separate trace attached
to the front of the sledge, passing between the legs, and
fastened in front to a collar. The dogs therefore are nearly
abreast, and the traces are very liable to become entangled.
The team is guided by throwing the lash of the whip on one
side or the other, and repeating certain words. ‘“‘ Wooa,”
as among our carters, means “ Stop*.”
   Their boats also are very ingeniously built, and are of two
kinds, the kajak or men’s boat, and the umiak or women’s
boat. The kajak is from eighteen to twenty feet long,
eighteen inches broad in the middle, tapering to both ends,
and scarcely a foot deep. It has no outriggers, and is there-
fore very difficult to sit. It is quite covered over at the top,
with the exception of a hole in the middle, into which the
Hsquimaux puts his legs. The boat therefore cannot fill
with water, and even if it upsets, they can right it again by
a sudden jerk of the oar, or rather paddle.               Indeed, a skilful
 Esquimaux will turn somersaults in the water, in his boat
with great ease.     In spite of this they are frequently
drowned; and indeed so dangerous is the navigation that
they generally go in pairs, so as to assist one another on an
emergency, for the skin sides of the kajak are very thin, and,
if they come in contact with any of the floating ice or drift-
timber which abound in the Greenland seas, are liable to be
torn open, in which case the unfortunate Hsquimaux has
little chance of saving himself. The umiak is much larger,
and has a flat bottom.          It is made of slender laths, fastened
together with whalebone, and covered over with sealskins.
The Esquimaux observed by Ross, at the northern end of
Baffin’s Bay, were entirely without canoes, and were “ igno-
rant, even     traditionally,    of the existence        of a boatt+.”       It
is, aS he justly observes, an extraordinary thing to find “a

  * Parry’s Three Voyages for the Discovery of a N.W. Passage, vol. iv. p. 310.
  + Ross, Baffin’s Bay, p. 170.
                           SCRAPERS.      CLOTHES.                         507

maritime and a fishing tribe unacquainted with any means
of floating on the water ;” but we must remember that they
had no wood, and that there were only a few weeks in the
year when the sea was unfrozen. No wonder that Ross’s
ships were mistaken for living creatures*, and that his boats
excited the most unbounded astonishment and admiration.
Kane also+ confirms the absence of boats, but he adds “ that
the kayack was known to them traditionally.”
   In the preparation of skins the Esquimaux use certain
stone instruments (figs. 105-107), which have frequently
been overlooked on account of their simplicity, but which
yet are interesting because they are exactly similar to cer-
tain ancient implements which are very common in various
parts of Europe, and have been already described in page 92.
The collection made by my lamented friend, Mr. Christy,
contains four of these skin-scrapers, three of which were
obtained from the Esquimaux north of Behring’s Straits.
These are set in fossil ivory. The fourth was found in a
Greenland grave, probably not older than the fifteenth cen-
tury, and belonging to the Stone period which supervened.
when the intercourse with Norway was suspended. Some
archeologists had considered that the “scrapers” were
“probably knives, the prolonged thick ends of which were
intended for handles, to be held between the finger and
thumb, or possibly for attachment to a short wooden shaft t.”
The true nature and use of the ancient skin-scrapers has,
however, been entirely explained by these modern specimens,
with which they are absolutely identical. The method of
preparing skins is curious and ingenious, but very disgusting.
   The clothesof the HEsquimaux are made from the skins
of reindeer,       seals, and birds, sewn         together     with   sinews.
For needles they use bones either of birds or fishes; yet

  * 1.0. p: 118.          + Kane, Arctic Explorations, vol. ii. pp. 135, 210.
                    t See Archzeologia, vol. xxxviii. p. 415.
508                    ORNAMENTS.        CHEEK-STUDS.

with these simple instruments they sew very strongly and
well. The outer dress of the men resembles a short great-
coat, with a hood that can be pulled over the head if neces-
sary, and which serves as a substitute for a hat or cap.
Their under-garments or shirts are made of bird-skins, with
the feathers inwards, or of skins with the hair inside; some-
times, however, they wear in addition another shirt made of
seal’s entrails. Their breeches, “of which in winter they
also wear two pair, and similarly disposed as to the fur*,”
are either of seal-skin or reindeer-skin, and their stockings
of skins from very young animals. The boots are of smooth
black    dressed     seal’s   leather, and      sometimes      when         at sea
they wear a great overcoat of the same material. Their
clothes are generally very greasy and dirty, and swarm with
lice. The dress of the women does not differ much from
that of the men.
    Their principal ornaments are cheek-studs (fig. 220), or
pieces of polished stone or bone, which are worn in the lower
lip or cheeks. The hole is made in early                       Fie, 220.
infancy, and gradually enlarged by a
series of “onidest.” These “ labrets,”’
however, are not worn by the Hastern
tribes. According to Richardson they &:
are in use from Behring’s Straits to the Psivimarx Cheek-stud.
Mackenzie Rivert. The other ornaments consist of strips
of variously coloured fur, and fringes of pierced teeth, gene-
rally those of the fox or wolf. Among the Esquimaux
visited by Captain Lyon, the ornaments were all appropriated -
by the men§. Some of the families are in the habit of
tattooing themselves.

  * Parry, 1. c. p. 495.                    f Arctic   Expedition,   vol.    i. p.
  + Vancouver’s Voyage, vol. li. p.      355.
280; see also p.408; Belcher, l. c. p.     § Lyon’s Journal, p. 314.
141.
                             MUSIC.      DRAWINGS.                              509

   The men hunt and fish. They make the weapons and
implements, and prepare the woodwork of the boats.
The women* are the cooks, prepare the skins, and make
the clothes. They also repair the houses, tents, and boats,
the men doing only carpenter’s work. Though they do
not appear to be very harshly treated, still the women
have certainly “a hard and almost slavish life of it,”
although perhaps after all not more so than the men.
   The Esquimaux are not altogether without music. They
have a kind of drum, and sing both alone and in chorus.
They are acquainted with several kinds of gamest, both of
strength and skill, and are fond of dances, which are often
very indecent.     One of their games resembled our cat’s
cradle t, and Kane saw the children in Smith’s Sound play-
ing hockey on the ice. The Esquimaux have also a great
natural ability for drawing. In many cases they have made
rude maps for our officers, which have turned out to be
substantially correct. Many of their bone implements are
covered with sketches. Figs. 221 to 223 represent three
bone drill-bows presented to the Ashmolean Museum by
Captain Beechey, and which I presume to be some of those
which he obtained in Hotham Inlet, Kotzebue Sound, and
described in his voyage to the Pacific.                   In fig. 223 we see
yourts, or winter-houses, in two cases, with dogs standing on
them.      Men      armed     with     bows      and     arrows,     and    others
dragging seals home over the ice, and one man about to
spear a reindeer with a movable-headed harpoon. In fig.
222 are reindeer, geese, a baidar, or flat-bottomed boat, a
tent, round which various articles of clothing are hung up
to dry, a woman, apparently engaged in the preparation of
food, and a hunting-scene.   A decoy, roughly representing
the head and antlers of a reindeer, has been put up, and a

        * Crantz, p. 164.                              + Egede, l. c. p. 162.
                            ih Hall lve: vols nu. p. S16-
510   DRAWINGS.

            Fie, 222.   Fig. 223.
                        RELIGION.        MODES     OF   BURIAL.                      511

real reindeer, while unsuspiciously browsing close by, is
about to be shot by an Esquimaux hunter.     In fig. 221 are
represented two animals, apparently intended for crocodiles ;
the draughtsman must, I think, have seen drawings of this
animal in some European vessel.
   According to Crantz, the Greenland Esquimaux “have
neither a religious nor idolatrous worship, nor so much as
any ceremonies to be perceived tending towards it*.” This
statement has been confirmed by many other observers +.
Their burial ceremonies have, however, been supposed to
indicate a belief in the resurrection. They generally bend
the body into a sitting posture, bringing the knees up under
the chin, and then wrap the corpse in one of their best skins.
For the grave they choose some high place, and over the
corpse they make a heap of stones. Near the body some
of them place the implements of the deceased, and even
sometimes, if he was a man, his kajak; believing, as it has
been said, that they will be of use to him in the new world.
Egedet, however, expressly denies that it is done with any
such idea.        This view is also confirmed by Hall, according
to whom the Hsquimaux have a superstitious objection to
use, or even touch, any thing which has been in a house
containing a dead body§. It is, perhaps, the same idea which
induces them to remove a corpse, not through the ordi-
nary entrance, but by way of the window||. In other
cases, when a person is evidently dying, they place by him
every thing which can soothe and comfort his last moments,
and then leave the igloo, or house, which they close up, thus
converting it into a tomb.                    Crantz tells us that they “lay

  * I. cp. 197.                                Egede, 1. c. p. 183.
  + Graah’s Voyage           to Greenland,       Sel (op fee alll,
p. 128;   Ross,   Baffin’s     Bay, vol. i.      § 1. c. vol. i. p. 201; vol. ii. p. 221.
p. 175; Voyage of Discovery, p. 128;              || Graah, 1. c. p. 128; Ross, Arctic
Parry, 1. c. p. 551; Richardson’s              Expedition, 1829-33, p. 290.
Arctic Expedition, vol. ii. p. 44;               “ Graah, l. c. p. 126.
512                THINGS    BURIED    WITH    THE    DEAD.

a dog’s head by the grave of a child, for the soul of a dog
can find its way every where, and will show the ignorant babe
the way to the land of souls,” and this is admitted by Egede.
Moreover, the custom of occasionally burying models of im-
plements, instead of the implements themselves, tends to the
same conclusion.
   Captain Cook saw burial mounds of earth or stone at
Oonalashka.    One of the latter was near the village, and
he observed that, in accordance with a custom which                      seems
to prevail all over the world, every one who passed threw a
stone on it*. Infants, if unfortunate enough to lose their
mothers, are always buried with them; and sickly aged peo-
ple are sometimes buried alive, as it is considered a kindness
to spare them the pain of a lingering death. The Hsqui-
maux observed by Captain Parry had a superstitious idea
that any weight pressing upon the corpse would give pain to
the deceased +. Such a belief would naturally give rise, in
a more     favoured      country,     to vaulted      tumuli;    but    in the
extreme north, the only result is that the dead bodtes are
but shghtly covered up, in consequence cf which the foxes
and dogs frequently dig them up and eat them. This the
natives regard with the utmost indifference; they leave the
human bones lying about near the huts, among those of
animals    which     have    served     for   food;    another    reason     for
doubting whether their burial customs can be regarded as
satisfactory evidence of any very definite and general belief
in a resurrection, or whether the objects which they bury
with their friends are really supposed to be of actual ‘use
to them.    On the whole, the burial customs of the Hsqui-
maux are curiously like those of which we find evidence in
the ancient tumuli of northern and western Europe.
   In character the Esquimaux are a quiet, peaceable people.
Those observed by Ross in Baffin’s Bay, “could not be made
 * Voyage to the Pacific Ocean, vol. ii. p. 519.       + lc. pp. 395, 417, 550.
                              CHARACTER.                              513
to understand what was meant by war, nor had they any
warlike weapons*,”   Like other savages they resemble
children in a great many respects. They are such bad
arithmeticians    that the    ‘enumeration        of ten is a labour,
and of fifteen an impossibility with many of them+.”                  Dr.
Rae, whose partiality for the HEsquimaux is well known,
assures us that if a man is asked the number of his children,
he is generally much puzzled. After counting some time
on his fingers, he will probably consult his wife, and the two
often differ, even though they may not have more than four
or five f.
  Amongst      the Esquimaux both polygamy and polyandry
appear to occur.  A strong or skilful man has often more
than one wife, a beautiful or clever woman in some cases
more than one husband§.            Again, the temporary loan of a
wife is considered a mark of peculiar friendship; in which,
however, the advantage is not all on one side, as a large
family, far from being any incumbrance, is among the Hsqui-
maux a great adyantage||. Apart, moreover, from these
recognized customs, it does not appear that the Esquimaux
set any very high value on the virtue of chastity.
   They are excessively dirty. Considering the difficulty in
obtaining enough water even to drink during the greater
part of the year, we cannot, perhaps, wonder that they never
dream of washing. Their word for dirt, eberk, conveys no
idea of any thing disagreeable or offensive; but, in justice
to them, we must remember that the extreme cold, by pre-
venting putrefaction, removes one of our principal induce-
ments to cleanliness, and at the same time induces so great
a scarcity of liquid water, as to render washing almost an
impossibility.
   * J. c. p. 186,                      § Ross, l. c. p. 2738.
   + Parry, l. c, p. 251.                || Ross, l. c. p. 515.
   t See for a curious instance   of    "| Kane, Arctic Explorations, vol.
this, Graah, 1. c. p. 131.             1D yaliG.
                                                           in,
514:                     CHARACTER,

    As a general rule it is impossible to put any dependence
on their promises, not-so much that they are intentionally
deceitful, as on account of the wavering and inconstant dis-
position which they possess in common with so many other
savages. Among themselves a successful huntsman or fisher-
man is always ready to share his seal or walrus with his less
fortunate neighbours; but he expects, as a matter of course,
that a sufficient return will be made to him when an oppor-
tunity occurs. They give away nothing themselves without
expecting to receive as much again, and, being unable to
imagine any other line of conduct, are naturally very de-
ficient in gratitude. Captain Ross, however, and Dr. Rae
 consider that the Hsquimaux encountered by them were
 neither ungrateful nor particularly selfish. In other respects
 also these appear to have been very favourable specimens of
 the race. Though not cruel, the Esquimaux seem to be a
 somewhat heartless people. They do not, indeed, feel any
 actual pleasure in the infliction of pain, but they will take
 little trouble to remove or relieve suffering. They are also
great thieves, but, as   Captain   Parry truly observes *, we
must “make due allowance for the degree of temptation
to which they were daily exposed, amidst the boundless
stores of wealth which our ships appeared to them to
furnish.” According to Hall+, moreover, they are strictly
honest among themselves, kind, generous, and trustworthy.
   Parry thus describes them: “In the few opportunities we
had of putting their hospitality to the test we had every
reason to be pleased with them. Both as to food and:ac-
commodation the best they had were always at our service;
and their attention, both in kind and degree, was every thing
that hospitality and even good breeding could dictate. The
kindly offices of drying and mending our clothes, cooking
our provisions, and thawing snow for our drink, were per-
       ¥ lo p. 522,                   le ConVOlertin ps alka.
                        NORTH    AMERICAN     INDIANS.                  DID

formed by the women          with an obliging cheerfulness which
we shall not easily forget, and which commanded its due
share of our admiration and esteem. While thus their guest,
I have passed an evening not only with comfort, but with
extreme gratification; for, with the women working and
singing, their husbands quietly mending their lines, the
children playing before the door, and the pot boiling over
the blaze of a cheerful lamp, one might well forget for the
time that an Esquimaux hut was the scene of this domestic
comfort and tranquillity ; and I can safely affirm with Cart-
wright that, while thus lodged beneath their roof, I know
no people whom I would more confidently trust, as respects
either my person or my property, than the Esquimaux*.”
   Dr. Rae also has a very high opinion of them, and they
seem from all accounts to present the remarkable pheno-
menon of a really high state of morality, without any thing
which can be called religion.

                      The North American         Indians.

   The aboriginal, or at least the Pre-Columbian inhabitants
of North America, fall naturally into three divisions,                 The
Esquimaux in the extreme north, the Indian tribes in the
centre, and the comparatively             civilized Mexicans        in the
south. The central tribes, which occupied by far the greater
extent of the continent, were again divided by the Rocky
Mountains into two great groups; that on the western side
being in much the most abject condition. Though no doubt
there was and is an immense difference between different
tribes—and particularly between the semi-agricultural na-
tions of the west, and the filthy barbarians of Northern
California—still as Mr. Schoolcraft, to whom we are indebted

  * Parry’s Three Voyages for the Discovery of a North-west Passage, vol. v.
p. 18.
                                   u12
516                      DRESS.         ORNAMENTS.

for an excellent work on the “History, Condition, and
Prospects of the Indian Tribes*,” truly says, “their manners
and customs, their opinions and mental habits, had, wherever
they were inquired into, at the earliest dates, much in com-
mon.   Their modes of war and worship, hunting and amuse-
ments, were very similar. In the sacrifice of prisoners taken
in war;     in the laws of retaliation; in the sacred character
attached to public transactions solemnized by smoking the
pipe; in the adoption of persons taken in war, in families;
in the exhibition of dances on almost every occasion that can
enlist human sympathy; in the meagre and imartificial style
of music; in the totemic tie that binds relationships toge-
ther, and in the system of symbols and figures cut and
marked      on   their grave-posts,           on trees, and sometimes              on
rocks, there is a perfect identity of principles, arts, and
opinions. The mere act of wandering and petty warfare
kept them ina savage state, though they had the element
of civilization with them in the Maize t+.”
   As regards dress many of the Indian chiefs had magni-
ficent dresses of skins and feathers. Some of the tribes,
indeed, wore no clothes; but this was rarely the case with
the women, and even the men had generally at least a loin
cloth. The amount of clothing, however, depended very
much on the temperature. In the plains and forests of the
tropical and southern Jatitudes, “the Indian wears little or
no clothing during a large part of the year ;” but it is very
different   on   the   mountains          and in the north, where                 the
common      dress was the breech-cloth and mocassins, with a
buffalo-skin thrown over the shoulders.                         The inhabitants of
Vancouver’s Island had mats, made either of dog’s-wool
alone, of dog’s-wool and goose-down together, or of threads
obtained from cedar-bark.               They often wore “necklaces or
       * Published by authority of Congress.                Philadelphia, 1853,
                           ap enh Akedle atte 40}, eAt7/.
                       ORNAMENTS.     LABRETS,                         ay

shells, claws, or wampum; feathers on the head, and armlets,
as well as ear and nose jewels*.”        Many of the Indian
tribes are clean in their persons, and frequently use both the
sweat-house and cold bath ; others are described as repulsive
in countenance and filthy both in person and habit.
   The eastern tribes do not generally disfigure themselves
artificially, except indeed by the use of paint; but it is very
different in the west. The Sachet Indians of De Fuca’s
Straits wear pieces of bone or wood passed through the
cartilage of the nose; the Classet Indians cut their noses
when they capture a whale; among the Babines, who live
north of Columbia River, the size of the under-lip is the
standard of female beauty+. A hole is made in the under-lip
of the infant, in which      a small bone is inserted;        from time
to time the bone is replaced by a larger one, until at last a
piece of wood three inches long and an inch and a half
wide, is inserted in the orifice, which makes the lip protrude
to a frightful extent.        The process appears          to be very
painful.
   Owing to the almost universal custom of fastening babies
to a cradle-board, the American skulls are characterized by a
flattened occiput. This peculiarity does not now occur in
European heads, but it is found in many ancient skulls from
various parts of the old continents, and indicates, as pointed
out by Vesalius,     Gosse, and Wilson,      that the cradle-board,
though long abandoned, was at one time used in Western
Europe, as it is even now among the Indians of North
America.   The extraordinary practice of moulding the form
of the head was common to several of the Indian tribes.
Tt prevailed in Mexico and Peru, in the Carib Islands, and
among the savage tribes of Oregon. Among the Natchez
the deformity is described by the historian of De Soto’s

  * Schoolcraft, vol. iii. p. 65.   rica, p. 242; Vancouver, l. c. vol. ii.
  + Kane’s Indians of North Ame.    pp. 280, 408.
518               THE   PRACTICE   OF HEAD-MOULDING.

expedition as consisting of an upward elongation of the
cranium, until it terminated in a point or edge. The Choc-
taws, though enemies of the Natchez, “improved” their
heads in the same way. Their children were placed upon
a board, and a bag of sand was laid upon the forehead,
“which, by continual gentle compressure, gives the forehead
somewhat the form of a brick from the temples upwards,
and by these means they have high and lofty foreheads
sloping off backwards*.”   The Waxsaws, Muscogees or
Creehs, Catawhas, and Altacapas are described as having
had a similar        custom.     It was,    however,      only the male
infants which were treated in this manner. Among the
Nootka-Columbians the practice of flattening the head was
universal. The child was placed in a box or cradle lined
with moss. The occiput rested on a board at the upper
part of the box, and another board was brought over the
forehead, and tied firmly down on the head of the infant.
The process continued until the child was able to walk, at
which time it is described as presenting a most hideous
appearance.    The eyes “stand a prodigious way asunder,”
the eyeballs project very much, and are directed upwards,
the head is very wide, and has almost the form of a wedge.
The Newatees, a tribe residing on the north end of Van-
couver’s Island, forced the head into a conical shape, by
means of a cord of deer-skin padded with the inner bark
of the cedar tree.        This cord, which is about as thick as a
man’s thumb, is wound round the infant’s head and gradually
forces it to take the shape of a tapering cone+. Among the
Peruvians the forehead was pressed downwards and back-
wards by tight bandages, of which there seem to have been
generally two, leaving a space between them, and thus pro-
ducing a well-marked ridge running transversely across the
      * Schoolcraft, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 324.
      + Wilson on Physical Ethnology, Smithsonian   Report, 1852, p. 288.
              RELIGION.        SOCIAL   POSITION    OF WOMEN.             519

skull. Thus, while the forehead was prevented from rising,
and the sides of the head from expanding, the occipital
region was allowed full freedom of growth, and the develop-
ment of the brain was forced to take an unnatural direction.
So great was the change produced, so extraordinary is the
shape of these abnormal skulls, that many ethnologists have
been disposed to regard them as belonging to a peculiar race.
This theory, however, has been clearly proved to be erroneous,
and is now universally abandoned.       It is very remarkable
that this unnatural process does not appear to have any
prejudicial effect on the minds of the sufferers*,
   Hearne states that the Northern Indians had no religion;
even the celebrated “five nations’’ of Canada, according to
Colden, had no religion, nor any word for God. Burnet+
never found any semblance of worship among the Coman-
ches. In the central parts of North America, however,
the Indian tribes generally believed in the existence of a
Great Spirit, and the survival of the soul, but they seem
to have had scarcely any religious observances, still less any
edifices for sacred purposes. The Dacotahs never pray to
the Creator; if they wish for fine weather, they pray to
the weather itself. They believe that the Great Spirit made
all things except thunder and rice, but we are not told the
reason for these two curious exceptions.
   The social position of the women seems to have been very
degraded among the aboriginal tribes of North America.
“Their wives, or dogs, as some of the Indians term them,”
are indeed well treated as long as they do all the work, and
there is plenty to eat; but throughout the continent, as
indeed among all savages, the domestic drudgery falls to their
lot, while the men hunt and make war; though in justice to

  * Beecher’s Woyage round the              + Schoolcraft, vol. i. p. 237. See
World, vol. i. p. 808; Wilson, Smith.    also Richardson’s Arctic Expedition,
sonian Report, 1862, p. 287.             vol. ii, p. 21.
520                            CHARACTER.

them we must remember that the former at least of these two
occupations was of the greatest possible importance, and that
upon it depended their principal means of subsistence.
Polygamy generally prevailed; the husband had absolute
power over his wives, and the marriage lasted only as long
as he pleased. Among some of the North Californian
Indians it is not thought right to beat the wives, but the
men “allow themselves the privilege of shooting such as
they tired of *.’ Among the Dogribs and other northern
tribes, the women are the property of the strongest. Hvery
one is considered to have both a legal and moral right to
take the wife of any man weaker than heis. In fact, the
men fight for the possession of the women, just like stags and
the males of other wild beasts+. Lending wives is a frequent
customf.
  “ Imperturbability§,        im all situations, is one of the most
striking and general traits of the Indian character. To still
his muscles to resist the expression of all emotion, seems to
be the point of attainment; and this is particularly observed
on public occasions. Neither fear nor joy are permitted to
break this trained equanimity.”     Even among relations “ it
is not customary to indulge in warm greetings.      The pride
and stoicism of the hunter and warrior forbid it. The pride
of the wife, who has been made the creature of rough
endurance, also forbids it.”
   But perhaps the most remarkable evidence of this is the
fact that the Algonquin language, although one of the
richest, contained no word for “to love,” and when Elliott
translated the Bible for them in 1661, he was obliged to
coin one. He introduced the word “ womon” to supply the

   * Col. M‘Kee in Schoolcraft’s In.      t Hearne, 1, c. p. 128; Carver's
dian Tribes, vol. iii. p. 127.         Travels, p. 131; James’ Expedition
  + See Hearne’s Journey to the        tothe Rocky Mountains, vol. i. p. 212.
Copper-Mine River, p. 104.               § Schoolcraft, vol. iii. p. 58.
                        CRUELTY.       INFANTICIDE.                  52t

want. Again, the Tinné language* contains no word to
express “dear” or “beloved.” It is only fair to add that
Kane found the Cree Indians swearing in French, having no
oaths in their own languaget. Mr. Schoolcraft records, as
an indication that they are in reality of affectionate dis-
position, that he “once saw a Fox Indian on the banks of
the Mississippi, near whose wigwam IJ had, unnoticed to him,
wandered, take up his male infant in his arms, and several
times kiss itt.’ The special mention of this fact conveys a
different impression from that which was intended. Never-
theless, among the better tribes many no doubt are capable
of feeling strong affection, and there are even cases on record
in which the father has redeemed his son from the stake, and
actually been burnt in his stead.
   Partly no doubt from the hatred produced by almost in-
cessant wars, partly perhaps encouraged by the stoical dis-
regard of pain which it was their pride to affect, the North
American Indians were very cruel to captives taken in war.
Scalping seems to have been an universal practice, and it is
even said that the Sioux sometimes ate the hearts of their
enemies, every one of the war-party getting a mouthful, if
possible.
  Infanticide     was    common      in the north, but does not seem
to have prevailed among the southern tribes to any great
extent; and until the advent of Europeans they do not
appear to have had any fermented liquors. The Sioux,
Assiniboines,     and other tribes on the Missouri        are said to
have habitually abandoned those who from age or infirmities
were unable to follow the hunting-camps. The same was
frequently the case among the northern tribes.
   Copper is found native in the northern districts, and even
before the advent of the Huropeans was used for hatchets,
  * Richardson’s Arctic Expedition, vol. il. p. 24.     + 1. c, p. 339.
                           t lo. vol. iii, p. 64.
oa                        IMPLEMENTS.        WHAPONS.

bracelets, etc. Nevertheless, it was used rather as a stone
than as a metal; that is to say, the Indians did not heat it
and run it into moulds, or work it when hot, but simply took
advantage of its malleability and hammered it into form,
without the assistance of heat. Metallic vessels were quite
unknown to the aborigines of North America.
     The implements of the Shoshonees, or Snake Indians, are
described by Wyeth.               Their possessions were confined tc
“the pot, bow and arrow, knives, graining tools, awls, root-
digger, fish-spears, nets, a kind of boat or raft, the pipe,
mats for shelter, and implements to produce fire *.”
   The pot was made of “long tough roots, wound in plies
around a centre, shortening the circumference of the outer
plies so as to form a vessel in the shape of an inverted bee-
hive.”      They were       so well made as to be quite water-tight,
and though of course they could not be put on the fire,
still they were used for boiling, in the manner already
described as practised by other savages.     The Dacotahs
are said to have sometimes boiled animals in their own
skins, taking the skin off whole, suspending it at the four
corners, and making use of boiling stones as usual. They
had also stone vessels, but these were rare, and probably
used only as mortars.
   Their bows are very skilfully made of the horns of the
mountain sheep and elk, or sometimes of wood. ‘ The string
is of twisted sinew,           and is used loose, and those using this
bow require a guard to protect the hand which holds it.”
The arrow is driven with such force that it will pass right
through the body of a horse or buffalo+, and in the account
of De Soto’s expedition, it is stated that on one occasion an
arrow went through the saddle and housings of a horse and
penetrated one-third of its length into the body.                  Although
  * Schoolcraft, vol. i. p. 212.            p. 14% Cathn, 1c. yolk. 1. pa 3h
   + Schooleraft, 1. c. vol. iii, pp. 35,   vol. ii. p. 212; McKean and Hall’s
46; Kane’s North American Indians,          Indian Tribes, vol. ii. p. 4,
                      KNIVES.     SPEARS.     BOATS.              520

on the whole far inferior to the rifle, still in hunting, the bow
has the one great advantage of silence. Among several of
the tribes, arrow-making was a distinct profession.           The
arrow-heads     are of obsidian, about three-fourths of an inch
long and half an inch wide, and quite thin. The base is
expanded and is inserted into the split end of the shaft, being
kept in its place by sinews. The shaft is about two feet and
a half long ; when intended for hunting it is expanded at the
end, so that when it is drawn out of the wound the arrow-
head is extracted also; but the shafts of war-arrows taper to
the end, so that when they are drawn out the head remains
behind. The sling does not appear to have been much used.
   The knives are rudely made of obsidian, and are sometimes
fastened in handles of wood or horn. The graining tools
for preparing skins are sometimes of bone, sometimes of
obsidian. Mr. Wyeth does not describe their form. Awls
were made of bone; large thorns also being sometimes used
for the purpose. Root-diggers are either made of horns, or
of crooked sticks pointed and hardened by fire. ‘ The fish-
spear is a very simple and ingenious implement.     The head
is of bone, to which a small strong line is attached near
the middle, connecting it with the shaft about two feet from
the point. Near the forward end of this head there is a
small hole, which enters it ranging acutely towards the point
of the head; it is quite shallow. In this hole the front end
of the shaft is placed.’ The shaft is of light willow, and
about ten feet long. When the fish is struck, the shaft is
withdrawn,     and the string at once pulls the bone end into a
transverse position.        The fish-nets are made of bark, which
gives a very strong line, and are of two kinds, the scoop and
the seine. They are, however, unknown among the northern
tribes west of the Mackenzie*. The boats of the Shoshonees
hardly deserve the name, and seem to be used only for cross-
              * Richardson’s Arctic Expedition, vol. il. p. 25.
524                                  FIRE.

ing rivers. They are about eight feet long, and made of
reeds, but there is no attempt to make them water-tight.
Other tribes, however, have much better canoes, made either
of bark or of a log hollowed out. The pipes are large, and
the bowl is generally of fuller’s earth, or of soap-stone.
The mats are about four feet long, are made of rushes, and
are used either as beds, or in the construction of wigwams.
   They obtain fire by rubbing a piece of wood in a hole.
The Chippeways and Natchez tribes had an institution for
keeping up a perpetual fire, certain persons being set aside
and devoted to this occupation.
   The Dacotahs used a drill bow (fig. 224) for the purpose
of obtaining fire. This instrument, as shown in the accom-
panying figure, is a small stiff bow, the string of which
 forms a loop round the upright stick, and thus, when the
bow is moved backwards and forwards, gives it a rotatory
movement.      The Iroquois had effected a still further im-
provement, and worked with an instrument (fig. 225) closely
resembling that used in Western Europe, and also in Cey-
lon*, to drill holes in earthenware and metal.

                Lia, 224,




           Dacotah Fire Drill Bow,
                                                  Troquois Fire Pump Drill.

                             * Davy’s Ceylon, p. 263.
                                DWELLINGS.                               525

   The huts or wigwams of the North American Indians are
of two kinds, one for summer,             and the other        for winter.
The winter wigwam of the Dacotahs is thus described by
Schoolcraft: “To erect one of them it is only necessary to cut
a few saplings about fifteen feet in length, place the large
ends on the ground in a circle, letting the tops meet, thus
forming a cone. The buffalo-skins, sewed together in the
form of a cap, are then thrown over them and fastened toge-
ther with a few splints. The fire is made on the ground in
the centre of the wigwam, and the smoke escapes through
an aperture at the top. These wigwams are warm and com-
fortable.  The other kind of hut is made of bark, usually
that of the elm*.”  The huts of the Mandans +, Minatarees,
etc., were    circular   in form, and from forty to sixty feet in
diameter. The earth was removed to a depth of about two
feet. The framework was of timber, covered with willow
boughs, but leaving a space in the middle to serve both as
chimney and window. Over the woodwork was placed a
thick layer of earth, and at the top of all some tough clay,
which was impervious          to water, and in time became             quite
hard, as in fine weather the tops of the huts were the com-
mon lounging place for the whole tribe. Though these
dwellings were sometimes kept very clean and tidy t, this
was not always the case.     Speaking of the Nootka Sound
Indians, Captain Cook§ says: “The nastiness and stench of
their houses are, however, at least equal to the confusion.
For, as they dry their fish within doors, they also gut them
there, which, with their bones and fragments thrown down
at meals, and the addition of other sorts of filth, lie every
where in heaps, and are, I believe, never carried away till it

   * I. c. vol. ii. p. 191.               t+ Catlin’s American Indians, vol.i.
   + This tribe, one of the most in- _ p. 82.
teresting, has been entirely swept        § Third Voyage, vol. ii. p. 316.
away by the small-pox.
526                     DWELLINGS.       AGRICULTURE.

becomes troublesome,           from their size, to walk over them.
In a word, their houses are as filthy as hog-sties: every
thing in and about them stinking of fish, train-oil, and
smoke.”
   The Wallawalla Indians* of Columbia dig a circular hole
in the ground about ten or twelve feet deep, and from forty
to fifty feet in circumference, and cover it over with drift-
wood and mud.           A hole is left on one side for a door, and a
notched pole serves as a ladder (see fig. 141, p. 1382). Here
twelve or fifteen persons burrow through the winter, requir-
ing very litle fire, as they generally eat their salmon raw,
and the place is warm from the numbers collected together
and the absence of ventilation. In summer they use lodges
made of rushes or mats spread on poles. This tribe lives
principally on salmon, preferring it putrid.
   South of the Gulf of St. Lawrence and west of the Rocky
Mountains almost all the tribes seem to have grown more or
less maize, In the Carolinas and Virginia the Indians raised
large quantities, and “all relied on it as one of their fixed
means of subsistence +.’”? The Delawares had extensive maize
fields at the time of the discovery of America.   In 1527,
De Vaca saw it in small quantities m Florida, and De Soto,
twelve years later, found it abundant among the Muscogees,
Choctaws, Chickasaws, and Cherokees.                    On one occasion his
army marched through fields of it for a distance of two
leagues. It 1s known to have been cultivated by the Iroquois
in 1610, and, though only in small quantities, ‘‘ by the hunter
communities        of the Ohio, the Wabagh, the Miami, and the
Illinois,” as well as by the natives along both banks of the
Mississippi.       The evidences of ancient agriculture have been
already alluded to in the chapter on North American Arche-

  * Kane’s North American Indians,          } Schoolcraft, l.c. vol.i.p.6.   See
p- 272; United State     Exploring Ex-    also Richardson’s Arctic Expedition,
pedition, vol. iv. p. 452,                vol. ii. p. 51.
                  MAIZE.     RICE.   ANIMAL FOOD.              527

ology ; the maize appears to have been the only plant actually
under cultivation; but some of the tribes depended for their
subsistence very much on roots, etc. The principal imple-
ment of agriculture seems to have been the hoe, for which
they often used the shoulder-blade of the bison fixed into a
handle of wood.       Wild rice also grew       abundantly   in the
shallow lakes and streams of Michigan, Wisconsin, Iowa,
Minnesota, as well as in the upper valleys of the Mississippi
and Missouri. It was gathered by the women, and formed
one of their principal articles of food. They went into the
rice-fields in canoes, and bending the stalks in handfuls over
the sides of the canoe, beat out the grain with paddles.
   The North American Indians, however, depended mainly
on the animal kingdom for their subsistence.         They are
essentially hunters    and   fishermen;   the   buffalo, the deer,
and the salmon supplying them with their principal articles
of food. The buffaloes were sometimes driven into pounds,
sometimes shot on the open prairie with bows and arrows.
Fish were speared, caught in weirs, etc., or shot with the
bow. The Macaws and Clallums on the Pacific coast some-
times even killed whales. For this purpose they use large
barbed harpoons of bone, with a string, and a strong seal-
skin bag filled with air. This apparatus was used in the
same manner as among the Hsquimaux (ante, p. 503). Like
all carnivorous animals, the Indians      alternate between    sea-
sons   of great plenty and extreme want.          Usually game is
abundant, and Noka, one of their most celebrated hunters,
is said to have killed in one day sixteen elks, four buffaloes,
five deer, three bears, one porcupine, and one lynx. This
of course was a very exceptional case. Still there is gene-
rally some season of the year when they kill more game than
is required for immediate consumption. In this case the
surplus is dried and made into pemmican.       In winter, how-
ever, they are often very short of provisions. Back gives a
528                          BURIAL.     ART.

terrible picture of their sufferimgs in famine times*; and
Wyeth tells us that the Shoshonees “nearly starve to death
annually, and in winter and spring are emaciated to the last
degree; the trappers used to think they all eventually died
from starvation, as they became old and feeble +.”
  As might naturally be expected, the mode of burial varies
much in different parts of North America. In Columbia
and among many of the Prairie tribes, the dead are generally
sewn up in a skin or blanket and placed either on the
boughs of a tree or on a scaffold, the personal property of
each deceased individual being placed near the body ft.” In
some cases the bodies were placed in canoes, and deposited
among the branches of trees. Many of the Eastern races,
as already mentioned (ante, p. 1380), buried their dead under
tumuli.   Among the Clear Lake Indians, the Carriers, etc.,
it was usual to burn them, while in Florida they were in-
terred in a sitting posture. Among other tribes the bones
of the dead were collected every eight or ten years, and laid
in one common burial place.
   The Redskins are not altogether deficient in art, being
able to make rude carvings, and to trace equally rude draw-
ings on their wigwams, robes, etc.; but about portraits they
have some curious ideas. They think that an artist acquires
some mysterious power over any one whose likeness he may
have taken; and on one occasion, when annoyed by some
Indians, Mr. Kane got rid of them at once by threatening to
draw any one who remained.      Not one ventured to do so.
If the likeness is good, so much the worse—it is, they fancy,
half alive,—at the expense of the sitter. So much life, they
argue, could only be put in the picture by taking it away
from the original.      Again, they fancy that ifthe picture were

   * Arctic Land Expedition, p. 194      + Schoolcraft, vol. i. p. 216.
to 226. See also Richardson’s Arc-        t United States’ Exploring Expe-
tic Expedition, vol. ii. p. 96.        dition, vol. iy. p. 389.
                             ART.                              529

injured, by some    mysterious   connexion      the original would
suffer also. But perhaps the oddest notion of allis recorded
by Catlin. He excited great commotion among the Sioux
by drawing one of their great chiefs in profile. “Why was
half his face left out,’’ they asked; “ Mahtocheega was never
ashamed to look a white man in the face.” Mahtocheega
himself does not seem to have taken any offence, but Shonka,
The Dog, took advantage of the idea to taunthim.          “The
Englishman knows,” he said, “that you are but half a man;
he has painted but one half of your face, and knows that
the rest is good for nothing.”      This view of the case led to
a fight, in which   poor Mahtocheega      was    shot; and as ill-
luck would have it, the bullet by which he was killed tore
away just that part of the face which had been omitted in
the drawing.   This was very unfortunate for Mr. Catlin,
who had great difficulty in making his escape, and lived
some   months   after in fear for his life; nor was the matter
settled until both Shonka and his brother had been killed in
revenge for the death of Mahtocheega.
   Like so many other savage races the North Americans are
rapidly disappearing. Left to themselves they would perhaps
have developed an indigenous civilization, but for ours they
are unfit. Unable to compete with Europeans as equals,
and too proud to work     as inferiors,   they have profited by
intercourse with the superior race only where the paternal
government of the Hudson’s Bay Company has protected them
both from the settlers and from themselves, has encouraged
hunting, put an end to war, prevented the sale of spirits,
and, in times of scarcity, provided food. LHre long the only
remains of the Indian blood will, perhaps, be found in the
territories of the Hudson’s Bay Company.
530                     THE    PARAGUAY     INDIANS.



                        The Paraguay Indians.

   The Indians of Paraguay have been described by Dobritz-
hoffer* and by Don Félix de Azarat, who lived a long time
among them. He found them divided into several different
nations or tribes, with at least forty distinct languages, and
with different customs.   Some of them lied by fishing, but
the greater number depended for their subsistence on the
wild horses and cattle, and must therefore have had different
habits before the discovery of America by the Europeans.
Their principal arms were long spears, clubs, and bows and
arrows.   Some tribes, however, as, for instance, those of the
Pampas, do not use bows and arrows, but prefer the bolas.
In war, the Indians of Paraguay gave no quarter to men,
but spared only the women and children.
      Their houses, if we can call them so, were of the simplest
character; they cut three or four boughs, stuck the two ends
into the ground, and threw over them a cow-skin.         Their
bed consisted of another skin; they had no chairs or tables,
or any kind of furniture.  The men seldom wore any clothes;
the dress of the women consisted usually of a poncho,
although among some of the tribes, as the Nalicuégas, even
this was dispensed with. The art of washing seems to have
been entirely unknown, though Azara admits that in very
hot weather they used sometimes to bathe, rather, however,
as it would appear, for coolness, than for cleanliness.   It is
unnecessary therefore to say that they were excessively filthy,
They had no domestic animals, nor any idea of agriculture.
Their doctors had but one remedy, which they applied in all
cases, and which had at least the great merit of being harm-

  * Dobritzhoffer,   History   of   the     t+ Voyages dans Amérique Méri-
Abipones.                                 dionale, 1809.
                          THE    PATAGONIANS.                            531

less—since     it consisted     “A sucer avec beaucoup             de force
Yestomac du patient, pour en tirer le mal*.”
    Many of the tribes painted their bodies in various ways,
and it was usual to pierce the under-lip and insert a piece
of wood, about four or five inches long, which they never
removed.
    They had no established form of government, nor, accord-
ing to Azara, any ideas of religion. He makes this latter
statement generally for all the Indians, and repeats it parti-
cularly for the following tribes—namely, the Charruas, Min-
uanas, Aucas, Guaranys, Guayanas, Nalicuégas, Guasarapos,
Guatos, Ninaquiguilas, Guanas, Lenguas, Aguilots, Mocobys,
Abipones, and Paraguas ;yet it appears from other passages
that some at least of these tribes were believers in witch-
craft and in mysterious evil beings.
    Azara describes the language of the Guaranys as being
the most copious, and yet it was in many respects very de-
ficient ; for instance, they could only count up to four, and
had no words for the higher numbers, not even for five or
six. It is quite unnecessary to say that the marriage tie was
little regarded among them; they married when they liked,
and separated again when they pleased.
  Infanticide was, in several of the tribes, the rule, rather
than the exception; the women brought up but one child
each, and as they spared only the one which they thought
likely to be the last, it often happened that they were left
without any at all.

                          The Patagonians.

  The inhabitants of the southern parts of South America,
although they are divided into numerous different tribes,

* Azara,l.c.p. 25.   Dobritzhoffer’s History of the Abipones, vol. i. p. 251.
                                 Mm      2
532                           STATURE.

may be considered as falling into two great groups:             the
Patagonians, or Horse Indians on the Hast, who have horses
but no canoes; and the Chonos and Fuegians, or Canoe
Indians, who have canoes, but no horses, and who inhabit
the tempestuous islands on the south and west.
   The Yacana-kunny who inhabit the north eastern part of
Tierra del Fuego, are, properly speaking, not Fuegians,
but Patagonians, and resemble them in colour, stature, and
clothing, except the peculiar boots. They hve now pretty
much as the main-landers probably did before the introduc-
tion of horses, and feed principally on guanacoes, ostriches,
birds, and seals, which they kill with dogs, bows and arrows,
bolas, slings, lances and clubs*.          The habits of the Pata-
gonians must have been much altered by the introduction of
the horse, but we can only deal with them as they now are.
   The Horse and Canoe Indians offer a great contrast in
point of size; while the latter are short, ill-looking, and
badly proportioned, the former are considerably above the
average height, and are described by early travellers as
being truly gigantic. They were first visited in 1519 by
Magellan, who assures us that many of them were above
seven feet (french) in height. In 1525 they were seen by
Garcia de Loaisa, who mentions their great stature, but does
not seem to have measured them.      Similar statements were
made by Cavendish, Knevett, Sibald de Veert, Van Noort,
Spilbergen, and Lemaire; in fact, out of the fifteen first
voyagers who passed through the Magellanic Straits, not
fewer than nine attest the fact of the gigantic size of the
Patagonians; in which they are confirmed by the testimony
of several subsequent travellers, and especially of Falkner,
who assures us that he saw many men who were over seven
feet in height.
  It is difficult altogether to reject these statements, and as
                   * Fitzroy, l. c. vol. ii. p. 187.
                              HUTS.      DRESS.                           533

they are certainly not applicable to the present race, it is
possible that there may have been a change of size owing to
the introduction and general use of the horse.
   The huts, or “toldos,” of the Patagonians, are “ rectan-
gular in form, about ten or twelve feet long, ten deep, seven
feet high in front, and six feet in the rear.                 The frame of
the building is formed by poles stuck in the ground, having
forked tops to hold cross pieces, on which are laid poles for
rafters, to support the covering, which is made of skins of
animals sewn        together, so as to be almost impervious to
rain or wind.        The posts and rafters, which are not easily
procured, are carried from place to place in all their travel-
ling excursions.       Having reached their bivouac, and marked
out a place with due regard to shelter from the wind, they
dig holes with a piece of pointed hard wood, to receive the
posts: and all the frame and cover being ready it takes but
a short time to erect a dwelling *.”
   They have no pottery, and for carrymg water the only
vessels they use are bladders.     Their dress consists princi-
pally of skins, sewn together with ostrich sinews, and often
curiously painted on one side; but, according to Falknert,
some of the tribes “ make or weave fine mantles of woollen
yarn, beautifully dyed with many colours.      They have also
a small triangular apron, two corners of which are tied round
the waist, while the third passes between the legs and is
fastened behind. When on horseback they use a kind of
poncho or mantle, with a slit in the middle, through which
they put their head. For boots they wear the “skin of
the thighs and legs of mares and colts;’’ they clean the
skins, and then, after drying, soften with grease, and so put
them on without either shaping or sewing}. They make
   * Fitzroy, l.c. vol. 1. p. 93.        and it was on account of these shoes
   + Falkner’s Patagonia, p. 128.        that Magellan called them “ Patago-
   + When first visited they used the   =nians.”
skin of the guanaco for this purpose,
534                               WEAPONS.

brushes of grass, twigs, and rushes, and use the jaw of a
porpoise for a comb*. The women wear a mantle, fastened
across the breast by a wooden skewer, or pin, and tied round
the waist. They have also a kind of apron which reaches
down to their knees, but which only covers them in front.
Their boots are made in the same way as those of the men.
Like other savages, they are fond of beads, feathers, and
other ornaments. They also paint themselves with red,
black, and white, which, however, to European eyes is any
thing but an improvement. Their defensive armour consists
of a helmet and a shield, both made of thick hide, and strong
enough to resist either arrows or lances.
  Their bows       are small, and the arrows, which are pointed
with stone or bone, are said to be sometimes poisoned. They
have also clubs and long cane lances, most of which are now
tipped with iron. But the weapons which are most charac-
teristic of the Patagonians, and which are indeed almost
peculiar to them, are the bolas+, of which there are two or
 three sorts. That used in war is a single rounded stone or
ball of hardened clay, weighing about a pound, and fastened
to a short rope or sinew of skin. This they sometimes throw
at their adversary, rope and all, but generally they prefer to
strike at his head with it. For hunting they use two similar
stones fastened together by a rope, which is generally three
or four yards long. One of the stones they take in their
hand, and then whirling the other round their head, throw
both at the object they wish to entangle. Sometimes several
balls are used, but two appear to be the usual number.
They do not try to strike their victim with the balls them-
selves, but with the rope, “and then of course the balls
swing round in different directions and the thongs become so
‘laid up,’ or twisted, that struggling only makes the captive

      * Fitzroy, vol. i. p. 75.              + Faikner, 1. c. p. 180.
                                 FOOD.   BURIAL.                           535

more secure*,” It is said that a man on horseback can use
the “bolas ” effectually at a distance of eighty yardst. They
also use the lasso.
   On the coast their food consists principally of fish, which
they kill either by diving or striking them with their darts.
Guanacoes and ostriches they catch with the bolas, and they
also eat mare’s flesh, as well as various sorts of small game,
and at least two kinds of wild roots. They have no fer-
mented liquor, and the only prepared drink which they use
is a decoction of chaliis, and the juice of berberries mixed
with water.
   The death of a native is attended with peculiar ceremonies.
The bones having been as much as possible freed from the
flesh, are hung “on high, upon canes or twigs woven
together, to dry and whiten with the sun and rain.” One of
the most distinguished women is chosen to perform the dis-
gusting office of making the skeleton, and, during the process,
“the Indians, covered with long mantles of skins, and their
faces blackened by soot, walk round the tent with long
poles or lances in their hands, smging in a mournful tone of
voice and striking the ground, to frighten away the Valichus
or evil beings,...... - The horses of the dead are killed that
he may have wherewithal to ride upon in the Alhue Mapu,
or Country of the Dead.”       In about a year the bones are
“packed together in a hide, and placed upon one of the
deceased’s favourite horses, kept alive for that purpose,” and
in this manner        the natives bear the relics, sometimes to a
very great distance, until they arrive at the proper burial
place, where the ancestors of the dead man are lying. The
bones are arranged in their proper positions, and fastened by
string. The skeleton is then placed, with others, in a square
pit, clothed in the best robes, and adorned with beads, fea-
thers, etc. The arms of the deceased are buried with him,
    * Fitzroy, 1. c. vol. ii. p. 148.        + Darwin’s Journal, p. 129.
536                             THE FUEGIANS.

and round the grave are ranged several dead horses, raised
on their feet, and supported with sticks*. Sometimes a cairn
of stones is raised over the gravet.
   Falkner regarded the Patagonians as Polytheists, but we
do not know much about their religion. According to the
missionaries, neither the Patagonians nor the Araucanians
had any ideas of prayer, or “any vestige of religious
worship f.”

                                The Fuegians.

   The inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego are even more de-
graded than those of the main-land: in fact, they have been
regarded by many travellers as being the lowest of mankind §.
Adolph Decker, who visited Polynesia and Australasia under
Jaques le Hermite in 1624, describes them as “ rather beasts
than men; for they tear human bodies to pieces, and eat the
flesh raw and bloody as itis. There is not the least spark
of religion or policy to be observed among them: on the
contrary, they are in every respect brutal”—of which he
proceeds to give evidence so convincing, that I refrain from
quoting it||. The men go altogether naked, and the women
have only a bit of skin about their middles;.........
Their huts are made of trees, in the shape of tents with a
hole at the top to let out the smoke. Within they are sunk
two or three feet under the earth; and the mould is thrown
upon the outside. Their fishing-tackle is very curious, and
their stone hooks very nearly the same shape as ours. They
are differently armed, some having bows, and arrows headed
with stone ; others have long javelins, pomted with bone;
some again have great wooden clubs; and some have slings,
  * Falkner’s Patagonia, pp.118,119.      World, p.80; Wallis’s Voyage round
  + Fitzroy, vol. ii. p. 158,             the World, p. 392; Cook’s     Voyage
  { The Voice of Pity, vol. ii. pp.       to the   South Pole, vol. ii. p. 187;
87, 95.                                   Darwin’s Journal, p. 235.
  § Byron’s     Voyage      round   the     ||Callander’s
                                                  Voyages, vol. ii.p.307.
                    HUTS.       IMPLEMENTS.    WEAPONS.                    5387

with stone-knives, which are very sharp.”               Their arrows are
of hard wood, straight and well polished.                 They are about
two feet long, and are tipped with a piece of agate, obsidian,
or glass; the head not being fixed to the shaft, remains in
the wound,       even    when    the arrow is drawn out.          The bows
are from three to four feet long, and quite plain. The string
is made of twisted sinews.
   Forster* found them “remarkably stupid, being incapable
of understanding any of our signs, which, however, were
very intelligible to the nations of the South Sea.” Wallis,
in his “Voyage round the World+,” describes them as
follows:   “They        were   covered with seal-skins, which            stunk
abominably, and some of them were eating the rotten flesh
and blubber raw, with a keen appetite and great seeming
satisfaction.’   And again he says, “Some of our people,
who were fishing with a hook and line, gave one of them a
fish, somewhat bigger than a herring, alive, just as it came
out of the water. The Indian took it hastily, as a dog would
take a bone, and instantly killed it, by giving it a bite near
the gills: he then proceeded to eat it, beginning with the
head, and going on to the tail, without rejecting either the
bones, fins, scales, or entrailst.”       Their cookery is, if possible,
still more disgusting.    Fitzroy tells us that it was “ too
offensive” for description; and the account given by Byron§$
entirely confirms this statement.
    The men, says Fitzroy ||, ‘are low in stature, ill-luoking,
and badly proportioned.      Their colour is that of very old
mahogany—or rather between dark copper and bronze. The
trunk of the body is large, in proportion to their cramped
and rather crooked limbs. Their rough, coarse, and extremely

  = Wh Gh sks, Psi                         § Byron’s Loss of the ‘‘ Wager,”
  ‘++ Hawkesworth’s Voyages, 1l.c.p.    p. 182.
A03.                                     || Voyages   of the    ‘‘Adventure”
  tle. p. 403.                         and “ Beagle,” vol. ii. p. 137.
538                      FOOD.   HABITS.

dirty black hair half hides, yet heightens, a villanous ex-
pression of the worst description of savage features. The
hair of the women is longer, less coarse, and certainly cleaner
than that of the men. It is combed with the jaw of a por-
poise, but neither plaited nor tied; and none is cut away,
excepting from over theireyes. They are short, with bodies
largely out of proportion to their height; their features,
especially those of the old, are scarcely less disagreeable than
the repulsive ones of the men. About four feet and some
inches is the stature of these she-Fuegians—by courtesy called
women.     They never walk upright; a stooping posture, and
awkward movement is their natural gait. They may be fit
mates for such uncouth men, but to civilized people their
 appearance is disgusting.              :           ot       Sa
The smoke        of wood fires, nae in cae wigwams, hurts
their eyes so much, that they are red and watery: the effects
of their oiling or greasing themselves, and then rubbing
ochre, clay, or charcoal    over their bodies; of their           often
feeding upon the most offensive substances, sometimes in a
state of putridity ; and of other vile habits, may readily be
imagined*.” Their incisors are worn flat+, like those of the
Esquimaux and of many ancient races.
   “The men procure food of the larger kind, such as seal,
otter, porpoise, etc.; they break or cut wood and bark for
fuel, as well as for building the wigwams or canoes. They
go out at night to get birds; they train the dogs, and of
course undertake all hunting or warlike excursions.       The
women nurse their children, attend the fire (feeding it with
dead wood rather than green, on account of the smoke),
make baskets and water-buckets, fishing-lines and necklaces,
go out to catch small fish in their canoes, gather shell-fish,
dive for sea-eggs, take care of their canoes, upon ordinary

      a MG ©, Ye UBER              + Fitzroy, Appendix, p. 144.
                             MODE   OF FISHING.                         539

occasions paddle their masters about while they sit idle, and
do any other drudgery*.”
   “Swimming is a favourite amusement of the Fuegians
during summer; but the unfortunate women are obliged to
go out into rather deep water, and dive for sea-eggs in the
depth of winter as often asin summer.                Men, women, and
children are excellent swimmers,            but they all swim           like
dogs.”
   “When      there is time, the natives roast their shell-fish,
and half-roast any other food that is of a solid nature; but
when in haste, they eat fish, as well as meat, in a raw state.
Panes,  45            Both seal and porpoises are speared
by them from their canoes. When struck, the fish usually
run into the kelp, with the spear floating on the water, being
attached by a short line to a movable barb: and then the
men follow with their canoe, seize the spear, and tow by it
till the fish is dead. To them the taking of a seal or a
porpoise is a matter of as much consequence as the capture
of a whale is to our countrymen.         On moonlight nights,
birds are caught when roosting, not only by the men, but by
their dogs, which are sent out to seize them while asleep upon
the rocks or beach: and so well are these dogs trained that
they bring all they catch safely to their masters, without
making any noise, and then return for another mouthful.
Birds are also frequently killed with arrows or by stones
slung at them with unerring aim. Eggs are largely sought
for by the natives ; indeed I may say that they eat any thing
and every thing that is eatable, without being particular
as to its state of freshness, or as to its having been near the
firey.’
  According to Byron the dogs of the Chonos Indians assist
in killing fish as well as birds.       They are, he says, “ cur-like
looking animals, but very sagacious, and easily trained to
      * Fitzroy, l. c. p. 185.                + Fitzroy, l.o. p. 184.
540                         FOOD.     HABITS.

this business. . . . . . The net is held by two Indians, who
get into the water; then the dogs, taking a large compass,
 Fic. 226,
             dive after the fish, and drive them into the net; but
             it is only in particular places that the fish are taken
             in this manner.” He adds that the dogs, “‘ enjoy it
             much, and express their eagerness by barking every
             time they raise their heads above the water to
             breathe*.”
                “In the winter, when the snow lies deep, the Te-
             keenica people assemble to hunt the guanaco, which
             then comes down from the high lands to seek for
             pasture near the sea. The long legs of the animal
             stick deeply into the snow and soft boggy ground,
             disabling him from escape, while the Fuegians and
             their dogs hem him in on every side, and quickly
             make him their prey; ¢ 2:                     GO ae     ae
             A+ other times of the year they sometimes get them
             by lying in wait, and shooting them with arrows,
             or by getting into a tree near their track, and
             spearing them as they pass beneath the branches,
             An arrow was shown to Low, which was marked
             with blood two-thirds of its length in wounding a
             guanaco, afterwards caught by dogs. Low held out
             his jacket, making signs that the arrow would not
             penetrate 16; upon which the native pointed to his
             eyet.” Fig. 226 represents the head of a Fuegian
             harpoon, which closely resembles the ancient Danish
             specimen figured in p. 105.
                Of vegetable food they have very little: a few
             berries, cranberries, those which grow on the arbu-
   Bone      tus, and a kind of fungus which is found on the
 Harpoon.
             beech, being the only sorts used. The wretched
  * Byron’s Loss of the ‘Wager.’      xvii. pp. 339, 368, 463.
In Kerr’s Voyages and Travels, vol.      t Fitzroy, 1. c. p. 187.
                  CANNIBALISM.       ABSENCE      OF RELIGION.                  541

Fuegians often suffer greatly from famine. On one occasion
when the Chonos were in great distress on this account, a
small party went away, and the natives said that in four
sleeps they would return with food. On the fifth day they
came back almost dead with fatigue, and “ each man having
two or three great pieces of whale-blubber, shaped like a
poncho with a hole in the middle, on his shoulders. The
blubber was half putrid, and looked as if it had been buried
underground.”    Notwithstanding this, it was cut into slices,
broiled, and eaten.   On another occasion masses of blubber
were found in sand, doubtless laid in store for a season of
want.    Their principal food, however, consists                      of limpets,
mussels, and other shell-fish.
   Admiral Fitzroy entertains no doubt that the Fuegians are
cannibals.  ‘ Almost* always at war with adjoining tribes,
they seldom meet but a hostile encounter is the result; and
then those who are vanquished and taken, if not already
dead, are killed and eaten by the conquerors.                    The arms and
breast are eaten by the women;               the men eat the legs, and
the trunk is thrown into the sea.”                Again, in severe winters,
when they can obtain no other food, they take “the oldest
woman of their party, hold her head over a thick smoke,
made by burning green wood, and pinching her throat,
choke her. They then devour every particle of the flesh,
not excepting the trunk, as in the former case.” When
asked why they did not rather kil their dogs, they said,
“Dog catch iappo,” i. e. otters.
   Like Decker, Admiral Fitzroy “never witnessed or heard
of any act of a decidedly religious naturet.”  Still some of
the natives suppose that there is a powerful and mysterious
being who resides in the woods. When a person dies, they


 * Le. p. 188.                            South    Pole, p. 179;      The   Voice of
 + See   also    Weddell,   Voyage   to   Pity, vol. vi. p. 92, &e.
542                        CANOES.    DRESS.

carry the body far into the woods*, “place it upon some
broken boughs, or pieces of solid wood, and then pile a great
quantity of branches over the corpse.”
  Their canoes are large pieces of bark sewn together.                In
the bottom they make a fireplace of clay, for they always
keep fires alight, though with the help of iron pyrites they
soon obtain sparks if any accident happens. The Chonos
Indians, who in most respects resemble the Fuegians, have
much better canoes. These are formed of planks, which are
generally five in number, two on each side and one at the
bottom. Along the edges of each are small holes about an
inch apart. The planks are sewn together with woodbine,
the holes being filled with a kind of bark beaten up until it
resembles oakum. Byron truly observes that in the absence
of metal, ‘the labour must be great of hacking a single
plank out of a large tree with shells and flints, even though
with the help of fire.”
   The Fuegians have no pottery, but like the North Ameri-
can Indians     use vessels made of birch, or rather of beech-
bark.    On the east coast many of the natives possess
guanaco-skins, and on the west some of them wear seal-
skins. ‘“ Amongst the central tribes the men generally
possess an otter-skin, or some small scrap about as large as
a pocket-handkerchief, which is barely sufficient to cover
their backs as low down as their loins. It is laced across
the breast by strings, and according as the wind blows, it is
shifted from side to side+.”         Many, however,        even   of the
women, go absolutely without clothes. Yet,as Captain Cook
quaintly expresses it, “ although they are content to be naked,
they are very ambitious to be fine;” for which purpose they
adorn themselves with streaks of red, black, and white, and
the men as well as the women wear bracelets and anklets of

      * lc. p. 181.
      + Darwin’s Researches in Geology and Natural History, p. 234.
                              FIRE.                         543

shell and bone. Dr. Hooker informs us that at the extreme
south of Tierra del Fuego, and in mid-winter, he has often
seen the men lying asleep in their wigwams, without a scrap
of clothing, and the women standing naked, and some with
children at their breasts, in the water up to their middles,
gathermg limpets and other shell-fish, while the snow fell
thickly on them and on their equally naked babies. In fact,
fire does not appear to be necessary with them, nor do they
use it to warm the air of their huts as we do, though some-
times as a luxury they take advantage of it to toast their
hands or feet.   Doubtless, however, if deprived of this source
of warmth, they would die of starvation rather oftener than is
now the case.
   If not the lowest, the Fuegians certainly appear to be
among the most miserable specimens of the human race, and
the habits of this people are of especial mterest from their
probable similarity to those of the ancient Danish shell-
mound builders, who, however, were in some respects rather
more   advanced, being acquainted with the art of making
pottery.
                                      544




