                        CHAPTER      IX.

                    QUATERNARY   MAMMALIA.


    N addition to those still existing, the fauna of Northern
       Europe during the Paleolithic period comprised several
 species of mammalia which have either become entirely
 extinct, or very much restricted in their geographical distri-
 bution, since the appearance of man in Europe. The principal
 of these are—
          Ursus speleus (the cave-bear).
          U. priscus.
          Hycena spelea (the cave-hyzna).
         Felis spelea (the cave-lion).
         Elephas primigenius (the mammoth).
         EL. antiquus.
         Rhinoceros tichornunus (the hairy rhinoceros),
         RL. leptorhinus, Cuv.
         R. hemiteechus.
        Hippopotamus major (the hippopotamus).
         Ovibos moschatus (the musk ox).
        Megaceros hibernicus (the Irish elk),
        B. fossilis (the wild horse).
         Giulo luseus (the glutton).
        Cervus tarandus (the reindeer).
        Bison Europceus (the aurochs).
        Bos primigenius (the urus).
   The first ten of these have been regarded, uutil lately, os
altogether extinct, but recent researches have induced many
                                                   U
290                 SUCCESSION    OF SPECIES.

naturalists to regard some of them as the direct ancestors of
species still existing in other parts of the world, so that the
Trish elk, the elephants, and the three species of rhinoceros
are perhaps the only ones which are absolutely extinct. Most
of the smaller species now inhabiting Europe already existed
in Quaternary times, from which we may conclude that the
changes which have taken place were due to a gradual
change of circumstances, rather than to any sudden cataclysm,
or general destruction of life: it is also very improbable that
the extinction of the different species was simultaneous;   and,
acting on this idea, M. Lartet has attempted* to construct
a paleontological chronology.
   He considers that we may establish tour divisions, namely,
the age of the cave-hear, of the mammoth and rhinoceros, of
the reindeer, and of the aurochs. It is evident, I think, that
the appearance of these mammalia in Hurope was not simul-
taneous, and that their disappearance has been successive.
The evidence is very strong that in Central and Western
Europe the aurochs survived the reindeer, and that the rein-
deer, on the other hand, lived on to a later period than the
mammoth or the woolly-haired rhinoceros. But the chrono-
logical distinction between these two species and the cave-bear
does not appear to be so well established. Admitting that the
cave-bear has not yet been found in the river gravels of the
Somme valley, we must remember that the animal was essen-
tially a cave-dweller, and that its absence is, perhaps, to be
attributed rather to the absence of caves than to the extinction
of the species. Moreover, the bones found in the gravel are
very much broken, and are seldom in such a condition as to
enable the palzontologist to distinguish the remains of U.
spelceus from those of other large bears,
   There is as yet no evidence that the cave-bear existed in
Europe before the commencement of the quaternary period,
                  * Ann. des Sci. Nat. 1861, p. 217.
                             THE   CAVE-BEAR.                           291


 when it appears to have been             abundant   in Central Europe,
 and in the southern parts of Russia.            It is doubtful whether
 it has been     discovered north         of the Baltic, nor has it yet
 been found in Spain. In Italy, on the contrary, it has been
 met with, and in one instance apparently in conjunction with
 a polished stone implement, and even pottery*. Mr. Regnoli
 has been so good as to forward me a cast of the speci-
 men on which this statement rests; it belongs to the
 cave-bear, but I can hardly regard it as being undoubtedly
 contemporaneous with the pottery and stone axe which were
found near it. In Northern Europe no such case has yet
been met with, but it is of course possible that in Italy the
cave-bear may have survived to a more recent period than in
the region north of the Alps. No trace of it has yet been
found by Mr. Busk and Dr. Falconer, among the numerous
remains from Gibraltar.
   Perhaps the most interesting discovery of remains belong-
ing to this species was that in Brixham Cave, which is thus
described by Dr. Falconer in a letter to me, from which I
quote, as the facts have not been so clearly stated in any
published report :—‘ All the circumstances connected with
the entire leg of cave-bear—femur,              with tibia and fibula
folded together, with the ball of astragalus partly dislocated,
and its position in comminuted shale, below the ochreous
cave-earth, and above a well-defined flint implement, were
determined by me at Torquay and Brixham on September 2
Mr. Pengelly gave us the data.                          ;              ORR
   *‘T identified the remains and the flint, and aeew neein-
ference that the leg must have been introduced with its liga-
ment ai least fresh, after the flint manufactured by the hand
of man had been introduced into the lower cave deposit.”
   Mr. Busk, however, who has carefully examined these

   * Richerche Paleoetnologiche nelle Alpi Apuane.   Nota del Dott. C. Reg-
noli.
                                    uc2
992                         THE   CAVE-BEAR.

bones, and detached them more completely from the matrix
in which they were imbedded than was the case when
they were examined by Dr. Falconer, is of opinion that
there is no sufficient reason for referring them to Ursus
spelceus rather than to one of the other large species of fossil
bear.
   It has been stated that remains of the cave-bear have
occurred in the river gravels at Ilford and Gray’s Thurrocks.
In the opinion, however, both of Mr. Busk and Mr. Boyd
Dawkins we have no clear case of the remains of this species
being found in river-drift gravels. In fact, as materials for
comparison have increased, it has proved more and more diffi-
cult to separate Ursus spelceus from other large species of bear.
The jaws and teeth are characteristic, but the other portions
of the skeleton are scarcely distinguishable, especially when
they are so much fractured, as is generally the case with those
found in gravel deposits.
   Vogt, indeed, has expressed the opinion that every grada-
tion may be traced between this species and our common
brown bear      (Ursus Arctos), and Brandt leans to the same
opinion*. Mr. Boyd Dawkins also says that “those who
have compared the French, German, and British specimens
gradually realize the fact that the fossil remains of the bears
form a graduated series, in which all the variations that at
first sight appear specific vanish away+.”  Whether, how-
ever, the cave-bear will eventually be regarded as belonging to
the same species as the brown bear or not, it will still remain
a well-characterized variety, and one which has never yet
been met with in the peat mosses, in the tumuli of Western
Europe, in the Danish    shell-mounds, the Swiss lake-villages,
or, in short, associated with Neolithic remains.


   * Zoogeographische und Palzon-       + Pleistocene Mammalia, Palzeon-
tologische Beitriige, 1867, p. 220.   tographical Soc. y. xyiii. p. xxii.
                     THE CAVE-HYENA.        THE CAVE-LION.                  293

    My. Busk* has recently made the very interesting obser-
 vation that some remains of bear found in our British caves
 and gravels are identical with the corresponding bones of
 U. ferox, or grizzly bear of the Rocky Mountains.
    The cave-hycena, like the preceding species, is in Hurope
 characteristic of the Paleolithic age, but it is now regarded as
 scarcely distinguishable specifically from the Hyena crocuta,
 or spotted hyzena of Southern Africa.
    Felis spelcea, the cave-lion, was             on the whole of a larger
  size than the lions of the present day, and possesses in an
  exaggerated degree the characters by which that species is
  distinguishable from the tiger. It has hitherto been regarded
 as a distinct species, but Messrs. Dawkins and Sanford now
 considert it as only a large variety of the lion. It has
 not yet been found in Scotland, Ireland, Scandinavia, Den-
 mark, or Prussia. It occurs, however, in France, Germany,
 Italy, and Sicily. As long ago as 1672, Dr. John Hains figured
 a bone of this species from the Carpathians, an observation
 of considerable interest, as it carries the area of the I’. speleu
 so near to the mountains of Thessaly where, as Herodotus
tells us, the camels attached to the army of Xerxes were
attacked by lionst. Messrs. Boyd Dawkins and Sanford refer
also to the same species, the remains found at Natchez, in
Mississippi, and which were described by Dr. Leidy as a new
species under the name of Felis atrov. The characters, how-
ever, which induced Dr. Leidy to regard his specimens as
distinct, are met with in some of the bones of F’. spelea from
the Mendip Hills. If this opinion is correct, F'. spelea must
have stretched        eastwards across Russia and Siberia, where
no remains of it have yet been observed.                  Inasmuch, how-
ever,   as the mammoth,             the   musk    ox, the reindeer,        the
  * Geol. Journal.                        ing Memoir   on the Zoology of An-
  + Paleontological     Soc,   V.   for   cient Europe, Cam. Phil, Soc., March,
1868, p. 149.                             1862.
  t See also Mr. Newton’s interest-
294,                          THE MAMMOTH.

bison,   the elk, the horse,          the wolf,—in         short,      many   of
our most characteristic quaternary mammalia—occur also in
America, jt seems & priori rather probable than otherwise,
that Messrs. Dawkins and Sanford are correct in regarding
F. atroz of that Continent as specifically identical with the
LF’. spelcea of Europe.
    Remains of a second large species of Felis, considered to
be identical with the leopard, have been discovered in the
bone-caves      of England, France, Germany, Belgium, Italy,
and Spain; and the lynx has been found by Dr. Ransom, in
a Derbyshire cave.
   The Mammoth, or Elephas primigenius, had very exten-
sive geographical range. Its remains are found in North
America, from the Atlantic coast to Escholtz Bay, and from
Behring’s Straits to Texas; in the old continent, from the
farthest extremity of Siberia, to the extreme west of Hurope,
occurring, though rarely, even in Ireland; it crossed the
Alps, and established itself in Italy as far southward as
Rome, but it has not yet been discovered in Naples, south of
the Pyrenees, in any of the Mediterranean Islands or in
Scandinavia. In Denmark it occurs, though rarely.
   In the extreme north, on the contrary, remains o this
species are remarkably abundant. Kotzebue was struck by
this in Escholtz Bay (N. W. America), and his remarks
have been fully confirmed by Beechey*.                      The islands of
Lachowski and New            Siberia, are said to be almost made
up of the bones of extinct animals, but particularly of the
mammoth;        from them and from other parts of Siberia so
much fossil ivory is obtained that it forms a regular article
of commerce. Nor have skeletons alone been discovered.
In 1799 a Tungusian hunter discovered the body of a mam-
 moth embedded         in a cliff of frozen soil, where it remained
 for several years.       In 1806 it was visited by Mr. Adams,
             * Narrative of a Voyage to the Pacific, vol. i. p. 257,
                         THE MAMMOTH.                        295

who found it partly devoured by wolves and other wild
animals, and partly removed by the Yakuts, who used it as
food for their dogs. Fortunately, however, a considerable
portion of the animal still remained. The skin was dark
grey, covered with reddish wool, mixed with long black
bristles, somewhat thicker than horsehair.   Since that time
several other well-preserved portions of the mammoth have
 been discovered in Siberia, and it was probably from earlier
 discoveries of a similar nature that the Siberian tribes came to
 regard the mammoth as a gigantic burrowing animal.
    It is hardly necessary to observe that the state of preserva-
tion in which mammoths have been found is no evidence of
recent existence, for when once enveloped in frozen soil they
might remain unchanged for an indefinite period. The best
authorities consider that the mammoth and the woolly-haired
rhinoceros lived in Siberia before, as well as during the glacial
period, but neither of them has yet been found in Europe in
any stratum anterior to the river-drift gravels, from which
Murchison, De Verneuil, and Keyserling conceived that these
animals lived in Siberia long before they found their way
into Europe; that, in fact, they belong to the tertiary fauna
of Northern Asia, though they did not make their appearance
in Europe until the quaternary period.   Falconer, on the con-
trary, was inclined to believe, principally from the specimens
collected by the Rev. John Gunn and the Rev. S. W. King,
that H. primigentus existed in England before the deposition
of the boulder-clay. Mr. Gunn himself, however, regards
these specimens as post-glacial, and we certainly do not at
present appear to have any satisfactory evidence that the
mammoth existed in England in pre-glacial times. What-
ever doubt, however,    there may be as to the date at which
this species made its appearance in Hurope, we can no longer
doubt that our ancestors, or at least our predecessors, co-
existed in England with the mammoth, which they no
996   EXISTENCE    OF THE     AFRICAN           ELEPHANT      IN EUROPE.

doubt: hunted,    as   the wildest        tribes       of Africa and       India
do now.
  In Southern Europe undoubted remains of the existing
African elephant have been met with, but the only other
species which inhabited northen Hurope during the quater-
nary period was the Hlephas antiquus, remains of which have
been found in English caves and river gravels, though, on
the whole, it had a more southerly range than the mammoth,
It is generally associated with Rhinoceros leptorhinus Cuv.,
while, on the contrary, the mammoth and QZ. tichorhinus
usually occur together.
                                  Fig. 179.




                         Molar Tooth of Z. antiquus.


   Fig. 179 represents a molar tooth of H. antiquus, and Fig.
180 one belonging to L. primigenius ; it will at once be seen
that the plates are much narrower in the latter than in the
former.
                                   Fira, 180.
                                              SS         ee




                          Molar Tocth of Mammoth.

  Ai least three species of rhinoceros inhabited Europe
during the quaternary period; on this all are agreed, but,
unfortunately the nomenclature is involved in very consider-
          THE    QUATERNARY     SPECIES    OF RHINOCEROS.       297

able confusion. . leptorhinus was originally so named by
Cuvier in 1812, from a drawing of a specimen found in the
Val d’Arno, and in which the osseous septum between the
nostrils was    represented    as deficient.    In 1835, however,
M. De Christo] stated that he had examined the specimen in
question, that the drawing was incorrect, and the name con-
sequently inapplicable. Subsequently, however, Dr. Falconer
visited Italy and satisfied himself that, after all, the original
drawing was correct, and that therefore Cuvier’s name must
be restored. In the mean time Prof. Owen had unfortunately
described another species of rhinoceros found at Clacton as
fh. leptorhinus, which name must of course be abandoned if
Cavier’s name is permitted to stand. Hence Dr. Falconer
proposed to call this latter species BR. hemitechus.    It is
necessary therefore to bear in mind that the BR. leptorhinus
of Owen is not the PM. leptorhinus of Cuvier, but that it is the
Fi. hemitechus of Falconer, while M. Lartet maintains that it
is identical with the #. Merckii of Kaup. On the other hand,
M. De Christol, in 1835, described a rhinoceros, which
undoubtedly wanted the nasal septum, and believing himself
to have proved that the figure on which Cuvier based his
description    of R.   leptorhinus   was   incorrect, he named this
species R. megarhinus.       Hence Cuvier’s Lt. leptorhinus is
identical with De Christol’s R. megarhinus. The third species
is the R. tichorhinus of Cuv., a name which has been generally
adopted, although Blumenbach had previously proposed that
of R. antiquitatis.
   Mr. Boyd Dawkins considers that there is still some doubt
about the real, character of the specimen on which Cuvier
founded his R. leptorhinus, and consequently adopts the fol-
lowing nomenclature: QR. megarhinus, De Christol; 2. lep-
torhinus, Owen; and R. tichorhinus, Cuvicr.   AL. Lartet uses
the names R. leptorhinus, Cuv.; Lt. Merkii, Kaup; and R.,
tichorhinus, Cuvier. These differences of opinion, however,
298                         RHINOCEROS       TICHORHINUS.

relate merely to the nomenclature, and do not touch the
existence of the species themselves. The first two belonged
to the pre-glacial as well as to the post-glacial period. The
woolly-haired, two-horned, smooth-skinned R. tichorhinus,
on the contrary, which appears to have been the commonest
in post-glacial times, has not yet been proved to have existed
in Hurope in the period before the glacial epoch. The first
two species also have a more southerly range, having been
found in Italy and Spain, while R. tichorhinus, though it has
been met with from the extreme north of Siberia*, through-
out Central Europe and England, does not appear to have
crossed either the Alps or the Pyrenees. It is somewhat
remarkable that no remains of rhinoceros have yet been
discovered in Sicily, Malta, Ireland +, or America} in all of
which countries the elephant has been met with. On the
other hand a single tooth has, according to Brandt, been
found in Scandinavia, where no remains of elephant have yet
been met with.
      The Musk-or,          or   rather   mushk-sheep,       is at present          con-
fined to the northern part of Arctic America.                             Its remains,
however, occur in Siberia; and in 1856 Mr. Kingsley and
I were so fortunate as to obtain a portion of a skull from the
large gravel-pit near Maidenhead station. Since then I have
met with it again at Greenstreet Green, near Bromley, in
Kent; it has also been found in the gravel of the Avon, near
Bath, in that of the Severn, near Gloucester, and at Cray-
ford. In France it has been found twice; namely, in the
valley of the Oise, and in the Dordogne.
   The Hippopotamus, though hitherto regarded as a distinct
species from the H. anphibius of Africa, was, if not identical
      * In more      than one instance the       + Lartet, Note      sur deux tétes de
 actual    carcase     of this animal has      Carnassiers    Fossiles.     Ann.   d. Sci.
 been found preserved like the Mam-            WNat., 5 ser. yol. viii.
 moth, by being imbedded         in frozen       t D’Archiac, Lecons sur le Faune
 soil,                                         quaternaire, p, 196.
                    THE    MUSK   OX.    THE    HIPPOPOTAMUS.                      299

 with, at any rate very closely allied to it. Some paleontolo-
 gists believe that, like the mammoth and the R. tichorhinus,
 it was   covered         with hair;     we    have, however, no           distinct
 evidence in support of this view.                 It may,        moreover,         be
remarked, though too much importance must not be attached
to the observation, that our ancient hippopotamus has been
less frequently found in association with these two species,
than with H. antiquus and R. hemitechus, Falc. (leptorhinus,
 Owen),    which,         as just mentioned;       have a more            southerly
range.      ‘Thus, in this country, it has only been found in four
bone-caves, those of Durdham Down, Kirkdale, Kents Hole
Cavern, and Ravenscliff in Gower, and in the two former it
was associated with H. antiquus and ft. hemiteechus. In the
river gravels its remains are found at Grays and Ilford,
associated with the 2. tichorhinus, R. leptorhinus, and R.
hemitechus ; at Walton             and    Folkestone, with         Hlephas an-
tiquus; at Peckham, with #. antiquus and H. primigenius;
at Bedford, with H. antiquus, the tichorhine rhinoceros, and
the reindeer; and at Barton, with the mammoth and A.
hematechus*.
  The magnificent Irish Elk, or Megaceros hibernicus, which
attained a height of more than ten feet, with antlers measur-
ing eleven feet from tip to tip, may perhaps have lived to a
somewhat more recent period, but appears to have had a
much more restricted range. Its remains have been found in
Germany as far as Silesia, in France as far as the Pyrenees,
and in Central Italy. It seems, however, to have been most
abundant in the British Isles, and especially in Ireland. It
is reported to have been frequently found in peat bogs, but
Professor Owen believes that, in reality, the bones generally
occur in the lacustrine shell marl, which underlies the peat
or bog earth t.
  * The   British   Pleistocene   Mammalia.     Paleontological    Soc.    1866,    p.
xxviii,                                               + Owen, 1. c. p. 465.
300                          THE    IRISH     ELK.

  In the Niebelungen Lied of the twelfth century, a mys-
terious animal is mentioned under the name of schelch:
        After this he straightway slew a bison and an elk,
        Of the strong uri four, and one fierce schelch :

  It has been supposed by some writers that the schelch was,
in fact, the Megaceros hibernicus.              There is, however, no suf-
ficient reason for this hypothesis, and we must remember
that the same poem, as Dr. Buckland has pointed out, con-
tains allusions to giants, dwarfs, pigmies, and fire-dragons.
Neither Ceesar nor Tacitus mention the Irish elk, and they
would surely not have omitted such a remarkable animal, if
it had existed in their time.
   No remains of the Irish elk have yet been found in asso-
ciation with bronze, nor mdeed am I aware of any which can
be referred to the later Stone, or Neolithic Age.
   These twelve species, then, are characteristic of the river-
drift deposits. Most of them occur also in the loéss of the
Rhine and its principal tributaries, but they have not yet
been met with in the peat bogs. They never occur in the
Kjékkenméddings, the Lake-habitations, or the tumuli; nor
are there any traditions in Western Hurope which can be
regarded as indicating, even in the most obscure manner,
any recollection of these gigantic mammalia.
   The Wild Horses, which in ancient times inhabited Europe,
differed somewhat from our present breed, and have been
described as separate races by Professor Owen, under the
names of Hquus fossilis and Hquus speleus. The latter is the
race which was largely used for food by the ancient inhabi-
tants of the Bruniquel Cave in Dordogne*. It was rather
small in size, but appears to have resembled the true horse
more    than the ass*.         Some     naturalists      have, indeed, been

  * Owen,    Philosophical   Transac-       meyer, Beitriige zur Kenntniss   der
tions, 1869, p.535.   See also Ruti-        fossilen Pferden.
                              WILD HORSES.                                301

disposed to believe that Europe contained two wild species
of the genus Hquus during quaternary times. This opinion,
however, seems to depend on difference of size, rather than
 of form, and we know that the varieties of the horse differ
 considerably in magnitude.
  Hkkehard in the “Benedictiones ad mensas Ekkehardi
monachi Sangellensis”” mentions “ ferales equi” as existing
in the eleventh century in Switzerland. Lucas David also
(Reuss. Chronik. Bd. II. s. 121) alludes to the wild horse as
existing in 1240 in Russia. Even at the beginning of the
seventeenth century, Herberstain expressly says, “ Feras
habet Lithuania, preter eas, que in Germania referuntur,
bisontes, uros, alces, eqguos sylvestres,”’ etc.
   Perhaps, however, these medizval wild horses were merely
 tame ones which had escaped and bred in the extensive forests
 of Central Europe. Indeed, the history of the horse in Europe
seems to have been much the same as in America. In the
one country, as in the other, wild horses were at one time
frequent, and their remains are abundant.      The Spanish con-
querors, however, found no trace or tradition of the horse at
the time of the discovery of America, and so also in the
Danish shell-mounds, and at the earlier Swiss lake-villages,
the horse was either unknown, or at least extremely rare.
Gradually it seems to have become again abundant, both in a
domesticated and a wild condition; until at length, as popu-
lation increased, the wild horse finally disappeared in Hurope,
as he seems destined ere long to do in America*.
   The Reindeer still exists in Northern Europe, in Siberia,
and in North America, where it has been found as far north
as man has yet penetrated. Even so recently as the time of
Pallas it might still be met with on the wooded summits of
the Oural Mountains, as far south as the Caucasus.      In
   * See for further particulars   Brandt,   Zoographische   und Palwontolo-
gische Beitriige, p. 176.
302                        THE   REINDEER.

Western Europe it is now an extinct species, though it was
at one time abundant in England and France, whence, how-
ever, it is unnecessary to say, it has long disappeared. M.
Lartet found no traces of it in any of the Spanish caves
examined by him; but Ponzi mentions it, though appa-
rently with some little doubt, as occurrmg among the
animal remains collected by M. Regnoli, at Cantalupo, near
Rome *.
  At the present day the reindeer, like the Laplander, is
gradually retirimg northwards, unable to resist the pressure
of advancing civilization. Even within the last ten years
a few families of Lapps might still be found in the neigh-
bourhood of Nystuen, on the summit of the Fillefjeld, and
some other places in the south of Norway, but none are now
to be found on this side of the Namsen river.            The reindeer,
in a wild state, indeed, even at the present day, is generally
distributed, though in small numbers, over the highest and
wildest of the Norwegian fjelds, protected, however, by
stringent game laws, but for which it would, probably, have
ere now ceased to exist.
   On the other hand, this species must have been at one
time very abundant in Great Britain, no fewer than 1000
horns having been discovered by Col. Wood in some of the
Welsh caves.
   As far as we can judge from the present evidence, the first
appearance of the reindeer in Hurope coincided with that of
the mammoth, and took place at a later period than that of
the cave-bear or Irish elk. It is generally found wherever
the mammoth and woolly-haired rhinoveros occur; but, on
the other hand, as its remains         are abundant in some of the
bone-caves in which the gigantic Pachyderms are wanting, it
is probable that it survived toa still later period. The rein-
  * Rapporto sugli Studie sulle Scoperte Paleoetnologiche nel Bacino della
Campagna Romana,     Roma, 1867.
                                 THE REINDEER.                             303
deer has not, however, been found in the Kj dkkenméddings
of Denmark, nor in any of the tumuli of England, France, or
Germany.          It is also wanting in the Swiss lake-villages,
although we know that it was at one time an inhabitant of
Switzerland, bones of it having been found in a cave at
L’Echelle, between the great and little Saléve, near Geneva,
where they were mixed with worked flints, ashes, and
remains of the ox and horse.
   As might naturally have been expected, the reindeer has
been occasionally met with in the peat mosses of Sweden, as
well as in those of Scotland and England. It is not, how-
ever, represented on any of the ancient British or Gallic
coins. Cesar, indeed, mentions it as existing in the great
Hercynian forest ; but his description is both imperfect and
incorrect.  He seems to have heard of it only at second
hand, and never to have met with any body who had actually
seen one. It does not appear to have ever been exhibited in
the Roman circus.
   Buffon stated on the authority of Gaston, Comte de Foix,
that in his time (1331 to 1390) the reindeer still lived in
the south of France.     Cuvier, however, by examining an
ancient manuscript, sent by Gaston himself to Philippe le
Hardi, showed that, though his expression is a little ambi-
guous, he probably intended to say exactly the reverse, his
words being—
   “ J’en ay veu en Nourvegne et Xuedene et en ha oultre
mer, mes en Romain pays en ay je peu veu*.”
   Remains of the reindeer have been found in Scotland in
beds of marl and till, and also, though very rarely, in peat +.
Dr. Hibbert}, Brandt§, Dawkins, J. A. Smith, and other good

  * Recherches    sur   les Ossements     Soc. Ant. Scot., 1869, p. 186.
Fossiles, vol. vi. p. 125.                  { Edinburgh Journal of Sci., 1831.
  + See Dawkins, Popular Science            § Zoogeogr.und Paleont, Beitrige
Review, Jan. 1868.         Smith, Proc.   (1867), pp. 62, 256.
304                        THE    REINDEER.

authorities, consider that it survived in the extreme north
down to the twelfth century; relying on the statement of
Torfaus, that the Norwegians used to make incursions from
the Orkneys into Caithness for the purpose of hunting rein-
deer (hreina) and other game*.
  While, however, fully admitting the high authority of
Torfzeus, I cannot regard a casual statement of this charac-
ter as conclusively deciding the question, and I may add that
Dr. Dasent, who is so great an authority on all questions
connected with Scandinavian literature, is convinced that the
reindeer was extinct in Scotland at the period in question.
It may also be remarked that several attempts which have been
made to introduce the reindeer into Scotland have completely
failed, the animals dying without any very apparent reason,
while, on the contrary, in Iceland they have become numerous.
IT admit that these experiments are far from conclusive;           but,
on the other hand, in Scandinavia the deer are said to be
larger in the northern districts than in the southern, while
the Spitzbergen specimens are the finest of all.
   If indeed Torfeeus had distinctly stated that the reindeer
existed in northern Scotland during the twelfth century, the
state of the case would have been very different; the passage
referred to, however, could hardly be accepted as conclusive
by itself, especially as long as no traces of reindeer had been
found among the ancient ruins which abound in that district.
On the other hand, since the last edition of this work was
published, Mr. J. A. Smith has carefully examined the horns
and bones found in the ruins of the curious towers known as
“Brochs,” or “ Burghs,” and has shown that some of them
certainly belonged to the reindeer+. Thus fragments of rein-
deer’s horns have been collected by Mr. Joass among the
ruins of the Cill-Trdlla Broch, on the farm of Kintradwell,
            * Rerum Orcadensium His., i. 36.
            tT Proc. Soc. Antig. Scot., 1869, vol. viii. p. 186.
                          THE    AUROCHS.                      300

near Brora, on the sea-coast of Sutherlandshire. Mr. Smith,
on carefully examining the remains of deer obtained by Mr.
Laing at Keiss, in Caithness, finds that they do not all belong,
as ab first supposed, to the red deer, but that some of them
belonged to the reindeer. Lastly, remains of this species have
been collected by Mr. Anderson in the ruins of the Yarhouse
Broch, in the same county. It is indeed more than probable
that in other cases remains of the reindeer have been incor-
rectly ascribed to the red deer.
   We do not unfortunately know the date at which these
Burghs or Brochs were first constructed, but it is on record
that some of them were in use down to the twelfth century
(see ante, pp. 54, 55).
   It must be admitted     that these observations strongly
support the inference derived from the statement of Torfeeus,
and   we have therefore     now,   not   I think conclusive,   but
still very strong grounds for believing that the reindeer
Survived in northern Scotland down to a comparatively
recent period.
   The glutton of Northern Europe, which is the wolverine of
the North American fur-hunters,
                              has been found in three of the
English bone-caves, and is very abundant in those of Belgium.
  The Aurochs, or European Bison, appears to have been
abundant in Western Europe.      It has been found in Scot-
land, England, France, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Poland,
and Italy, as well as in Russia.    Its remains occur in the
river-drift gravels, the bone-caves, the lake-villages of Swit-
zerland, and in the peat-bogs, though none have yet been
found in the shell-mounds       of Denmark, nor, so far as I am
aware, in any of our British peat-bogs or tumuli. M. Lartet
thinks that it is represented on a coin of the Santones, which
was shown to him by M. de Saulcy. It is stated by Pliny
and Seneca to have existed in their times, with the urus, in
the great forests of Germany.    Though not mentioned by
                                                      be
306                        THE URUS.

Cesar, it is alluded to in the Niebelungen Lied, and is said
to have existed in Prussia down to the year 1775.         Accord-
ing to Nordmann and Von Baer, it still survives in some
parts of Western Asia.
   It is also preserved by the Emperor of Russia in the im-
perial forests of Lithuania,    where, however,      its existence
seems to be very precarious. In 1830 the herd numbered
711 head, of which, during the Polish revolution in 1831,
115 were killed. From that time they gradually increased
until 1857, when the numbers       were 1898, but during the
late Polish rebellion they fell to 874. Since 1863 no num-
bers have been given.
    According to Riitimeyer, than whom it is impossible to
 cite a greater authority on such a question, our ancient bison
 (B. priscus) was identical with the existing American bison.
Every stage, however, between the fossil form and the exist-
ing European aurochs can be traced, so that it is impos-
sible to separate the two specifically, an opinion in which
Brandt also coincides.  It would appear, therefore, that the
American form of bison is the more archaic.     We have here,
moreover, a clear case, in which two now distinct species
are connected by the evidence of fossil remains.
  The Urus or Bos primigenius      did not extend its range to
America, nor, so far as I am      aware, have     its remains   yet
been met with in North-Eastern Asia. They occur, however,
throughout Hurope, in England, Scotland, Denmark, and
the South of Sweden, in France and Germany.            Across the
Alps and Pyrenees, it occurs in Italy and Spain, and even,
according to M. Gervais, in Northern Africa. In the museum
at Lund is a skeleton belonging to this species, in which one
of the vertebree still shows   traces of a wound, made, in the
opinion of Professor Nilsson, by a flint arrow.      Bones of this
species have also been met with in ancient tumuli, as well as
in the lake-habitations, and the Kjékkenméddings.
                    ELK.    LEMMING.              SNOWY    OWL.                   807

   Ceesar particularly mentions the urus as occurring in the
Hercynian forest; it is alluded to in the Niebelungen Lied,
and, according to Herberstain, it existed in Germany down
to the sixteenth century. In England wild bulls are men-
tioned by Fitz-Stephen, in his Life of Becket, as occurring
near London as late as the twelfth century. It does not seem
certain, however, that these were uri. The celebrated wild
cattle of Chillmgham, and some of our domestic breeds, are
generally regarded by Palzontologists as being descended
from the ancient urus.
  Mr. Dawkins is also of opinion that Machairodus latidens,
one of the most remarkable                of the Pliocene         carnivora,     sur-
vived to post-glacial times. It was found by MacHnery in
Kent’s Hole, but has not been met with in the present exami-
nation of that interesting cavern. Nor has it occurred in any
other of our bone-caves or river gravels with remains of
post-glacial mammalia.     The Norway Hk, which is identical
with the American moose, was also au inhabitant                               of this
country, but has long become extinct here, as                                 indeed
throughout Western Europe.                  Even in Prussia it is said that
there are only about 226 remaining*.       The lemming has
been discovered by Dr. Blackmore, in the river gravels at
Fisherton, near Salisbury ;and the lagomys, or tailiess hare, a
genus now confined to the Himalayas, Siberia, and the colder
regions of North America, has been identified by Prof. Owen
among the bones from Kent’s Cavern, and by Dr. Falconer
among those from the Brixham Cave.           Another glacial
genus, that of the marmots, is represented by two species,
one of them very closely resembling that now lying in
Siberia. Lastly, it may be observed that remains of the
great snowy owl (Strie nivea) have recently been discovered
in France.
  * See Report from Her Majesty’s           and    regulations    relating   to game.
representatives abroad, on the laws         Presented to Parliament, 1871.
                                      5
308                        MOLLUSCA.

   The river gravels contain also thirty-six species of shell-
fish, of which thirty-four at present live in Sweden*, and
twenty-nine in Lombardy.      These latter, however, are prin-
cipally species having a very wide range, and we shall see
still more clearly that the leaning of the molluscan fauna is
towards the north, if we remember that out of seventy-seven
Finland species, thirty-one have been found in the upper level
gravels, while of 193 Lombard species, only twenty-nine have
as yet occurred.
    Another very interesting point connected with this quater-
nary fauna is the manner in which it connects together species
now quite distinct. Opponents of Mr. Darwin’s theory often
 ask with misplaced triumph for the links connecting any two
 species. In fact, however, every species is a link between
 other allied forms. Of course, indeed, as long as any varie-
 ties remain undescribed there will be intervals—indicating,
however, gaps in our knowledge, not in nature. More-
over, it is admitted by every one that there are variable
species, that is to say, species which present two or more
extreme forms, with intermediate gradations. Now we may
fairly ask those who assert that no two species are connected
by links, how they would separate the instances of variable
animals (which they admit to occur) from the case which
they say does not exist. If we were to obtain to-morrow all
the links between any two species which are now considered
distinct, no one can deny that the two would at once be
united, and would hereafter appear in our classifications as
one variable species. In fact, therefore, they first unite into
one species all those forms, however different, between which
a complete series 1s known, and then argue in favour of the
permanence of species because no two of them are united
by intermediate links.
  Moreover, if species were in reality perfectly distinct from
                  * Proc. Roy. Soc., 1862, p. 44.
              LINES   BETWEEN   EXISTING   SPECIES.        3809

one another, then it would necessarily follow that as our
knowledge of any group increased, the separations betweep
the different species would become more and more unmis:
takable. On the contrary, however, it is a well-known fact
that the difficult genera become still more difficult as they
are more profoundly studied. If, indeed, we consider existing
forms only, no doubt the distinctions between the greater
number of species are well marked, nor does any one expect
to find a living series of links between them. The interme-
diate forms lived in tertiary and quaternary times.      Thus
directly we commence to study the extinct forms, all the con-
venient lines of separation gradually thin out. For instance,
the larger species of mammalia are at present in most cases
well marked, but it becomes much more difficult satisfactorily
to distinguish them from one another, when we consider fossil
specimens as well as recent ones.      Thus, to take only two
eases from the group of quaternary mammalia, we have seen
that, according to Riitimeyer, the European and American
bisons, which are now quite distinct, are connected by the
Bison priscus, while between our brown bear and the grizzly
bear of the Rocky Mountains a series of links has been
discovered among the abundant remains in our bone-caves.
   Great as is the interest attaching to the existence of man
at a period so much more ancient than that hitherto assigned
to him, there is something which, to many minds, will appear
even more fascinating in the presence of such a fauna as that
which I have thus briefly indicated. For it must be regarded
as a well-ascertained fact, that, even during the human
period, the pleasant and sunny valleys of England and
of France have been inhabited by the gigantic Irish elk, two
species of elephant, and three of rhinoceros, together with
the reindeer, a large bear closely resembling the grizzly bear
of the Rocky Mountains, a bison scarcely distinguishable
from that of the American Prairies, the musk ox of Arctic
310            CLIMATE   OF THE       QUATERNARY    PERIOD.

America, the lemming of the Siberian Steppes, the lion of
the Tropics, the hyena of the Cape, and a hippopotamus
closely resembling that of the great African rivers.
   Influenced mainly by the presence of the great pachy-
derms, and particularly by that of the Hippopotamus, M.
WArchiac is disposed to consider that the climate of the
quaternary period was warmer than ours*, while M. Lartet +
suggests that we may have had a climate like that of Chih,
where, as Mr. Darwin has pointed out, glaciers actually come
down to the sea-level in latitudes corresponding with that of
our south coast, and the northern provinces of France.
   In other respects, however, the fauna of the quaternary
deposits indicates a more severe climate. The presence of
the reindeer     and musk      ox, the lemming         and the marmot,
corroborated as we shall see in the next chapter by physical
evidence, leave little doubt on this subject.              Moreover, we
must remember that the tichorhine rhinoceros and the mam-
moth were not only well provided against cold, but in some
cases were enveloped in the ice and frozen mud of the
Siberian rivers so soon after death that the flesh had not had
time to decay.        Much weight is also to be attributed, I
think, to the smaller quadrupeds, as, for instance, the lem-
ming and lagomys.
   Yet I feel strongly that some of the species, and particu-
larly the hippopotamus, point to a warmer climate. Even if
protected by fur, as Mr. Prestwich supposes, the animal could
never live in a country where the rivers were frozen every
winter. To meet this difficulty a suggestion has been thrown
out that it may have made annual migrations.                  In the Gulf
of Penas, on the west coast of South America, lat. 47° S.,
Mr. Darwin has pointed out that glaciers now “descend to
the sea within less than nine degrees of latitude from where
   * Leconssurla Faune Quaternaire,        + Lartet, Ann. des Sc. Nat., 1867,
pp. 15, 16.                             p. 37.
             PROBABLE    FLUCTUATIONS     OF CLIMATE.           311

paims grow, less than two and a half from arborescent
grasses, less than two from orchideous parasites, and within
a single degree of tree-ferns*.” The reindeer in America
makes, we know, very extensive           annual   migrations, but a
heavy animal like the hippopotamus would hardly do so. I
am, therefore, rather disposed to believe that the presence of
the hippopotamus, the B. antiquus, and BR. leptorhinus, indi-
cates that the climate of the quaternary period was not
uniformly severe, but contained at least one interval of
exceptional mildness.
   It is remarkable also that the late M. Morlot, well known
as an excellent and careful observer, considered it to be certain
that, in Switzerland, there were two periods of great exten-
sion of the glaciers, separated by an epoch of comparative
warmth.
   We shall also see presently that if the cold of the glacial
epoch was due to the astronomical causes pointed out by Mr.
Adhemar and Mr. Croll, the period of extreme cold must
have been followed by one of unusual warmth, or rather
there must have been several oscillations of climate from
unusual heat to extreme cold.
   I am disposed then, on the whole, to consider that the
quaternary fauna consists of two distinct groups, belonging
to different periods and to two different conditions of climate,
one warmer than the present, the other colder. The whole
subject, however, while it is of great interest, is also of
extreme difficulty. On many points we must be contented to
suspend our judgment, but we may at least regard it as
proved that, since the appearance of man, there have been
great changes in the fauna of Western Europe, which then
contained several important species, either now altogether
extinct or existing only in distant parts of the world.

         * Researches in Geology and Natural History, p. 285.
                           CHAPTER         X.

                               CAVE MEN,


   T would be quite impossible, within the limits of a single
      chapter, to describe all the caves in which human
remains have been found, in association with, and apparently
belonging to the same period as, those of the extinet mam-
malia. I will only call attention to a few of those which
have been most thoroughly examined, and in which the con-
clusions appear to be satisfactorily established.
   It is unnecessary to observe that a great number of caves
present evidence of having been inhabited during times long
subsequent to those which we are now considering; but for
the Neolithic Age, as well as for all later periods, we have,
as has been already mentioned, other sources of information,
and more satisfactory evidence than ary which can be derived
from the examination of caves.
   Some writers, indeed, have gone so far as to question
altogether the value of what may be called cave-evidence.
They have suggested that the bones of extinct animals may
have lain in the caves for ages before the appearance of man;
that the relics of the human period may have been introduced
subsequently; and that remains belonging to very different
periods may have been mixed together. This was, for instance,
the conclusion arrived at by M. Desnoyers, even so recently
as the year 1845, in his article on Bone-caves*.             Unless this
   * Recherches Géologiques et His-   ments. Dictionnaire Universe! d’ Hiss
toriques sur les Cavernes, particu.   toire Naturelle.
litrement sur les cavernes A osse-
                  CAVES    IN THE      SOUTH   OF FRANCE.                 313

argument admitted of a satisfactory answer, it must be con-
ceded that the evidence derivable from cave contents would
always be liable to grave suspicion. I trust, however, to be
able to show that this is not the case.
   Already, in the year 1828, MM. Tournal and Christol in
the south of France had found fragments of pottery and
human bones and teeth, intermingled with remains of extinct
animals; and M. Tournal distinctly expressed: the opiion
that these had certainly not been washed in by any diluvial
catastrophe, but must have been introduced gradually. The
presence of pottery, however, throws much doubt on the sup-
posed antiquity of these remains.
  A few years later, in 1833 and 1834, Dr. Schmerling*
published an account of his researches in some caves near
Liége in Belgium.    In four or five of these he found human
bones, and in all of them rude implements, principally flint
flakes, were discovered, scattered in such a manner among
the remains of the mammoth, Rhinoceros tichorhinus, cave-
hyzena, and cave-bear, that Dr. Schmerling referred them to
the same period. One feels a natural surprise that such
animals as these should ever have been natives of England
and France, ever have wandered about among our woods or
along our streams; but when it was also suggested that they
were contemporary with man, surprise was succeeded by
incredulity. Yet these cave-researches appear to have been
conducted     with care,     and the principal results have been
confirmed by more recent discoveries.
  The hesitation, however,             with which     the   statements      of
Dr. Schmerling were received by scientific men arose, no
doubt, partly from the fact that some of the fossil remains
discovered by him were certainly referred to wrong species,
and partly because, with reference to several of the extinct
   * Recherches sur les Ossements        de la Province de Liége.   Par le Dr.
Fogsiles découverts dans lesCavernes     PP. C. Schmerling.
314                          BELGIAN   CAVES.

species, and especially to the mammoth, he expressed the
opinion that the remains had been brought from a distance,
and had very likely been washed out of some earlier bed.
“Nous n’hésitons point,” he says, “a exprimer ici notre
pensée, c’est que nous doutons fort que l’éléphant, lors de
Vépoque du remplissage de nos cavernes, habitat nos con-
trées. Au contraire, nous croyons plutdt que ces restes ont
été amenés de loin, ou bien que ces débris ont été déplacés
dun terrain plus ancien et ont été entrainés dans les
cavernes.”
   Even, therefore, thongh Dr. Schmerling might be quite
right in his conclusion that the human remains had been
“enfonis dans ces cavernes & la inéme époque, et par consé-
quent par les mémes causes qui y ont entrainé une masse
d’ossements de différentes espéces éteintes,”’ still it would not
necessarily follow that man had lived at the same period as
these extinct species.
   Careful explorations of the Belgian caves have recently
been carried on under the auspices of the Government by
M. E. Dupont*. These caverns belong principally to the
so-called Reindeer period, and the flint implements are never
ground.     Thus out of 30,000 worked flints found                 in the
cavern of Chaleux, and 1200 in those of Furfooz, not one
presents a trace of polish.  Some of these flint flakes, etc.,
appear to consist of Pressigny flint, and in the opinion of
Dr. Dupont, as well as of M. de Mortillet, must have come
from that distant locality. In this cavern the humerus of an
elephant was discovered, but in M. Dupont’s opinion, founded
on the state of the bone, it belonged to an earlier period than
the other remains. Human bones have been found in several
of these caverns. The Trou du Frontal contained bones
belonging to no less than thirteen individuals. They had
   * Notices Preliminaires sur les     du Gouvernement Belge dans        les
Fouilles exécutées sous les Auspices    Cavernes de la Belgique. 1867.
                          KENT’S HOLE.                       315

probably been buried in the cave, the door of which seemed
to have been purposely closed by a large block of stone.
When discovered they were in great confusion, having in the
opinion of MM. Dupont and Van Beneden been disturbed
and rearranged by water.     The form of the cavern, and the
fact that the opening was in great measure closed by the
above-mentioned stone, seem to me to speak strongly against
this suggestion, and I should rather regard the disturbance
of the bones as due to foxes and badgers.        The Trou de la
Naulette contamed a very remarkable lower jaw, of which
M. Dupont says that “regardée dans la face interne, elle offre
une telle proclivité d’arriére en avant de la partie symphy-
saire qu’on est porté ay voir un prognatisme tout animal.
Les apophyses géni ne sont pas indiquées; les fossettes
latérales sont tres-prononcées et le rebord mentonnier est
réduit 4 son minimum.     Les alvéoles des canines, bien que
trés-rapprochées   des alvéoles des incisives, et les molaires,
nous rappellent la disposition qu’on observe sur la machoire
du singe.   En effet, Valvéole qui logeait la canine est fort
vaste et bombée 4 la face externe.           Ce qui semble plus
étrange encore, c’est que les trois alvéoles des grosses molaires
présentent absolument Vordre typique du maxillaire simien
par ’augmentation progressive des alvéoles de la premiére 4
la deuxiéme et a la troisiéme molaire.”
   The celebrated cavern of Kent’s Hole, near Torquay, was
examined by Mr. MacEnery as long ago as 1825. He did
not, however, publish his notes on the subject, and they
remained in manuscript until 1859, when Mr. Vivian suc-
ceeded in obtaining them. Mr. MacHnery found human
bones, flint flakes, etc., but all either on the surface or in
disturbed soil, so that on the whole he regarded them,
though apparently with much doubt, as posterior to the
remains of the cave-bear, hyzena, etc.
   In the year 1840 Mr. Godwin-Austen communicated to
316                          KENT’S HOLE.

the Geological Society a memoir on the Geology of the South
Hast of Devonshire*, and in his description of Kent’s Hole,
he says that “human remains and works of art, such as
arrow-heads and knives of flint, occur in all parts of the cave,
and throughout the entire thickness of the clay: and no
distinction   founded on condition,           distribution,     or relative
position, can be observed, whereby the human can be sepa-
rated from the other reliquie,’”’ which included bones of the
“elephant, rhinoceros, ox, deer, horse, bear,                  hysetia,   and
a feline animal of large size.” The value, he truly adds, “of
such a statement mus’ rest on the care with which a collec-
tor may have explored. I must therefore state that my own
researches were constantly conducted in parts of the cave
which had never been disturbed, and in every instance the
bones were procured from beneath a thick covering of stalag-
mite; so far, then, the bones and works of man must have
been introduced into the cave before the flooring of stalag-
mite had been formed.” Notwithstanding the high authority of
Mr. Godwin- Austen, these statementsattracted little attention ;
and the very similar assertions made by Mr. Vivian, in a paper
read befcre the Geological Society, were considered so impro-
bable that the memoir containmg them was not published.
   They have, however, been completely confirmed by the
systematic examination which is now being carried on by the
British Association.    Worked flints are less abundant in
the lower layers than near the surface, but several have been
discovered under circumstances which leave no doubt that
they were deposited at the same time as the bones of the
large mammalia. ‘The researches are carried on by a com-
mittee, consisting of Sir C. Lyell, Mr. Busk, Mr. Evans,
Prof. Philips, Mr. Vivian, Mr. Pengelly, and myself, and
the work is under the more immediate superintendence of
Mr. Pengelly and Mr. Vivian.
         * Transactions of the Geol. Soc., Ser. 2, vol. vi. p. 433.
                        BRIXHAM CAVE.                      B17.

  In May, 1858, Dr. Falconer called the attention        of the
Geological Society to a newly-discovered cave at Brixham,
near Torquay, and a committee was appointed to assist him
in examining it. Grants of money were obtained for the
same object from the Royal Society and Miss Burdett Coutis.
In addition to Dr. Falconer, Mr. Pengelly, Mr. Prestwich,
and Professor Ramsay were entrusted with the investigations.
In September, 1858, a preliminary report was made to the
Geological Society, but it is very much to be regretted that
the results have not yet been published in extenso.
   The deposits in the cave were, in descending order—
     1. Stalagmite of irregular thickness.
    2. Ochreous cave-earth with limestone breccia.
    3. Ochreous cave-earth with comminuted shale.
    4, Rounded gravel,
The organic remains belonged chiefly to the following species:
    1. Hlephas primigenius.
    2. Ehinoceros tichorhinus. Teeth in considerable numbers
         and an astragalus.
    3 . Bos sp. Teeth, jaws, and other bones.
    4,. Equus sp. A few remains.
    5 . Cervus tarandus.   The reindeer—skull and horns.
    6. Cervus elaphus. Horns.
     7 . O. capreolus.
    8 . Ursus speleeus—the cave-bear. Lower jaws, teeth, etc.
    9 . Uz feroe.
   10. U. arctos.
   1l. Hyena spelea.       Lower jaws, teeth, fragments of
         skulls, and other bones.
   12. Felis speleea.
   13. Lagomys.

  Several flint flakes were also found indiscriminately mixed
with these bones, and, according to all appearance, of the
318                     SICILIAN CAVES.

same antiquity. They occurred at various depths, from ten
inches to eleven feet, and some of them were in the gravel,
below the whole of the ochreous cave-earth.
    Again, in the grotto of Maccagnone, in Sicily, Dr. Falconer
found human traces, consisting of ashes and rude flint imple-
ments, in a breccia containing bones of the Elephas antiquus,
of the hyeena, of a large Ursus, of a Felis (probably F’. spelcea),
and especially with large numbers of bones belonging to the
hippopotamus. The “ ceneri impastati,” or concrete of ashes,
had at one time filled the cavern, and a large piece of bone
breccia was still cemented to the roof, but owing to some
change in the drainage, the greater part had been washed out
 again. The presence of the hippopotamus sufficiently proves
 that the geographical conditions of the country must have
 been very different from what they are now; but I cannot
 do better than quote Dr. Falconer’s own summary of his
 observations in this case:
    “The vast number of Hippopotami implied that the phy-
 sical condition of the country must have been greatly different,
at no very distant geological period, from what obtains now.
He considered that all deposits above the bone breccia had
been accumulated up to the roof by materials washed in from
above, through sinuous crevices or flues in the limestone, and
that the uppermost layer, consisting of the breccia of shells,
bone-splinters, siliceous objects, burnt clay, bits of charcoal,
and hyzena coprolites, had been       cemented to the roof by
stalagmitic infiltration.    The entire condition of the large
fragile Helices proved that the effect had been produced by
the tranquil agency of water, as distinct from any tumultuous
action.   There was nothing to indicate that the different
objects in the roof breccia were other than of contemporaneous
origin: subsequently a great physical alteration in the con-
tour, altermg the flow of superficial water and of the subter-
ranean springs, changed all the conditions previously existing,
                        GIBRALTAR     CAVES.                 319

and emptied out the whole of the loose incoherent contents,
leaving only the portions agglutinated to the roof.     The
wreck of these ejecta was visible in the patches of ‘ceneri
impastati,’ containing fossil bones, below the mouth of the
cavern.    That a long period must have operated in the
extinction of the hyzena, cave-lion, and other fossil species
is certain, but no index remains for its measurement.    The
author would call the careful attention of cautious geologists
to the inferences—that the Maccagnone Cave was filled up
to the roof within the human period, so that a thick layer
of bone   splinters, teeth, landshells, hyzenas’ coprolites, and
human objects, was agglutinated to the roof by the infiltra-
tion of water holding lime in solution. That subsequently,
and within the human period, such a great amount of change
took place in the physical configuration of the district as to
have caused the cave to be washed out and emptied of its
contents, excepting the patches of material cemented to the
roof and since coated with additional stalagmite.”’
   Similar proofs of great and recent geographical changes
have been afforded by the examination of certain Spanish
caves. The rock of Gibraltar abounds in caverns containing
human remains, with stone, bone, and bronze implements,
mixed with those of domesticated animals, such as the goat
and ox.     In the bone breccia from the Genista Cave and
fissure, Mr. Busk and Dr. Falconer have discovered Hyena
crocuta, an existing African species, the leopard, lynx, serval,
and Barbary stag, together with Rh. hemitechus and a species
of ibex. But, although it is more than probable, it does not
appear to be proved, that man co-existed with these animals
on the rock of Gibraltar. Among some bones found in
another cave near Madrid, M. Lartet has discovered molars
of the existing African elephant.
   M. Lartet* has also described with his usual ability an
                  * Ann. des Sc. Nat., 1861, p. 177.
320                          AURIGNAC.

interesting grotto, or small cave, which was discovered some
years ago at Aurignac, in the south of France. A peasant
named Bonnemaison, seeing a rabbit run into a hole on a
steep slope, put his hand in, and to his surprise pulled out a
human bone. Curiosity urged him to explore farther, and
on removing a quantity of rubbish, he found a large block
of stone, which almost closed up the entrance to a small
chamber, in which were no less than seventeen human
skeletons.   Unfortunately for science, the mayor of Au-
rignac, hearing of these discoveries, collected the human
bones, had them reburied, and when M. Lartet some years
afterwards explored the cavern, they could not be found
again.
   After carefully examining the locality, M. Lartet came to
the conclusion that this small cavern had been used as a
burial place, and from the remains of bones broken for
marrow, and marks of fire immediately outside the cave, he
inferred that funeral feasts had been held there.
   The following is the list of species determined by M.
Lartet, together with the approximate number of individuals
belonging to each :—
                                               Number of individuals.
       1. Cave Bear (Ursus speleus)        . . . . 5—6
       Ze Drow ear Un Gretigieeras             0       een
       8. Badger (Meles tawus) . . . . . . 1—2
       4. Polecat (Putorius vulgaris) . . . . 1
       5.) Cave Lion (felis spelen) a 5 2) a as ok
       Ga WildiCat (i icaiis)=     eee     sue            ee)
       (otigena (Hyena spelca\er           ou.    tes     wo 26
       Se Wolts(Cantsel apis).         —se e e        e ees
       Omi ox (GC vulpes\y      an     eee,      Ae      e200
      10. Mammoth (Hlephas primigenius).
              Two molars and an astragalus.
        4 . Rhinoceros
      BRA              (Fhinoceros tichorhinus)       . 1
                                AURIGNAC.                                 321

      2. tlorse (Baus eaballus)    2...      12-15
      Perence) (heasimiaye,     (0       a Sad
      14. Boar (Sus scrofa). Two incisors.
      15. Stag (Cervus elaphus) .                   :           1
      16.   Irish Elk (Megaceros hibernicus)                   1
      Py    eine (OC. capreolus)   Gs                          BS
      18.   Reindeer (0. tarandus) . . .                .   . 10—12
      19.   Aurochs (Bison Huropeeus)     . .           .   . 12—15

Some of these were found in the grotto, others outside; the
latter had been gnawed by some large carnivorous animal, no
doubt the byzena, coprolites of which were found among the
ashes. On the other hand, the bones inside the cave were
untouched, from which          M. Lartet concludes that after the
funeral feasts, hyzenas came and devoured all that had been
left by the men, but that they could not effect an entrance
into the cave on account of the large block of stone by which
the entrance was closed, and which was actually found in its
place by Bonnemaison.
   In addition to the hyena, the animals occurring in this
list, and yet no longer existing, or known historically to have
existed in France, are the reindeer,             cave-bear,    rhinoceros,
cave-lion, Irish elk, and mammoth.    The contemporaneity
of the reindeer with man is very evident; all the bones are
broken      for marrow,     and many      bear the marks        of knives,
besides which, the greater number of the bone implements
are made out of the bones or horns of this species. That the
rhinoceros also was contemporaneous with man is inferred
by M. Lartet, firstly, on chemical grounds, the bones of this
species, as well as those of the reindeer, aurochs, etc., having
retained the same amount of nitrogen as the human bones
from the same locality; and secondly, because the bones

  * This is, I presume, a small variety of horse, and not the true Ass.   The
query is in the original.
                                                                NG
322                        AURIGNAC.

appear to have been broken by man, and in some cases are
marked by knives. Moreover, he has ingeniously pointed
out that these bones must have belonged to an individual
recently killed, because, after having been broken by man,
they were gnawed by the hyznas, which would not have
been the case if they had not been fresh and still full of
their natural juices.
   The elephant was represented only by some detached
plates of molars anda calcaneum. This latter was the only
gnawed bone found in the interior of the grotto. He is of
opinion that these plates were purposely separated, and the
calcaneum appears to have been placed in the vault at the
time of the last interments; but there is no evidence that it
was then in a fresh condition.    Indeed, the fact of its being
gnawed seems rather to point the other way.
  Remains of the Ursus speleus (cave-bear) were much more
abundant, and some of them were found in the grotto. In
one case a whole limb appears to have been buried with the
flesh on, as the different bones were all found together. It
is well known that food and drink were in ancient times fre-
quently buried with the dead, and M. Lartet thinks that we
may account in this manner for the bones of quadrupeds
found in the grotto at Aurignac.
   Ihave given the particulars of this case at length, because, if
the evidence was well-established, we should here have an in-
stance ofa sepulture belonging to the period at which the cave-
bear, the reindeer, the Irish elk, the woolly-haired rhinoceros,
and probably the mammoth, still lived in the south of France.
It is, however, much to be regretted that M. Lartet was not
present when the place was first examined; and, under all
the circumstances, we cannot, I think, feel satisfied that the
human remains found in this cave were certainly coeval with
those of the extinct mammalia.
   Another remarkable case is that of the Hyzna-den at
                               WOKEY HOLE.                                       393

Wokey Hole, near Wells, which has been ably explored and
described by Mr. Boyd Dawkins*. In this instance the cave
was filled with débris up to the very roof, and it appears that
the accumulation of material was partly due to the disinte-
gration of the dolomitic conglomerate forming the roof and
walls of the cavern, and partly to the sediment washed in
gradually by rain and small streams. It is evident that the
bones and stones were not brought into the cave by the
action of water; firstly, because none of the bones are at all
rolled; secondly, because, though several rude flint imple-
ments were found in the cave, on/y one single unworked flint
was met with ; and thirdly, because, in some cases, fragments
of the same bone have been found close together, while, if
they had been brought from a distance, it is almost incredible
that they should have been again deposited close to one
another. Again, there are several layers—one over the other
—of album grzcum, that is to say, the excrement of hyzenas,
each of which indicates, of course, an old floor, and a separate
period of occupation; so that the presence of, at least, one
such floor above some of the flint implements, proves two
things; firstly, that the hyzenas which produced the album
greecum occupied the cave after the savages who used the
flint   instruments;       and, secondly,           that    these   implements
have not been disturbed by water since the period of the
hyena.
   During the last years of his life, Mr. Christy, whose death
has been so great a loss to science, examined, in conjunction
with M. Lartet, with great care a number of small caves and
rock-shelters in the Dordogne, some of which had already
attracted the attention of archeologistst.     These caves are
particularly interesting, because, so far, at least, as we can
judge from the present state of the evidence, the remains
  * Geol. Journal, May, 1862, p. 115.        Arts   en Périgord.    Par   M.   |’Abbé
  + De lOrigine et de !’Enfance des          Audierne.
                                        yy
324                 CAVES   IN THE DORDOGNE.

found in them belong to: M. Lartet’s reindeer period, and
tend, therefore, to connect the later Stone or Neolithic Age
with the period of the river-drifts and the great extinct
mamialia; representing a period about which we had pre-
viously very little information. Those which have been most
carefully examined are ten in number, viz. Laugerie, La
Madelaine, Les Hyzies, La Gorge d’Enfer, Le Moustier,
Liveyre, Pey de ’Azé, Combe-Granal, and Badegoule, most
of which I have myself had the advantage of visiting. Some
of these, as, for instance, Les Eyzies and Le Moustier, are at
a considerable height above the stream, but others—as those
at La Madelaine and Laugerie—are little above the present
flood-line, showing, therefore, that the level of the river is
now nearly the same as it was at tbe period during which
 these caves were inhabited.
   The rivers of the Dordogne run in deep valleys cut through
calcareous strata; and while the sides of the valleys in chalk
districts are generally sloping, in this case, owing probably
to the hardness of the rock, they are frequently vertical.
Small caves and grottoes frequently occur; besides which,
as the different strata possess unequal power of resistance
against atmospheric influences, the face of the rock is, as it
were, scooped out in many places, and thus “rock-shelters”
are produced. In very ancient times these caves and rock-
shelters were inhabited by men, who have left behind them
abundant evidences of their presence.       But as civilization
advanced, Man, no longer content with the natural but in-
convenient abode thus offered to him, excavated         chambers
for himself, and in places the whole face of the rock is honey-
combed with doors and windows leading into suites of rooms.
often in tiers one over another, so as to suggest the idea of a
French Petra. Down to a comparatively recent period, as, for
instance, in the troublous times of the Middle Ages, many of
these, no doubt, served as very efficient fortifications, and even
                    FAUNA    OF THE    DORDOGNE   CAVES.               32a

now some of them are still in use as storehouses, and for
other purposes, as, for instance, at Brantéme, where there is
an old chapel cut in the solid rock. Apart from the scientific
interest, it was impossible not to enjoy the beauty of the
scene which passed before our eyes as we dropped down
the Vezére.     As the river visited sometimes one side of
its valley, sometimes the other, so we had at one moment
rich meadow-lands         on each side, or found       ourselves close
to the perpendicular and almost overhanging cliff. Here
and there we came upon some picturesque old castle, and
though     the    trees   were   not   in full leaf, the rocks were     in
many     places   green     with box and ivy and evergreen            oak,
which harmonized well with the rich yellow brown of the
stone itself.
   But to return to the bone-caves.     Remains of the cave-
bear have been found at the Pey de l’Azé, of the cave-hyena
at Le Moustier, and separated plates of elephant molars have
occurred at Le Moustier and at Laugerie, accompanied at the
latter place by a piece of a pelvis. As regards the two first
species, MM. Christy and Lartet regard them as probably
belonging to an earlier period than the human remains found
in the same caves. The presence of the pelvis has been
regarded as an evidence of the contemporaneity of the mam-
moth with the remdeer hunters of Laugerie, and it is cer-
tainly difficult to see why they should have brought a fossil-
bone into their cave, more especially as the bones of ele-
phants, from the looseness of their texture, are not well
adapted for implements.      Still MM. Christy and Lartet do
not commit themselves to any opinion, having, as they say,
laid down “une loi de ne procéder dans nos inductions que
par évidences incontestables.”
   As regards the Felis spelew, ametacarpal bone belonging
probably to this species, and bearing marks                of knives, was
found in the cave of Les Eyzies.
326              ABSENCE    OF DOMESTIC     ANIMALS.

  Still, so far as the positive zoological evidence is con-
cerned, the antiquity of the human remains found in these
grottoes rests mainly on the presence of the reindeer, as
regards which the evidence is conclusive. The bones of this
species are all broken open for the marrow; many of them
bear the marks of knives, and at Les Hyzies a vertebra was
found which had been pierced by a flint flake. MM. Christy
and Lartet are quite satisfied that this bone must have been
fresh when it was thus transfixed.            Moreover, as we shall
presently see, there is still more conclusive evidence that
man and the reindeer were contemporaneous in this locality.
   But in its negative aspect the zoological evidence is also
very instructive. No remains have been found which, in the
opinion of MM. Christy and Lartet, can be referred to do-
mestic animals. It is true that bones of the ox and horse
occur, but there is no evidence that they belonged to domes-
ticated individuals.    Remains of the boar are very rare,
and if these animals had been domesticated we might have
expected to find them in greater abundance. The sheep and
goat are entirely wanting, and, what is still more remarkable,
even the dog appears to be absent.      At the same time the
bones of the horse and reindeer, especially of the latter, are
very numerous;   but MM. Christy and Lartet do not think
that they were domesticated.   On the other hand, M. Riiti-
meyer seems to be of a different opinion*. Of the bones
from the cave of Veyrier he has drawn out the following list:
Ptarmigan 81 individuals, reindeer 18, ibex 6, horse 5,
stag 4, mountain hare 4, marmot 4, chamois 1, wolf 1,
bear 1, ox 1, fox 1, and stork 1.          He points out that this
is decidedly an Alpine fauna, and he asks why, if the rein-
deer were wild, they did not retire into the high Alps with
the bear, the ibex, and the chamois?    The condition of the
bones, and especially of the horns, will enable us some day
                 * Revue Savoisienne, 25th April, 18€8.
                 FLINT     IMPLEMENTS     FOUND     IN CAVES.                Sy7/

to answer this question, but we have at present no case in
which the reindeer and the horse are held in domestication
together by the same race, and we must be satisfied to wait
for further evidence before the question can be decided.
   In the collections made by MM. Christy and Lartet, as
well as that of M. le Vicomte de Lastic from Bruniquel, a
very large proportion of the animal remains consists of teeth,
lower jaws, and horns.              Other bones do indeed occur, but
they form a small fraction of the whole. Yet we cannot
attribute this to the presence of dogs, partly because no
remains of this species have yet been discovered, partly
because the bones which remain have not been gnawed,
but principally because dogs eat only certain bones and parts
of bones, as a general rule selecting the spongy portions,
and rejecting the solid shafts.
   Mr. Galton has pointed out that some of the savage tribes
of Africa, not content with the flesh of the animals                    which
they kill, pound up also the bones in mortars,                     and then
suck out the animal              juices contained      in them.    So       also,
according to Leems, the Danish Laplanders used to break
up with a mallet all the bones which contained any fat or
marrow, and then boil them until all the fat was extracted*.
The Esquimaux also mash up the bones for the sake of the
marrow contained in themt+t. Some of the ancient stone
hammers and mortars were no doubt used for this purpose,
and the proportions of'the different bones afford us, I think,
indirect evidence that a similar custom prevailed among the
ancient inhabitants of Southern France.
   Passing on now to the flint implements found in these
caves, we must first call attention to their marvellous abun-
dance. Without any exaggeration they may be said to he
  * Account of Danish Lapland, by         p. 396.                       :
Leems,   Copenhagen,     1767.   Trans-     + Hall, Life with the Hsquimaux,
lated in Pinkerton’s Voyages, vol. i.     vol. ii, pp. 147. 176.
328            FLAKES.      SCRAPERS.      AWLS, ETC.

innumerable.     Of course this adds greatly to the value of
the conclusions; nor need it surprise us, because flint is
so brittle, that implements made of it must have been easily
broken, and, in that case, the fragments would be thrown
away as useless; especially in a chalk district, where the
supply of flint would, of course, be practically inexhaustible.
Many implements, no doubt, would be left unfinished, having
been rendered useless, either by some misdirected blow, or
some flaw in the flint. Moreover, we should naturally expect
that, in a bone-breccia of this nature, the flint implements
would be relatively more abundant than in a Kjékkenmdd-
ding. Hach oyster furnishes but a single mouthful, so that
the edible portions evidently form a greater proportion of the
whole in the mammalia than in the mollusca. The Kjdk-
kenméddings,    therefore, would grow,             ceteris paribus, more
rapidly than the bone-breccia, and supposing the flint imple-
ments to be equally numerous in both cases, they would, of
course, be more sparingly distributed in the former, than in
the latter.
   The principal objects of stone found in the bone-caves
which we are now considering, are flakes, both simple and
worked, scrapers, cores, awls, lance-heads, cutters, hammers,
and mortar-stones.
    The simple and worked flakes are, of course, very nume-
rous, but they do not call for any special observations. They
present the usual varieties of size and form.
    Though less numerous than the flakes, the scrapers* are
still very abundant.    On the whole they seem to me longer
and narrower than the usual Danish type. Some of them
were probably intended to be used in the hand, as both ends
are fashioned for scraping. These may be called double-
scrapers. Others were apparently fixed in handles, as the
end opposite to the scraper is broken, sometimes on one side,
                         * See ante, pp. 96, 97.
                  HAMMERS.        LANCE-HEADS.                  329

sometimes on both, so as to form a tapering extremity, which
may have been fixed in a handle either of wood, bone, or
horn. Many of the flakes are also nipped off at one end, in
the same manner. Perhaps, as no trace of sucha handle has
yet been discovered by MM. Christy and Lartet, wood was
the material used for this purpose.
   Of course, where there was a manufactory of flint flakes,
the cores or nuclei, from which they were struck, must also
be present. I was, however, astonished at the number of
them in these caves; during my short visit, I myself picked
out more than ninety.
                                Fig. 181.




                             Flint Implement.


  Awls ana saws are very much less frequent, but some few
good specimens have been found. At some of the stations,
curious flat implements (fig. 181) are met with. From the
constancy of their form, which, moreover, is somewhat pecu-
liar, we may safely infer that they were applied to some
definite purpose. For hammers, the reindeer hunters seem
to have used round stones, a good many of which occur in
the caves, and which bear unmistakable marks of the pur-
pose to which they were applied. Some of them, however,
may haye served also as heaters. The North American
Indians, the Esquimaux, and some other savages, having no
pottery, but only wooden vessels, which could not be put
on the fire, used to heat stones,           and then place them in
the water which they wished to boil.             Many of the stones
330         RELATIVE       ANTIQUITY       OF   THE    REMAINS.

found in these caverns appear to have been used in this
manner.

            Fie, 182.




                        Fiint Implement from Le Moustier.
  ‘hese, the commonest sorts of flint implements, are found
indiscriminately in all the grottoes, but there are some other
types which appear to be less generally distributed.     Thus,
at Laugerie and Badegoule, fragments of leaf-shaped lance-
                ABSENCE   OF POLISHED   IMPLEMENTS               331

heads, almost as well worked as some of those from Denmark,
are far from uncommon.      If, therefore, we were to attempt
any classification of the grottoes, according to the periods of
their occupation, we might be disposed to refer these to a
somewhat later period than most of the others. On the con-
trary, to judge from the flint implements, the station at Le
Moustier would be the-most ancient.              Though it would
perhaps be premature to attempt any             such classification,
there can be no doubt that Le Moustier presents some types
not yet found in the other caves, and resembling in some
respects those of the drift.
   One of these peculiar forms has one side left unchipped,
and apparently intended to be held in the hand, while the
other has a cutting edge, produced by a number of small
blows.   Some    of these instruments     are   of large size, and
they are supposed by MM. Christy and Lartet to have been
used for cutting wood, and perhaps also the large bones of
mammalia.    Another very interesting type is figured on p.
330 (figs. 182-4). This specimen is worked on both sides,
but more frequently one of them is left flat. MM. Christy
and Lartet regard this type as identical with the “ lance-
head’ implements found in the drift. I cannot altogether
agree with them in this comparison. Not only are the Le
Moustier specimens smaller, but the workmanship is different,
being much less bold. Moreover, the flat surface (A) is no
individual peculiarity. It is very frequently, not to say
generally, present, and occurs also on the similar implement
found by Mr. Boyd Dawkins in the hyzna-den at Wokey
Hole, and figured by him in the Geological Journal, May,
1862, No. 70, p. 119. This very interesting type seems
rather to be derived from the “cutters” above described, in
which case its resemblance to the drift forms would be acci-
dental and insignificant.     MM. Christy and Lartet, indeed,
call the implements of this type “lance-heads,” but it may
332                        BONE    IMPLEMENTS.

well be doubted whether they were intended for use in this
manner, though there are specimens at Le Moustier which
have all the appearance of having been intended for this
purpose. On the whole, then, although these Le Moustier
types are of great interest, we must pause before we regard
them as belonging to the drift forms.
   Doubtless, among the immense variety of forms presented
by the flint implements from these caves, further study will
distinguish other types, and we may fairly hope that it will
throw more light on the purposes for which they were
designed. No polished implements have yet been found in
any of these caverns. Yet the collection made by the late
M. Mourcin, in the neighbourhood of Perigueux, contains,
among 5025 objects of stone, no less than 3002 polished axes,
of which, however, many are imperfect.
   The station at Moustier has not as yet produced any im-
plements made of bone, but a good many have been obtained
from the other caves. ‘‘ They consist of square chisel-shaped
wmplements ; round, sharply-pointed, awl-like tools, some of
which also may have served as the spike of a fish-hook ; har-
poon-shaped lance-heads; plain or barbed arrow-heads with
many      and   double barbs, cut         with wonderful vigour; and
lastly, eyed needles of compact bone finely pointed, polished,
and drilled with round eyes, so small and regular that some
of the most assured and acute believers in all the other find-
ings might well doubt whether they could indeed have been
drilled with stone, until their repetition by the hand of that
practical and conscientious observer, Monsieur Lartet, by the
very stone implements found with them, has dispelled their
honest doubts*.”?         Moreover,      we must remember         that the
New Zealanders were able with their stone tools to drill
holes even through glass ft.
      So far, then (with the exception, perhaps, of the well-
 * Christy, Trans. Ethn. Soc., N. S. vol. iii.   + Cook’s First Voy. p. 464.
                  REPRESENTATIONS        OF ANIMALS.                     3390

worked lance-heads of Laugerie and Badegoule), all the evi-
dence we have yet obtained from these caves points to a very
primitive period, earlier even than that of the first Swiss
lake-villages, or Danish shell-mounds.     No fragments of
metal or pottery have yet been found which can be referred
with confidence to the Reindeer period.
  But there is one class of objects in these caves which,
taken alone, would have led us to a very different conclusion.
No representation, however rude, of any animal has yet been
                                  Fis. 185.




                              Drawing of a Fish.
found in any of the Danish shell-mounds, or the Stone-age
lake-villages. Even on objects of the Bronze Age, they are
so rare, that it is doubtful whether a single well authen-
                                                   ticated instance could
                                                   be produced. Yet, in
                                                   these archaic bone-
                                                   caves, many very fair
                                                   sketches have been
                                                   found,    scratched   on
                                                   bone or stone with a
                                                   sharp point, probably
                                                   of a flint implement.
                                                   In some cases there is
            aes cia                                even an attempt at
shading.    In the Annales         des Sciences Naturelles*, M.
Lartet had already made known to us some rude drawings
found in the Caye of Savigné, and in his last memoir he has
described   and    figured    some      more       objects    of a similar
character.
   In the Dordogne caves also, several of these remarkable
                   * Ann. des Sc. Nat., 1861, vol. xv.
                                SCULPTURE.                               335

of a mammoth’s tusk, and indications of long hair will readily
be perceived.
   Another interesting specimen is a poniard, cut out of a
reindeer’s horn (fig. 189).      The artist has ingeniously
adapted the position of the animal to the necessities of the
cease. The horns are thrown back on the neck, the fore-legs
are doubled up under~the belly, and the hind-legs are
stretched out along the blade. Unfortunately the poniard
seems to have been thrown away before it was quite finished,
but several of the details indicate that the animal was in-
tended for a reindeer. Although it is natural to fecl some
surprise at finding these works of art, still there are in-
stances among recent savages of a certain skill in drawing
and sculpture being accompanied by an entire ignorance of
metallurgy. This is particularly the case with the Esquimaux,
some of whose drawings will be given in a future chapter.
                                  Fic. 189,




                              Handle of a Poniard.


   In considering the probable condition of these ancient
Cave-men, we must give them full credit for their love of
art, such as it was; while, on the other hand, the want of
metal, ot polished flint implements, and even of pottery*;
the ignorance of agriculture, and the apparent absence of all
domestic animals, including even the dog, certainly imply
a very low state of civilization, and a very considerable
antiquity.
   * Pottery is, however, veryrarein      and is not by any means abundant in
the remains of the Irish Crannoges,       the Danish shell-mounds.
336             HABITS   OF THE   CAVE-DWELLERS.

   There is also evidence that a considerable change of
climate must have taken place. The reindeer is the most
abundant animal, and evidently formed the principal article
of food, while we know that this species is now confined to
arctic climates, and could not exist in the south of France.
Again, the ibex and the chamois, both of which are now
restricted to the snowy summits of the Alps and Pyrenees,
and a species of spermophilus, also point to the same con-
clusion. The presence of the two former species in some of
the Swiss lake-dwellings is not equally significant, because
they are in the neighbourhood of high mountains, while
the highest hills of the Dordogne do not reach to an alti-
tude of much more than 800 feet.
   Another very interesting species recently determined
by M. lartet, is the Antilope Saigo of Pallas, which
now   abounds   on the    Steppes   of North       Hastern   Hurope
and Western Asia, in the plains of the Dnieper and the
Volga, round the shores of the Caspian, and as far as the
Altai Mountains.      Mr. Christy tells us that the northern
plains of Poland, and the Valley of the Dnieper, are the
southern limits of this species at the present day.
   Again, the accumulation of animal remains in these caves
is itself, as Mr. Christy has ingeniously suggested, a good
evidence of change in the climate.         We know that the
Esquimaux at present allow a similar deposit to take place
in thew dwellings, but this can only be done in Arctic
regions ; in such a climate as that now existing in the south
of France, such an accumulation would, except of course in
the depth of winter, soon become intolerably offensive.
   So far then as the present evidence is concerned, it appears
to indicate a race of men living almost as some of the Esqui-
maux do now, and as the Laplanders did a few hundred
years ago; and a period intermediate between that of the
Polished Stone implements and of the great extinct mam-
                             HUMAN    REMAINS.                        837


malia: apparently also somewhat more ancient than that of
the shell-mound builders of Denmark. But if these Cave-
men shall eventually be shown to have been contemporaneous
with the cave-tiger, the cave-bear, the cave-hyzna, and the
mammoth, remains of which have been found in doubtful
association with them, then, indeed, they must be referred to
an even more remote period.
   As regards the Cave-men themselves, we have, unfortu-
nately, but very little information.     For, although frag-
mentary human bones have been frequently found, there are,
as yet, very few cases on record in which the caves have
furnished us with skulls in such a condition as to allow of
restoration.   It is, however, remarkable that these few differ
greatly among themselves. Some are dolichocephalic or long-
headed, others brachycephalic or shortheaded.       One of the
most interesting, that discovered by Dr. Schmerling in the
cave of Engis, near Liége (figs. 190, 191), might have been
that of a modern European, so far at least as form is con-
cerned.    ‘There is no mark of degradation about any part
of its structure.      It is, in fact, a fair average human       skull,
which might have belonged to a philosopher, or might have
contained the thoughtless brains ofa savage*.” Very different
is the case with the celebrated skull, found in a limestone
cave in the Neanderthal, near Hochdal, between Diisseldorf
and Elberfeld.      This remarkable specimen was first described
by Schaafhausent, and “under whatever aspect,” says Prof.
Huxley t, “we view this cranium, whether we regard its ver-
tical depression, the enormous thickness of its supraciliary
ridges, its sloping occiput, or its long and straight squamosal
suture, we meet with ape-like characters, stamping it as the
most pithecoid of human crania yet discovered.” It has been
suggested that this Neanderthal skull may have been that of
 * Huxley, Man’s    Place in Nature, p. 156.
 } Muller’s Archiv., 1858.    Nat. Hist. Rev., 1S61.   Be tes yaks Maher,
                                                         Z
338                         THE ENGIS   SKULL.

an idiot.   There is not, however, any sufficient reason for this
                                                         hypothesis;
                                                         and   though
                                                         the shape of
                                                         the skull is
                                                         so   remark-
                                                         able,         the
                                                         brain appears
                                                         to have been
                                                         of consider-
                                                         able size, and,
                                                         indeed, is esti-
                                                         mated by Pro-
                                                         fessor Huxley
                                                         at      about
                                                         seventy-five
                                                         cubic      inches,
                                                         which is the
                                                         average capa-
                                                         city of the
                                                         Polynesian
                                                         and Hotten-
                                                 tot skulls. It must,
                                                 however, be admitted
                                                 that though the anti-
                                                 quity of this skull is
                                                 no doubt great, there
                                                 is no satisfactory proof
                                                 that it belonged to the
                                                 period of the extinct
                                                 Mammalia.         More-
                  Tize Engis Skull,
                                                 over,   as   Mr.     Busk
                                                 pointed out*, and as
                    * Nat. Hist. Rey., 1861, p. 172.
THE NEANDERTHAL          SKULL.   359




     ‘The Neanderthal Skull.

           z 2
340                         CAVE MEN.

Dr. Barnard Davis maintains, “we have yet to determine whe-
ther the conformation in question be merely an individual
peculiarity, or a typical character.”” Recent researches have
brought to light at Cro Magnon*, in the Dordogne, an inter-
ment which has been referred, though scarcely, perhaps, on
sufficient grounds, to the Reindeer period, and which com-
prises dolichocephalic skulls of a type very different to that of
the Belgian caves ; and Professor Owen has described a human
skull from Bruniquel, whichis oval, rather dolicho- than brachy-
cephalic, and shows most affinity with the oldest Celtic types.
It would appear then that, even at this early period, Kurope
was already occupied by more than one race of man.
   Thus, as regards the Engis skull, there seems no reason to
doubt that it really belonged to a man who was contempora-
neous with the mammoth, the cave-bear, and other extinct
mamumalia; yet it is a perfectly well developed skull, so that,
as Professor Huxley has well-pointed out, “the first traces
of the primordial stock whence man has proceeded need no
longer be sought, by those who entertain any form of the
doctrme of progressive development, in the newest ter-
tiaries ; but that they may be looked for in an epoch more
distant from the age of the Elephas primigenius than that is
from us.”
   If space permitted, I would gladly have referred to other
cave explorations ; to those, for instance, of Dr. Regnoli and
others in Italy, of the Marquis de Vibraye, M. Garrigon, M.
Bourguignet, M. Filhol, and many other archeologists in the
south of France, where these researches           have   been prose-
cuted with great energy       and    success.     In fact, a whole
volume might be written on the subject, and it is impossible
in the limits of a single chapter to do justice to these and
other observers.
   I trust, however that the evidence brought forward in this
                  * Reliquiee Aquitanices, part vi.
                          CAVE   MEN.                      3841

chapter has been sufficient to prove that the presence, in
bone-caves, of ancient implements and human remains, asso-
ciated with those of extinct mammalia, is no rare or excep-
tional phenomenon.     Nor, if we look at the question from a
scientific point of view, is there any thing in this that ought
to excite our astonishment.     Since the period at which these
caves were filled up, the changes which have taken place
have resulted rather in the extinction than in the creation of
species. The stag, the horse, the boar, the dog, in short, all
our existing forms of mammalia, were already in existence ;
and there would have been in reality more just cause for
surprise if man alone had been unrepresented.
                              342




                      CHAPTER XI.

                  RIVER-DRIFT GRAVEL-BEDS.

       HILE we have been straining our eyes to the East,
         and eagerly watching excavations in Egypt and
Assyria, suddenly a new light has arisen in the midst of us;
and the oldest relics of man yet discovered have occurred,
not among the ruims of Nineveh or Heliopolis, not on the
sandy plains of the Nile or the Euphrates, but in the
pleasant valleys of England and France, along the banks
of the Seine and the Somme, the Thames and the Waveney.
   So unexpected were these discoveries, so irreconcilable
with even the greatest antiquity until lately assigned to the
human race, that they were long regarded with neglect and
suspicion. M. Boucher de Perthes, to whom we are so much
indebted for this great step in the history of mankind, ob-
served, as long ago as the year 1841, in some sand contain-
ing mammalian    remains,   at Menchecourt,   near Abbeville,
a flint, rudely fashioned into a cutting instrument.    In the
following years other weapons were found under similar cir-
cumstances, and especially during the formation of the Champ
de Mars at Abbeville, where   a large quantity of gravel was
moved and many of the so-called “hatchets” were dis-
covered. In the year 1846 M. Boucher de Perthes published
his first work on the subject, entitled “De !’Industrie Primi-
tive, ow les Arts et leur Origine.” In this he announced
that he had found human implements in beds unmistakably
te (QC jo   PRL
                  M. BOUCHER    DE PERTHES.                  343

belonging to the age of the drift. In his “ Antiquités
Celtiques et Antédiluviennes” (1847), he also gave numerous
illustrations of these stone weapons, but unfortunately the
figures were rude, and did but scanty justice to the originals.
For seven years M. Boucher de Perthes made few converts ;
he was looked upon as an enthusiast, almost as a madman.
At length, in 1853, Dr. Rigollot, till then sceptical, examined
for himself the drift beds at the now celebrated St. Acheul, near
Amiens, found several weapons, and believed.        Still the new
creed met with but little favour; prophets are proverbially
without honour in their own country, and M. Boucher de
Perthes was no exception to the rule.     At last, however, the
tide turned in his favour.     In 1859 Dr. Falconer, passing
through Abbeville, examined his collection, and on his return
to England called the attention of Mr. Prestwich, Mr. Evans,
and other English geologists, to the importance of his dis-
coveries.   In consequence, the Valley of the Somme was
visited in 1859 and 1860, firstly, by Messrs. Prestwich and
Evans, and shortly afterwards by Sir C. Lyell, Sir R. Mur-
chison, Messrs. Busk, Flower, Mylne, Godwin-Austen, and
Galton; Professors Henslow, Ramsay, Rogers; Messrs. H.
Christy, Rupert Jones, James Wyatt, myself, and other geo-
logists. M. L’ Abbé Cochet, therefore, in his ‘Rapport adressé
i Monsieur   le Sénateur Préfet de la Seine-Inférieure,” does
no more than justice to our countrymen, when after a well-
merited tribute of praise to M. Boucher de Perthes and Dr.
Rigollot, he adds, “Mais ce sont les Géologues Anglais, en
téte desquels il faut placer d’abord MM. Prestwich et Hyans
     . qui.... ont fini par élever & la dignité de fait
See la découverte de M. Boucher de Perthes.”
  My visit to the Somme Valley was made in company with
Mr. Busk, Captain Galton, and Mr. Prestwich, and I com-
municated the results to the Natural History Review, in an
article “On the Evidence of the Antiquity of Man        afforded.
O44                MR. PRESTWICH       AND MR. EVANS.

by the Physical Structure of the Somme Valley *.”                    I have
seen no reason to modify the general conclusions contained
in that article, of which, indeed, this chapter is in the main a
reprint.
   We examined carefully not only the flint weapons, but also
the beds in which they were found.           For such an investigation,
indeed, our two countrymen were especially qualified: Mr.
Prestwich, from his long study and profound knowledge of
the tertiary and quaternary strata; and Mr. Evans, from his
intimate acquaintance with the stone implements belonging
to what we must now consider as the second, or at least the
more recent, Stone period.            On their return to England Mr.
Prestwich communicated the results of his visit to the Royal
Society+, while Mr. Evans described the implements them-
selves in the Transactions of the Society of Antiquaries +.
   Soon after his first visit, Mr. Prestwich addressed a com-
munication to the Academy of Sciences, through M: Blie de
Beaumont, in which he urged the importance of these dis-
coveries, and expressed a hope that they would stimulate
“les géologues de tous les pays 4 une étude encore plus
approfondie des terrains quaternaires.” The subject being
thus brought prominently before the geologists of Paris,
M. Gaudry, well known for his interesting researches in
Greece, was sent to examine the weapons themselves, and
the localities im which they were found.
   M. Gaudry was so fortunate as to find several flint weapons
an situ, and his report, which entirely confirmed the state-
ments made by M. Boucher de Perthes, led others to visit

   * On the Evidence of the Anti-       plements associated with the Re-
quity of Man afforded by the Physi.     mains of Extinct Species, in Beds of
cal Structure of the Somme Valley.      a late Geological Period, May 19,
By J. Lubbock, Esq., F.R.S. With        1859. Phil. Trans. 1860.
Plate vii. Natural History Review,         t Flint Implements in the Drift.
vol. ii.                                Archzologia, 1860-62.
  + On the Occurrence of Flint Im-
               MR. FRERE’S    DISCOVERY   IN 1800.            345

the valley of the Somme, among whom I may mention MM.
de Quatrefages, Lartet, Collomb, Hébert, de Verneuil, and
G. Pouchet.
   In the “ Antiquités Celtiques,” M. Boucher de Perthes
suggested some gravel-pits near Grenelle at Paris, as being,
from their position and appearance, likely places to contain flint
implements. M. Gosse shortly afterwards found flint imple-
ments in these pits, being the first discovery of this nature in
the valley of the Seine, while in that of the Oise, a small
hatchet has been found by M. Peigné Delacourt, at Précy,
near Creil.
   Nor have these discoveries been confined to France. There
has long been in the British Museum a rude stone weapon,
described as follows :—“No. 246.       A British weapon, found
with elephant’s tooth, opposite to black Mary’s, near Grayes
inn Jane. Conyers. It is a large black flint, shaped into the
figure of a spear’s point.”     Mr. Evans    tells us, moreover,
(l.c. p. 22) “that a rude engraving of it illustrates a letter
on the Antiquities of London, by Mr. Bagford, dated 1715,
printed in Hearne’s edition of Leland’s Collectanea, vol. i. 6,
p. lxiii. From his account it seems to have been found with
a skeleton of an elephant in the presence of Mr. Conyers.”
This most interesting weapon agrees exactly with some of
those found in the valley of the Somme.
  Mr. Evans, on his return from Abbeville, observed in the
museum belonging to the Society of Antiquaries, some spe-
cimens exactly like those in the collection of M. Boucher de
Perthes. On examination, it proved that they had been
presented by Mr. Frere, who found them with bones of
extinct animals in a gravel-pit at Hoxne in Suffolk, and had
well described and figured them in the Archzologia for the
year 1800. This communication is of so much interest that
I have thought it desirable to reproduce his figures, reduced
one-half (figs. 195-198).
346           SIMILAR DISCOVERIES            ELSEWHERE.

   Again, twenty-five years ago, Mr. Whitburn, of Godal-
ming*, while examining the gravel-pits between Guildford
and Godalming, remarked a peculiar flint, which he carried
away, and has since preserved in his collection. It belongs
to the “drift” type, but is very rude. Thus, this peculiar
type of flint implement has been actually found in association
with the bones of the mammoth on various occasions during

                 Fie,   195,                                Fre. 196.




                        Flint Implement from Hoxne.


nearly a hundred and fifty years!               While, however, these
instances remarkably corroborate the statements made by
M. Boucher de Perthes, they in no way detract from the
credit due to that gentleman.
               * Prestwich, Geol. Jour, August, 1861.
         SIMILAR    DISCOVERIES       IN OTHER        COUNTRIES.                347

  In addition to the above-mentioned, similar hatchets have
been found in various other localities, as for instance by

                   Fre, 197,                                       Fre.   198




                        Flint Implement frem Hoxne.


Mr. Warren, at Icklingham ; by Mr. Leech, near Herne Bay ;
by Mr. Evans himself at Abbot’s Langley; by Mr. Norman
348                           ASSYRIA.     INDIA.

at Green Street Green, in Kent; by Messrs. Whitaker and
Hughes, near Dartford; in fact, similar discoveries have been
made in most of our south-eastern counties.
    In the gravel near Bedford, again associated with the
remains     of the mammoth,            rhinoceros,     hippopotamus,         ox,
horse, and     deer,   Mr. Wyatt*         has   found       flint implements
resembling both of the two principal types found at Abbe-
ville and Amiens.  This case is very interesting, because it
shows that the drift flint hatchets are subsequent to the
boulder clay; the Bedford valley being cut through hills
capped by a deposit of that period.             At Hoxne, also, the bed
containing flint implements appears actually to rest on the
boulder clay.
   The number of localities on the Continent in which stone
implements have been obtained from beds of the Quaternary
period has also largely increased.
    Stone implements more or less resembling those charac-
teristic of the Paleolithic Age, have also been found in other
parts of the world, as for instance, in Assyria, North America,
 and Hindostan; though except in the latter case we have no
 reason for attributing to them any very great antiquity.
The Indian specimens have been described by Mr. Bruce
Foote+: they were found in the Madras and North Arcot
districts, and are of quartzite, and in several cases were
found by Messrs. Foote and King in sitw at depths of
from 3 to 10 feet. The specimens figured (figs. 199, 200)
will show how closely they resemble our European specimens,
and it is interesting that in the words of Mr. Foote, “the
area, over which the lateritie formations were spread, has
undergone, as already stated, great changes since their

  * Flint Implements in the Drift.         + On the Occurrence of Stone im.
By J. Wyatt.   Bedfordshire   Archi-     plements in lateritic formations in va-
tectural and Archzological Society,      rious parts of the Madras   and North
1862,                                    Arcot Districts.    By R. Bruce Foote.
         ANTIQUITY   AS SHOWN      BY PHYSICAL        GEOGRAPHY.   349

deposition. A great part of the formation has been ro-
moved by denudation, and deep valleys cut into them, now
occupied by the alluvium of various rivers*.” Unfortunately
no bones have yet been found in these beds. Worked agates
have also been found in the deposits of the Nerbudda, and
                                 Fra. 199.




                      Stone Implement fromm Madras,


in the bone-beds of the upper Godavery, “which are, there
is little doubt, the same age as those of the Nerbudda, which
contain Elephas insignis, LD. Namadieus, Hippopotanus pale-
indicus, Bos palceinidicus, and B. Numadicus +.”
 * 1s Cp. 2c.           + Blandford, Geol. Magazine, February, 1866.
350               ANTIQUITY    AS SHOWN           BY

   The specimens found in the Somme Valley are, as I shall
endeavour to show, connected with the present river system,
and the same was the case with those first discovered in
England. Further researches, however, have brought to
light cases in which flint implements have been found in beds
                               Bie, 200.




                   Stone Implement from Madras.


of gravel having no relation to the existing river systems.
Mr. Flower has called attention to several of these in our
eastern counties, and I have had the advantage of visiting
them with him. The Shrub Hill gravel-bed, for instance, is
alow mound of gravel of about fifteen feet thick, rising in
the middle of the fen near Ely, and surrounded on all sides
                      PHYSICAL     GEOGRAPHY,               351

by a low flat district. Yet in this bed, and especially in the
lowest part of it, numerous flint implements of the palzo-
lithic types have been discovered.
   Some of the Hampshire specimens also have been found
in situ, ina mass of drift gravel which covers the Tertiary
beds, and is intersected by all the streams which now run
into the Southampton water. This mass of drift gravel,
moreover, is not confined to the mainland, but caps also the
Foreland Cliffs on the east of the Isle of Wight, where an
oval flint implement has recently been discovered by Mr. T.
Codrmgton. As Mr. Evans has pointed out, we seem, in
this discovery, to have clear evidence that man existed in
this country before the Southampton water was formed, or
the Isle of Wight was separated from the mainland, and we
may therefore regard these implements as among the most
striking proofs of Man’s Antiquity, which they carry back to
a period far more ancient than that which had previously been
assigned to him.
   We cannot therefore wonder that the statement by Mr.
Frere has been distrusted for more than half a century; that
the weapon found by Mr. Conyers has lain unnoticed           for
more   than double that    time;    that the discoveries by M.
Boucher de Perthes have been ignored for fifteen years ; that
the numerous cases in which caves have contained the
remains of men together with those of extinct animals have
been suppressed or explained away: these facts show how
deeply rooted was the conviction that man belonged alto-
gether to a more recent order of things; and whatever other
accusation may be brought against them, geologists can at
least not be said to have hastily accepted the theory of the
co-existence of the human race with the now extinct Pachy-
dermata of Western Europe.
  Though, however, geologists are now almost unanimous
as to the great antiquity of these curious weapons, still, it is
352               THE QUESTIONS     AT ISSUE.

not necessary that they should be received as judges; I only
propose to summon them as witnesses.
   The questions to be decided may be stated as follows :—
   Ist. Are the so-called flit implements of human work-
manship ?
   2ndly. Are the flint implements of the same age as the
beds in which they are found, and the bones of the extinct
animals with which they occur ?
   3rdly. What are the conditions under which these beds
were deposited? And how far are we justified in imputing
to them a great antiquity?
   To the first two of these questions an affirmative answer
would be given by almost every geologist who has paid any
special attention to the subject.    Fortunately, however, for
the sake of the discussion, there is one exception. Black-
wood’s Magazine for October, 1860, contains an able article
in which the last two questions are maintained to be still
unanswered, and in which, therefore, a verdict of ‘ Not
Proven” is demanded.      Not, indeed, that there is any dif-
ference of opinion as to the weapons themselves.       “They
bear,” admits the writer (p. 438), “unmistakably the indica-
tions of haying been shaped by the skill of man.”       ‘For
more than twenty years,’ says another competent wit-
ness—Prof. Ramsay—“ I have daily handled stones, whether
fashioned by nature or art, and the flint hatchets of Amiens
and Abbeville seem to me as clearly works of art as any
Sheffield whittle*.” But best of all, an hour or two spent in
examining the forms of ordinary flint gravel, would,     Iam
sure, convince any man that these stones, rude though they
be, were undeniably fashioned by the hand of man.
   Still it might be supposed that they were forgeries made
by ingenious workmen to entrap unwary geologists.      They
have, however, been actually found by Messrs. Boucher de
                   * Athenzum, July 16, 1859.
         EVIDENCE DERIVABLE FROM THE FLINTS THEMSELVES.       353

Perthes, Henslow, Christy, Flower, Wyatt, Evans, myself, and
others, under circumstances which preclude all idea of decep-
tion. One seen, though not found by himself in situ, is thus
described by Mr. Prestwich: “it was lying flat in the gravel
at a depth of seventeen feet from the original surface, and six
and a half feet from the chalk. One side slightly projected.
The gravel around was undisturbed, and presented its usual
perpendicular face. I carefully examined the specimen, and
saw no reason to doubt that it was in its natural position, for
the gravel is generally so loose, that a blow with a pick
disturbs and brings it down for some way round; and the
matrix is too little adhesive to admit of its being built up
again as before with the same materials. .... T found also
afterwards, on taking ont the flint, that it was the thinnest
side which projected, the other side being less finished and
much thicker*.”      But evidence of this nature, though in-
teresting, is unnecessary; the flints speak for themselves.
Many of them are more or less rolled or worn at the edges.
Those which have lain in siliceous or chalky sands are more
or less polished and have a beautiful glossiness of surface,
very unlike that of a newly-broken flint. In ochreous sand,
“ especially if argillaceous, they are stained yellow, whilst in
ferruginous sands and clays they assume a brown colour,”
and in some beds they become white and porcellaneous.
In many    cases, moreover,     they have incrustations of carbo-
nate of lime and small dendritic markings.          The freshly-
broken    chalk flints, on the contrary, are of a dull black or
leaden colour ; they vary a little in darkness but not in colour,
and do not present white or yellow faces; moreover, the
new surfaces are dead, and want the glossiness of those which
have been long exposed. It is almost unnecessary to say,
that they have no dendritic markings, nor are they encrusted
by carbonate of lime.
                     * Phil. Trans. 1860, p. 292.
354                    THE FORGERIES.

  Now the forgeries—for there are forgeries—differ from the
genuine implements by just those characters which distin-
guish newly-broken flints from those which have lain long in
sand or gravel, or exposed to atmospheric agencies. They
are black; never white or yellow; their surfaces are not
glossy, but dull and lustreless, and they have no dendritic
markings or incrustations. Nor would it be possible for an
ingenious rogue to deceive us by taking a stained flint and
fashioning it into a hatchet; because the discoloration of
the flint is quite superficial, seldom more than a quarter of
an inch in thickness, and follows the outline of the present
surface, showing that the change of colour was subsequent to
the manufacture; while if such a flint were tampered with,
the fraud would be easily detected, as each blow would re-
move part of the outer coating, and expose the black flint
inside, as may be seen in pl. 1, fig. 11.
   Moreover, it must be remembered, that when M. Boucher de
Perthes’ work was published, the weapons therein described
were totally unlike any of those familiar to archeologists.
Since that time, however, not only have similar implements
been found both in England, France, and other countries,
but, as already mentioned, it has since come to light that
similar weapons were in two cases actually described and
fisured in England many years ago, and that in both these
instances they were found in association with the bones of
extinct animals.   On this point, therefore, no evidence could
be more conclusive.
   We may, then, pass on to the second subject, and consider,
Whether the Flint implements are as old as the beds in which
they occur, and as the remains of extinct mammalia with
which they are associated.
   It has been suggested by some writers, that though they
are really found in the mammaliferous gravel, they may be
comparatively recent, and belong really to the Neolithic or
          CHARACTER      OF THE    TRUE    DRIFT   IMPLEMENTS.        355

later Stone Age, but have gradually sunk down from above
by their own weight, or perhaps have been buried in arti-
ficial excavations.     There are, however, no cracks or fissures
by which the hatchets could have reached their present
positions, and the strata are “altogether too compact and
immovable to admit of any such insinuation or percolation
of surface objects*.” Nor could any ancient excavations
have been made and filled in again without leaving evident
traces of the change. Moreover, we may in this case also
appeal to the flint implements themselves, which, as we have
already seen, agree in colour and appearance with the gravel
in which they occur ; and it seems, therefore, only reasonable
to infer that they have been subjected to the same influences.
Moreover, if they belonged to the later Stone period, and had
found their way by any accident into these gravels, then they
ought to correspond with the other flint implements of the
Stone period. But this is not the case. The flakes, indeed,
offer no peculiarities of form.      Similar splinters of flint, or
obsidian, have been used in the absence of metal by savage
tribes in almost all ages and all countries. The other imple-
ments, on the contrary, are very characteristic.         They are
almost always made of flint, whereas many other minerals,
such, for instance, as serpentine, jade, clayslate, etc., were
used in the later Stone Age. Their forms are also peculiar ;
some are oval (pl. 1, fig. 11), chipped up to an edge all round,
and from two to eight or nine inches in length. A second
type is also oval, but somewhat pointed at one end (pl. 1,
fig. 10, and figs. 195, 196). Others again (figs. 197, 198)
have a more or less heavy butt at one end and are pointed
at the other. Mr. Evans regards these+ as having served
as spear or lance heads. He treats as a mere variety of this
type those implements in which the cutting end is rounded
off but not pointed. Some of these, however, were evidently
        * Blackwood, l. c.                     + 1. c. 1860, p. 11.
                                  Aa   2
856           DRIFT   IMPLEMENTS   NEVER   GROUND.

intended to be held in the hand, and probably served a dif-
ferent purpose; they may, I think, fairly be considered as a
fourth type, though it must be confessed that all these types
run very much into one another, and in any large collection
many intermediate forms may be found. The smaller endis,
in all cases, the one adapted for cutting, while the reverse is
almost invariably the case in the oval celts of the Neolithic
Stone Age (figs. 97 and 98).
   Again, the flint implements of the drift are never polished
or ground, but are always left rough. We may safely esti-
mate that five thousand at least have been already found in
the drift gravels of England and France, and of this large
number there is not one which shows a trace of polishing or
grinding; while we know that the reverse was almost always
the case with the celts of the later Stone period. It is true
that the latter is not an invariable rule; thus, in Denmark
there are two forms of so-called “axes” which are left rough
—namely, the small triangular axes of the Kjékkenméddings
(figs. 108-110) which are invariably so, and the large square-
sided axes with which this is often the case. But these two
forms of implements resemble in no other way those which
are found in the drift, and could not for a moment be mis-
taken for them. It is not going too far to say, that there is
not a single well-authenticated instance of a “ celt ” being
found in the drift, or of an implement of the drift type being
discovered either in a tumulus, or associated with remains of
the later Stone Age.
   It is useless to speculate upon the use made of these rude
yet venerable weapons.       Almost as well might we ask, to
what use could they not be applied? Numerous and spe-
cialized as are our modern instruments, who could describe
the exact use of a knife? But the primitive savage had
no such choice of weapons; we see before us perhaps the
whole contents of his workshop; and with these implements,
                       SCARCITY OF HUMAN        BONES.                  357

rude    as they seem         to us, he may have cut down trees,
scooped them out into canoes, grubbed up roots, attacked his
enemies, killed and cut up his food, made holes through the
ice in winter, prepared firewood, etc.
   The almost entire absence of human bones, which has ap-
peared to some so inexplicable as to throw a doubt on the
whole question, is, on consideration, less extraordinary than
it might at first sight appear to be. If, for instance, we turn
to other remains of human settlements, we shall find a
repetition of the same phenomenon.     Thus in the Danish
shell-mounds, where worked flints are by far more plentiful
than in the St. Acheul gravel, human bones are of the
greatest rarity, only one piece in fact having ever been
found. At that period, as in the Drift age, mankind lived
by hunting and fishing, and could not, therefore, be very
numerous.        In the era, however, of the Swiss Lake-habi-
tations, the case was different.            M. Troyon estimates         the
population of the “ Pfahlbauten”’ during the Stone Age at
about 82,000; in the Bronze era, 42,000.  On these calcu-
lations, indeed, even their ingenious author would not
probably place much reliance; still the number of the Lake-
villages already known is very considerable; in four of the
Swiss lakes only, more than seventy have been discovered,
and some of them were of great extent: Wangen, for in-
stance, being, according to M. Lohle, supported on more than
50,000 piles. Yet, if we exclude a few bones of children,
human remains have been obtained from these settlements in
six cases only. The number of flint implements obtained
hitherto from the drift of the Somme valley probably does
not much exceed 5000*; the settlement at Concise alone
(Lake of N euchatel) has supplied about 24,000, and yet has

   * One of the tumuli in the Missis-    implements.    This, however, must
sippi Valley isestimated to have alone   have been a very exceptional case.
contained nearly four thousand stone
358              SCARCITY     OF MEN IN ANCIENT TIMES.

not produced a single human skeleton*.        Probably this
absence of bones is in part attributable to the habit of
burying or burning; the instinct of man has long been in
most cases to bury his dead out of his sight. Still, so far as
the drift of St. Acheul is concerned, the difficulty will alto-
gether disappear, if we remember that no trace has ever yet
been found of any animal as small as a man. Hyven of the ele-
phant and rhinoceros, the ox, horse, and stag}, only the larger
and more solid bones remain; every vestige of the smaller
ones has perished. No one supposes that this scanty list
fairly represents the mammalian fauna of this time and place.
When we find at St. Acheul the remains of the wolf, boar,
roedeer, badger, and other animals which existed during the
drift period, then, and not till then, we may perhaps begin
to wonder at the entire absence of human skeletons.
   We must also remember that when man lived on    the
produce of the chase there must have been a very large
number of wild animals to each hunter. Among the Lap-
landers, 100 reindeer is the smallest number on which a man
can subsist, and no one is considered rich who does not pos-
sess at least from 300 to 500.            But these are domesticated,
and a large supply of nourishment is derived                      from their

  * Rapport    & la Commission     des    them in preference to all others, nay,
Musées, October, 1861, p. 16.             almost exclusively, in the manufac-
  + The bones of the stag owe their       ture of those instruments which
preservation perhaps      to another      could be made of bone (Fauna der
cause.   Prof. Riitimeyer tells us that   Pfahlbauten, p. 12). How common
among the bones from the Pfahl-           the bones of the stag are in quater-
bauten none are in better condition       nary strata, geologists know, and.we
than those of the stag: this is the       have here, perhaps, an explanation of
consequence, he says, of their “ dich-    the fact. The antler of the reindeer
ten Gefiige, ihrer Harte und Sprédig-     is also preferred at the present day
keit, so wie der grossen Fettlosig-       by the Esquimaux in the manufac-
keit,” peculiarities which recom-         ture of their stone weapons.   (Sir BH.
mended them so strongly to the men        Belcher, Trans. Ethn. Soc. vol. i. p.
of the Stone Age, that they used          139.)
            PROPORTION        OF MEN             TO OTHER                      ANIMALS.                   359

milk, In the case of wild animals we may safely assume
that a much larger number would be necessary. The Hud-
son’s Bay territory is said to comprise about 900,000,000
acres.  The number of Indians is estimated at 139,000.
Allowing one wild animal to each twenty acres, this would
give about 300 animals to each Indian; and, if we consider
the greater longevity of man, we must multiply this by six,
or even more.
   Or again, we may attempt to form an estimate in the
followmg manner.      The number of skins received by the
Hudson’s Bay Company in 1866 amounted to 1,250,000,
made up as follows:
          ipeaver™  cop’.   0) e t  4 iat Eads
         Poteet           as: Anew      be                                eS            Does
         pats      sere         at Cem.      8                                          G8 040
         Micrtoien      es, 6   aa         oe                         A                 9287S
         WER ches OMe              We      acy                                          Lao
         Mesquasit       9               Gi,                   4.7                  008,896
         Cerio     oe     elie                 OG!       sy     hgh   e-at          1 140876
         apOiiel         te s (Os:       .     os        are   a                    (105,909
         Seater amen!            tah           O               258                       6,457
         Racsoiewn=..                    0h,   sa              s «                      ~24;860
         AC      es i    et     ee                   i         rr                           7,429
         pandrics#,     9       a        Gls             a>.          «.                68,950
                                                                                                    1,242,765
The number of Indians is éstimated at 139,000,
   and Hearne states that every one requires at
   least twenty deerskins for clothes, without
   counting those required for tent-cloths, bags,
   ete.; this therefore would give us 139,000
    ao OE       ee            eC.              ete                                 ne         4     2,790,000

                                       Carried over                            .        .     .     4,022,765
360                          HUMAN      REMAINS.

                                  Brought over         .   .   .   4,022,765
But the deerskins are fit for clothes only during
      2 months in the year, and as it will be ob-
      served that the majority of the animals
      enumerated above are not fit for food, others
      must have been killed in sufficient quantities
      to serve as food for 10 months.              Assuming
      that an Indian requires one every month, which
      is probably within the mark, we shall again
      require 139,000 x 10 (the number of months)                  1,390,000

            Making therefore atotalof              .   .   .   .   5,412,765

   And assuming that one animal out of twenty is killed by
the Indians, we shall have 108,000,000 to 139,000 Indians,
or about 750 animals to each man, besides which, a further
allowance must be made as before on account of man’s
greater longevity. Dr. Rae, who has had so much experi-
ence in these matters, has been good enough to look over the
above calculation, which he considers fairly estimated, but it
has of course no pretensions to accuracy.
   Lastly, it may be observed that man is less likely to be
drowned by sudden river floods, than is the case with other
land mammalia * ; and, on the whole, therefore, it is natural
that the bones of animals would be far more common in these
gravels than those of man.
   It must not, however, be supposed that the latter are alto-
gether absent. Without relying on the human lower jaw,
stated to have been found in the pit at Moulinguignon, and
about which there has been so much discussion and difference
of opinion, I may instance the discovery of human remains
by M. Bertrand +, at Clichy, in the valley of the Seine.

  * See, for instance, Bakie, Explor-      + Les Mondes, 1869, p. 64.
ing Voyage up the Kwora, p. 215.
          COEXISTENCE   OF MAN      WITH    THE     MAMMOTH.        361

Among these bones, about the authenticity and antiquity
of which there seems to be no doubt, was a skull which
has been examined by M. Lartet, and which is decidedly
dolichocephalic.
  We have as yet but partly answered the second of the two
questions with which we started. Hven admitting that the
flint hatchets are coeval with the gravel in which they occur,
it remains to be shown that the bones of the extinct animals
belong also to the same period. This was at first doubted by
some geologists, who suggested that they might have been
washed out of earlier strata.
  If, however, these bones belonged to a period earlier than
that of the gravel, where, we may ask, are the remains of the
animals which did exist at that time? Moreover, the bones,
though sometimes much worn and broken, are at others, and
even, according to Mr. Prestwich, “asa general rule*, either
not rolled at all, or are slightly so.” Secondly, these species,
and particularly the mammoth and the woolly-haired rhino-
ceros, are the characteristic and commonest species of these
beds, not only in the valley of the Somme, but in all the
drift gravels of England and France; while, if they belonged
in reality to an earlier period, they would not occur so con-
stantly, and they would be accompanied by other species
characteristic of earlier times.
   Thirdly, the materials forming the drift gravels of the
Somme Valley have all been obtained from the present area
of drainage, and there are in this district no older beds from
which the remains of these extinct mammalia could possibly
have been derived. There are, indeed, outliers of tertiary
strata, but   the mammalian       remains      found    in those   beds
belong to other, and much older, species.
  Fourthly, as regards the rhinoceros, we have the express
testimony of M. Baillon, that on one occasion all the bones
                     * Phil. Trans. l. c. p. 300.
362           THE MAMMOTH        AND RHINOCEROS.

of a hind-leg were found in their natural positions at Men-
checourt, near Abbeville, while the rest of the skeleton was
found at a little distance. In this case, therefore, the animal
must have been entombed before the ligaments had decayed
away.
  M. Casciano de Prado has made a very similar discovery
in Spain, not far from Madrid.      There the section was as
follows: First, vegetable soil; then about twenty-five feet of
sand and pebbles, under which was a layer of sandy loam, in
which during the year 1850, a complete skeleton of the mam-
moth was discovered. Underneath this stratum was about
ten feet of coarse gravel, in which some flint axes, very
closely resembling those of Amiens, have been discovered.
   Finally, as regards the rhinoceros, M. Lartet assures us *
that some of the bones bear the marks of flint implements;
nay more than this, he has even satisfied himself, “‘ by com-
parative trials on homologous portions of existing animals,
that incisions, presenting such appearances, could only be
made in fresh bones, still retaining their cartilage.”
 -There is, then, no more reason for believing that the bones
of these extinct mammalia were washed out of earlier strata
into the drift gravels, than for attributing such an origin to
the implements themselves; and we may, I think, regard it
as well-established,   that the     mammoth         and woolly-haired
rhinoceros, as well as the other above-mentioned mammalia,
co-existed with the savages who used the rude “ drift
hatchets,” at the time when the gravels of the Somme were
being deposited.
   The second of the three questions with which we state
(p. 842) may therefore be answered in the affirmative.
   Must we, then, carry man back far into the past, or may
we retain our date for the origin of the human race by bring-
ing the extinct animals down to comparatively recent times ?
                 * Geological Journ. vol. xvi. p. 471.
                CHARACTERISTICS   OF   THE      DRIFT   BEDS.                    363
The absence of all tradition of the elephant                    Fie, 201,
and rhinoceros in Europe carries us back
far indeed in years, but a little way only,
when measured by geological standards, ville
and we must therefore solve this question
by examining the drift gravels themselves,
                                            on
                                            Hitt
                                            Road,oe
                                                 ‘)
                                                 SW
the materials of which they are composed, loMoyenrevi
and the positions which they occupy, so as
to determine,    if possible, the conditions
under which they were deposited, and the
lapse of time which they indicate.
   Fig. 201 gives a section across the
valley of the Somme at Abbeville, taken
from the memoir in the Philosophical
Transactions*, by Mr. Prestwich, who has
long studied the quaternary beds, and has
done more than any other man to render
them intelligible. We should find almost
the same arrangement and position of the
different beds, not only at St. Acheul, but
elsewhere along the valley of the Somme,
wherever the higher beds of gravel have
not been removed by subsequent action
of the river. Hven at St. Valéry, at the                                        eaacee

present mouth     of the river, I found a bed              Seren.
                                                            epee            2        x
                                                                                     SEF
of gravel at a considerable height above
the level of the sea. This would seem to
show that at the period of these high-level             Winn


gravels, the English Channel was narrower                        ,      :i { \ | !
than it is at present, as indeed we know
                                                                                      meaniide
                                                                                      Level
                                                                                      at
                                                                                     :op
                                                                                       Ys
to have been the case even in historical
times. So early as 1605 our countryman
Verstegan   pointed that the waves and tides were                           eating
                         # Phil. Trans, 1860.
864      PHYSICAL    GEOGRAPHY        OF THE          SOMME   VALLEY.

away our coasts. Sir C. Lyell* gives much information on
this subject, and it appears that, even so lately as the reign
of Queen Elizabeth, the town of Brighton occupied the site
of the present Chain Pier.
   Mr. Prestwich has pointed out} that a section, similar to
that of the Somme,         is presented by the Lark, Waveney,
Ouse, etc., while it is well shown also along the banks of the
Seine. Probably, indeed, it holds good of most of our rivers,
that along the sides of their valleys are patches of old gravels
left by the stream at various heights, before they had ex-
cavated the channels to their present depth. Mr. Prestwich
considers that the beds of sand and gravel can generally be
divided into two more or less distinct series, one continuous
along the bottom of the valleys and rising little above the
water level—these he calls the low-level gravels; the other,
which he terms the upper or high-level gravels, occurring in
                                   Fia. 202,




                             Section at St. Acheul.


detached masses at an elevation of from fifty to two hundred
feet above the valley.       They seem to me, on the contrary,
only the two extremes of a single series, once continuous, but
now generally presenting numerous interruptions. A more
magnified view of the strata at St. Acheul, near Amiens, is
shown in fig 202.      The upper layer of vegetable soil having
been removed, we haye—
 * See Principles of Geology, p. 315,                     + Phil. Trans, 1864.
                         ST. ACHEUL.                      363
  1. A bed of brick earth (a) from four to five feet in thick-
ness, and containing a few angular flints.
   2. Below this is a thin layer of angular gravel (b), one to
two feet in thickness.
  3. Still lower is a bed of sandy marl (c), five to six feet
thick, with land and freshwater shells, which, though very
delicate, are in most cases perfect.
   4. At the bottom of all these, and immediately overlying
the chalk, is the bed of partially rounded gravel (d) in which
principally the flint implements are found. This layer also
contains many well-rolled tertiary pebbles.
   In the early Christian period this spot was used as a
cemetery: the graves generally descend into the marly sand,
and their limits are very distinctly marked, as in fig. 202 f;
an important fact,as showing that the rest of the strata have
lain undisturbed for 1500 years. Some of the coffins were
of hard chalk (fig. 202 e), some of wood, in which latter case
the nails and clamps only remain, every particle of wood
having perished, without leaving even a stain behind.
Passing down the hill towards the river, all these strata
are seen to die out, and we find ourselves on the bare chalk;
but again at a lower level occurs another bed of gravel,
resembling the first, and capped also by the bed of brick
earth which is generally known as loéss. This lower bed of
gravel is that called by Mr. Prestwich the lower-level gravel.
  These strata, therefore, are witnesses; but of what?    Are
they older than the valley, or the valley than they? are they
the result of causes still in operation, or the offspring of
cataclysms now, happily, at an end?
   If we can show that the present river, somewhat swollen
perhaps, owing to the greater extension of forests in ancient
times, and by an alteration   of climate, has excavated the
present valley, and produced the strata above enumerated;
then “the suggestion of an antiquity for the human family
366                        ST, ACHEUL.

so remote as is here implied, in the length of ages required
by the gentle rivers and small streams of eastern France to
erode its whole plain to the depths at which they now flow,
acquires, it must be confessed, a fascinating grandeur, when,
by similitude of feature and geology, we extend the hypo-
thesis to the whole north-west frontiers of the continent, and
assume, that from the estuary of the Seme to the eastern
shores of the Baltic, every internal feature of valley, dale and
ravine—in short, the entire intaglio of the surface—has been
moulded by running waters, since the advent of the human
race*,””
  But, on the other hand, it has been maintained that the
pliant facts may be read as “expressions                of violent and
 sudden mutations, only compatible with altogether briefer
periods.” The argument of the Paroxysmist, I still quote
from Blackwood, would probably be something like the
 following :—
    “ Assuming the pre-existing relief, or excavation rather, of
the surface to have approximated to that now prevailing, he
will account for the gravel by supposing a sudden rocking
movement of the lands and the bottom of the sea of the
nature of an earthquake, or a succession of them, to have
launched a portion of the temporarily uplifted waters upon
the surface of the land.”
  Let us, however, examine the strata, and see whether the
evidence they give is in reality so confused and contradictory.
   Taking the section at St. Acheul and commencing at the
bottom, we have first of all the partially rounded high-level
gravel, throughout which, and especially at the lower part,
the flint implements occur.
   These beds but rarely contain vegetable remains. Large
pieces of the oak, yew, and fir, have, however, been deter-
mined at Hoxne.     The mammalia, also, are but few; the
               * Blackwood s Magazine, October, 1860.
                             ORGANIC    REMAINS.                         367

mammoth, the Hlephas antiguus, with species of Bos, Cervus,
and Hquus are the only ones which have yet occurred at
St. Acheul, though beds of the same age in other parts of
England and France have added the Rhinoceros tichorhinus,
the reindeer, and several other species.      The mollusca are
more numerous; they have been identified by Mr. J. G.
Jeffreys, who finds in the upper-level gravel thirty-six species,
all of them land or freshwater forms, and all belonging to
existing species.         It is hardly necessary to add, that these
shells are not found in the coarse gravel, but only here and
there, where quieter conditions, indicated by a seam of finer
materials, have preserved them from destruction.        Here,
therefore, we have a conclusive answer to the suggestion
that the gravel may have been heaped up to its present
height by a sudden irruption of the sea. In that case we
should find some marine remains; but as we do not, as all
the fossils belong to animals which                live on the land, or
inhabit fresh waters, it is at once evident that this stratum,
not being subaerial, must be a freshwater deposit, and as the
most delicate shells are entire, it 1s equally evident that they
were deposited in tranquil water, and not by a cataclysm.
   But the gravel itself tells us even more than this: the
river Somme flows through a country in which there are no
rocks older than the chalk, and the gravel in its valley con-
sists entirely of chalk flints and tertiary débris*. The Seine,
on the other hand, receives            tributaries    which    drain other
formations. In the valley of the Yonne we find fragments of
the crystalline rocks brought from the Morvant. The Aube
runs through cretaceous and Jurassic strata, and the gravels
along its valley are entirely composed of materials derived
from these formations. The valley of the Oise is in this
respect particularly instructive: “De Maquenoise 4 Hirsont
 * Buteux, l. c. p. 98.        + D’Archiac, Progrés de la Géologie, p. 163.
                           { D’Archiace, 1. c. p. 155.
368             MINERALOGICAL     CONSTITUENTS.

la vallée ne présente que des fragments plus ou moins
roulés des roches de transition que traverse le cours de
la riviére. En descendant 4 Htréaupont, on y trouve des
calcaires jurassiques et des silex dela craie, formations
qui ont succédé aux roches anciennes. A Guise, le dépdt
erratiqueast.) cays est composé de quartzites et de schistes
de transition de quelques grés plus recents, de silex de
la craie, et surtout de quartz laiteux, dont le volume varie
depuis celui de la téte jusqu’a celui de grains de sable... .
Au dela les fragments de roches anciennes diminuent gra-
duellement en volume et en nombre.”              At Paris the
granitic débris brought down by the Yonne forms a notable
proportion of the gravel; and at Précy, near Creil on the
Oise, the fragments of the ancient rocks are abundant;     but
lower down the Seine at Mantes, they are smaller and less
numerous, while at Rouen and Pont de Arche I found none,
though a longer search would doubtless have shown frag-
ments of them. This case of the Oise is, however, interesting,
not only on account of the valuable evidence contained in
the above quotation; but because, though the river flows, as
a glance at the map will show, ummediately across and at
right angles to the Somme, yet none of the ancient rocks
which form the valley of the Oise have supplied any débris to
the valley of the Somme: and this, though the two rivers
are at one point within six miles of one another, and
separated by a ridge only eighty feet in height.
   The same division occurs between the Seine and the Loire:
“Bien que la ligne de partage des eaux de la Loire et. de
la Seine, entre St. Amand (Niévre) et Artenay, au nord
d’Orléans, soit & peine sensible, aucun débris de roches
venant du centre de la France, par la vallée de la Loire n’est
passé dans le bassin de la Seine*.”
  In the Vivarais near Auvergne, “Les dépdts diluviens
                      * D’ Avchiac, 1. c. p. 164.
               OBJECTIONS     TO THE   PROPOSED      THEORY.              369

sont composés des mémes roches que celles que les riviéres
actuelles entrainent dans les vallées, et sont les débris des
seules montagnes de la Lozin, du Tanargue et du Mézéine,
qui entourent le bassin du Vivarais*.”’
   Again,
   “Te diluvium des vallées de I’Aisne et de l’Aire ne ren-
ferme que les débris plus ou moins roulés des terrains que
ces riviéres coupent dans leur courst.”
   Finally, Mr. Prestwich has pointed out that the same
thing holds good in various English rivers. The conclusion
deduced by M. D’Archiac from the consideration of these
observations, and specially from those concerning the valley
of the Seine, is “Que les courants                diluviens ne venaient
point d’une direction unique, mais qu’ils convergaient des
bords du bassin vers son centre, suivant les dépressions pré-
existantes, et que leur élévation ou leur force de transport ne
sufisait pas pour faire passer les débris qu’tls charriaient dune
de ces vallées dans l autre t.””
   Considering, however, all these facts, remembering that
the constituents of these river-drift gravels, are, in all cases,
derived from ‘beds now im situ along the valley, that they
have not only followed the lines of these valleys, but have
done so in the direction of the present waterflow, and
without in any case passing across from one river system
to another, it seems quite unnecessary to call in the assistance
of diluvial waves, or indeed any other agency than that of
the rivers themselves.
   There are, however, certain facts in the case which have
been regarded by most geologists as fatal to this hypothesis,
and which prevented M. D’Archiac, as well as the French
geologists generally, from adopting an explanation appa-
rently so simple and so obvious. These difficulties appear
  * D’Archiac, l.c. p. 160.          + Malbos. Bull. Geol. vol. iii. p. 631.
                                £ Le. p. 163.
                                                             Bb
370         OBJECTIONS   TO THE          PROPOSED   THEORY.

to have been twofold; or at least the two principal were,
firstly, the large sandstone blocks which are scattered,
throughout the river gravels of Northern and Central France;
and secondly, the height at which the upper-level gravels
stand above the present water-line. We will consider these
two objections separately.
   It must be admitted that the presence of the sandstone
blocks in the gravels appears at Grst sight to be irreconcilable
with our hypothesis. In some places they occur frequently,
and are of considerable size; the largest I have myself seen
is represented in the section, fig. 203, taken close to the
railway-station at Joinville.       It was 8ft. 6in. in length, with




                                   & 9. ey>
                                 Saito    Sh

                          Section at Joinville.


a width of 2ft. 8. and a thickness of 3ft.4im.                Even when
we remember that at the time of its deposition the valley was
not excavated to its present depth, we must still feel that a
body of water with power to move such masses as these must
have been very different from any floods now occurring in
those valleys, and might fairly deserve the name of a
cataclysm. But whence could we obtain so great a quantity
of water?    We have already seen that the gravel of the
Oise, though so near, is entirely unlike that of the Somme,
while that of the Seine, again, is quite different from that of
any of the neighbouring rivers.       These rivers, therefore,
cannot have drained a larger area than at present; the river
                            ICE    ACTION.                    rill


systems must have been the same as now. Nor would the
supposition, after all, account for the phenomena.       We
should but fall from Scylla into Charybdis. Around the
blocks we see no evidence of violent action; in the section
at Joinville, the grey subangular gravel passed under the
large block above-mentioned, with scarcely any traces of dis-
turbance.    But a flood which could bring down so great a
mass would certainly have swept away the comparatively
hght and movable gravel below. We cannot, therefore,
account for the phenomena by aqueous action, because a
flood which would deposit the sandstone blocks would re-
move the underlying gravel, and a flood which would deposit
the gravel would not move the blocks. The Deus ex ma-
china has not only been called in most unnecessarily, but,
when examined, turns out to be but an idol after all.
  Driven, then, to seek some other explanation of the diffi-
culty, Mr. Prestwich falls back on that of floating ice. Here
we have an agency which would satisfactorily explain all
the difficulties of the case.  The “‘ packing” and propelling
action of ice would also account for some irregularities in the
arrangement of the beds which are very difficult otherwise
to understand.    We are, indeed, irresistibly reminded of the
figure given by Sir Charles Lyell* from a view taken by
Lieut. Bowen,    of the boulders     drifted by ice on the shores
of the St. Lawrence.   Sir C. Lyell’s work is in the hands
of almost every geologist, and it will, perhaps, therefore,
be unnecessary for me to quote the accompanying descrip-
tion, accurately as it portrays what must, we         think, have
been taking place in the valley of the Somme thousands
of years ago, just as it does in that of the St. Lawrence at
the present time.    Nor is it the physical evidence only,
which points to an arctic climate during the period now

                     * Principles, 1853, p. 220.
                              Bb     2
372         FRESHWATER     ORIGIN    OF   THE   GRAVELS.

under consideration; the fauna, as we have             already   seen,
tells the same tale.
   But though the presence of the sandstone blocks and the
occasional contortions of the strata are in perfect accordance
with the view of Mr. Prestwich, that the gravels have been
deposited by the rivers, our second difficulty still remains—
namely, the height at which the upper-level gravels stand
above the present water-line. We cannot wonder that these
beds have generally been attributed to violent cataclysms.
   M. Boucher de Perthes was always of this opinion. “Ce
coquillage,” he says, “cet éléphant, cette hache, ou la main
qui la fabriqua, furent donc témoins du cataclysme qui donna
a notre pays sa configuration présente*.”
   M. C. D’Orbigny, observing that the fossils found in these
 quaternary beds are all either of land or freshwater animals,
wisely dismisses the theory of any marine action, and ex-
presses himself as follows :—‘ En effet opinion de la plupart
des géologues est que les cataclysmes diluviens ont eu pour
causes prédominantes de fortes oscillations de l’écorce ter-
restre, des soulévements de montagnes au milieu de l’océan,
d’ow seraient résultées de grandes érosions.   Par conséquent
les puissants courants d’eau marine, auxquels on attribue ces
érosions diluviennes, auraient da laisser sur les continents
des traces authentiques de leur passage, tels que de nom-
breux débris de coquilles, de poissons et autres animaux
marins analogues a ceux qui vivent actuellement dans la
mer. Or, ainsi que M. Cordier l’a fait remarquer depuis
longtemps 4 son cours de géologie, rien de semblable n’a été
constaté. Sur tous les points du globe oi Von a étudié les
dépéts diluviens, on a reconnu que, sauf quelques rares ex-
ceptions trés contestables, il n’existe dans ces dépdts aucun
fossile marin: ou bien ce sont des fossiles arrachés aux
terrains préexistants, dont la dénudation a fourni les ma-
            * Mem. Soc. d’Em. l’Abbeville, 1861, p. 475.
                    INAPPLICABILITY      OF CATACLYSMS.                  373

tériaux qui composent le diluvium.             En sorte que les dépéts
diluviens semblent avoir eu pour cause des phénoménes
météorologiques, et paraissent étre le résultat d’immenses
inondations d’eau douce et non d’eau marine, qui, se pré-
cipitant des points éléyves vers la mer, auraient dénudé une
grande partie de la surface du sol, balayé la généralité des
étres organisés et pour ainsi dire nivelé, coordonné les bassins
hydrographiques actuels*.”’
  Such cataclysms, however, as those thus suggested by
M. D’Orbigny, and many other French geologists, even if
admitted, would not account for the results before us.                   We
have seen that the transport of materials have not followed
any single direction, but has in all cases followed the lines of
the present valleys, and the direction of the present water-
flow; that the rocks of one valley are never transported into
another ; that the condition of the loéss is irreconcilable with
a great rush of water ; while, finally, the perfect preservation
of many of the most delicate shells is clear proof that the
phenomena are not due to violent or cataclysmic action.
  We must, moreover, bear in mind that the gravels and
sands are themselves both the proof and the results of an
immense denudation.       In a chalk country, such as that
through which the Somme flows, each cubic foot of flint,
gravel, or sand, represents the removal of, at the very least,
twenty cubic feet of chalk, all of which, as we have already
seen, must have been removed from the present area of
drainage. In considering, therefore, the formation of these
upper and older gravels, we must not picture to ourselves the
original valley as it now is, but must, in imagination, restore
all that immense mass of chalk which has been destroyed in
the formation of the lower-level gravels and sands.       Mr.
Prestwich has  endeavoured  to illustrate this by a diagram,
  * C. D’Orbigny, Bul. Geo. 2nd ser. V. xvii. p. 6. See also D’Archiac, 1. c.
passim,                               + Proceed. Roy. Soc. p. 1862, p. 41.
RYE!               ALTERATION       OF    THE   RIVER   LEVEL.

and I must once more repeat that this is no mere hypothesis,
since the mass of sand and gravel cannot have been pro-
duced without an immense removal of the chalk. On the
whole, then, we may safely conclude that the upper-level
gravels were deposited by the existing river, before it had
excavated the valley to its present depth and when conse-
quently it ran at a level considerably higher than                          the
present.
   Far, therefore, from requiring an immense flood of water,
two hundred feet in depth, the accumulation of the gravel
may have been effected by an annual volume of water, differ-
ing little from that of the present river.
   A given quantity of water will, however, produce very
different effects, according to the rapidity with which it flows.
 “We learn from observation, that a velocity of three inches
per second at the bottom will just begin to work upon fine
clay fit for pottery, and however firm and compact it may be,
it will tear it up. Yet no beds are more stable than clay
when the velocities do not exceed this: for the water even
takes away the impalpable particles of the superficial clay,
leaving the particles of sand sticking by their lower half in
the rest of the clay, which they now protect, making a very
permanent bottom, if the stream does not bring down gravel
or coarse sand, which will rub off this very thin crust, and
allow another layer to be worn off. A velocity of six inches
will lift fine sand, eight inches will lift sand as coarse
as     limseed,   twelve   inches        will sweep     along    fine   gravel,
twenty-four inches will roll along rounded pebbles an inch
diameter, and it requires three feet per second at the
bottom to sweep along shivery angular stones of the size of
an egg.”
  If, therefore, we are justified in assuming a colder climate
than that now existing, we should much increase the erosive
                    * Cyc. Brit. Article “ Rivers,” p. 274.
              GRADUAL    EXCAVATION    OF THE    VALLEY.            370

action of the river, not only because        the rains would fall on
a frozen surface, but because the rainfall of the winter months
would accumulate on the high grounds in the form of ice and
snow, and would every spring produce floods much greater
than any which now occur *.
  We now come to the light-coloured marl (fig. 202 ¢, p. 864).
It is composed, according to Mr. Prestwich, as follows: Of
white siliceous sand and light-coloured marl, mixed with
fine chalk grit, a few large sub-angular flints, and an oc-
casional sandstone block, irregular patches of flint gravel,
bedding waved and contorted, here and there layers with
diagonal   seams, a few ochreous        bands, portions concreted.
Sand and      freshwater     shells   common,      some    mammalian
remains.
   In the pits at Amiens this bed is generally distinct from
the underlying gravels, owing perhaps to the upper portion
of the gravel having been removed; but in several places
(Précy, Ivry, Bicétre, etc.) this section is complete, the
coarser gravel below becoming finer and finer, and, at length,
passing above into siliceous sand. These sections evidently
indicate a gradual Joss of power in the water at these parti-
cular spots; rapid enough at first to bring down large
pebbles, its force became less and less until at length it was
only able to carry fine sand. This, therefore, appears to
indicate a slight change in the course of the river, and
gradual excavation of the valley, which, by supplying the
floods with a lower bed, left the waters at this height with a
gradually diminishing force and velocity.
   The upper part of the section at St. Acheul consists of
brick earth (fig: 202 a), passing below into angular gravel,
while between this and the underlying sandy marl is some-
times a small layer of darker brick earth.         These beds, how-
ever, vary much even        in adjoining sections.         Taken as a
  * See Murchison’s Geology of Russia and the Ural Mountains, p. 572.
374            ALTERATION     OF   THE   RIVER   LEVEL.

and I must once more repeat that this is no mere hypothesis,
since the mass of sand and gravel cannot have been pro-
duced without an immense removal of the chalk. On the
whole, then, we may safely conclude that the upper-level
gravels were deposited by the existing river, before it had
excavated the valley to its present depth and when conse-
quently it ran at a level considerably higher than the
present.
   Far, therefore, from requiring an immense flood of water,
two hundred feet in depth, the accumulation of the gravel
may have been effected by an annual volume of water, differ-
ing little from that of the present river.
   A given quantity of water will, however, produce very
different effects, according to the rapidity with which it flows.
 “We learn from observation, that a velocity of three inches
 per second at the bottom will just begin to work upon fine
 clay fit for pottery, and however firm and compact it may be,
it will tear it up. Yet no beds are more stable than clay
when the velocities do not exceed this: for the water even
takes away the impalpable particles of the superficial clay,
leaving the particles of sand sticking by their lower half in
the rest of the clay, which they now protect, making a very
permanent bottom, if the stream does not bring down gravel
or coarse sand, which will rub off this very thin crust, and
allow another layer to be worn off. A velocity of six inches
will lift fine sand, eight inches will lift sand as coarse
as lmseed, twelve inches will sweep along fine gravel,
twenty-four inches will roll along rounded pebbles an inch
diameter, and it requires three feet per second at the
bottom to sweep along shivery angular stones of the size of
an egg*,”’
  If, therefore, we are justified in assuming a colder climate
than that now existing, we should much increase the erosive
               * Cyc. Brit. Article ‘ Rivers,” p. 274.
              GRADUAL    EXCAVATION    OF   THE   VALLEY.           375


action of the river, not only because the rains would fall on
a frozen surface, but because the rainfall of the winter months
would accumulate on the high grounds in the form of ice and
snow, and would every spring produce floods much greater
than any which now occur *,
  We now come to the light-coloured marl (fig. 202 ¢, p. 864).
It is composed, according to Mr. Prestwich, as follows: Of
white siliceous sand and light-coloured marl, mixed with
fine chalk grit, a few large sub-angular flints, and an oc-
casional sandstone block, irregular patches of flint gravel,
bedding waved and contorted, here and there layers with
diagonal seams, a few ochreous bands, portions concreted.
 Sand and freshwater shells common, some mammalian
remains.
   In the pits at Amiens this bed is generally distinct from
the underlying gravels, owing perhaps to the upper portion
of the gravel having been removed; but in several places
(Précy, Ivry, Bicétre, etc.) this section is complete, the
coarser gravel below becoming finer and finer, and, at length,
passing above into siliceous sand. These sections evidently
indicate a gradual loss of power in the water at these parti-
cular spots; rapid enough at first to bring down large
pebbles, its force became less and less until at length it was
only able to carry fine sand. This, therefore, appears to
indicate a slight change in the course of the river, and
gradual excavation of the valley, which, by supplying the
floods with a lower bed, left the waters at this height with a
gradually diminishing force and velocity.
   The upper part of the section at St. Acheul consists of
brick earth (fig. 202 a), passing below into angular gravel,
while between this and the underlying sandy marl is some-
times a small layer of darker brick earth. These beds, how-
ever, vary much even        in adjoining sections.          Taken as a
  * See Murchison’s Geology of Russia and the Ural Mountains, p. 572.
373                         THE PEAT.

   In such a group of species as this the hippopotamus seems
singularly out of place, and in the preceding chapter I have
discussed the conclusions which are, I think, to be drawn
from its presence; taking the fauna as a whole, however,
and looking more especially to such animals as the musk ox,
the reindeer, the lemming, the Myodes torquatus, the Sibe-
rian mammoth, and its faithful companion the woolly-haired
rhinoceros, we have clear evidence      of a climate unlike that
now prevailing in Western Europe.
   Finally, the lowest portion of the valley is at present occu-
pied by a bed of gravel, covered by silt and peat, which
latter is in some places more than thirty or even forty feet
thick, and is extensively worked for fuel.       These strata have
afforded to the antiquaries of the neighbourhood, and espe-
cially to M. Boucher de Perthes, a rich harvest of interesting
relics belonging to various periods. The depth at which these
objects are found has been carefully noted by M. Boucher de
Perihes.
   “Prenant,” he says, “pour terme moyen du sol de la
vallée, une   hauteur   de 2 métres   audessus    du niveau   de la
Somme, c’est 4 30 a 40 centimétres de la surface qu’on
rencontre le plus abondamment les traces du moyen-fge.
Cinquante centimétres plus bas, on commence & trouver des
débris romains, puis gallo-romains.   On continue & suivre
ces derniers pendant un métre, c’est & dire jusqu’au niveau
dela Somme.     Aprés eux, viennent les vestiges gaulois purs
qui descendent sans interruption jusqu’é prés de 2 métres
audessous de ce niveau, preuve de la longue habitation de ces
peuples dans la vallée. C’est & un métre plus bas, ou a 4
métres environ audessous de ce méme niveau, qu’on arrive
au centre du sol que nous avons nommé Celtique, celui que
folérent les Gaulois primitives ou les peuples qui les précé-
dérent ;” and which belonged, therefore, to the Neolithic
period. Jt is, however, hardly necessary to add that these
                OBJECTS    FOUND    IN   THE   PEAT,             879


thicknesses are only given by M. Boucher de Perthes “ comme
terme approximatif.”
   The “ Antiquités Celtiques” was published several years
before the Swiss archeologists had made us acquainted with
the nature of the Pfahlbauten;           but, from some   indications
given by M. Boucher de Perthes, it would appear that there
must have been, at one time, lake-habitations in the neigh-
bourhood of Abbeville. He found considerable platforms of
wood, with large quantities of bones, stone implements, and
handles closely resembling those which come from the Swiss
lake-villages.
    These weapons cannot for an instant be confounded with
the ruder ones from the drift-gravel. They are ground to a
smooth surface and a cutting edge, while those of the more
ancient types are merely chipped, not one of the many hun-
dreds already found having shown the slightest trace of
grinding. Yet though the former belong to the Stone Age,
to a time so remote that the use of metal was apparently
still unknown in Western Europe, they are separated from
the earlier weapons of the upper-level drift by the whole
period necessary for the excavation of the Somme Valley,
to a depth of more than one hundred feet.
   If, therefore, we get no definite date for the arrival of man
in these countries, we    can at least form a vivid idea of his
antiquity. He must have seen the Somme running at a
height of about a hundred feet above its present level. It
is, indeed, probable that he dates back in Northern France
almost, if not quite, as far as the rivers themselves. The
fauna of the country was indeed unlike what it is now.
Along the banks of the rivers ranged a savage race of
hunters   and fishermen,    and      in the forests wandered     the
mammoth, the two-horned            woolly rhinoceros, a species of
lion, the musk ox, the reindeer, and the urus.
  Yet the geography of France cannot have been very dif-
380         RELATION    OF THE    LOESS TO THE      GRAVEL.

ferent from what it is at present. The present rivers ran in
their present directions, and the sea even then lay between
the Somme and the Adur, though the channel was not so
wide as it 1s now.
   Gradually the river deepened its valley; ineffective, or
even perhaps constructive, in autumn and winter, the melt-
ing of the snows turned it every spring into a roarimg
torrent. These floods were perhaps more destructive to
animals even than man        himself; while, however          rude they
may have been, our predecessors can hardly be supposed to
have been incapable of foreseeing and consequently escaping
the danger.
   While the water had sufficient force to deposit coarse gravel
at any given level, at a still higher one it would part with
finer particles, and would thus form the loéss, which at the
same time would here and there receive angular flints and
shells brought down from the hills in a more or less trans-
verse direction by the rivulets after heavy rains.
   Mr. Prestwich regards the difference of level between the
upper gravels and the loéss as “‘a measure of the floods of
that period.” Ifthe gravel-beds were complete, this would
no doubt be the case; but it seems to me that the upper-
level gravels are mere fragments of an originally almost con-
tinuous deposit, and under such circumstances the present
cannot be taken as evidence of the original difference.
   As the valley became deeper and deeper the gravel would
be deposited at lower and lower levels, the loéss always fol-
lowing it *; thus we must not consider the loéss as a dis-
tinct bed, but as one which was being formed during the
same time, though never at the same place, as the beds of
gravel. In fig. 204 I have given a diagram, the better to
illustrate my meaning ; the loéss is indicated by letters with

* See Mr. Prestwich’s paper read before the Royal Society, June 19, 1862.
            CONTINUAL   CHANGES    OF RIVER   COURSES.        381

a dash and is dotted, while the gravels are represented        as
rudely stratified. In this case I suppose the river to have
run originally on the level (1), and to have deposited the
gravel (a) and the loéss (a’); after a certain amount of
erosion, which would reduce the level to (2), the gravel
would be spread out at (b), and loéss at (b’). Similarly the
loéss (c’) would be contemporaneous with the gravel (c).

                              Fie, 204.




  Thus, while in each section the lower beds would of course
be the oldest, still the upper-level gravels as a whole would
be the most ancient, and the beds lying in the lower parts of
the valley the most modern.
   For convenience I have represented the sides of the valley
as forming a series of terraces; and though this is not
actually the case, there are places in which such terraces do
occur.
   It is, however, well known that rivers continually tend to
shift their courses; nor is the Somme any exception to the
rule ; the valley itself indeed is comparatively straight, but
within it the river winds considerably, and when in one of
its curves, the current crosses    “its general line of descent,
it eats out a curve in the opposite bank, or in the side of the
hills bounding the valley, from which curve it is turned back
again at an equal angle, so that it recrosses the line of de-
scent, and gradually hollows out another curve lower down
in the opposite bank,” till the whole sides of the valley, or
river-bed, “present a succession of salient and retiring
382                     ELEVATION       OF THE    LAND.

angles*.”      During these wanderings from one side of the
valley to the other, the river continually undermines and
removes the gravels which at an earlier period it had de-
posited. Thus the upper-level gravels are now only to be
found here and there, as it were, in patches, while in many
parts they have altogether disappeared ; as, for instance, on
the right side of the valley between Amiens and Pont Rémy,
where hardly a trace of the high-level gravels is to be seen.
   The neighbouring shores of England and France show
various traces of a slight and recent elevation of the land.
Raised beaches have been observed at an elevation of from
five to ten feet at various points along the coasts of Sussex
and the Pas de Calais. Marine shells also occur at Abbeville
about twenty-five feet above the sea levelt, and no doubt
this change of level has had an important bearing ou the
 excavation of the valley.
   Mr. A. Tylor ¢, im a recent memoir, agrees with me that
the upper-level and lower-level gravels are merely the ex-
tremes of a series, seldom complete, but generally imperfect,
sometimes in one part, sometimes                 in another.     But he also
maintains that the surface of the chalk in the valley of the
Somme had assumed its present form prior to the deposition
of any of the gravel or loéss now existing in it. As, how-
ever, he admits that the materials forming this gravel and
loéss are derived exclusively from the area drained by the
Somme and its tributaries, he involves                himself in a double
difficulty.    In the first place he maintains that the materials,
by the removal of which the valley was formed, were swept
completely out of the valley, which, considering its length,
depth, and narrowness, appears to be impossible ; and in the
  * Lyell's Principles, p. 206.           be disposed to refer principally to an
   t+ The higher-level gravelsin some     encroachment of the sea on the land,
places fringe the coast at an eleva-      and the consequent intersection of
tion of as much as one hundred feet;      the old river-beds at a higher level.
this phenomenon, however, I should          t Geol. Journal, vol. xxiv. p. 103.
                        RECAPITULATION,                        383

second place, the admission that the gravel and sand consist
of flint débris brought down by the Somme and its tribu-
taries, is fatal to his argument, since you cannot remove
matter from one place to another, without affecting the con-
figuration of the surface in both. In admitting then that
“the gravel in the valley of the Somme at Amiens is partly
derived from débris brought down by the river Somme, and
by the two rivers, the Celle and the Arve, and partly con-
sists of material from the adjoining higher grounds, washed
in by land-floods *,’” Mr. Tylor virtually adopts the explana-
tion of the phenomena given in this work, since the for-
mation or removal of this gravel necessarily involved an
alteration of the surface and a deepening of the valley.
   When finally the excavation of the valley was completed,
the climate had gradually become more like our own, and
either from this change, or rather perhaps yielding to the
irresistible power of man, the great Pachydermata became
extinct.   Under   the altered   conditions   of level, the river,
unable to carry out to sea the finer particles brought down
from the higher levels, deposited them in the valley, and
thus raised somewhat its general level, checking the velocity
of the stream, and producing     extensive marshes, in which a
thick deposit of peat was gradually formed. We have, un-
fortunately, no trustworthy means of estimating the rate of
formation of this substance, which indeed varies considerably,
according to the conditions of the case, but on any supposi-
tion the production of a mass in some places more than
thirty feet in thickness must have required a very consider-
able period. Yet it is in these beds that we find the remains
of the Neolithicor later Stone period. From the tombs at
St. Acheul, from the Roman remains found in the superficial
layers of the peat, at about the present level of the river, we
know that fifteen hundred years have produced scarcely any
                          = WNecup LO;
384                    RECAPITULATION.

change in the configuration of the valley.    In the peat, and
at a depth of about fifteen feet in the alluvium at Abbeville,
are the remains of the Neolithic period, which we have
ample reason for believing, from the researches in Denmark,
Switzerland, and other countries, to be of no slight antiquity.
Yet all these are subsequent to the excavation of the valley.
‘What date then are we to ascribe to the men who lived when
the Somme was but beginning its great task? No one can
properly appreciate the lapse of time indicated, who has not
stood on the heights of Liercourt, Picquigny, or on one of the
other points overlooking the valley: nor, I am sure, could
any geologist return from such a visit without an overpower-
ing sense of the changes which haye taken place, and the
length of time which must have elapsed since the first ap-
pearance of man in Western Europe.
                                 iS)(ea)or




                         CHAPTER XII.
                   ON   THE   ANTIQUITY      OF   MAN,


     LTHOUGH the facts recorded in the preceding chapters
       have been for the most part discovered within a com-
paratively recent period, it is by no means merely of late
years, or among archeologists only, that the difficulties in
Archbishop Usher’s chronology have been felt to be insuper-
able. Historians, philologists, and physiologists have alike
admitted that the short period allowed could hardly be recon-
ciled with the history of some         eastern    nations; that it did
not leave room for the development either of the different
languages, or (assuming the unity of the human race) for the
important physical peculiarities, by which the various races
of men are distinguished.
  Thus, Dr. Prichard      says, “ Many writers who have been
by no means inclined to raise objections against the authority
of the Sacred Scriptures, and in particular Michaelis, have
felt themselves embarrassed by the shortness of the interval
between the Noachic Deluge and the period at which the
records   of various nations commence, or the earliest date to
which their historical memorials lead us back. The extrava-
gant claims to a remote and almost fathomless antiquity,
made by the fabulists of many ancient nations, have vanished
before the touch of accurate criticism; but after abstracting
all that is apparently mythological from the early traditions
of the Indians, Egyptians, and some other nations, the pro-
bable history of some of them seems still to reach up toa
                                                 cc
386                      HISTORICAL    EVIDENCE.

period too remote to be reconciled with the short chronology
of Usher and Petavius. This has been so universally felt
by all those writers who have entered on the investigation
of primeval history that it is superfluous to dwell upon the
subject*.”
  Baron Bunsen, one of the ablest among those who regard
the various forms of language as having                 had a common
origin, is forced to claim for the human race an antiquity of
at least 20,000 years. Again, the ingenious author of “ The
Genesis of the Earth and of Mant,” says truly that “one
of the greatest of the difficulties that beset us when we
endeavour to account for the commonly supposed descent of
all. mankind froma single pair,     . . . . lies in the fact
of our finding, upon Egyptian monuments, mostly of the
thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries before the
 Christian era, representations of individuals of numerous
nations, African, Asiatic, and Huropean, differing in phy-
sical characteristics as widely as any equal number of nations
of the present age that could be grouped together; among
these being negroes, of the true Nigritian stamp, depicted
with a fidelity, as to colour and features, hardly to be sur-
passed by an accomplished modern artist. That such diver-
sities had been produced by natural means in the interval
between that remote age and the time of Noah, probably no
one versed in the sciences of anatomy and physiology will
consider   credible,”    and he concludes,         therefore,    that   the
human race cannot have been derived from a single pair.
For, just as the philological difficulties will not, of course,
affect those who accept literally the account given in our
English Version of the miraculous creation of languages at
the Tower of Babel; so in the same way “the shortness
of the period allowed by the received chronology, for the
 * Prichard, Researches into the Physical Hist. of Mankind, vol. v. p. 553.
                               Gell sib Lalys
                   ETHNOLOGICAL       EVIDENCE.                  387

development of those physical varieties which distinguish
the different races of men*,” though felt as “one of the
greatest difficulties connected with the opinion that all
mankind are descended from one primitive stock,” will not
affect those who believe in the existence of separate species
of men.
   Prof. Huxley has also deduced a very interesting argu-
ment from the geographical distribution of the races of men.
He divides mankind into four groups, the Australoid, Ne-
groid, Mongoloid, and Xanthochroid. The latter are the fair,
light-haired, blue-eyed people who occupy a large part of
Europe; the Mongoloid are the Tartar, American, and Poly-
nesian races; the Negroid are the Negroes, Hottentots, and
Negritos; and the Australoid type contains all the inhabi-
tants of Australia, and the native races of the Deccan, with
whom he also associates the Ancient Egyptians. Whatever
difference of opinion may exist among ethnologists about the
other three divisions, still as to the Negroid race most are-
agreed, and this is the one to which J now wish to call atten-
tion. The geographical distribution of the Xanthochroid and
Mongoloid races presents no difficulty, nor will I here discuss
that of the Australoid group. But I entirely agree with
Prof. Huxley that the present position of the Negro race
cannot be explained excepting on the hypothesis that since
the appearance of that race immense geographical changes
have taken place,—that      continent      has become   ocean,   and
sea, land. The negroes are essentially a non-navigating
race; they build no ships, and even the canoes of the Fee-
geeans are evidently copied from those of the Polynesians.
Now what is the geographical distribution of the race?
They occupy all Africa south of the Sahara,—which neither
they nor the rest of the true African fauna have ever crossed,
and though they do not occur in Arabia, Persia, Hindostan,
                      * Prichard, ]. c. p. 552.
                              Cucee
888    EVIDENCE   DERIVABLE   FROM   PHYSICAL   GEOGRAPHY.

Siam, or China, we find them in Madagascar, and in the
Andaman Islands,—not in Java, Sumatra, or Borneo, but in
the Malay peninsular, in the Philippines, New Guinea, the
New Hebrides, New Caledonia, the Feegee Islands, and in
Tasmania.
   This remarkable distribution is perhaps most easily ex-
plicable on the hypothesis that since the Negroid race came
into existence there must have been an immense tract of land
or a chain of islands stretching from the eastern coast of
Africa right across the Indian Ocean, and secondly, that sea
then occupied the area of the present great desert. In
whatever manner, however, these facts are to be explained,
they certainly indicate that the Negro race is of very great
antiquity.
   I have often been much struck, when standing at the feet
of glaciers, by the great size of the terminal moraines, and
the length of time which must have been required for their
formation.    Let us take as an instance the Nigaard glacier
in the Justedal, on the Sognefjord. The Norwegian glaciers
no doubt covered formerly a much larger area than that which
they now occupy. They retreated as the cold diminished;
but we have already seen that man was present in Western
Europe when the general temperature was several degrees
at least lower than it is at present; and we’'shall probably,
therefore, be within the mark if we suppose that the glacier
at Justedal has retreated at least a mile up the valley since
the period of the river-drift gravels, and the entrance of
man into Hurope.     Now the terminal moraine of the glacier
covers the whole of this space with great blocks of stones,
thousands and hundreds of thousands in number, and yet,
although all these have probably been brought down in the
human period, I could only see a few blocks on the lower
end of the glacier itself.
  As far as Denmark is concerned we must, for the present,
                THE   VEGETATION   OF DENMARK.            389

rely principally on the double change which has taken place
in the prevalent vegetation. Beech forests are now the
pride of the country, and, as far as tradition goes, they have
always been so. But, as is shown by the peat-bogs, this is a
mistake. The large peat-mosses do not help us very much
in this matter, but there are in many of the forests, small
and deep depressions, filled with peat, and called skov-mose.
These, as might naturally be expected, contain many trees
which grew on their edges, and at length fell into them. At
the bottom is usually an amorphous peat, above is a layer of
pines—a tree which does not now grow naturally in Den-
mark. Higher up the pines disappear, and are replaced by
oaks, and white birches, neither of which are now common
in Denmark; while the upper layer consists principally of
the Betula verrucosa, and corresponds to the present, which
we may call the Beech period. Professor Steenstrup has
found stone implements among the stems of the pines, and
as the capercailzie, which feeds on the young shoots of the
pine, has been found in the Kjékkenmoddings, it seems
likely, to say the least, that these shell-mounds belong to
the pine period, and that the three great stages of civiliza-
tion correspond in some measure to these three periods
of arborescent vegetation.  For one species of tree thus
to displace another, and in its turn to be supplanted by
a third, would evidently require a great, though at pre-
sent we have no means      of measuring how great, lapse of
time.
   Turning now from Denmark to Switzerland, there are two
cases in which a more definite estimate has been attempted.
We must not, indeed, place too much reliance on them as
yet, but if many calculations made on different data shall
agree in the main, we may at length come to some approxi-
mate conclusion.
   The first of these calculations we owe to M. Morlot.   The
390               THE CONE   Of THE TINIERE.

torrent of the Tiniére, at the point where it falls into the
Lake of Geneva, near Villeneuve, has gradually built up a
cone of gravel and alluvium.     In the formation of the rail-
way this cone has been bisected for a length of one thousand
feet, and to a depth, in the central part, of about thirty-two
feet six inches above the level of the railway. The section
of the cone thus obtained shows a very regular structure,
which proves that its formation was gradual. It is composed
of the same materials (sand, gravel, and large blocks) as
those which are even now brought down by the stream. The
amount of detritus does, mdeed, differ considerably from
year to year, but in the long-run the differences compensate
for one another, so that, when considering long periods, and
the structure of the whole     mass, the influences of the tem-
porary   variations, which   arise from meteorological causes,
altogether disappear, and need not, therefore, be taken into
account. Documents preserved in the archives of Villeneuve
show that in the year 1710 the stream was dammed up, and
its course a little altered, which makes the present cone
slightly irregular. That the change was not of any great
antiquity is also shown by the fact that on the side where
the cone was protected by the dykes, the vegetable soil,
where it has been affected by cultivation, does not exceed
two or three inches in thickness. On the side thus pro-
tected by the dykes the railway cutting has exposed three
layers of vegetable soil, each of which must, at one time,
have formed the surface of the cone. They are regularly
intercalated among the gravel, and parallel to one another,
as well as to the present surface of the cone, which itself fol-
lows a very regular curve. The first of these ancient surfaces
was traced on the south side of the cone, over a surface of
15,000 square feet : it had a thickness of four to six inches,
and occurred at a depth of about four feet (1.14 metre mea-
sured to the base of the layer) below the present surface of
                  THE   CONE   OF THE   TINIERE.           391

the cone.   This layer, which belonged to the Roman period,
contained tiles and a Roman coin.
   The second layer was traced over a surface       of 25,000
square feet; it was six inches in thickness, and lay at a
depth of about ten feet (2.97 metres) including the thickness
of the layer. In it have been found several fragments of
unglazed pottery, and a pair of tweezers in bronze.       The
third layer has been followed for 3500 square feet; it was
six or seven inches in thickness, and lay at a depth of nine-
teen feet (5.69 metres) below the present surface: in it were
found some fragments of very rude pottery, some pieces of
charcoal, some broken bones, and a human skeleton with a
small, round, and very thick skull. Fragments of charcoal
were even found a foot deeper, and it is also worthy of notice
that no trace of tiles was found below the upper layer of
earth.
   Towards the centre of the cone, the three layers disappear,
since, at this part, the torrent has most force, and has de-
posited the coarsest materials, even some blocks as much as
three feet in diameter. The farther we go from this central
region, the smaller are the materials deposited, and the more
easily might a layer of earth, formed since the last great
inundations, be covered over by fresh deposits. Thus, at a
depth of ten feet, in the gravel on the south of the cone, at
a part where the layer of earth belonging to the Bronze Age
had already disappeared, two unrolled bronze implements
were discovered. They had probably been retained by their
weight, when the earth which once covered them was washed
away by the torrent. After disappearing towards the centre
of the cone, the:three layers reappear on the north side, at a
slightly greater depth, but with the same regularity, and the
same relative position. The layer of the Stone Age was but
slightly interrupted, while that of the Bronze era was easily
distinguishable by its peculiar character and colour.
392                    THE   CONE   OF THE   TINIERE.

   It must be confessed that the starting-point of this argu-
ment, viz. the so-called “Roman” layer, is far from being
satisfactorily determined. It is quite possible that tiles were
used in Switzerland before the “Roman” period; it is pro-
bable that they continued in use to a later period. The coin
found in the “‘ Roman” layer was so much worn as to be un-
determinable; it had, therefore, probably been long in use.
M. Uhlmann has also argued* that the bones found in the
lower layer are not such as we should expect to find in a
Stone Age deposit, since they are not so much discoloured as
those from the Stone Age pfahlbauten, and all belong to
domestic animals.     Only fourteen determinable fragments,
however, were found, and of these several probably belonged
to a single individual. Moreover, it would be very illogical
to compare the condition of bones from a peat-moss with
those which had been lying in a material such as that forming
the cone of the Tiniére.
   M{. Morlot did not disguise from himself that there were
certain elements        of doubt    in the case, but on the whole it
seemed to him that the phenomena were so regular and so
well marked that he was justified in applying to them a cal-
culation, with some little confidence of at least approximate
accuracy.       Making some allowances ; for instance, admitting
three hundred years instead of one hundred and fifty, for the
period since the embankment,.and taking the Roman period
as representing an antiquity of from sixteen to eighteen
centuries, he obtains for the age of Bronze an antiquity of
from 2900 years to 42U0 years, for that of the Stone period
from 4700 to 7000 years, and for the whole cone an age of
from 7400 to 11,000 years. M. Morlot thought that we
should be most nearly correct in deducting two hundred
years only for the action of the dykes, and in attributing to
  * Ueber Thierreste und Gebisstheil   gefunden in den Schuttablagerungen
der Tiniére.   Bern, 1868.
                     THE   VALLEY     OF THE THIELE.                       393

the Roman layer an antiquity of sixteen centuries, that is to
say, in referring it to the middle of the third century.                  This
would give an antiquity of 3800 years for the Bronze Age,
and 6400 years for that of Stone; and, on the whole, he is
inclined to suppose for the former an antiquity of from 3000
to 4000 years, and for the latter of from 5000 to 7000 years.
   Not less ingenious is the attempt which has been made
by M. Gilliéron*, Professor at the College of Neuveville, to
obtain a date for the lake-habitation at the Pont de Thiéle.
This stream connects the lakes of Neufchatel and Bienne.
During the first part of its course, the valley is narrow, and
the bridge, close to which the lake-dwelling has been dis-
covered, is situated at the narrowest spot. A little farther
down the valley suddenly expands, and from this point re-
mains of the same width until it joins the Lake of Bienne.
It is evident that the valley, as far as the bridge over the
Thiéle, was once occupied by the lake, which has gradually
been silted up by the action of forces still in operation, and,
if we could ascertain how long it would have taken to effect
this change, we should then know approximately the date of
the remains found at the Pont de Thiéle, which are evidently
those of a lake-dwelling.    The Abbey of St. Jean, which
stands in this valley, about 875 metres from the present
shore of the lake, was founded, according to ancient docu-
ments, between       the years 1090           and 1106, and is therefore
about 750 years old. It is possible that the abbey may not
have been built exactly on the then edge of the lake; but
even if this were the case, the gain of land will only have
been 375 metres in 750 years. Prof. Gilliéron does not com-
pare with this the whole space between the convent and the
lake-dwelling, because in the narrower part of the valley,
in which the latter is situated, the gain may have been more
   * Notice sur les Habitations   Lacustres    du Pont de Thisle.   Porrentruy,
1862.
394,              THE FORMATION   OF EGYPT.

rapid; but if we only go to the point at which the basin
contracts, we shall have a distance   of 3000 metres, which
would upon these data indicate a minimum antiquity of 6750
years. This calculation assumes that the shape of the bottom
of the valley was originally uniform. M. Morlot agrees with
Prof. Gilliéron in believing that this was the case, and from
the general configuration of the valley it seems to me also to
be a reasonable supposition. Moreover, the soundings taken
by M. Hisely in the Lake of Bienne show that the variations
in depth are but of slight importance. These two calcula-
tions, then, appear to indicate that 6000 or 7000 years ago
 Switzerland was already inhabited by men who used polished
 stone implements, but how long they had been there, or how
 many centuries elapsed before the discovery of metal, we
 have as yet no evidence to show.
    A still greater antiquity was obtained by Mr. Horner as
 the result of his Egyptian researches, which were undertaken
at the joint expense of the Royal Society and the Egyptian
 Government.      Every year the Nile, during its periodical
 overflow, deposits a certain amount of fine mud, and even
as long ago as the time of Herodotus it was inferred that
Egypt had been formerly an arm of the sea, filled up gradually
and converted into dry land by the mud brought down from
the upper country.
   In the great work on Egypt which we owe to the French
philosophers who accompanied Napoleon’s expedition to that
country, an attempt was made to estimate the secular eleya-
tion thus produced, and it was assumed to be five inches in
a century. This general average was consistent, however,
with great differences at different parts, and Mr. Horner,
therefore, did not consider himself justified in applying this
estimate to particular cases, even if he had been satisfied
with the evidence on which it rested. He preferred to exa-
mine the accumulation which had taken place round monu-
          THE   GRADUAL   ELEVATION     OF THE    COUNTRY.   395

ments of known age, and selected two—namely, the obelisk
at Heliopolis, and the statue of Rameses II., in Memphis.
“The obelisk is believed to have been erected 2300 years
B.c., and adding 1850, the year when the observation was
made (June, 1851, i.e. before the inundation of that year),
we have 4150 years in which the eleven feet of sediment
were deposited, which is at the rate of 8.18 inches in a
century*.” But Mr. Horner himself admits that “entire
reliance cannot be placed on this conclusion, principally
because it is possible that the site originally chosen for the
temple and city of Heliopolis was a portion of land some-
what raised above the level of the rest of the desert.” He
relies, therefore, principally on the evidence supplied by the
colossal statue in Memphis. In this case the present surface
is 10 feet 62 inches above the base of the platform on which
the statue stood. Assuming that the platform was sunk
142 inches below the surface of the ground at the time it
was laid, we have a depth of sediment from the present
surface to that level of 9 feet 4 inches. Rameses is sup-
posed by Lepsius to have reigned between 1394 and 1328 B.c.,
which would give an antiquity of 8215 years, and con-
sequently a mean increase of 84 inches in a century.
Having thus obtained an approximate measure of the rate
of deposit in that part of the Nile valley, Mr. Horner dug
several pits to a considerable depth, and in one of them,
close to the statue and at the depth of 39 feet, a piece of
pottery was found, which upon the above data would indicate
an antiquity of about 13,000 years.
   In many other excavations, pieces of pottery and other
indications of man were found at even greater depths, but
it must be confessed that there are several reasons which
render the calculations somewhat doubtful.    For instance, it
is impossible to ascertain how far the pedestal of the statue
                 * Torner, Phil. Trans., 1858, p. 73.
396     OWING   TO THE ANNUAL    DEPOSIT    OF NILE   MUD.

was inserted into the ground; Mr. Horner has allowed 142
inches, but if it was much deeper, the rate of deposition
would be diminished, and the age increased.           On the other
hand, if the statue was     on   raised    ground, of course   the
reverse would be the case.
   It has also been argued that the ancient Egyptians were
in the habit of making embankments round the areas on
which they erected temples, statues, etc., so as to keep out
the waters of the Nile.
   “‘ Whenever, then,” says Sir Charles Lyell, “ the waters at
length break into such depressions, they musi at first carry
with them into the enclosure much mud washed from the
steep surrounding banks, so that a greater quantity would
be deposited in a few years than, perhaps, in as many cen-
 turies on the great plain outside the depressed area, where
 no such disturbing causes intervened.” This objection is,
however, untenable, because the rapidity of depression will
be in proportion to the previous retardation, and will only
tend to bring the depressed area up to the general level.
Supposing, for instance, that the monument of Rameses,
erected on the flat plain of Memphis 3200 years ago, was
protected by embankments for the first 2000 years, and
that during that time the plain outside was gradually raised
5 feet 10 inches, being at the rate of 3$ inches in a century.
When the embankment gave way the space enclosed would
soon be filled up to the general level, and a thickness of 5 feet
10 inches might be deposited in a few years: still this
exceptionally rapid accumulation would only be the comple-
ment of the exceptional want of deposit which had preceded
it; and, consequently, when the level of the surrounding
plain had been attained,    then, although the mud covering
the base of the statue may have been altogether deposited
in the last few hundred years, i.e. since the embankments
have been neglected, the thickness of the deposit will still
              MR.   HORNER’S   EGYPTIAN   RESEARCHES.            397

be a measure of the general elevation which has taken place
on the surrounding plain since the erection of the monu-
ment.
   Kven if the embankments had remained intact to this day,
and the monument stood now in the hollow thus produced,
Mr. Horner’s argument would not be invalidated, but rather
confirmed. The depth of the hollow would give us a measure
of the deposit which had taken place since the erection of the
monument, or rather since the formation of the embankment.
If, however, the monument had been erected in an area
already depressed by the action of still older embankments,
the calculation would be vitiated, but in this case the rate of
deposition would appear to be greater than it really is, and
the true age consequently would be even greater than the
above estimate.  There are other causes, however, which
prevent me from accepting unreservedly the conclusions of
Mr. Horner, although his experiments          are of great impor-
tance, and much credit is due to the Egyptian government
for the liberal manner in which they assisted Mr. Horner
and the Royal Society in this investigation.
   I have already mentioned the evidence on which M. Morlot
has endeavoured to estimate the age of the Cone de la
Tiniére, and which gave about six thousand years for the
lower layer of vegetable soil, and ten thousand years for the
whole of the existing cone. But above this existing cone is
another, which was formed when the lake stood at a higher
level than at present, and which M. Morlot refers to the
period of the river-drift gravels. This drift-age cone is about
twelve times as large as that now forming, and would appear,
therefore, on the same data, to indicate an antiquity of more
than one hundred thousand years.
   In his “Travels in North America,’           Sir C. Lyell has
endeavoured    to estimate     the age of the Mississippi   delta in
the following manner :—“ Dr. Riddle,” he says, “ communi-
398            AGE   OF THE   MISSISSIPPI   DELTA.

cated   to me, at New     Orleans,   the result      of a series   of
experiments which he had made to ascertain the proportion
of sediment contained in the waters of the Mississippi. He
concluded that the mean annual amount of solid matter was
to the water as 4,      in weight,   or about >,4, in volume,
Since that period he has made another series of experiments,
and his tables show that the quantity of mud held in sus-
pension, increases regularly with the increased height and
velocity of the stream. On the whole, comparing the flood
season with that of clearest water, his experiments, continued
down to 1849, give an average annual quantity of solid
matter somewhat less than his first estimate, but not varying
materially from it. From these observations, and those of
Dr. Carpenter and Mr. Forskey (an eminent engineer, to
whom    I have before alluded), on the average width, depth,
and velocity of the Mississippi, the mean annual discharge of
water and sediment were deduced.         I then assumed 528
feet, or the tenth of a mile, as the probable thickness of the
deposit of mud and sand in the delta; founding my con-
jecture chiefly on the depth of the Gulf of Mexico between
the southern point of Florida and the Balize, which equals,
on an average, one hundred fathoms, and partly on some
borings six hundred feet deep, in the delta near Lake Pont-
chartrain, north of New Orleans, in which the bottom of the
alluvial matter is said not to have been reached.          The area
of the delta being about 13,600 square statute miles, and the
quantity of solid matter annually brought down the river,
38,702,758,400 cubic feet, it must have taken 67,000 years
for the formation of the whole; and if the alluvial matter of
the plain above be 264 feet deep, or half that of the delta, it
must have required 33,500 more years for its accumulation,
even if its area be estimated only as equal to that of the
delta, whereas it is, in fact, larger.”
   Moreover, as Sir Charles has himself pointed out, a very
    LAPSE OF TIME AS INDICATED BY CHANGE OF CLIMATE.                      399
large proportion of the mud brought down by the river is
not deposited in the delta, but is carried out into the gulf,
In the “ Antiquity of Man*,” he refers to the above given
calculation, and admits that the discharge of water seems to
have been much underrated by the earlier experiments,
Messrs. Humphrey and Abbot, who have recently surveyed
the delta, also      “remark      that    the   river pushes    along its
bottom into the gulf a certain quantity of sand and gravel,
which would,” they suppose, “augment the volume of solid
matter by about one-tenth.”  This, of course, would greatly
diminish the time required; but taking into consideration
the quantity of mud which is carried out to sea, and which
was not allowed for in the previous calculation, Sir Charles
Lyell still regards 100,000 years as a moderate estimate ; and
he considers      that, “the alluvium of the Somme containing
 flint implements and the remains of the mammoth and
hyzena,’’ is no less ancient.
    Again, whatever cause or causes may have produced the
great change which has taken place in the climate of Western
Europe, there can be little doubt that this change indicates
a very considerable lapse of time. Weare indebted to Mr.
Hopkins for a very interesting memoir on this subject.
Among the possible causes of change he discusses—
    Firstly, A variation in the intensity of solar radiation.
    To this theory Mr. Hopkins sees no @ priort objection ; but
he does not feel disposed to attach much weight to it, because
it is “a mere hypothesis framed to account for a single and
limited class of facts, and unsupported by the testimony of
any other class of allied, but independent phenomena.”
   It is, moreover, open to the objections stated with great
force by Professor Tyndall+, who argues that the ancient

  * Appendix to third edition of the     p. 1.               ’
Antiquity of Man, p. 16. See also           + Heat considered as a Mode    of
Geological Journal, 1869, vol. xxv.      Motion, p. 192.
400   LAvtSE OF TIME AS INDICATED      BY CHANGE OF CLIMATE.

glaciers indicate the action of heat as much as of cold.
“ Cold,” he says, “ will not produce glaciers. You may have
the bitterest north-east winds here in London throughout
the winter, without a single flake of snow.    Cold must have
the fitting object to operate upon, and this object—the
aqueous vapour of the air—is the direct product of heat.
Let us put this glacier question in another form: the latent
heat of aqueous vapour, at the temperature of its produc-
tion in the tropics, is about 1000° Fahr., for the latent
heat augments as the temperature of evaporation descends.
A pound of water thus vaporized at the equator, has absorbed
one thousand times the quantity of heat which would raise a
pound of the liquid one degree in temperature. .... It is
perfectly manifest that by weakening the sun’s action, either
through a defect of emission, or by the steeping of the entire
solar system in space of a low temperature, we should be
cutting off the glaciers at their source.”
   Professor Frankland has even gone so far as to express the
opinion that “ the sole cause of the phenomena of the glacial
epoch was a higher temperature of the ocean than that which
obtains at present*,” having no doubt overlooked the fact
that the fauna of the sea, as well as of the land, had an Arctic
character.
   Secondly. Admitting the proper motion of the sun, it
has been suggested that we may have recently passed from
a colder into a warmer region of space.
  I must refer to Mr. Hopkins’ memoir for his objections to
this suggestion ; they certainly appear to “ render the theory
utterly inapplicable to the explanation of the changes of
temperature at the more recent geological epochs.”
   This hypothesis, moreover, is liable to the same fatal
objection as the first. To produce snow requires both heat
and cold; the first to evaporate, the second to condense.
                    * Phil. Mag. 1864, p. 328.
          SIR J. W.   LUBBOCK     ON THE     EARTH’S   AXIS.          401

In fact, what we require is a greater contrast between the
temperature of the tropics and that of our latitudes; so that,
paradoxical as it may appear, the primary cause of the
“glacial” epoch may be, after all, an elevation of tempera-
ture in the tropics, causing a greater amount of evaporation
in the equatorial regions and consequently a greater supply
of the raw material of snow in the temperate regions during
the winter months.
   Thirdly. An alteration in the earth’s axis.
   The possibility of such a change has been denied by many
astronomers.    My father, the late Sir J. W. Lubbock, has,
on the contrary, maintained*           that this would         necessarily
follow from upheavals and depressions of the earth’s surface,
if only they were of sufficient magnitude.     The same view
has recently been taken by other mathematicians.          This
suggestion, hike the preceding, presupposes immense geo-
graphical changes, which would therefore necessarily imply
an enormous lapse of time.
   Fourthly. Mr. Hopkins inclines to find the true solution
of the difficulty in the supposition that the Gulf-Stream did
not at this period warm the shores of Hurope.      “A depres-
sion of 2000 feet would,” he says, “convert the Mississippi
into a great arm of the sea, of which the present Gulf of
Mexico would form the southern extremity, and which would
communicate at its northern extremity with the waters occu-
pyig the... . great valley now occupied by the chain. of
lakes.” In this case the Gulf-Stream would no longer be
deflected by the American coasts, but would pass directly up
this channel into the Arctic Sea; and as a very great ocean
current must have its counter current, it is probable that
there would be a flow of cold water from the North between
the coasts of Norway and Greenland. The absence of the
Gulf-Stream would probably lower the January temperature
                      * Geol. Journ. vol. v. p. 4.
                                                         bd
4.02        EFFECT    OF A CHANGE   IN THE    GULF-STREAM.

of Western Europe ten degrees, while the presence of a cold
current from the north would make a further difference of
about three or four degrees*, an alteration of the climate
which would apparently be sufficient to account for all
the phenomena. This theory Mr. Hopkins considers as no
mere hypothesis, but as necessarily following from the sub-
mergence of North America, which has been inferred from
evidence of a different nature.
   In this case, of course, the periods of great cold in Europe
and in America must have been successive, and not synchro-
nous; and it may also be observed, that in this suggested
deflection of the Gulf-Stream, Mr. Hopkins was contem-
plating a period anterior to that of the present rivers. For
if we are to adopt this solution of the difficulty, an immense
time would be required. If, when the gravels and loéss of
the Somme and the Seine were being deposited, the Gulf-
Stream was passing up what is now the valley of the Missis-
sippi, then it follows that the formation of the loéss in that
valley and its delta, an accumulation which Sir C. Lyell has
shown to require a period of about           100,000 years, would be
subsequent to the excavation of the Somme valley, and to
the presence of man in Western Europe.
   The deflection of the Gulf-Stream from our coasts might,
however, be owing to another cause, namely, a subsidence of
the isthmus of Panama; in support of which suggestion may
be mentioned the remarkable fact recently observed by Dr.
Gunther, that out of 173 tropical marine fish, no less than
57, or 30 per cent., occur on both sides of the isthmus; in
both the Atlantic and the Pacific +.
  Mr. Croll, however, has pointed out that at present the
“S.H. trade winds of the Atlantic blow with greater force
than the N.H. trades, and the consequence is that the S.H.
trades sometimes extend to 10° or 15° N. lat., whereas the
  * Hopkins, 1. c. p. 85.           tT Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. vi. p. 397.
            EFFECT   OF   A CHANGE      IN    THE   GULF-STREAM.,     403

N.E. trades seldom blow south of the equator. But during
the glacial epoch the very reverse must have occurred.
Hence the great equatorial current of the Atlantic must
during that period have been driven considerably south of
its present position *.” Even at present, while the greater
part of the water enters the Gulf of Mexico, one portion is
deflected   southwards,      which      in the case      mentioned   above
would happen to the greater portion, if not the whole.
   Under existing circumstances, however, the southern divi-
sion is comparatively small; by far the larger portion of the
great equatorial current        turns        northwards, and warms     the
northern hemisphere, so that the comparatively high tempe-
rature of the Northern Atlantic is in some measure due to
heat derived from the Southern hemisphere. In a recent
memoir + Mr. Croli has shown the great effect produced by
the Gulf-Stream on the present climate of Europe. He cal-
culates that it conveys as much heat as is received from the
sun by 3,121,870 square miles at the Equator, nearly as much
as is received from the sun by the entire Arctic regions, the
proportions being as 15 to 18. Our present climate is 12°
higher than     the normal      due to its latitude, but Mr. Croll
points out that this is by no means to be considered as mea-
suring the effect of the Gulf-Stream.      The temperature of
the whole hemisphere is raised by the equatorial currents,
and the 12° “‘ only represent the number of degrees that the
mean normal temperature of our island stands above what is
called the normal temperature of the latitude.”
   There is yet another cause to. which the present mild tem-
perature of Europe is partly due, and which must not be
altogether neglected. At the period under consideration,
indeed, the geography of Western Europe must have been
very nearly what it is now.    There is, however, good reason
              * Croll, Philosophical Magazine, Aug. 1864.
              + 1. c. Feb. and Oct. 1870.
                                   D d.2
404,                   ASTRONOMICAL     CAUSES.

for considering that the desert of Sahara then formed part of
the Atlantic Ocean. Mr. Tristram has called attention to
cliffs, ancient sea-beaches, and lines of terraces along the
northern margin of the desert, and the common cockle is
still found livmg in some of the salt lakes. Mr. Tristram
also discovered a species of Haligenes, which inhabits the
Gulf of Guinea, in a salt lake in lat. 82° N. and long. 7° E.,
separated, therefore, from its present marine habitat by the
whole extent     of the Great    Desert.      Moreover, as we have
already seen, the present geographical distribution of animals
can only be explained on the hypothesis that the existing
fauna, including man, occupied Africa long before the Sahara
became dry land.
   Mr. Croll has shown in the memoir already cited that
 currents of warm water: produce a far greater effect upon
 chmate than aerial currents of equal volume and tempera-
ture, yet it is evident that such a change would have a
great effect on the climate of Europe.         At present we
receive   from   the   south, hot      dry winds,     which    warm    us
both directly and also indirectly by melting the snow and
ice on our mountain-tops.     If the Sahara was a sea, the
“Fohn,” mstead of being a burning, dry wind, which strips
the snow cff the Alps, both by melting and evaporation,
would be a moist,        damp   wind,     and when      it reached    the
mountains would produce dense clouds and thick fogs, which
would prevent the sun’s rays from warming the earth or
melting the glaciers. So that to the barren desert of the
Sahara, which we are apt to look upon as a useless waste,
we are in reality much indebted for the fertility and civi-
lization of Hurope.
   M. Adhémar* has suggested a mode of accounting for
the cold of the glacial epoch, which, if the true one, would
give us means of calculating its antiquity.             If the plane of
             * Revolutions dela Mer.    J. Adhémar.   Paris.
                PRECESSION   OF   THE   EQUINOXES,              405

the equator coincided exactly with that of the ecliptic, i.e.
with that of the earth’s orbit, then it is evident that every
day would be followed by a night of equal length. In con-
sequence, however, of the obliquity of the ecliptic, there are
only two days in the year when this is actually the case,
namely, the 20th of March and the 28rd September.         Thus
our year is divided into four well marked periods.           “ Win-
ter” begins on the 22nd December, which is the shortest
day of the year, and continues until the 20th March, which
is called the spring equinox, because on it the day and
night are of equal lengths. ‘‘Spring’? commences on the
20th March and continues till the 21st June, during which
time the days continue to elongate at the expense of the
night.
  From the 21st June, however, which is the first day of
“summer,” the days begin to shorten, until, on the 28rd of
September, day and night are again equal, and we have the
autumn equinox.
  Autumn commences on the 23rd September, and the days
continue to diminish till the 22nd December, which is the
shortest day, and after which they begin to lengthen.
   At present, then, the northern hemisphere enjoys in each
year seven days more of spring and summer than of autumn
and   winter, while, on the other       hand, the southern   hemi-
sphere has seven days more of autumn and winter than of
spring and summer.        This inequality of the seasons is due
to the greater rapidity with which the earth moves when it
is in perihelion, or nearest the sun, as is the case on the 31st
December.
   The dates of perihelion and spring equinox have not
always been, nor will they always continue to be, the same
as at present.   On the contrary, a constant though slow
movement is continually taking place: the spring equinox,
which is now on the 20th March, will after a while be on the
406                 M. ADHEMAR’S   ARGUMENT.

19th, then on the 18th, and so on; whilst perihelion, which
now happens on the 31st December, will in the lapse of time
fall on the 1st of January, then on the 2nd, and soon.    The
interval between the two occurrences, therefore, is diminish-
ing; at some future day they will be coincident, and in
about 21,000 years they will be as far apart again as they
now are. The longest and shortest days, and the autumnal
equinox, move of course in the same manner as the spring
equinox, and consequently the northern and southern hemi-
spheres alternately enjoy a preponderance of summer.      The
year 1248 a.p. was that in which the first day of winter cor-
responded with the passage of the earth into perihelion, and
consequently was the period when the balance of summer in
favour of the northern hemisphere was greatest. Up to that
date the duration of summer was increasing ; it is now, and
has been for 620 years, gradually diminishing.
      zistronomers have not, however, generally considered that
these changes, or even those which affect the excentricity of
our orbit, would produce any material difference between the
climates of the two hemispheres, because whatever the excen-
tricity of our orbit may be, the two hemispheres must receive
exactly the same amounts of heat, “ the proximity of the sun
in perigee, or its distance in apogee, exactly compensating
the effect of its swifter or slower motion ;” in other words,
the southern hemisphere has a shorter summer than ours
because it is nearer    the sun, and for the same reason it re-
ceives in a given time more heat, so that the two differences
neutralize one another.
   M. Adhémar points out, however, that the temperature of
each hemisphere does not depend on the quantity of heat
received from the sun, but on the difference between the
amount received, and the amount      radiated away into space;
in other words, on the quantity retained.        If, he says in
illustration, you burn a given quantity of wood in two iden-
           THE       CUPOLA   OF ICE AT THE      SOUTH         POLE.           407

tical rooms, and then open the windows in one and not
in the other, you will soon have a difference of tempe-
rature, though the supply of heat has been the same in
both*.
   Now our northern hemisphere has 186 x 24 = 4464 hours
of day in the year, and 179            x 24 = 4296 hours of night,
while the southern hemisphere has 4464 hours of night, and
only 4296 of day. We may admit that the southern hemi-
sphere will receive as much heat from the sun in its 4296
hours of day, as we do in our 4464, but it is evident that it
will retain less, because it will have 168 hours more of night,
during which radiation will be going on. Though, therefore,
the heat received by the two hemispheres will be equal, the
temperature of the two will not be by any means the same,
and though at first this difference may be slight, it will in
its nature be to a certain extent cumulative.
   That the southern hemisphere is colder than the northern
is evident on account of the much greater accumulation of
ice in the former; but it is also clear that this very fact tends
to aggravate the difference to which it is due.
   Moreover, M. Adhémar affirms that the immense cupola
of ice which is known to exist round the South Pole must
affect the centre of gravity of the earth, and consequently
attract the ocean       southwards.       In this manner,              indeed, he
attempts to explain the remarkable preponderance of land in
the north, and of sea in the southern hemisphere. A glance
at the map will show this difference, but the following table
makes it more apparent. Taking each parallel as unity, the
proportion of sea is as follows :—
  60° North      .       ~    80.08       10° South.                   Sein   oo
  con              e e oz                 aoe     8,                   0777
  Lis            oe WY                    a)              ea             OE
                       * Revolutions de la Mer, p. 344.
408          THE      CUPOLA   OF ICE AT THE    SOUTH        POLF.

  30° North .             . 0.536       40° South       .            2200951
  COS     a               POLO          50°. eae                     wet.O ye
  LO2aaa;       Des       O21 10        GOS   Si        he           1000
     OSs 5,0 be as        eOched

Certainly a progressive increase of sea, which is so remark-
ably regular, can hardly be the result of accident.
   M. Adbémar maintains that this is due to the alteration of
the centre of gravity of the earth, caused by the great
southern cupola of ice, and consequently that 11,120 years
ago (i.e. 10,500 years before 1248), when the northern hemi-
sphere was at its coldest, the northern glacier consequently
at its maximum, and the southern at its minimum, the pre-
ponderance of water would have been in the northern hemi-
sphere, and the submersion of the lower lands of Europe and
America may have been due to an alteration, not in the level
of the land, but in that of the sea.           He   conceives that when
the increasing cupola counterbalances the decreasing one,
there is a sudden transfer of the centre of gravity of the
earth from one side of the centre of the solid part to the
other, and consequently a rush of water, or deluge, alter-
nately from north to south and from south to north, occur-
ring every 10,500 years. It seems to me, however, that the
alterations of the ice cupolas would be too slow, and conse-
quently the change in the centre of gravity too gradual to
cause any sudden rush or deluge of water from the one pole
to the other.                                                |
   According to this theory, the year 1248 was that in which
our northern hemisphere was at its period of greatest heat,
the southern at that of greatest cold; and as 600 years have
since elapsed we ought to find some evidence of subsequent
change.
  As regards the southern hemisphere, M. Adhémar points
out that the great southern glacier has considerably retreated
                  OBJECTIONS    TO M. ADHEMAR’S       THEORY.             4.09

since the time of Captain Cook, but it is in the northern
hemisphere that he finds the greatest evidence of alteration.
He dwells much on the increase, during the last few cen-
turies, of the Swiss glaciers, and of the ice in Greenland,
and points out that the cultivation of the vine does not now
extend so far northwards as was once the case. M. Adhémar,
then, considers that the last epoch of greatest cold must
have been 11,120 years ago, since which                time the climate of
our hemisphere gradually improved up to the year 1248,
when it was most genial, and after which it has, in his opinion,
gradually commenced again to deteriorate.           Sir Charles
Lyell*, however, does not think that this change, “ which
could hardly produce more than a difference of half a degree
Fahrenheit between the cold of the present winter and that
of 1248, would be appreciable.”      He adds that the whole
effect which can be produced by secular astronomical changes
must “always be very subordinate to the influence of geo-
graphical conditions +.”
    Sir John Herschell { also “is very far from supposing it
competent” to account for so great an alteration. Moreover
it is remarkable as showing how far we are from possessing the
data necessary for any satisfactory conclusions, that while, as
we have seen, M. Adhémar regards the enormous cupola of
ice at the South Pole as the reason for the almost entire
absence of land at that Pole, Sir C. Lyell, on the other hand,
states as a fact, that the chief cause of the intense celd of
high southern latitudes is “the vast height and extent
of the Antarctic continent,” the very existence of which
is denied by, and is indeed incompatible with, the theory
of M. Adhémar, while it is necessary to that of Sir C.
Lyell.

  * Principles of Geology, 1867, vol. i.     + Outlines of Astronomy, 1858, p.
p. 278.                                    235.
   + Ibid. vol. i. p. 243.
410            PROBABLE     EFFECT    OF   PRECESSION.

   It must, I think, be confessed that the existence of Vic-
toria Land, Enderby’s Land, and other coasts, as well as the
great volcano of Mount Hrebus, are unfavourable to the
theory advocated by M. Adhémar, so far at least as he applies
it to explain the present remarkable distribution of land and
sea; and it must also be remembered, as tending to show
that the geographical distribution of land and sea has more
influence on climate than M. Adhémar             is disposed to admit,
that according to his theory the southern hemisphere ought
at the present time to be, as a whole, far colder than the
northern, which, however, is not the case.
   Although, then, there can be no doubt that astronomical
changes would, to a certain extent, affect our climate in the
manner indicated by M. Adhémar, those best qualified to
form an opinion do not consider that the cause assigned by
him would by itself be sufficient to account for changes so
great as those which have taken place. The effect produced
increases, however, with the excentricity of the earth’s orbit.
The form of this orbit is always altering; as it approaches to
a circle, the effect produced by precession and change of
position of perihelion diminishes, while on the other hand it
increases as the orbit elongates. At present the excentricity
of our orbit is only 0.0168,—that is to say, the orbit is nearly
circular; but there have been periods when it was much more
elongated, and when consequently the extremes of tempera-
ture dependent on precession and the position of perihelion
must also have been much greater.
   Mr. Croll and Mr. Stone have calculated the excentricity
for the last million years, and Mr. John Carrick Moore has
worked out the effect upon our climate, assuming other
things to remain unchanged, in the four last columns of the
following table which is given by Sir C. Lyell in the last
edition of the “ Principles of Geology *.”
                          * lc. vol. inp. 298.
                        THE        EXCENTRICITY           OF     THE     EARTH’S       ORBIT.                411
Table showing the variations in the excentricity of the earth’s
      orbit for a million years before a.p. 1800, and some of the
      climatal effects of such variations.

                         ell                2      =I                    a            5               6S
                    Number of | Excentricity |Difference!          Number          Mean of        Mean of
  |                 years before            of      of distance} of winter          hottest        coldest
                     A.D. 1800.           Orbit.    in millions}       daysin   [month in lat./month in lat
                                                        of miles. | excess.     | of London.   | of London.

                  1,000,000               .0151             23           a3           83°F,         Zeon
          D         950,000               -0517             93          25.1         109°            3°
                    900,000               .0102             1i           4.9          80°           23.
              [=    850,000               .0747            134          36.4         126°            We
       C       .b   800,000               -0132             22           6.4          82°           222
              Le}     750,000 | .0375                      103 | 27.8                113°             0°6
                      700,000             .0220             4           10.2          87°            sl
                      650,000             .0226             4           ae            88°            16°
                      600,000             .0417             7%          20.3         101°9            79
                      550,000 | .0166                       3            8            84°            20°
                      500,000             .0388             7           18.8          O98             9°
                      450,000             .0308             54          15            94°            oe
                      400,000       |     .0170             3            8.2          84°            20°
                      350,000 |           0195              34           9.5          86°            18°
                      800,000             0424              7           20.6        102°              im
                      250,000             .0258             4s          12.5         90°            5°
      B       fa      210,000       |     0575             103          27.8        TRS              0°7
              Lb;     200,000       |     .0567            10;          27.7        Ibis             i)
                      150,000             .0332             6           16.1         95°            12°
 | A                  100,000             -0473             8h          23          105°             De
                        50,000            .0131             22           6.3          82°           22°
                         0                .0168             3            8.1          84°           20°



                                   EXPLANATION               OF THE          TABLE.
      Corumn         1.—Division of a million years preceding 1800 into twenty equal
parts.
      Cotusn 2.—Computed by Mr. James Croll, by aid of Leverrier’s formula,
gives the excentricity of the earth’s orbit, in parts of a unit equal to the
mean distance, or half the longer diameter of the ellipse.
   Cotumy 3.—Which, together with the three following columns, has been
computed by Mr. John Carrick Moore, gives in millions of miles the differ-
ence between the greatest and least distances of the earth from the sun,
during the excentricities given in Column 2.
   Coruun 4.—Gives the number of days by which winter, occurring in
aphelion, is longer than the summer in perihelion.
   Cotuun 5.—Gives the mean temperature of the hottest summer month in
the latitude of London when the summer occurs in perihelion.
      Coruxn         6.—Gives           the mean temperature of the coldest winter month in
the latitude of London when the winter occurs in aphelion.
412           DATE   SUGGESTED    FOR THE    GLACIAL    EPOCH.

  This table shows that there are four periods marked A, B,
C, and D, in which there has been a large excentricity, and
an extreme climate. The periods marked A and B, says Sir
Charles Lyell, ‘‘ would not, I conceive, be sufficiently distant
from our era to afford time for that series of glacial and post-
glacial events which we can prove to have happened since
the epoch of the greatest cold.         These events relate tc
changes in the level of the land in opposite directions, as well
as the excavation of valleys, and variations in the range and
distribution of aquatic and terrestrial animals, all of which
take place at so slow a rate that 200,000 years would not be
sufficient to allow of the series of changes with which we are
acquainted.      I agree, therefore, with Mr. Croll, that if the
date of the most intense glacial cold can be arrived at by aid
of a very large excentricity, it would be a more probable
 conjecture to assign C than B as the period in question, “in
other words, to regard the glacial epoch as representing a
period 800,000 years ago.”
   In differing from such a great authority as Sir C. Lyell,
Ido so with great diffidence, but I confess that I should
be disposed rather to assign the glacial era to the periods
A and B, than to either C or D*,
   It seems to me unlikely that the present fauna of Europe
should have continued to exist, almost without alteration, for
so long a period as 800,000 years, and the “ variations in the
range and distribution of aquatic and terrestrial animals,”
might, [think, have occurred in even less than 200,000 years
under the great changes in climate which have taken place.
Moreover the Geological Magazine for June, 1868, contains an
interesting paper by Mr. Geikie, “On denudation now in pro-
gress,” in which he discusses the general effect produced by
rivers in excavating valleys and lowering the general level
   * In a recent memoir, Mr. Croll also expresses this opinion.   Phil. Mag.
1868, p. 367.
      EFFECT   OF RIVERS   ON THE   LEVEL    OF ConTINENTS.       413

of the country. “For it is clear that if a river carries so
many millions of cubic feet of sediment every year into the
sea, the area of the country drained by it must have lost
that quantity of solid material, and if we could restore the
sediment so as to spread it over the basin, the layer so laid
down would represent the fraction of a foot by which the
basin had been lowered during a year.” From observations
made on the Mississippi, Ganges, Rhone, Danube, and other
great rivers, Mr. Geikie estimates the annual       loss at aoe    Of
a foot. But he points out that this would not be uniform.
The plains and watersheds would lose little, the slopes and
valleys much.    ‘ There can be no doubt,” he says, “ that the
crosion of the slopes and watercourses is very much greater
than that of the more level grounds. Let it be assumed that
the waste is nine times greater in the one case than in the
other (in all likelihood it is more): in other words, that
while the plains and table-lands have been having one foot
worn off their surface, the declivities and river-courses have
lost nine feet. Let it be further assumed that one-tenth part
of the surface of a country is occupied by its water-courses
and glens, while the remaining nine-tenths are covered by
the plains, wide valleys, or flat grounds.     Now, according to
the foregoing data, the mean annual quantity of detritus
carried to the sea is equal to the yearly loss of gy54 of a foot
from the general surface of the country. ‘The valleys, there-
fore, are lowered by +5y of a foot, and the more open and
flat land by +4. of a foot.”
  Mr. Geikie calculates in this manner that Europe would
disappear in little more than 4,000,000 of years. I cannot
altogether accept this conclusion, for when a river has less
than a given amount of fall, it ceases to excavate.     Thus the
effect of the Nile is to raise, not to lower the level of Egypt,
and most of our large rivers near their mouths act im a some-
what similar manner.      As regards the higher districts, how-
Al4,              THE    OBLIQUITY    OF THE   ECLIPTIC.

ever, his data are perhaps not far wrong, and if we apply
them to the valley of the Somme, where the excavation is
about 200 feet in depth, they would indicate an antiquity for
the Paleolithic epoch of from 100,000 to 240,000 years,
which, though arrived at from perfectly different data,
agrees with the periods A and B in the calculation made
by Messrs. Croll and Stone.
   In addition to the causes already alluded to, there is at
least one other astronomical phenomenon, namely, the change
in the obliquity of the ecliptic, which must be taken into
account in considering the effects which cosmical causes
may, or must, have exercised on climate. The whole ques-
tion then is one, not only of extreme             interest, but also of
very great difficulty, and we are not, I think, at present in
a position to estimate with confidence the effects on climate
which may have been produced by these various causes.
   Several other points connected with the glacial period
would receive a natural explanation if we were able to adopt
the suggestions of M. Adhémar and Mr. Croll. Thus M.
Morlot * some years ago pointed out that there are in Swit-
zerland evidences of two periods of cold, during what is
called the glacial epoch, separated by an interval of mildness.
   Whether M. Adhémar is right in attributing the prepon-
derance of ocean in the southern hemisphere to the influence
of the great Antarctic glacier, cannot, I think, in the present
state of our knowledge, be conclusively determined.       There
can, however, be no doubt that an accumulation of snow and
ice at one pole would, by affecting the position of the centre
of gravity of the earth, attract the waters towards that pole.
Mr. Croll calculates that a diminution of 470 feet in the
thickness of the Antarctic glacier would raise the sea level
at the North Pole 26 feet 5 inches, and 25 feet at the lati-
  * Bull. de la Soc. Vaudoise des Sciences Naturelles.   March, 1854.   Bibl.
Universelle de Geneve.   May, 1858.
         M. ADHEMAR    ON   CHANGES   IN THE   SEA-LEVUL.   415

tude of Glasgow. A mile of ice removed in the same way
would produce a change of 280 feet. M. Adhémar dwells
on various considerations which induce him to attribute a
very great thickness to the great southern glacier, and
consequently he considers, that the alterations of sea-level
which would result from the alternate preponderance of ice
in the Arctic and Antarctic regions, would account for the
various alterations in the distribution of land and water.
That there must, however, have been elevations and depres-
sions of the land itself is sufficiently evident from other
considerations, but it is impossible to deny that the cause
pointed out by M. Adhémar may have produced the relative
elevation of the sea, as proved by the various raised beaches
which fringe our shores, and the depression on the other
hand indicated by the submerged forests, observed at so
many points.
   The former would indicate the periods of cold, the latter
those of heat. The present condition of our rivers will-also
thus be simply explained. There can, I think, be no doubt
that many of them have excavated their own valleys. At
present, however, they are all fillmg up the lower parts of
the excavation, as, for instance, we have seen to be the case
with the Somme.
   Moreover, the bottom of these valleys is in most cases lower
than the present sea-level, which cannot have been the case
at the time when they were excavated. It is evident, then,
that the excavation must have been finished at the time
when the sea was at a lower relative level than at present.
  Again, it will be remembered that side by side with the
remains of Arctic animals have been found others indicating
a warm climate, such for instance as the hippopotamus.
This fact, which has always hitherto been felt as a difficulty,
is at once explained by Mr. Croll’s suggestion, for, when
the excentricity was at a high value, we should have a
416                     GEOLOGICAL    CHANGES

change every ten or twelve thousand years from a high to a
low temperature, and vice versé. But a period of ten thou-
sand years, long as it may appear to us, is very little from a
geological point of view; and we can thus understand how
the remains of the hippopotamus and the musk ox come to
be found together in England and France. The very same
astronomical conditions which fitted our valleys for the one,
would at an interval of ten thousand years render them suit-
able for the other.
   Sir C. Lyell has also* attempted to form an estimate of
the duration of the glacial epoch, on the assumption that
the different movements of elevation and depression pro-
ceeded at an average rate of 24 feet ina century. As the
 simplest “series of changes in physical geography which can
 possibly account for the phenomena of the glacial period,”
 he gives the following :—
      “First, a continental   period, towards the close of which
the forest of Cromer flourished: when the land was at least
500 feet above its present level, perhaps much higher, and
its extent probably greater than that given in the map,
fig. 41.”    In this map the British Isles, including the
Hebrides, Orkneys, and Shetlands, are connected with one
another and with the continent, the whole German Ocean
being laid dry.
   “ Secondly, a period of submergence, by which the land
north of the Thames and Bristol Channel, and that of
Ireland, was gradually reduced to such an archipelago as
is pictured in map, fig. 40; and finally to such a general
prevalence of sea as is seen in map, fig. 39, only the tops of
the mountains being left above water. This was the period
of great submergence and of floating ice, when the Scandi-
navian flora, which overspread the lower grounds during
the first continental period, may have obtained         exclusive
                    * Antiquity of Man, pp. 282, 285.
                 IN THE     QUATERNARY   PERIOD.             417

possession of the only lands not covered with perpetual
snow.
   “Thirdly, a second continental period, when the bed of
the glacial sea, with its marine shells and erratic blocks, was
laid dry, and when the quantity of land equalled that of the
first period.”
   It is evident that such changes as these would require
a great lapse of time. Sir Charles Lyell admits that the
average change of 23 feet in a century is a purely arbitrary
and conjectural rate, and that there are cases        in which     a
change of as much as six feet in a century appears to have
taken place: still itis in his opinion probable that the rate
assumed in a century is, if any thing, above the average; and
in this I believe most geologists would be disposed to agree
with him. On this hypothesis the submergence of Wales,
to the extent of 1400 feet, would require 56,000 years; but
“taking Prof. Ramsay’s estimate of 800 feet more, that
elevation being required for the deposition of some of the
stratified drift, we must demand an additional period of
32,000   years, amounting     in all to 88,000;    and the same
time would be required for re-elevation of the tract to its
present height. But if the land rose in the second con-
tinental period no more than 600 feet above the present
NOVO SbIS bre a) ails would have taken another 24,000 years;
the whole of the grand oscillation, comprising the sub-
mergence and re-emergence, having taken, in round num-
bers, 224,000 years for its completion; and this, even if
there were no pause or stationary period, when the downward
movement ceased, and before it was converted into an up-
ward one.”
   To the geologist, however, these figures, large as they
are, will have no appearance of improbability. All the facts
of geology tend to indicate an antiquity of which we are
but beginning to form a dim idea.        Take, for instance, one
                                                    Ee
418                   GEOLOGICAL   TIME.

single formation—our well-known chalk.        This consists
entirely of shells and fragments of shells deposited at tho
bottom of an ancient sea, far away from any continent.
Such a progress as this must be very slow: probably we
should be much above the mark if we were to assume a rate
of deposition of ten inches in a century. Now the chalk
is more   than a thousand feet in thickness, and would have
required therefore more than 120,000 years for its forma-
tion. The fossiliferous beds of Great Britain, as a whole,
are more than 70,000 feet in thickness, and many which
with us measure only a few inches, on the continent expand
into strata of immense depth; while others of great im-
portance elsewhere are wholly wanting with us, for it is
evident that during all the different periods in which Great
Britain has been dry land, strata have been forming (as is,
for example, the case now) elsewhere, and not with us.
Moreover, we must remember that many of the strata now
existing have been formed at the expense of older ones;
thus all the flint gravels in the south-east of England have
been produced by the destruction of chalk. This again is
a very slow process. It has been estimated that a cliff 500
feet high will be worn away at the rate of an inch in a
century. This may seem a low rate, but we must bear in
mind that along any line of coast there are comparatively
few points which are suffering at one time, and that even on
those, when a fall of cliff has taken place, the fragments
serve as a protection to the coast until they have been
gradually removed by the waves. The Wealden Valley is
twenty-two miles in breadth, and on these data it has been
calculated that the denudation of the Weald must have
required more than 150,000,000 of years.
   There can be no doubt about the interest of these calcu-
lations, and they have also the great merit of giving some
definiteness to our ideas. We must not, however, attribute
                        GEOLOGICAL   TIME.                    419

to them a value which has been distinctly disclaimed eyen
by their authors. ‘Dans tous les cas,” says M. Morlot,
“il doit étre bien entendu que l’auteur n’expose le présent
calcul que comme une premiére imparfaite et hasardeuse
tentative, sans valeur absolue en elle-méme, tant qu'elle
maura pas été verifiée au moyen d’autres essais du méme
genre.”   Moreover, we must remember that these estimates
are brought forward not as a proof, but as a measure, of
antiquity. Our belief in the antiquity of man rests not on
any isolated calculations, but on the changes which have
taken place since his appearance ; changes in the geography,
in the fauna, and in the climate of Europe. Valleys have
been deepened, widened, and partially filled up again; caves
through which subterranean rivers once ran are now left
dry; even the configuration of land has been materially
altered, and Africa finally separated from Europe.
   Our climate has greatly changed for the better, and with
it the fauna has materially altered. In some cases, for
instance, in that of the hippopotamus and of the African
elephant, we may probably look to the diminution of food
and the presence of man as the main cause of their dis-
appearance ; the extinction of the mammoth, the Hlephas
antiquus, and the Ithinoceros tichorhinus, may possibly be
due to the same   influences;   but the retreat   of the reindeer
and the musk ox are probably in great measure          owing to
the change   of climate.    These and similar facts, though
they afford us no means of measurement, impress us with
a vague and overpowering sense of antiquity. All geolo-
gists, indeed, are now prepared to admit that man has
existed on our earth for a much longer period than was until
recently supposed to have been the case.
   But it may be doubted whether even geologists yet realize
the great antiquity of our race.
   «‘When speculations on the long series of events which
                            Bea
420                REPORTED     EVIDENCE     OF MAN

occurred in the glacial and post-glacial periods are indulged
in,” says Sir C. Lyell*, “the imagination is apt to take
alarm at the immensity of the time required to interpret the
monuments of these ages, all referable to the era of existing
species. In order to abridge the number of centuries which
would otherwise be indispensable, a disposition is shown by
many to magnify the rate of change in pre-historic times, by
investing the causes which have modified the animate and
the inanimate world with extraordinary and excessive energy.
    Bo RE? We of the living generation, when called upon
to make grants of thousands of centuries, in order to explain
the events of what is called the modern period, shrink
naturally at first from making what seems so lavish an ex-
penditure of past time.”
    That man existed in Western Europe during the period
 of the Mammoth and the Rhinoceros tichorhinus, no longer,
I think, admits of a doubt; but when we come to Pliocene,
and still more to Miocene, times, the evidence is less conclusive.
  M. Desnoyers+ has called attention to some marks noticed
by him on bones found in the upper pliocene beds of St.
Prest, and belonging to the Elephas meridionalis, Rhinoceros
leptorhinus, Hippopotamus major, several species of deer
(including the gigantic Megaceros carnutorum, Laugel), and
two species of Bos. M.Desnoyers has examined a consider-
able number    of these bones, and he comes              to the conclu-
sion “que les traces d’incisions, . . . . en un mot, que des
traces tout a fait analogues 4 celles que produiraient les
outils de silex tranchants 4 point plus ou moins aigué, &
bords plus ou moins dentelés, se voyaient sur la plupart de
ces ossements.”
   Among the bones of the deer were several crania, all of
which have been broken in one way, namely, by a violent
              * Address to the Brit. Ass. 1864, p. 21, Bath.
              + Comptes Rendus.     June 8, 1863.
                      IN THE      PLIOCENE   PERIOD.                42)

blow given on the skull between, and at the base of, the
horns. M. Steenstrup has noticed fractures of this kind in
other less ancient skulls of ruminants, and at the present
day some of the northern tribes treat the skulls of ruminants
in the same manner. Through the courtesy of M. Desnoyers,
I have had the opportunity of examining some of the
scratched bones from Saint Prest. The markings fully bear
out the description given by him, and some of them at least
appear to me to be probably of human origin; at the same
time, and in the present state of our knowledge, I am not
prepared to say that there is no other manner in which they
might have been produced. At the same place that indefa-
tigable archeologist, M. Abbé Bourgeois, has more recently
discovered worked flints, including flakes, awls, and scrapers,
but unfortunately there is some doubt as to the stratigraphical
relations of the bed in which they occurred*.
  At the meeting in Spezzia, of the “ Societé Italienne des
Sciences   Naturelles,’        Prof.   G. Ramorino     exhibited   some
bones cf Pliocene Age, said to bear marks of knives. These
specimens are in the museum at Genoa, but I have not
myself seen themt.
   Some archeologists even consider that we have proof of the
presence of man in miocene times. Thus M. Bourgeois has
found in the calcaire de Beauce, near Pontlevoy, many flints
which have been subjected to the action of heat, and others
which he considers to show undoubted marks of human work-
manship.    On the former point there is still some diffe-
rence of opinion, and the action of fire, though it points
strongly to, does not absolutely prove, the presence of man.
These interesting specimens were found in a stratum, which
contains the remains of Acerotherium, an extinct animal allied
to the Rhinoceros, and beneath a bed which contains the

            * Mat. pour l’Histoire de I'Homme, 1867, p. 17.
            + 1. c. vol. ii. p. 41.
422                           MIOCENE    MAN.

Mastodon, Dinotherium, and Rhinoceros.                  M. Bourgeois gives
the following section * :—
       Vegetable.carth: sien            Grey    rien         a USD
                ”       », mixed with quaternary
                pebbles     . . .            ee                   20
          Faluns, with shells and ated bones
                of Rhinoceros,      Mastodon,          and
            Dinotherianic, se atat us         :      60
        Compact calcaire de Beauce inte
             rated by. Pholas..   mesqus “ale ps     30
        Marly calcaire de Beauce . . . . 6
        Layer containing worked flints . .           60
   In the Matériaux pour |’ Histoire de ’Homme for 1870 +,
is a figure of a flint flake found by M. Tardy in the miocene
beds of Aurillac (Auvergne), together with the remains of
Dinotherium giganteum, and Machairodus latidens. Not
having visited the locality, I cannot, of course, express any
opinion as to the age of the bed in which this interesting
specimen was        discovered,    but from the figure given there
can be no reasonable doubt that it is of human workmanship.
M. Delaunay also has called attention to a rib, found by him
at Pouancé (Maine et Loire) and belonging to a well-known
miocene species, the Halitherium fossilet ; this bears certain
marks which closely resemble those which might have been
made by flint implements. M. Harny gives a good figure
of this interesting specimen. Whether, however, we have con-
clusive evidence of the existence of man in miocene times is
a question on which           archeologists       are still of different
opinions.
   Sir Charles Lyell himself thinks that we may expect to
find the remains of man in the pliocene strata, but there he
draws the line, and says that in miocene time, “had some
      * Mat. pour l’Histoire de Homme, 1869, p. 297.          too. p. Ge.
      { Précis de Paléontologie Humaine, p. 58,
                         MIOCENE MAN.                        423

other rational being, representing man, then flourished, some
signs of his existence could hardly have escaped unnoticed,
i the shape of implements of stone or metal, more frequent
and more durable than the osseous remains of any of the
mammalia.””
   Without expressing any opinion as to the mental condition
of our ancestors in the miocene period, it seems to me evident
that the argument derived from the absence of human
remains, whatever may be its value, is as applicable to
pliocene as to miocene times. But those who have learnt
geology at the feet of Sir Charles Lyell, and look up to him
as their master in the science, will be the least able to agree
with him on this point, for the imperfection of the geological
record has hitherto been urged upon us almost as strongly by
Sir C. Lyell as by Mr. Darwin. It is true that few of our
existing species, or even genera, have as yet been found in
miocene strata; but if man constitutes a separate family of
mammalia, as he does in the opinion of the highest authori-
ties, then, according to all paleontological analogies, he must
have had representatives in miocene times. We need not,
however, expect to find the proofs in Hurope; our nearest
relatives in the animal kingdom are confined to hot, almost
to tropical climates, and it is in such countries that we are
most likely to find the earliest traces of the human race.
                                 424




