 Robert McC. Adams
                    TZsjOIIMiIO
     Urban Societ
 Early Mesopotamia                    &
 Prehispanic Mexico
 a comparative study of one of the great
 transformations in the career of humanity




^is^^M^^S"'*^^ »&                            *
 >•»«*

::
     *4    j*>.
The Evolution of
Urban Society
Early Mesopotamia and Prehispanic Mexico


by ROBERT McC. ADAMS



This comparative analysis of the two best-docu-
mented examples      of "pristine"   state   societies
examines the validity of the theory of cultural
evolution by demonstrating essential similarities
                                   Mesopo-
in the evolutionary patterns of early
tamia   and Prehispanic Mexico during their
"careers to statehood."
  The author first provides a critical discussion
of conceptual tools useful in the study of early
civilizationsand then examines the similarities
and differences in the underlying ecological
variables and modes of subsistence which char-
acterize these two societies. A number of strik-
ing parallels are traced in the organization of
these early states and in their development
from theocratic to political control over whole
societies,   culminating in the establishment of
trade and tribute states which extended their
domination over wide regions.
  From models of change appropriate to his
major focus of study, the author concludes that
both can be considered as slightly variant ex-
amples of one of the great transformations that
have punctuated the human experience of
urban development.

The author is Dean of the Division of Social
Sciences, University of Chicago, and has con-
ducted extensive field work in Mexico and the
Middle East. This volume was originally pre-
sented as the University of Rochester s 1965
Lewis Henry Morgan Lectures.




Jacket design: Jane Bedno
THE EVOLUTION
          OF
URBAN SOCIETY
THE LEWIS HENRY MORGAN LECTURES/1965
               presented at
        The University of Rochester
           Rochester, New York
 THE EVOLUTION
           OF
 URBAN SOCIETY
EARLY MESOPOTAMIA AND PREHISPANIC MEXICO



  by ROBERT McC. ADAMS




     ALDINE PUBLISHING COMPANY
                Chicago
Copyright © 1966 by Robert McC. Adams


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may
be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy,
recording, or any information storage and retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publisher.


First published 1966 by
Aldine Publishing Company
529 South Wabash Avenue
Chicago, Illinois 60605


First paperback edition 1971


Sixth printing, 1973
ISBN 0-202-33016-8 (cloth); 0-202-33028-1 (paper)
Library of Congress Catalog Number 66-15195


Designed by David Miller
Printed in the United States of America
                                         FOREWORD

LEWIS HENRY MORGAN WAS ASSOCIATED WITH THE UNIVERSITY OF
Rochester from its founding. At his death he left it his manu-
scripts and library, and money to found a women's college. Save

for a  wing of the present Women's Residence Halls that is
named for him, he remained without a memorial at the Uni-
versity until the Lewis Henry Morgan Lectures were begun.
    These Lectures owe their existence to a happy combination
of circumstances. In 1961 the Joseph R.       and Joseph C. Wilson
families made a gift to the University, to be used in part for the
Social Sciences. Professor Rernard S. Cohn, at that time Chair-
man of the Department of Anthropology and Sociology, sug-
gested that establishing the Lectures would constitute a fitting
memorial to a great anthropologist and would be an appropriate
use for part of this gift. He was supported and assisted by Dean
(              McCrea Hazlett, Dean Arnold Ravin and Asso-
    later Provost )

ciate Dean R. J. Kaufmann. The details of the Lectures were
worked out by Professor Cohn and the members of his Depart-
ment.
      The Morgan Lectures were planned initially as three annual
series, for 1963,     1964 and 1965, to be continued if circumstances
permitted.     It   was thought fitting at the outset to have each
series   focused on a particularly significant aspect of Morgan's
work. Accordingly, Professor Meyer Fortes' 1963 Lectures were
on kinship, Professor Fred Eggan devoted his attention to the
American Indian, and Professor Robert M. Adams considered
vi                             Foreword

the development of civilization. The first three series were in-
augurated by Professor Leslie A. White, of the University of
Michigan, who delivered two lectures on Morgan's life and work
in January, 1963.

     Publication of Professor Adams' Lectures makes them avail-
able to a wider public. A complete record of the informal daily
seminars held during his visit at Rochester would fill additional
volumes, were    it   available. Students   and faculty   alike recall

these discussions with    much pleasure.
     The present volume is a revision of the third series, de-
      by Professor Adams under the title, "Regularities in
livered
Urban Origins: A Comparative Study," on April 6-22, 1965.

                                     Alfred Harris
                                     Department of Anthropology
                                     The University of Rochester
                                                 PREFACE

THE SUBSTANCE OF THIS STUDY WAS PRESENTED IN APRIL, 1965, AS
a third annual series of lectures at the University of Rochester
in honor of    Lewis Henry Morgan. I am indebted to a number
of colleagues     at   Rochester, including especially           Edward      E.
Calnek, Alfred Harris, and Rene Millon, for critical comments
at the    time they were delivered, which subsequently were in-
corporated in the revised      text.   Further suggestions and com-
ments, which also have served as a basis for revision, were
made by many of the participants at a Burg Wartenstein con-
ference on "The        Evolutionist    Interpretation       of   Culture" in
August, 1965. Particularly to be thanked for advice on that
occasion are S. N. Eisenstadt, Friedrich Katz, and the confer-
ence chairman, Eric R. Wolf. Since other, less direct contribu-
tions to the final     form of the manuscript must have stemmed
from the plenary discussions of the conference, it is appropriate
also to express    my gratitude to the Wenner-Gren Foundation
for Anthropological Research,          under whose sponsorship              this

unusually fertile gathering of diverse specialists was convened.
Among my colleagues at Chicago, I have benefited from com-
ments made by Lloyd A. Fallers and Pedro Armillas. Finally,
I   am much indebted to Miguel Civil for a number of illuminat-
ing suggestions on  how some of the Sumerological materials
utilized in this study might be more solidly           and imaginatively
interpreted.
     It   was a singular pleasure       to   lecture   on    this   theme    in

                                  Vll
viii                                Preface


L. H. Morgan's city and in his name. Surely we are all victims
to     some degree of the narrowing professionalism and increas-
ing timidity that accompanies the development of a mature
field,   but anthropology   still    represents not so   much an aca-
demic discipline in the prevailing sense as a broadly general-
izing    and comparative tradition of empirical inquiry. And one
of the most significant parts of that tradition began with       Mor-
gan, as did the recognition of the immediate subject of these
lectures as    an enduring problem. However reoriented or           di-

luted the line of descent at times may be, I hope that the main
course and conclusions of this study justifiably can be said to
continue in the direction he led          us.

                                                Robert McC. Adams
                                       CONTENTS

CHAPTER I.       The Problem and the Evidence                 1

CHAPTER H.       Subsistence and Settlement     .            38

CHAPTER HI.      Kin and Class        ....                   79

CHAPTER rV.      Parish and Polity    ....                  120

CHAPTER V.       Conclusion                                 170

                 References Cited     ....                  176

                 Index                                      185



                  LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.     Comparative chronologies for early
        Mesopotamia, and reconstructed network          .    25

Figure 2.     Early Dynastic settlements in southern
        Mesopotamia, and reconstructed network
        of contemporary watercourses            ...          70

Figure 3.     Late prehispanic settlements in
        central Mexico, largely from Aztec
        documentary sources                                  73

Figure 4.    Paradigms of early urban growth        .   .   171



                                 IX
THE EVOLUTION
          OF
URB.4X SOCIETY
           I

                   THE PROBLEM AND
                       THE EVIDENCE
THE GENERALIZING, COMPARATIVE STUDY OF THE ORIGINS OF EARLY
states has been an important research theme since before the
emergence of anthropology as a conscious, distinctive intel-
lectual approach. Indeed, the view that "savagery," "barba-
rism," and "civilization" form stages in a universal evolutionary
sequence lay very close to the core of thought and speculation
out of which anthropology arose. With the subsequent, in-
creasingly conscious and refined, acquisition and analysis of
both historical and ethnographic data, the deficiencies of this
view became so strikingly apparent that for a long time the
diversity of cultures received greater stress than their similari-
ties. If   today the tide has begun again to run in the opposite
direction,     perhaps at least a part of the explanation lies in the
persuasiveness and vigor with which            it   has continued to be
affirmed over the years that the early civilizations provide a
significant     example of broad   regularities in        human behavior.
      This volume is concerned with the presentation and analy-
sis   of regularities in our    two best-documented examples of
early,   independent urban societies. It seeks to provide as            sys-
tematic a comparison as the data permits of institutional forms
and trends of growth that are to be found in both of them.
Emphasizing basic similarities in structure rather than the
many acknowledged formal features by which each culture is
rendered distinguishable from        all   others,   it   seeks to   demon-
strate that     both the societies in question can usefully be re-
garded as variants of a single processual pattern.
2                     The Evolution of Urban Society

   The independent emergence of stratified, politically organ-
ized societies based upon a new and more complex division of
labor clearly is one of those great transformations            which have
punctuated the human career only rarely, at long intervals. Ob-
viously it deserves study as a crucial part of mankind's cumu-
lative   achievement. Yet surely it is also an untidy problem, on
whose component elements closure can be achieved only slowly
and painfully by marshalling every technique, every potential
source of insight and evidence in the arsenal of scholarship.
Herein, perhaps, lies the major reason for the durability and
attractiveness of the problem as a specifically anthropological
focus of interest.
     The available evidence in the form of written sources, to
begin with,  is too circumscribed in purpose and too limited

in amount to permit us to advance very far with the unaided
approach of the documentary historian. Hence we fall back
on other sources, which all too often are incommensurate with
whatever contemporary documentary data there may be. In
particular, archeology becomes a primary means of investiga-
tion,    although the conclusions that archeological data permit
often    seem to support an edifice of inferences different from
that erected on the basis of the documents.            Still   another line
of inquiry leads back through later materials of a literary or
mythical genre, relying on the attractive but always somewhat
hazardous assumption that usable accounts of preliterate events
and institutions have survived thus in traditional, encapsulated
form.
     With sources     as inconclusive as these, the only         approach
that can retain even a vision of the central, crucial problem of
the emergence through time of a whole new set of institutional
relationships   is   one that   is   "contextual" rather than "textual"
in   emphasis— that proceeds by offering, testing, and refining or
replacing as necessary a scries of structured summaries or syn-
theses rather than confining analysis to fragmentary, isolated
cultural components.      With some rare but notable exceptions,
               THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                                     3

on the whole            it   would appear that few but anthropologists
combine a sense of the importance of the pivotal episodes of
man's cultural evolution, a necessarily reconstructive or syn-
              and a tolerance for ambiguity— all of which are
thetic outlook,
required to work effectively on so elusive and yet intriguing
a problem.
    One other aspect of the origin of the earliest urbanized
societies may be mentioned, which, arising from the character
both of the data and of the transformation itself, has made it
a special concern of scholarship within an anthropological tra-
dition.      Given the present limits to our detailed understanding
of the process of change in            any one area, we have a problem
for which the comparative             approach our discipline always has
been identified with is highly suitable or perhaps even impera-
tive.   Given, further, the essentially independent internal se-
quences of cause and              effect leading to           statehood in widely
different areas and epochs— whatever the precise role of ex-
ternal stimuli may have been— we have a problem that is pe-
culiarly amenable to comparative treatment.
    While the emergence of states has been a long-standing
focus of anthropological discussion,                it   is    impossible to deal
more than very briefly here with the historical succession of
views and issues that have characterized its development as a
problem. The balanced appraisal of this development is a prob-
lem in intellectual history, a discipline with its own demanding
methodology.           A researcher in one generation, in attempting
to     trace     the    genealogy    of     the   assumptions       and concerns
most     vital    to    him, tends systematically to distort the issues
that    commanded the attention of his predecessors.                    Ideas, of
course, are transmitted upward through time,                      from generation
to generation, but they             emerge and are periodically           reinter-
preted in a context of discussions and unspoken understandings
that    is   continually changing and that is never confined to the
bounds of a            single discipline.
     To cite an example pertinent to our own theme, what are
4                       The Evolution of Urban Society

we to conclude from Lewis Henry Morgan's concluding in-
sistence in Ancient Society            on the transcendental role of a
Supreme Intelligence in propelling along the evolution of civil-
ization out of savagery and barbarism? To some, this insistence
is part of a ringing refutation of the view that Morgan properly

may be regarded as a progenitor of materialist conceptions,
which he stimulated in others. To others, including myself,
such an interpretation misconstrues both Morgan's major aims
and his most enduring contributions. 1 But the more important
point   is   that the issue of intellectual parentage, insofar as             it

rests   on essentially post hoc evaluations, has as many answers
as there are articulate,         self-professed children.       Only a quite
different kind of study than we have yet seen, resting on all the
technical apparatus of the competent intellectual historian with
highly developed sensitivities to             modes   of thought      and   dis-

course of the Victorian era, may convincingly tell us how much
of Morgan's deism         was a formal concession to the temper of
his times     and how much a deeply held conviction that shaped
his views of society.
    In an even broader sense, the controversy over Morgan's
formal relationship to ( a variety of ) idealistic and materialistic
positions    is   irrelevant to the problems of cultural evolution as
he understood them. These positions have assumed a detailed
signficance— both stemming from and ramifying into spheres of
political allegiance      and action— unknown in Morgan's time. At
least to     judge from the variety of causal factors he adduced
for successive evolutionary stages, Morgan's            approach is better
characterized by its flexibility than by any insistence on a philo-
sophical     position    that   is   internally   consistent    by   latter-day
standards.
    The problem         of   tracing    the   genealogy    of    evolutionary
thinking with reference to the emergence of early states                      is

further obscured by the changing context in which that thought

    1. Cf. the exchange between M. E. Opler, T. G. Harding, and E. B.
Leacock in Cur. Anthrop. 3 (1962), 478-79, and 5 (1964), 109-14.
              THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                           5

has occurred. Since ancient history, ethnohistory, and arche-
ology have essentially emerged as disciplines during the past
century or so, the empirical base upon which reconstructions
and theories have been formulated has been subject to radical
and cumulative changes. In the later decades of the nineteenth
century, Morgan and his colleagues knew little of the civiliza-
tions of the New World save an essentially synchronic picture
that could be drawn from Spanish contact sources, and for the
Old World had little to draw upon save the immediate ante-
cedents of classical Greece and Rome and the testimony of the
Old Testament. Within these limitations, the failure to perceive
important developmental trends in late pre-Conquest nuclear
American societies, for example, is hardly surprising. Even the
reliance on extrapolations from putative "survivals," so often
criticized    now, may have been regarded      at     the time as an
inadequate but inescapable and heuristically valid           way     in
which to make a beginning with the data at hand. Of course,
what contributed most to transforming this situation was the
development of archeology to the point      at    which long, well-
founded sequences of change and interrelationship            in   time
and space could be formulated even in the absence of written
records.But progress was almost equally marked in the re-
covery and decipherment of early documents.
     In addition to the   immense increase       in   the depth    and
breadth of available data over the past century or          so,   there
have   also   been broad qualitative changes     in the context of

inquiry. Consider Morgan's classic formulation of the problem
as   he saw it:

    As we re-ascend along the several lines of progress toward the
primitive ages of mankind,    and eliminate one after the other, in
the order in which they appeared, inventions and discoveries on
the one hand, and institutions on the other, we are enabled to per-
ceive that the former stand to each other in progressive, and the
latter in unfolding relations. While the former class have had a
connection, more or less direct, the latter have been developed
6                     The Evolution of Urban Society

from a few primary germs of thought. Modern institutions plant
                                          which their germs were
their roots in the period of barbarism, into
transmitted from the previous period of savagery. They have had
a lineal descent through the ages, with the streams of the blood,
as well as a logical development.
      Two independent lines of investigations thus invite our atten-
tion. The one leads through inventions and discoveries, and the
other  through primary institutions. With the knowledge gained
therefrom, we may hope to indicate the principal stages of human
development. [1963:4]

      If   my object were merely to insist anew on the authenticity
of a viable scholarly tradition that descends to us from Morgan,
it   would be enough to perceive in this and similar passages
an astonishingly modern emphasis on empirical exposition of
the course of cultural evolution, a primary commitment, as
Eleanor Leacock puts it, "to the rationality of historical law"
(in     Morgan 1963 :vii). But the apparent anachronisms are as
striking as this continuity of emphasis, and they shed a greater
light      on the changing context of study.
      Morgan's tendency, in the first place, was to counterpose
the     cumulative growth of technology and related cultural
items,      on the one hand, with institutional developments that
were visualized      as the unfolding of potentialities already in-
herent in the germ. Thus he saw the idea of government, in a
sense apparently not really distinguishable from the developed
institutions of his own day, as having existed far back into the
stage of savagery.     What is missing, in our terms, is the world
of thought succinctly      summarized in Julian Steward's seminal
expression, "levels     of sociocultural complexity"— aframework
of functionally interconnected institutions forming the struc-
tural core of a distinctive set of social systems.
      Apparently not having known of the sharply discontinuous
character of evolutionary advance generally, Morgan, in his
conception of the course of cultural evolution, tended at times
to assume that it had an "orthogenetic," preordained character.
Moreover, rather than seeing the ordered sequence of small
            THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                                   7

increments of change as a continuously adaptive process mov-
ing through time, he was content to chart the fortuitous pres-
ence of innovations in technique as convenient symbols of
arbitrarily   demarcated stages, without devoting much thought
either to the character of the transitions               between them or to
the interplay of factors propelling the change. And, even where
innovations of a societal rather than a technical character were
brought forward, as in the case of the emphasis Morgan                    at-

tached to the advent of private property, it is noteworthy that
this   was formulated not as the appearance of a new and pro-
foundly important set of organized social relationships— a strati-
fied    grouping of classes— but only as a discrete            new idea or
feature.
       In comparison with Morgan's usage, there has emerged not
merely a difference in terminology but a significant conceptual
advance beyond his demarcation in terms of convenient, easily
recognizable        traits   of successive stages in      what he seems   to
have regarded as a preordained path of progress leading up-
ward to civilization. The more recent view is one that, instead,
focuses attention on the disjunctive processes of transformation
connecting one qualitatively distinctive level of sociocultural
complexity with another. In fact, for purposes of systematically
comparing the seemingly              parallel    and largely independent
processes of growth leading to the formation of early urbanized
polities   or states, the concept of major, successive organiza-
tional levels   now seems perhaps the single most indispensable
one. Such levels may be regarded as broadly integrative pat-
terns whose basic functional relationships tend to remain fixed
(or,    at least,    tend to occur in fixed sequences), while their
formal, superficial features vary widely from example to ex-
ample. Given the             much greater variability in the occurrence
of individual features associated with the                 Urban Revolution
than Morgan was aware               of,    including even such seemingly
basic attributes as the degree of urbanism in settlement pat-
terns    and the invention of             writing, the   employment   of the
8                     The Evolution of Urban Society

concept of levels permits us still to proceed beyond the ac-
knowledgment of diversity to the recognition of genuine evo-
lutionary parallelisms.
     While the unearthing of new data on the history of cultural
development undoubtedly played a part in changing the ways
in   which we formulate the course of cultural development, in
the main the comparatively rapid, widespread, and unopposed
acceptance of a view stressing the disjunctive aspects of evo-
lutionary change probably          is   to   be attributed to the broad
shift   toward similar views for biological evolution as a whole.
After all, the stress that cultural evolutionists place on the

expanded potentialities for adaptation conferred by new levels
of cultural complexity surely has the Darwinian insistence on
the central role of natural selection as           its   prototype. Just as
ecological studies have         become a major facet of research in
modern biology,       so   we find a closely related growth in the
emphasis given to studies in cultural ecology. Even the concept
of levels of sociocultural integration itself is operationally very
similar to the idea of organizational grades as the major units
of evolutionary          in the biological world. At a more
                   advance
                  main course of cultural evolution increas-
abstract level, the
ingly has come to be viewed as a succession of adaptive
patterns, each new cultural type tending to spread and dif-
ferentiate at the expense of less efficient precursors.
     There is an interesting further parallelism between studies
in evolutionary biology, on the one hand,           and those in cultural
evolution,   on the    other.    Perhaps the most profound change
in the    former during recent decades has come through the
recognition of the population as the unit within which adapta-
tion takes place   and upon which selective pressures act. The
concept of a population as the unit of evolutionary potential,
variable in the behavior of its constituents as well as in their
genetic constitution,      encourages the corresponding study of
human societies rather than individuals as the adaptive units,
even though corporate human behavior is mediated by the
                                                                     "



                THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                                      9

unique factor of culture. Perhaps           also,   although   this      remains
more a matter of future possibility than of present performance,
recognition of the importance of biological                 variability         may
encourage fuller study of cultural heterogeneity and dissonance
as basic features of both adaptation          and change.
       There is no need to dwell        at length    on definitions of the
entities     with which this study deals. The major characteristics
of early states have been repeatedly described,                 and       in    any
case    I    am more concerned with the process of their growth
than with a detailed discussion of their characteristics. There
is   no more adequate term evoking this process than that intro-
duced by V. Gordon Childe, the "Urban Revolution. 2 Among
its important advantages are that it places stress on the trans-

formative character of the change, that               it   suggests at least
relative rapidity,      and that it specifies a restricted, urban locus
within which the process was concentrated.
       Yet it must be admitted that there are potential distortions
involved in the use of the term as well as advantages, quite
apart from the specific attributes Childe attaches to                     it.   The
more common usage of the word "revolution/' for example, im-
plies aspects of conscious struggle. Possibly there were over-

tones of consciousness about certain stages or aspects of the
Urban Revolution, although the issue is unsettled. Any implica-
tion that such        was generally the case, however,          is       certainly

false. Again, the term perhaps implies a uniform emphasis on

the growth of the city as the core of the process. At least as
a form of settlement, however, urbanism seems to have been
much less important to the emergence of the state, and even
to the      development of civilization in the broadest sense, than


       2.   Childe 1950. For a more substantive presentation of his views in
the specific case of Mesopotamia see Childe 1952, esp. chap. 7. Both works
emphasize archeological rather than textual findings, leading to a corres-
ponding interpretive stress on technological aspects of change. No attempt
has been made in this essay to duplicate or replace Childe's treatment of
this   theme.
10                       The Evolution of Urban Society

social stratification      and the institutionalization of political au-
thority.

      Still   a further possible drawback is that uncritical use of the
term may invoke an implicit, and therefore dangerous, assump-
tion of the unity of all         urban phenomena. This        is   at best a
proposition that applies at so gross a level as to be hardly
more than trivial, and yet it sometimes has served to divert
attention toward misleading analogies with other cultural set-
tings sharing only          the fact of settlement in dense, "urban"
clusters rather than        toward the empirical investigation of the
phenomena in hand. In short, the purpose of this study em-
phatically      is    not to generalize about the nature of        cities   but
rather to discuss the processes by which, at least in some cases,
they seem first to have come into existence. And as will become
apparent, the achievement of these first steps in urban growth
leads to a distinctive constellation of features that cannot be
regarded simply as progressively approximating contemporary
urbanism more and more closely.
      In balance, the insights engendered by the term seem to
outweigh        its   drawbacks. But the characteristics with which
Childe sought to describe and associate it are less satisfactory.
His criteria were the following: (1) increase in settlement size
toward "urban" proportions; (2) centralized accumulation of
capital resulting from the imposition of tribute or taxation;

(3) monumental public works; (4) the invention of writing;
(5) advances toward exact and predictive sciences; (6) the
appearance and growth of long-distance trade in luxuries; (7)
the emergence of a class-stratified society; (8) the freeing of
a part of the population from subsistence tasks for full-time
craft    specialization;     (9) the substitution of a politically or-
ganized society based on           territorial principles,   the state, for
one based on kin ties; and (10) the appearance of naturalistic
—or perhaps better, representational— art.
      One objection to such a listing is that it gives us a mixed
bag of characteristics. Some, like monumental architecture, can
                THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                                           11

be unequivocally documented from archeological evidence but
also are known to have been associated occasionally with non-
civilized       peoples.   Others, like exact and predictive sciences,
are largely matters of interpretation from evidence that                          is   at
best fragmentary and ambiguous.              And still others, if not most
of Childe's criteria, obviously           must have emerged through a
gradual, cumulative process not easily permitting distinctions
in kind to       be kept apart from those merely in degree. More-
over,     these characteristics differ radically from one another
in their    importance as causes, or even as indices, of the Urban
Revolution as a whole. The significance of the reappearance
of representational art— indeed,           its   initial   appearance, insofar
as   it   deals with the human figure— for example,                  is   at least not

immediately apparent.
     A more basic objection to any such listing is that its eclec-
ticism      embraces fundamental contradictions                 as        to   purpose.
Childe echoes Morgan in seeking to identify the Urban Revo-
lution     by    a series of traits   whose      vestiges the specialist can
conveniently recognize. This was a reasonable procedure for
Morgan's purpose, the           initial   delineation of a succession of
stages,     but with Childe, on the other hand, we enter an era
in which the emphasis shifted toward providing accounts                           with
explanatory power as well.
     The term "Urban Revolution" implies a focus on ordered,
systematic processes of change through time. Hence the identi-
fying characteristics of the Urban Revolution need to be more
than loosely associated features (no matter how conveniently
recognizable),  whose functional role is merely assumed and
which are defined in terms of simple presence or absence.
Usefully to speak of an Urban Revolution, we must describe
a functionally related core of institutions as they interacted and
evolved through time. From this viewpoint, the characteristics
Childe adduces can be divided into a group of primary vari-
ables,     on the one hand, and a larger group of secondary, de-
pendent variables, on the other. And                 it    clearly    was Childe's
12                          The Evolution of Urban Society

view that the primary motivating forces for the transformation
lay in the rise of new technological              and subsistence patterns.
The accumulative growth                of technology        and the increasing
availability of food surpluses as deployable capital,
                                               he argued,
were the central causative agencies underlying the Urban
Revolution.
     This study        is    somewhat    differently      oriented;    it   tends to
stress "societal" variables rather           than "cultural" ones. Perhaps
in part, such an approach is merely an outgrowth of limitations

of space; social institutions lend themselves more easily to the
construction of a brief paradigm than do the tool types or pot-
tery styles with which the archeologist traditionally works.                     But
I also   believe that the available evidence supports the conclu-
sion that the transformation at the core of the                  Urban Revolu-
tion lay in the realm of social organization.                   And, while the
onset of the transformation obviously cannot be understood
apart from its cultural and ecological context, it seems to have
been primarily changes in social institutions that precipitated
changes in technology, subsistence, and other aspects of the
wider cultural realm, such as religion, rather than vice versa.
     Perhaps     it   is    for this reason that I shall largely avoid the
word "civilization" in this            discussion.   It    refers inclusively to
the totality of an expansive and long-lived cultural manifesta-
tion,   and hence reduces the possibility of erecting meaningful
paradigmatic    models— "cores"— for purposes of comparison.
Consider the use of the word by A. L. Kroeber,                        its   most dis-
tinguished exponent:

    To the historian, civilizations are large, somewhat vague seg-
ments of the totality of historical events which it may sometimes be
convenient or useful to segregate off from the remainder of his-
tory, and which tend to evince certain dubiously definable qualities
when     so   segregated.      To   the student of culture, civilizations         are
segments of the totality of human history when this is viewed less
for its events, and less as behavior and acts, than as the more en-
during products, forms, and influences of the actions of human
         To the student of culture, civilizations are segregated or
societies.
               THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                                 13

delimited from one another by no single criterion: partly by geog-
raphy, partly by period;         partly   by speech,   religion,   government,
less by   technology; most of all, probably, by those activities of civi-
lization that are especially     concerned with values and the manifest
qualities of style. [1953:275].


To be sure, Kroeber goes on to observe that "the form and
structure possessed         by civilizations invite a comparative mor-
phology." But, in practice, the forms upon which he concen-
trates are indefinitely inclusive and distinctive for each civiliza-

tion, as reflected in the fact that          they find their most succinct
expression in stylistic terms rather than in analytical terms that
are potentially expressive of genuine regularities.
      This is not to deny that the term "civilization" has advan-
tages for other purposes,         and in particular for characterizing
state societies as they are distinguished from societies of lesser
degrees of complexity. As Morgan already saw, civilizations are
associated with qualitatively             greater scale   and internal    dif-

ferentiation than other societies or cultures,            and it is entirely
proper to set them aside as a class under this term even if the
terms for his other equally inclusive categories, "savagery"
and "barbarism," will seem to most anthropologists excessively
ethnocentric and pejorative.
   The cultural referent of the term "civilization" confers still
other advantages when the objective is not processual explana-
tion of       growth but the synchronic analysis of a wide range of
potentially interacting variables.           A distinction between great
and little civilization al traditions as posited by Robert Redfield
(   1953 ) for example, encourages us to look for creative patterns
          ,




of interaction       between    different social constituencies— on the
one hand, the conscious, literate (generally), syncretistic, phil-
osophical, mythopoeic expression of the urbanized elite and,
on the other, the little traditions of the rural peasantry, more
limited in scope,         more variable in both space and time. But,
without denying that important insights             may flow from this
line of analysis,     I   would only insist that it has little to do with
14                       The Evolution of Urban Society

an attempt to account for the genesis of civilized               society.
Like the idea of a folk-urban continuum, which Redfield also
posited, its value is more heuristic than truly explanatory.

     The term "state" on the other hand, is useful for this dis-
cussion in that         it   centers on the political order, one of our
major subjects of inquiry. For all the acrimonious debate about
the essential features of state societies, they may reasonably be
defined as hierarchically organized on political and territorial
lines   rather than on kinship or other ascriptive groups            and
relationships. Internally, at least,        even primitive states tended
to   monopolize the use of force for the preservation of order,
while externally they exercised a degree of sovereignty. Like
the state     itself,                       emerged at varying
                        these root characteristics
rates during the course of the    Urban Revolution. While our
recognition of them is often rendered dubious and never pre-
cise by the nature of the data, they clearly serve to distinguish

a new, qualitatively more complex and extensive, mode of
social integration.
     References     made earlier to the "core" of the Urban Revo-
lution as a changing, functionally related group of social in-
stitutions prompt a comparison of this usage with that of
Julian Steward, from whom I have borrowed the term in
slightly altered form. For Steward, the "core" of a culture is

a nexus of basic institutions and relationships, a statement of
the "functional interdependency of features in a structural re-
lationship"     (1955:94).       The   recognition of culture "cores" as
distinct    from "secondary" features provides the basis          for   a
typology of cultures stressing their most essential, invariant
characteristics and, hence, for a study of processual regularities
common to the appearance of a given cultural type. That far
I would agree fully with him. However, while he concedes
that social, political, and even religious patterns may be em-
pirically    determined to fall within the limits of the core as an
operational concept, for him the concept centers on "the con-
stellation of features         which are most    closely related to sub-
            THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                           15

sistence activities    and economic arrangements"      (p. 37). Here,
at least   with respect to his emphasis upon ecological adapta-
tion as the primary source of change— "the extracultural factor
in    the fruitless assumption that culture comes from culture"
(p.    36)— and upon the separation of economic forms          of be-
havior from the social and political institutions that generally
mediated them, it seems necessary to part company with him.
      Steward himself concedes that "the simpler cultures are
more directly conditioned by their environment than advanced
ones" (p. 40), so at least for the latter we are entitled to doubt
whether his view is correct that the only (or even the major)
effective locus of     change is to be found outside culture rather
than within it. The effect of regarding ecological response as
the primary creative process,      it   may be pointed out, is to en-
courage the search for misleadingly self-generating extracul-
tural factors,     such as population pressure or the managerial
requirements of irrigation systems, as the effectively independent
causes of cultural development. Particularly in these two in-
stances, the evidence for the period of the         emergence of the
early states strongly suggests that they were neither independent
causal agencies "outside" culture nor of sufficient overall im-
portance even to be viewed as among the major, closely inter-
acting factors precipitating cultural change.
      No matter how defined, the distinction between a cultural
core and secondary features is one that is operationally imposed
on, not inductively derived from, the empirical data of history
and archeology. It is applied a posteriori as an explanatory tool,
both to focus attention on certain apparently strategic aspects
of    change and to elucidate a plausible cause-and-effect        se-

quence.    It   involves discrimination as to the significant aspects
of reality— significance in this case being associated with the
achievement of the major features that we associate with the
Urban Revolution. As such, it concentrates on the cluster of in-
stitutions whose development characterizes the full achieve-

ment of the Urban Revolution. It emphasizes those features
16                 The Evolution of Urban Society

which exhibit a rapid, qualitative advance rather than those
which change more slowly or which, in spite of internal changes,
maintain a relatively high degree of continuity as to both form
and function. In a word, any meaningful use of the concept of
a culture core in the study of change involves special stress on
emergent phenomena. But,        at   least,   any explanatory, causal
orientation to the study of history— and ultimately there       is   no
other that justifies the effort— involves a precisely similar proc-
ess of selection of what constitute the significant trends, institu-

tions,   and events from the point       of view of understanding
change.
     There are also dangers of teleology in the employment of
the concept of a culture core as an analytic device. Almost cer-
tainly the core trends   we associate with the Urban Revolution
—social stratification, urbanization, political differentiation, mil-
itarization, craft specialization,   and the like— were subject re-
peatedly to brakings and reversals along the way, even though
we generally remain ignorant of these irregularities and can
perceive only the cumulative transformation that the           Urban
Revolution brought about. But, just as evolutionary biologists
have done, we must continue to speak of trends for as long as
our evidence points to them, while recognizing that change           is

a continuously adaptive process in which the ends are never
immanent.
   The concept of a culture core implies the less obvious, and
hence perhaps more dangerous, connotations of interdepend-
ency and compactness. These connotations may create no dis-
tortions for earlier, simpler stages of cultural development, to
which the fully integrated, seamless web of classical functional-
ism applies as a reasonably close approximation of reality. But,
in the case of complex state societies, their rise is accompanied

by the progressive dissociation of major institutional spheres
from one another, the differentiation of what S. N. Eisenstadt
(1964: 376) describes as "relatively specific and autonomous
symbolic and organizational frameworks within the confines of
              THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                                      17

the     same       institutionalized   system."    Ifenee    the     functionalist
model may become progressively                 less      Urban
                                                      relevant as the
Revolution proeeeds. To take our speeifie ease, the employment
of the concept of a culture core should not be taken to imply
that social stratification and the growth of autonomous political
organs      proceeded       in   continuous,      intimate    interdependency
throughout the period of the Urban Revolution and beyond.
At least at times, they seem to have been, as Eisenstadt (1963:
93)     insists,    "two analytically distinct and independent               vari-
ables."
      A basic question relating to the possibility of discontinuities
in the causally interrelated web of changes that constitutes the

Urban Revolution concerns the rate and duration of the trans-
formation      itself.   To the degree that we visualize it as really
abrupt or rapid— rapid in absolute terms and not merely in rela-
tion to the long antecedent period of sedentary village farming,
which was characterized at most by few and limited structural
changes— to that degree, the possibility that                 it   had internally
distinctive subphases or changes of direction                 assumes less im-
portance.      To that degree also, the process as a whole can be
regarded as an abrupt "step" upward to new levels of sociocul-
tural complexity, in contrast with the "ramp" that is implied                   if

the process continued over many generations or even centuries.
      These terms "step" and "ramp" were recently introduced by
Robert J. Braidwood and Gordon R. Willey (1962:351) espe-
cially to characterize an apparent difference between the course

of development in Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica, respectively.
The metaphor of the ramp introduces                    a source of potential
teleological distortion, for it suggests a smooth upward progres-
sion,                                        whose common
         a uniformly unfolding series of trends
direction was somehow fixed from the outset. The step meta-
phor, on the other hand, tends to compress                   all   aspects of the
Urban Revolution into the same brief, inexplicably creative
period. Since our knowledge becomes progressively fuller with
the later phases of the archeological and historical sequences
18                     The Evolution of Urban Society

leading to all the early states, a corollary of the step metaphor
is   the assumption that we can infer all the essential part of the
transformation at the earliest point in the archeological record
at which there is any evidence of rapidly increasing differentia-
tion or complexity. It      would follow, to continue with the step
metaphor, that most or all of the crucial directions of change
somehow were fixed inconveniently far back in prehistory and
that our written and ethnohistorical records can tell us only
about minor cyclical fluctuations superimposed on sociocultural
systems that were already fully stabilized.
      My own bias is to rely, insofar as possible, on the ramp
metaphor, at least for purposes of this discussion. The advan-
tages of doing so are primarily heuristic. First,              it   forces us to
come to grips with the Urban Revolution as an intelligible se-
quence of change rather than simply accepting it as an almost
mystically sudden impulse. Second, the ramp metaphor brings
at least the later phases of the transformation in              both the Old
and the New World down into the range of the rich source of
questions and insights available only in written documents.
Recognizing that the future tide of discoveries may compel us
to  abandon all the documentary sources as primary, contem-
porary accounts of the initial Urban Revolution and, hence, to
fall back on the step metaphor and consequently on archeo-

logical evidence alone, to do so as an a priori position seems
self-defeating.

     Just as    we may isolate for analytical purposes a strategic
institutional locus of change, a culture core,             and a temporal
locus during   which fundamental changes proceeded at least
relatively rapidly, the Urban Revolution, so we must specify
a geographical locus. It has already been noted that the term
"Urban Revolution" focuses our attention on the city as both
the consequence and the chief locus of the Urban Revolu-
tion.   But, of course, the formation of a city can be under-
stood    only    in   relation   to   its   hinterland,   in   spite    of   how
seemingly resistant to change the peasantry in that hinterland
                    THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                                                  19

sometimes                may be. Moreover, both the individual early city
and      its        hinterland rarely      if    ever must have occurred except
as   parts of an interacting network                        composed          of   many such
entities.           Particularly appropriate for the                 description of such
networks             is    the recently introduced concept                    of   a    key area
and       its        surrounding        symbiotic        region      (Palerm           and     Wolf
1957:29;             Sanders 1956:115).          As the use            of   this   concept to
understand the cultural primacy of areas                               like    the Valley of
Mexico over long periods implies, key areas must be con-
sidered             not in    isolation   but in close interaction with their
often      highly variable              surroundings.        While obvious              in     prin-
ciple,     in        practice    this    point     often     tends     to     be overlooked.
There          is    a    perhaps unavoidable tendency, for example, for
archeologists to              become preoccupied with the major                              centers
in   which monumental construction and creative activity were
concentrated at the expense of depressed, dependent outlying
settlements               whose specialized resources and "surpluses" may
have been indispensable for the former. Or. again, there are
pitfalls that are            not often recognized in regarding urban states
as   based on agriculture, and agriculture                           as     implying an ex-
clusively sedentary               way of life. On this basis, the symbiotic
region within which early states arose might be defined too
narrowly in terms of the limits of sedentary agriculture. But,
in so doing, at least in             some cases we would ignore what may
have been vital,               causal elements in the Urban Revolution. It
will     be argued presently               that,    at    least   in    Mesopotamia, no-
madism was one of the strategic disequilibrating factors that
may have set the core processes of the Urban Revolution into
motion and, further, that the                     earliest    durable patterns of po-
litical    organization to extend beyond the confines of the indi-
vidual city-state received their                     impetus from semitribalized
entities        whose recent nomadic background can be assumed.
     I   propose to contrast and compare only two from among
the considerable                number     of    examples of the Urban Revolu-
tion for which evidence might be adduced. In part, the choice
20                       The Evolution of Urban Society

of    Mesopotamia and central Mexico reflects the special limi-
tations ofmy own knowledge. But, to a degree at least, the
opposite   also true, for my own specialized interest in the
              is

two areas developed with, not before, my preoccupation with
the growth and functioning of patrimonial societies and primi-
tive states as a theoretical        problem. Hence        it    may be useful
more     fully     to   develop the arguments      in   favor of selecting
these two examples.
  To begin with, the advantages of selecting an Old World
and a New World example of early states as the major bases
for comparison          seem plain. By doing so we tend to minimize
the possibility that similarities reflect genetic interconnection,
that    is,   the operation of cultural diffusion,             rather than in-
dependently occurring           (and therefore presumably "lawful,"
cause-and-effect ) regularities. For        all   Old World civilizations
save that in Mesopotamia, it is at least a matter of continuing
debate whether the course of development may not have been
                       by a neighboring civilizational nucleus
significantly influenced
of earlier date. This problem is by no means entirely elimi-
nated by including a New World example as well as an Old
World one, as currently intensifying interest in the possibilities
of early trans-Pacific interconnections shows, but                  it   is   at least
held to a minimum.
      Julian Steward, to be sure, has rightly insisted that even
a considerable degree of diffusion may not seriously distort the
regularities of change. Decrying the tendency to treat diffusion
as "a    mechanical and unintelligible, though universal, cause,"
he believes that "one may fairly ask whether each time a society
accepts diffused culture, it is not an independent recurrence of
cause and effect" (1955:182). But, at any rate, the problem of
how extensive the external factors in the formation of a primi-
tive state must have been before having a significant effect on
its   basic course and patterns of development            is    a   problem for
empirical study rather than a priori theorizing. Therefore                          it

surely is desirable to base systematic comparisons primarily on
               THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                                     21

a selection of the most divergent             and nearly independent of
the existing examples.
       In a recent paper Morton Fried has proposed the distinc-
tion    between     "pristine"   and "secondary"       states,    arguing that
the latter followed a distinctive course of development based
on the superimposition of a conqueror stratum over the bulk
of the local population, while the former "developed sui generis
out of purely local conditions" (1960:729).                  I   tend to agree
with his decision to group          all   the major civilizational nuclei
(Mesopotamia, Egypt, Indus Valley, North China, Mesoamer-
ica,    and Peru)    as "pristine" examples, in contrast to all other
possible cases. But the important point is that Fried acknowl-
edges the validity of the distinction between voluntary states
and externally imposed or inspired ones, so that the question
of whether all the Old World examples belong in this category
must again be an empirical one. And, since our primary in-
terest    is   with the "pristine" case      (or,   we may hope, cases),
again    it    seems best to work with but a single example from
within the Old World oikoumene and to contrast it with one
from the New World.
       In the Old World, Mesopotamia offers certain obvious ad-
vantages quite apart from          its    apparent temporal priority;           or,

perhaps, if we phrase the matter more honestly,                   it   offers rela-

tively fewer and less serious disadvantages.            At least in contrast
with Egypt, the Indus Valley, and China, a more ample, diversi-
fied,    and continuous archeological record            is   available of the
antecedent stages leading up to the achievement of an "urban"
level    of sociocultural    complexity.      In Egypt, to be sure, Sir
Flinders Petrie's sequence dating scheme, although derived ex-
clusively from seriation studies, has stood the test of time                   and
corroborative radiocarbon-dating analyses as reflecting continu-
ity of occurrence.       But exposures continue to be limited very
largely to graves, and a processual understanding of changing
patterns of social organization will never be obtained from the
mortuary cult alone. Precivilizational              levels of settlements in
22                  The Evolution of Urban Society

the alluvial plain of the Indus still remain as poorly known as
those in the Nile Valley; and developments leading to that
civilization are not likely to be well represented in excavations
of small-scale village settlements of marginal hill-folk in neigh-
boring Baluchistan. For China, later          and hence exposed
                                          still

for a still longer time to a variety of direct and indirect influ-
ences from civilization farther west, the problem of the incom-
pleteness of the archeological record during the course of the
Urban Revolution is equally acute.
     There are further valid reasons for the selection of Meso-
potamia if we consider the evidence available just after each
nuclear area had crossed the threshold of "urban" complexity.
In spite of the many problems involved in interpreting the early
Sumerian cuneiform texts, at any rate a considerable degree of
understanding is possible for the greater number that fall into
non-"literary" categories. Further, the archeological sequence
has been worked out with considerable precision and can be
linked not only with the usual succession of temples but also
with palaces, city walls, private houses, tombs, and "royal"
graves, and even with individuals whose names appear as kings
in reliable later records of the dynastic succession.   By contrast,
our information on Egypt continues to come virtually entirely
from tombs.
     With respect to a few aspects      of social organization— for
example, careers of individual rulers, nobles, and members of
the administrative elite— Egyptian mortuary practices inform
us much more fully than do their Mesopotamian counterparts.
But, in general, and particularly with respect to quantitative
aspects of economic behavior for which both the mass of Meso-
potamian texts and the relatively wide extent of Early Dynas-
tic Mesopotamian excavations in settlement debris are pertinent,

nothing is possible in Egypt that approaches the breadth and
depth of reconstruction of functioning Mesopotamian political,
social,   and economic institutions that the cuneiform texts make
possible.
            THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                             23

      For the Indus Valley, the problem is not one of the scale of
archeological exposure but of the relatively poor stratigraphic,
and hence chronological, control that was characteristic of
most of the early, large-scale work there. Furthermore, only a
very limited body of inscriptional materials       is   yet available,
and it is still untranslated. Only China remains as an instance
of civilizational   development that    is   comparable to Mesopo-
tamia in quantity and quality of the available evidence. In that
case, its relatively late development increases the likelihood that
it   may be "secondary" rather than "pristine" in significant ways
and also increases the possibility that any observed similarities
with the prehispanic civilizations of the New World may reflect
cultural influences rather than evolutionary parallelisms.
      For the New World, the case is more simply stated. Archeo-
logical work in Mesoamerica has been much more extensive and
has continued for longer, with earlier attention to secure strati-
graphic control, a geographically wider and much fuller knowl-
edge of regional developmental sequences than in the central
Andean area. A large and important body of Spanish ethno-
historical material   is   available on both these areas, but only
from Mesoamerica are a number of prehispanic written docu-
ments also available.
      An additional drawback to the Andean area is that archeo-
logical knowledge is much fuller from coastal areas, which were
overwhelmed, destroyed as independent political entities, and
partly depopulated during the final generations of Inca expan-
sionism before the Spanish Conquest. As a result, the body of
Spanish ethnohistorical material for those areas         is   extremely
limited. On the other hand, the antecedents of the Inca Empire
in the highlands, in the area     where the Inca had their origins
and where Spanish descriptions of the floruit of their empire are
more adequate, still remain only fitfully illuminated by small-
scale excavations that are widely scattered in space and time.
In short, the utility of the already limited data is further reduced
by the fact that the area whose prehistoric sequence is best
24                      The Evolution of Urban Society

known archeologically differs ecologically and culturally from
the area where the imperial organization that            is   described in
the ethnographical sources first arose and became characteristic.
   Thus a persuasive case can be made, based on the extent
and type of the available evidence, for concentrating upon
Mesoamerica in outlining comparisons with the course of the
Urban Revolution in the Old World. Within Mesoamerica, how-
ever, a further narrowing of geographical focus is indicated by
striking differences in ecological potential        and cultural tradi-
tion   from region to region. Maya civilization, centered in the
lowland rain forests of Guatemala, is virtually as distinctive and
autonomous in relation to Mesoamerican civilization as a total-
ity as   Egyptian civilization is within the general rubric of early
Near Eastern civilization. Only the development of the study
of Mesoamerica within the bounds of a unified and intercom-
municating anthropological discipline, in contrast to the growth
in the        Old World of entirely separate philological specializa-
tions,    has obscured this similarity in geographic and cultural
scale between Mesoamerica and the Near East as a whole.
     For the special purposes of a comparative study the Maya
area     is    not an especially suitable one.     The   disruption   and
termination of many of its major cultural patterns at about the
end of the Classic period (ca. 900 a.d. ), and the undeniable

Mexican influence on later phases of development that con-
tinued only in previously marginal regions like northern Yuca-
tan, create special problems that seriously deter a consideration
of possible parallelisms.
     The most useful unit equivalent to southern Mesopotamia
as a civilizational nucleus      is   central Mexico. Although in large
part a rugged highland region that is strikingly different from
the alluvial plains adjoining the lower Tigris and Euphrates
Rivers, the two regions are closely comparable in terms of pop-
ulation potential, degree of political centralization          and urban-
ization.      Moreover, while continuous, uninterrupted patterns of
settlement do not seem to have been characteristic of central
                   THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                                       21


 MESOPOTAMIAN ALLUVIUM                                    CENTRAL MEXICO
                                 B.C.                   AD.
                   Agade        2300-    CONQUEST      -1500
 Dynasty      of
                                          STATES                                  E

                                2500-                  -1300       Aztec
                                        MILITARISTIC
                           m                                                      n
 Early   Dynastic                         POLITIES

                                2700-                  -1100                      i
                           n

                           — — 2900-                   -900
                                                                   Coyotlatelco



                            d

                                3100-                  -700        Metepec
                            c
                                         THEOCRATIC
 Protoliterate                            POLITIES                 Xolalpan
                                3300-                  -500
                            b


                                                                   Tlamimilolpa
                            a   3500-                  -300
                                                                   Miccaotli

_Warka                          3700-                  -100
                                                                   Tzacualli
                                                        A.D.
 Late    Ubaid
                                                       ~B.C.       Patlachique
                                3900-                  -100    -


                                                                   Cuicuilco




   Figure          1.   Comparative chronologies for early Mesopotamia
                           and prehispanic central Mexico



Mexico, at least the region as a whole provides a relatively con-
tinuous sequence when a succession of different religious and
political centers are taken into account.                Having constituted the
core of the Aztec realm at the time of the arrival of the Span-
iards,   it    furnishes us also with that special wealth of recorded
observational detail which the Spaniards accorded to their prin-
cipal Mesoamerican adversaries.
    A chronological framework for the comparison of Mesopo-
26                   The Evolution of Urban Society

tamia with central Mexico is outlined in Figure 1. Having speci-
fied these examples of the rise of early states as the         ones upon
which it seems best to concentrate, we must consider more fully
the quality and quantity of available empirical data. It is hardly
necessary to discuss the potentialities and limitations of archeo-
logical data in abstract terms for dealing with historical or socio-
logical problems; surely they are now commonplaces.            But what
are some of the effects of the changing character of documenta-
tion,    both at different time periods and as the Old World is
differentiated    from the New, upon the prevailing assumptions
and emphases of study? Before contrasting Mesopotamian with
central Mexican societies in an effort to elicit developmental
regularities, a   problem must be introduced to which we shall
return repeatedly:     To what degree may the observed similar-
ities   or differences between these two widely separated regions
possibly be only artifacts of accidental differences in the data
or in the dominant directions that studies in each of them have
followed?
      One set of conditions applies to the Early Village horizon
in both areas, that is, to the time of consolidation and expansion
of a sedentary, agricultural way of life organized around small-
scale,    relatively undifferentiated   settlements.   First   and most
important, the available material for that horizon             is   almost
exclusively    archeological.   Particularly in   Mesopotamia, most
exposures are limited to deep pits in massive later sites, limiting
the scale of excavations and often preventing the recovery of
complete building plans.        An increasingly serious problem in
both areas is the disproportionately greater share of attention
that the earliest agricultural origins are receiving than subse-
quent phases in the consolidation of a sedentary way of life.
Late prehistoric villages are virtually unrepresented by excava-
tions carried out according to       modern (post-World War II)
standards. As a result, changes in ecological adaptations or sub-
sistence patterns that    might have contributed to the onset of
the     Urban Revolution remain on the whole hypothetical. Re-
                THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                             27

constructions      of   individual   settlements   based    on   large-scale
clearance, to say nothing of regional patterns, are still virtually
unknown. What makes this more serious is that non-archeologi-
cal    information, whether from         documentary, ethnohistorical,
or ethnographic sources, is of very limited importance, since it
stems from so much later a time that its applicability is highly
questionable.
   In comparison with the more three-dimensional picture that
complementary sources of data for later periods permit, the
prehistoric village record imposes marked limitations or biases.
An obvious technological emphasis or even preoccupation, for
example, is engendered by the imperishable artif actual materials
with which the archeologist generally deals. With the relative
paucity of modern excavations in this late preurban time range,
the word "artifactual" is an especially appropriate one; on the
whole, published illustrations and discussion of wastes of manu-
facture (e.g., chipping debris), non-artifactual traces of sub-
sistence patterns,      and even quantitative data on behavior pat-
terns associated with mass-produced artifactual categories are
simply unavailable. Disproportionate emphasis also is given to
individual objects rather than to complex in situ groupings of
features in their architectural context. While archeological pro-
cedures for stratigraphic-temporal placement of objects gener-
ally    have been followed (except in the case of looting, which
begins as a significant factor with the later prehistoric time
periods ) in the absence of quantitative studies the time periods
            ,




that are assigned tend to be excessively long              and impression-
istically defined.

       From data subject to these limitations, the main outlines of
dominant socioeconomic          institutions   (to say nothing of less
tangible aspects of culture)          often at best can be only very
crudely and conjecturally sketched. In fact, interpretive recon-
structions of any kind frequently seem so tenuous that the bulk
of what passes for archeological interpretation tends to remain
at the level of refinements in time-space systematics— resting
28                    The Evolution of Urban Society

upon the implicit and altogether unwarranted assumption that
the latter are directly equatable with culture process          (e.g.,   the
stale and misleading "diffusion" versus "independent invention''

controversy).     Even with all the precision that quantitative ar-
cheological techniques of analysis permit under optimal circum-
stances, of course, chronological controls of the order of two or
three generations remain exceptional. Moreover, work is seldom
possible on a sufficient scale to provide fully equivalent bodies
of material for successive levels.
     Under such conditions, accidents of discovery continue to
exercise a decisive influence. This in turn not only supports a
tendency to extreme cautiousness in interpretation but also en-
hances the tendency to "lump" data into larger chronological
categories. As a result, sequences of change are uniformly— and
perhaps quite wrongly— regarded as relatively slow and smoothly
developing rather than rapid and disjunctive. The milieu of re-
search being a largely anthropological one, and archeological
exposures being obviously concentrated on the more important
and long-lived sites, the further tendency has been to interpret
such changes as do appear in the context of community studies
with a strongly localized and integrative focus. Emphasis                 is

given to objects and institutions evoking consensual patterns of
behavior— art     styles, cult objects, rituals— rather    than to those
which might suggest incipient patterns of differentiation and
stratification.   For all these reasons, the contrast with the po-
litically   organized societies of later periods tends to be drawn
as   an excessively sharp one, and the onset of the processes of
change comprising the Urban Revolution, as well as the Urban
Revolution itself, tends to be interpreted as more abrupt and
disjunctive than was in fact the case.
     There is a broad change in the character of the data with
the onset of the Urban Revolution. Individual settlements char-
acteristically increased in    both size and complexity, raising a
host of problems concerned with the representativeness of ar-
cheological samples that, at least      it   is   assumed, are distinctly
             THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                                29

less    important for earlier periods. Monumental buildings, for
example, represent at best a small fraction of the spectrum of
activities associated with an urban center, but it is equally clear

that an archeological reconstruction of urbanism that does not
pay them close attention neglects one of the primary symbols,
or even a central component, of the Urban Revolution itself.
The problem of properly balancing work on monumental struc-
tures with other types of excavation, it might be pointed out, is
an especially thorny one because of the attraction that temples
and palaces have always had for archeologists with individual
reputations to establish and museums to fill.
       Other sampling problems arise from the trend toward social
differentiation.    New crafts appeared, each with its own increas-
ingly     autonomous and complex techniques and traditions, ex-
tending both the material inventory and the range of specialties
for which adequate documentation         somehow must be supplied
from the incomplete and badly preserved record. With increas-
ing social stratification, too, the problem arises whether an
individual house or       tomb is properly representative of a par-
ticular class or status group, so only a vastly expanded number
of such features can hope to provide as representative a pic-
ture as we assume is available for early villages from more or
less    random, small-scale exposures.
       Finally,   urban societies are involved in an unprecedented
geographical range of cultural-ecological interactions. Hence,
problems of sampling also arise in assessing the role of raw ma-
terials    brought from great distances or in seeking to evaluate
the complementarity of a variety of specialized subsistence
sources serving the urban center.
       The   notorious   archeological preoccupation with temples,
tombs, and palaces sets its stamp on the interpretation of all
later developments that the Urban Revolution inspired. The ap-

proach to the study of        civilizations   characteristically   is   con-
ducted with big picks and large, inadequately supervised work
groups rather than with trowels and paintbrushes primarily
30                    The Evolution of Urban Society

in the    hands of students and specialists. As the ratio of spe-
cialists to    work force and excavated area falls, there is neces-
sarily   a radical reduction, on the basis of dubious aesthetic
criteria, in   the excavated data that ever are preserved, studied,
and published. And as this reduction implies, there is an in-
creasing preoccupation with narrow,              elitist   political    and   cul-
tural traditions in their monumental repositories.
      In short, the increasing urgency of the sampling problems
occasioned by the progress of the Urban Revolution is met with
some increase in the scale of exposures but otherwise is only
reinforced by an increasingly arbitrary selectivity.                   Were we
confined to archeological data of the earlier type alone for the
study of early cities, we would have to acknowledge that there
are increasing sources of distortion           whose cumulative           effects

upon our capacity        to   reconstruct      cumulative sequences            of
change are difficult to estimate but certainly large.
      This dismal prognosis     fails   to materialize       because of two
new features: the appearance of writing and the advent of rep-
resentational art. The latter is much the less important, but it
is   also more uniform in its effects upon interpretation and hence
may be considered first. Whether it takes the form of murals or
sculpture, glyptic or ceramics,         its   content, formal symbolism,
and style in both Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica combine to
suggest for most of it a genesis in myth and ritual rather than
an objective, secular orientation. As such, even though much of
the art portrays individual       human protagonists,            it    reinforces
previously existing biases toward religious institutions and cere-
monies.
      To be sure, secondary inferences may permit an enhanced
understanding of other social institutions as well— for example,
uniformity and refinement of craftsmanship                 may suggest the
degree to which full-time specialists were available to be as-
signed to this aspect of ritual activity, or differences in costume
and other details of portraiture may suggest aspects of the pre-
vailing system of social stratification.         But even when that is
              THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                               31

possible, art focused      on myth and ritual creates special prob-
lems of distortion in the study of sociocultural change. It tends
to deal      mainly with traditiOnalized, symbolic themes, which
probably always were most resistant to change. In so doing, it
avoids representation of other activities, particularly in the po-
liticaland economic sectors, which we might expect to find
most sensitive to the trends at the core of the Urban Revolution.
Useful and important as representations in art are, therefore,
their primary contribution      is   not to the interpretation of broad
institutional patterns      but to the    fuller   understanding of the
same limited range of ritualized activities that the remainder
of the archeological record already tends to overemphasize.
      What saves the situation— indeed, transforms it— is the avail-
ability of written evidence.         Let us briefly consider   its   effects

for each area. In      Mesopotamia, the so-called Protoliterate texts
of the terminal fourth millennium b.c.         embody a still-primitive
system of communication; some of them can be identified as to
general subject matter, and individual signs can be identified
on the basis of later developments, but translation in the full
sense is not possible. With progressive refinements in the cunei-
form      script   during the Early Dynastic period,     it   emerges by
about the middle of the third millennium as a versatile and rea-
sonably unambiguous writing system, however incomplete and
imperfect present understandings of it still may be. Hence there
was a corresponding expansion in the range of uses to which it
is   put. By soon after the middle of the third millennium it still
consisted, in the main, of massive numbers of briefly noted eco-
nomic accounts and transactions, but now there also were myths,
epics, dynastic lists, syllabaries, land deeds, and royal records

which, if not themselves historical in intent, nevertheless pro-
vide the basis for reconstructions of political history.
      By the later Early Dynastic period of Mesopotamia, the
written evidence has immeasurably enlarged and enriched the
available archeological record. Phrased differently, archeological
evidence begins to serve mainly as loose corroboration for basic
32                   The Evolution of Urban Society

patterns of social organization         (e.g.,        social stratification)    in-

ferred from texts that take the societal context completely for
granted and hence that present           it    to us only in a very frag-
mentary fashion. But the opposite approach would not be
possible;   the unfolding world of social interaction that the
documents reveal, even if only fragmentarily as yet, would be
forever lost if we had only the archeological record.
     Alongside these rich potentialities for interpretation provided
by the cuneiform documents, and                    less    often recognized, are
distortions that are inherent in the incompleteness of the re-
covered archives and in the narrowly specialized activities they
record. In the first place, the extent of controlled excavations is
still   minute in relation to even the most important ancient
cities.   Therefore the written evidence                  is   always fragmentary
and tends to be limited to brief chronological intervals at scat-
tered sites, between which synchronisms and direct comparisons
are difficult to establish. Also, there is considerable danger that
what are interpreted as general conditions                      in fact   may have
been of strictly local or temporary application.
     There is a second source of error or uncertainty of equal
importance. Not merely the literary texts but also those of an
economic or administrative character concentrate upon the ac-
tivities of elite   groups and undoubtedly fail to provide a bal-
anced representation even of those. Insofar as the activities of
a general public can be perceived at all in such records, they
are obviously activities that       somehow were important in rela-
tion to state institutions;   it   follows that an accurate assessment
of the real importance of such institutions in the lives of ordinary
persons is extremely difficult or impossible. Further to obscure
the tasks of reconstruction, there            is   no necessary relationship
between the scale or importance of activities and the extent to
which it was felt necessary to record them. Not a single account
has come to light, for example, of the obviously large and thriv-
ing pottery industry that has provided so large a proportion of
the grist for all the mills of the archeologists. Or, again, there
              THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                              33

are virtually innumerable accounts of the receipt or disburse-
ment of grain and animals, but administrative documents deal-
ing with fresh, non-storable vegetables arc noteworthy by their
absence. 3 What we have, in short,          is   highly fruitful and often
tantalizingly detailed, but        we must recognize also that it is
highly selective. And, regrettably but not suprisingly, the small
class of ancient scribes were not sufficiently detached from their

social setting to     have left us a description of the principles by
which that selection was made.
     In Mesoamerica the situation is different.         The earliest sub-
stantial corpus consists of the inscriptions of the Maya "Classic"

period, roughly a.d. 300-900.          Thus far only their calendrical
aspects      have been unequivocally deciphered,              although the
earlier view that on the whole they were purely of a ritual char-

acter is giving way to the belief that they record a substantial
amount of political information as well. Pending decipherment,
however, they will remain at best a minor resource that is mainly
useful in establishing a secure and accurate chronological basis
for archeological research in the         lowland Maya area.
     For the entire remainder of the prehispanic period in Meso-
america, only a score or so of indigenous documents are known
to   have survived the destruction— planned            as well as   merely
thoughtless— of the Spanish Conquest. As the accidents of dis-
covery would have it, these are primarily concerned with reli-
gion, calendrics,      and divination. Of the four large Aztec and
three Maya codices known to have been preserved, for example,
only one of the former and none of the latter treats historical
events.  With an acute consciousness of what may have been
lost, in other words, we must turn away from indigenous pre-

hispanic sources as a substantial basis for societal interpretation.
   What is left are the post-Conquest sources. While internal
contradictions and lacunae may abound to the eye of the spe-
cialist,    the summary impression is of a richness and variety far


     3. I   am indebted to Miguel Civil for these examples.
34                   The Evolution of Urban Society

surpassing anything available in the Near East. In such ac-
counts of the Conquest        itself,   for example, as that of Bernal
Diaz or of Cortes in his letters to Charles V, we learn not only
                         Mexican state but also much of its
of the death throes of the
mode of organization in full flower just prior to that time.
Through sixteenth-century Spanish eyes— not the eyes of mod-
erns, to be sure, but far closer to our own time and point of view

than anyone who ever reported on the city-states of early Meso-
potamia—we learn of at least the external appearance of an in-
tegrated social system functioning over a wide area.
     Essentially complementary to this are the encyclopedic com-
pilations of indigenous customs          and beliefs compiled by mem-
bers of Spanish ecclesiastical orders. The great work of Sahagun,
for example, not only sets forth in richly           documented         detail
the day-to-day life of a wide variety of social strata and spe-
cialized groups but also deals          comprehensively— if not without
obvious bias— with belief systems and the world of speculative
thought. As an effort at integration and synthesis that is almost
"ethnographic" in scope and intent, again there                is   absolutely
nothing that remotely approaches it in the entire body of cunei-
form literature.
     A third major category consists of quasi-historical accounts,
complied and plagiarized, not always              critically    or   disinter-

estedly, by native authors after the Conquest. In these conven-
tionalized and often contradictory accounts of dynastic succes-
sion and tribal wanderings the student of Mesopotamian society
would find himself on more familiar ground. Particularly for
periods earlier than the century or less immediately preceding
the Conquest, there     is   the   same problem of separating myth
from history as arises in connection with the early Sumerian
city-states.   There is a very similar problem in interdigitating
dynastic lists for separate towns and areas into an intelligible
overall chronology. Still a further          common limitation within
which the historian must work in both Mesopotamia and Meso-
america is the narrowness and somewhat arbitrary quality of
               THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                              35

what Leo Oppenheim (1960) has termed the recorded "stream
of tradition." Finally, the beginning of the recorded flow is tan-
talizingly late, particularly in central          Mexico where even the
immense urban center of Teotihuacan is altogether prehistoric.
Given the limited         intelligibility   of the   Protoliterate   tablets
from Mesopotamia, this situation, too, is relatively similar.
       In spite of the similarities of this last category of "historical"
writings to those of Mesopotamia,           it   must be emphasized that
the effects of the entire corpus of documentary sources upon an
understanding of Mesoamerican society differ sharply from its
effects in     Mesopotamia. For the synthetic reconstruction of in-
digenous patterns of political and economic organization in the
period immediately prior to the Conquest, we are incomparably
better equipped in       Mesoamerica than for any period in Meso-
potamia.       On the other hand, for certain types of quantitative
studies, particularly of specialized    economic relationships, we
are at least potentially in a better position in Mesopotamia.
And, more important, the Mesopotamian data permit the study
of longer-term developmental trends (at least insofar as they
are dependent on documentary sources ) than do those in Meso-
america.
       Thus it appears, in summary, that there are real and im-
portant factors limiting the comparability of data on the Urban
Revolution in Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica.                A "contextual"
account, as opposed to a more narrowly focused "textual" one,
is   possible for Mesoamerica during the relatively short span of
years immediately preceding the Spanish Conquest. Perhaps
the especially full elaboration of the structure and functioning
of late prehispanic society       owes something also to the anthro-
pological tradition within which        much of the data has been
studied. But, important as the Spanish sources are, their short
time perspective imposes severe limits on interpretation. Above
all,   it   leaves us without an adequate basis on which to assess
the rate at which the society was increasing in complexity or
coming to be dominated by new institutional patterns. Hence
36                        The Evolution of Urban Society

the fundamental cleavage between characterizations of Aztec
society as primitive         and tribal or advanced and monarchical,
dating from the days of Morgan and Bandelier, on the one hand,
and Prescott and Bancroft, on the other, remains not fully re-
solved today.
      Was Tenochtitlan the center of a chiefdom or the capital of
a    still    primitively organized but increasingly formidable           em-
pire? Surely in the early to mid-fifteenth century the former
description       is   correct, but   how extensive and basic were the
changes during the intervening century before the decapitation
of the society at the hands of the Spaniards? Partly, of course,
it   may be a matter of definitions, but partly also it reflects the
ambiguity that          arises   from the projection of trends across so
short        and poorly known a period. In any case, for the much
longer span of development leading up to the founding of Tula
in the tenth century we must depend almost exclusively on the

unaided data of archeology, from which developments in the
crucial sociopolitical sphere can           be inferred only with much
effort       and considerable uncertainty.
      In Mesopotamia, on the other hand, it is the "textual" point
of    view that predominates           in all historical periods.   At   least

partly because of problems inherent in the study of the early
cuneiform texts         (e.g.,   the absence of bilingual texts providing
translations into fully known languages         and the long and com-
plex later history of            Sumero-Akkadian writing), the purely
philological aspects of scholarship that intercede            between the
student and meaningful problems of sociocultural interpreta-
tion are prodigiously       more difficult and time-consuming than
those in        Mesoamerica. Works that genuinely synthesize and
analyze the primary textual sources with respect to social                 in-

stitutions are correspondingly rarer           and seldom confront one
another directly on crucial points of difference. As a degree of
compensation, the rate and direction of long-term social trends
are at least potentially much better known. Successive steps in
the development of social and economic institutions connected
               THE PROBLEM AND THE EVIDENCE                        37

with the state are often traceable over       many centuries. Here
too,    however, the crucial early stages of the Urban Revolution
lie   far back in an essentially prehistoric record, salvageable   by
archeological means alone.
     The shift from almost exclusively archeological evidence at
the outset of the Urban Revolution to composite, mutually rein-
forcing forms of documentation in which texts play an increas-
ing role thus significantly affects interpretation. However, this
is   not an admission of defeat but only a statement of difficulties
to be faced. Similarly, the differences in documentary sources
between the Old and the New World are not a justification for
eschewing comparison but rather a problem to be recognized
and overcome if the comparative outlook claimed for anthro-
pology is more than a pious, meaningless pledge. The broad
similarities in the course of theUrban Revolution in a number
of historically independent areas, and in the organization of
the primitive states that were its culminating products, simply
demand recognition and study as essentially parallel examples
of a particular type of development in a "multilinear" evolu-
tionary framework.
      As Julian Steward has put it, what is necessary is that "com-
parative cultural studies should interest themselves in recurrent
phenomena as well as in unique phenomena, and that anthro-
pology explicitly recognizes that a legitimate and ultimate ob-
jective   is   to   see through the differences of cultures to the
similarities,   to   ascertain processes that are   duplicated inde-
pendently in cultural sequences, and to recognize cause and
effect in both temporal and functional relationships" ( 1955:180).

It is   with the detailed discussion of these questions, as they
apply in the specific cases of Mesopotamia and central Mexico,
that the remainder of this study deals.
             n
                         SUBSISTENCE AND
                                         SETTLEMENT
IT IS A TRUISM THAT COMPLEX, CIVILIZED SOCIETIES DEPEND UPON
a subsistence base that is sufficiently intensive and reliable to
permit sedentary, nucleated settlements, a circumstance that
under most circumstances, and certainly in the long run, has
implied agriculture.
    A significant exception to that generalization may have oc-
curred in restricted regions of the Near East during and soon
after the closing phases of the Pleistocene. Recently Jean Perrot
has argued that the evidence for either plant or animal domesti-
cates in Palestine        and Syria remains at best highly ambiguous
until possibly as late as the fifth millennium B.C., in spite of the
fact that a settlement like Jericho already had become a small
walled town or village as early as the eighth millennium (1964:
18 ) In this case, of course, the major resources would Lave been
    .




the wild progenitors of the later domesticated races of wheat,
barley, sheep,        and goats, supplemented by a greater quantity
and variety of wild plant foods and lacustrine products than is
available in the region today. Probably even the wild cereals
alone, einkorn, emmer,          and two-row barley, were a larger and
more         stable   subsistence resource than commonly has been
realized.       Recent experiments indicate 1 that yields of as much
as 40 kilograms per family per day of actual grain equivalents
over a three-week harvest period are              still   possible   on unpro-
tected Near Eastern stands of wild einkorn, suggesting that the

        1.   Jack R. Harlan, personal communication.

                                        38
            SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                            39

harvest of wild grain could even have been the basic subsistence
resource, at least within the relatively limited (and not identi-
cal!) ecological niches     where conditions for each of the plants
were favorable.
   But the important point is that these conditions seemingly
were transitory and passed on without having generated civi-
lized, urban societies. The early florescence represented by "neo-

lithic" Jericho   was followed in that area by widespread aban-
donments, and settled life, when it reappeared in that area and
apparently even upon its first appearance elsewhere, was and
thenceforth remained agricultural.
   The domestication of cereals immensely expanded the en-
vironmental range within which these crops were an effective
subsistence source, and it surely also increased substantially the
size and reliability of yields in relation both to labor input   and
to available land. As the numbers and range of sheep and goats
also expanded following their domestication,     an assured supply
of milk and meat products came to overlap the expanding ranges
of distribution of the cereals, further establishing the superiority
of agriculture.   It   was upon this basis, although with such im-
portant later additions as cattle, pigs, donkeys, and the domesti-
cated date palm, that early Mesopotamian civilization met its
underlying subsistence needs.
   In Mesoamerica, the pattern was somewhat different.           The
wild progenitors of the great New World triad of food plants,
especially maize but also beans      and squash, required a much
longer period of selective breeding before they became         suffi-

cient, as domesticates, to replace a     wide spectrum of hunted
and gathered products. Fully sedentary village life accordingly
began much later than in the Old World, perhaps even as late
as the middle of the first millennium B.C., although the earliest
incipient cultivation extends back into at least the seventh mil-
lennium.
   Perhaps the very limited role of domesticable animals— only
the dog and turkey ever became economically important out-
40                   The Evolution of Urban Society

side Peru— contributed to this retardation        by failing to provide
inducements to an agricultural mode of subsistence as compel-
ling as those that    had been present in the Old World. Hus-
bandry, for example, permitted the involvement of even quite
young children      in the   productive process as herdsmen, thus
perhaps stimulating population growth.       It    also created special
opportunities for enhanced resource utilization, as exemplified
by stubble-grazing and consequent manuring.
   For purposes of understanding the Urban Revolution, how-
                                                between the
ever, differences in the onset of food production
Old and the New World are of little consequence, except inso-
far as they reflect cumulative differences in subsistence poten-
tialities.   What matters are the underlying similarities in the
conditions precipitating the Food-Producing Revolution, as well
as in the major changes of which it was constituted.        For these,
it   now seems clear, identify the Food-Producing Revolution not
merely as the predecessor and prerequisite for the Urban Revo-
lution   but as a type of transformation profoundly different
from the latter.
      As I have argued elsewhere, the closing phases of the Pleis-
tocene saw a whole series of adaptive changes in subsistence, of
which the incipient development of agriculture at first was only
a regional variant (Adams 1693). Perhaps foremost among the
more general features of the changes was an increasing seden-
tism, based upon the substitution of patterns of intensive local-
ized, "broad-spectrum" collecting for the more wide-ranging
selective pursuit of migratory herbivores.        These localized pat-
terns took     many forms, ranging from new techniques for the
exploitation of riverine and lacustrine resources to a fuller and
more variegated reliance on seeds, fruits, nuts, and small forest
animals. Many, if not most, of the new patterns involved the
development of a new technology as well: composite tools and
weapons like drills and bows, more specialized reaping and dig-
ging tools than had been necessary earlier, grinding stones for
extracting seeds from husks, cooking processes suitable for the
                         SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                                              41

new       task of         making vegetal foods edible and palatable in bulk,
not to mention even                more ambitious devi< es, su< h as boats, nets,
weirs,            and     their associated             equipment       which were necessary
for the successful exploitation of                             shoreline environments.                      It    is

apparent thai               much    of       tin's    technological advance               is      "preadapt-
ive"      for       successful     agriculture,              which even         in    cultural          terms
consists of hardl) anything                           more profound than the intentional
sowing or breeding                     of     plants and          animals whose exploitation
for food            must alread) have been well known. Moreover, it has
recently been pointed out                             thai   from an ecological standpoint
the distinction between terminal food-collecting and the onset
of    food production              is    equally elusive and                artificial:


      .   .   .    the important point      is not that man planted wheal bul
that he           (i)    moved it to niches to which it was not adapted, (ii) re-
moved             certain pressures of               natural   selection,    which allowed more
deviants from the norma] phenotype to survive, and                                    (   \\\ j   eventually
selected           for    characters     not         beneficial   undei     conditions            of   natural
selection           [Flannery 1965:1251],
                                                                                                       15

In short, the               Food-Producing Revolution was                         a   "process              and
not an "event,* in that it developed gradually or by small steps
over a considerable period and followed different emphases and
sequences according                     to     differing local        conditions even within
the       Near East and Mesoarnerica.
      What were the essential features of agriculture, not only as
a mode- of subsistence but                            as a set of    social    problems and ac-
tivities,         which seem to have influenced the course of the Urban
Revolution?                We may begin with certain very general conse-
quences             of   food production that tend to be                       common to all its
manifestations,               and then turn subsequently                         to       those        whose
effects           may have been at least partly different in Mesopotamia
and in Mesoarnerica.
      Increased yields,                 in    relations to labor input,                   have already
been mentioned. An essential feature of virtually every agricul-
tural regime is that its                 demands upon the farmer are discontinu-
ous through the year and. moreover, are generally phased fairly
42                   The Evolution of Urban Society

uniformly for the population of an entire region. This provides
a basis not merely for a substantially greater         aggregate of
leisure time than     most hunting-eolleeting societies can achieve
but also for its organized disposition as labor not directly tied
to the satisfaction of the      immediate subsistence requirements
of the primary producers       and their families— and hence for the
control    and manipulation of labor as a form of capital.
       Figures are obviously variable according to local conditions,
particularly in Mesoamerica, but under the traditional swidden
agricultural regime a representative published estimate of an-
nually required labor ranges from 143 to 161 man-days at Te-
poztlan, including time required for fencing against cattle (not
a prehispanic problem)       and providing substantial surpluses
available for sale. In   Mesopotamia the local differences prob-
ably are less significant, but the problem of obtaining estimates
is   obscured by oppressive conditions of tenancy. In general,
however, the same impression of substantial potential leisure
is   confirmed. Recent calculations from the northern part of the
alluvial plain suggest that maximally there are about 249 man-

days of agricultural labor per family unit per year under the
traditional   methods of cultivation, with the immediate subsist-
ence requirements of the producing family of peasants seem-
ingly needing only half or less of this time investment. In both
cases, to be sure,   it   should be noted that the estimates include
only the work of the men in the fields and in crop transport. To
this    must be added the frequently onerous and always time-
consuming tasks of fuel collection and food preparation, the
former also men's work,            modern Mexico, while in
                               at least in

contemporary Iraq both fall to women.
     As to yields in relation to land, the virtue of agriculture is
not so much in its higher potential value over that for hunting-
collecting under ideal local conditions as it is in the aggregate
number of units in a relatively large area that can maintain sub-
stantial   and roughly equivalent outputs. In this sense, agricul-
ture can be said to constitute an artificial extension of the
                SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                   43

ecological niche available        for   certain    cultigens through such
techniques as weeding, clearing, seeding, and irrigation, an ex-
tension that permits immensely larger population aggregates
in suitable areas.      Of course, it remains an empirical question
whether great size and density of rural population were a pre-
condition for the growth of nucleated, urban settlements or
whether, instead, the progress of the Urban Revolution pro-
vided a profound inducement to the growth of the rural popu-
lation as well.
     Representative figures for land requirements for subsistence
in   Mesoamerica again tend to be highly variable according to
local conditions       and type of agriculture. Under the traditional
swidden or "slash-and-burn" system                in   the forested tropical
lowlands, from 7.5 to 15 or more hectares per family are re-
quired either under cultivation or as part of a cyclically utilized
reserve.   In    the    highlands,   the   maintenance        of     permanent
kitchen gardens in addition to the practice of swidden has been
reported to reduce land requirements to perhaps 6.5 hectares
per family.     Where there is irrigation, these figures are much
more radically reduced— to less than a hectare where alternate
rainfall and irrigation permit two crops to be harvested per

year and to less than half a hectare under the especially inten-
sive conditions of chinampa cultivation around the lakes in the
Valley of Mexico. For Mesopotamia, there are no adequate
data available on maximal yields attainable with irrigation.
Since shortages of water limit the land that can be cultivated,
there is little incentive to maximize output per unit area; hence
cultivation has always        been extensive rather than              intensive,

with single crop cultivation during the winter growing season
and with alternate years in fallow. Even on this basis, however,
a recent report indicates that in one district the median holding
of   farm-owning families was 6 hectares. Presumably minimal
requirements for subsistence are considerably                 less    than this
figure.

     A third concomitant of agricultural subsistence related to
44                    The Evolution of Urban Society

the growth of civilization  was increased stability of residence.
Data on                 would depend on kinds of longitudinal
             this subject

studies that    are seldom undertaken even by modern ethnog-
raphers and that are essentially unavailable in ancient records
or in archeological findings. But surely we are justified in as-
suming that agriculture generally is a strong inducement to at
least relative stability    and that residential stability in turn is
positively associated with an increasing technological repertoire.
Perhaps as important as its effect on the development of new
tools   and specialized     skills,    residential stability   may also en-
gender social stability, encouraging an irregular but cumulative
shift   from small lineage-oriented systems           in   which   fissionary
tendencies dominate to larger, more open-ended systems tend-
ing toward local continuity and endogamy.
     Certain built-in incentives to population growth constitute
a fourth feature of agricultural regimes              generally and, pre-
sumably, of those in early            Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica as
well. Children, for example,           can be incorporated into the pro-
ductive process earlier than is the case among hunter-gathers.
More important, since agriculture constitutes not merely the
passive exploitation of an existing ecological niche but an ex-
pansion of it, the number and size of agricultural communities
in a given region can grow substantially without increasing the
pressure     upon   their resource base;        on the other hand, such
pressures tend to increase on hunter-gatherers as population
increases.
     The foregoing is not meant to imply that population                  in-

creases that are due to agriculture set the stage for urbanization.
Possibly the attainment of some minimal population level was
necessary to set the process into motion. But such evidence as
there   is   suggests that appreciable population increases gen-
erally followed, rather than preceded, the core processes of the
Urban Revolution.       Particularly       in   Mesopotamia, where the
sedentary village pattern seems to have been stabilized for
several millennia     between the establishment of effective food
                 SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                      45

production and the "take-off* into urbanism,                    it   may be noted
that there       is   simply no evidence for gradual population                  in-

creases that might have helped to precipitate the                     Urban Revo-
lution    after       reaching    some undefined           threshold.   Given the
nature of the evidence available at present, of course,                   it   must
be added that any attempt to describe the extent or timing of
demographic changes               in relation     to the   Urban Revolution in
both Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica remains hazardous in the
extreme.
    Next we may consider the nature of agricultural "surpluses"
insofar as they         may have been a precondition for the Urban
Revolution in Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica. That agricultural
producers can, to a degree quite unprecedented among hunters
and collectors, be induced or compelled to provide a surplus
above their own subsistence needs for socially defined ends is
littlemore than a truism. But does the exploitation of a given
environment by a given agricultural technology, implying a
potential level of productivity from which actual consumption
can be subtracted to define the surplus available for realloca-
tion, actually        help to engender the ideologies and institutional
contexts that are required to mobilize that surplus? Is there an
inherent tendency for agriculturalists to advance in productivity
toward the highest potential              level consistent      with their tech-
nology, that is, to maximize their production above subsistence
needs and so to precipitate the growth of new patterns of ap-
propriation and consumption involving elites freed from re-
sponsibilities        for   food production? Gordon Childe, although
never    dealing        with     these   issues    directly,   appears   to    have
thought    so.    Karl Polanyi and his collaborators have argued
persuasively to the contrary (1957), noting that actual agricul-
tural surpluses are always defined and mobilized in a particular
institutional setting          and that it is precisely the growth of the
collective   symbols and institutions of the primitive states that
can explain the conversion of peasant leisure into foodstuffs in
urban storehouses.
46                     The Evolution of Urban Society

     A useful and somewhat different approach to the problem
of interpreting the significance of agricultural           surpluses has
recently been suggested          by Martin Orans (1966).      Briefly,   he
focuses criticism on the conception of surplus as it is applied at
the level of the individual producer.        What really matters, he
argues,    is   not the margin between per capita production and
consumption, which implies improving "efficiency" as the major
factor in change and which is inherently incalculable from the
usual archeological-historical data. At least from the viewpoint
of understanding sociocultural change, the crucial variable, in-
stead,    is   the gross   amount of deployable wealth or "surplus."
     There are several advantages to conceptualizing the prob-
lem in these terms. First, it calls attention to the fact that a
chain of processes is involved in mobilizing "surpluses" in any
sociocultural context rather than merely the attainment of a
margin between production and consumption on the part of the
primary producers. The accumulation of a surplus is              at least

facilitated by improvements in technological-transport facilities

not directly related to agriculture at all     (e.g.,   boats and carts)
and, in any case, involves the elaboration of complex institu-
tional    mechanisms, not merely for assuring production of a
surplus by the peasantry, but also for concentrating and reallo-
cating it. Equally important, the concept of gross surplus directs
attention to the political or religious centers of the society,
urban or otherwise.      was in those centers, after all, that its
                            It

utilization resulted in the formation of the   new classes and
groups of specialists, as well as the monumental structures and
luxuries primarily associated with them, by which we identify
the Urban Revolution in the first place.
    Emphasis on gross surplus rather than per capita surplus
serves other functions as well. It suggests, for example, that an
increase in the gross size of population and territorial unit may
offer at least as strong a stimulus to the       Urban Revolution as
putative increases in "efficiency." Trends toward territorial ag-
grandizement, political unification, and population concentra-
               SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                                  47

tion within the political unit accordingly can be interpreted not

merely as expressions of the outcome oi the Urban Revolution
hiii   as functionally interrelated processes thai                   are central to         it.


       Calculated as gross amounts                 of    deployable wealth rather
than per capita ones, the significance oi surpluses changes from
an implied independent factor oi change to a component                               in    an
interdependent network             ol   e;uise     and    effect.   Extensions of         ter-

ritorial   control,   new forms of political               superordination, and a
multiplicity    ol    technological        advances         all     may have had           as
much effect on the- size ol the surplus as improvements in im-
mediate agricultural "efficiency," while the deployment                             ol    the
surplus, however it was formed, obviously had important re-
ciprocal effects on these othei factors. Further to emphasize the
interdependence of surpluses with a host of political, economic,
and technological institutions, it may be noted that agriculture
received organizational inputs from some of the institutions that
emerged during the course of the Urban Revolution. At least
in the case of        Mesopotamia, rationalization                   of   production       in

large-scale, internally specialized units surely increased not only
gross output but also per capita productivity, suggesting that
surpluses can be isolated from the processes constituting the
Urban Revolution as a whole only in the sense that they may
serve as convenient indices for              it.    In reality, they        and the in-
stitutions    promoting and disposing of them were inextricably
intertwined to form         its   substance.
   The composite character of both Mesopotamian and Meso-
american subsistence patterns is a somewhat less easily defined
and tangible common feature that nevertheless seems certain
to be functionally related to the onset of the                      Urban Revolution.
Phrased      differently,    there      were       significant      respects   in    both
cases in   which their component producing units were not self-
sustaining.  While specific forms naturally differed greatly, some
of the most characteristic institutions of the emergent states in
both areas played a decisive role in mediating the relationship
between the complementarity specialized                        units of production.
48                   The Evolution of Urban Society

This point may be more fully explained by considering each of
the areas separately.
     While from a distance the Mesopotamian alluvium appears
to   be an ecologically undifferentiated region, in fact there al-
ways have been a number of distinctively specialized subsist-
ence zones within it. Wheat and barley cultivation is perhaps
the best known, with the prevailing emphasis on the latter be-
ing related to the fluctuating effects of salinity.          It   takes the
form of field cultivation on an extensive rather than intensive
basis, both   along levee back-slopes and the margins of swamps
and depressions. A second niche consists of garden and orchard
cultivation. These summer harvests are small, limited to 10 per
cent or less of the areas devoted to the winter cereals             by the
sharply reduced availability of water; hence they are largely
confined    to   favorable   low-lying       areas   adjoining permanent
watercourses.    A third adaptation is that of the herdsman, in-
cluding weeds and stubble in fallow fields (establishing a pat-
tern of symbiosis with cultivators )     ,   as well as great enclosed or
marginal tracts of semiarid pastureland. Fourth, the swamps
and rivers constitute a subsistence system whose importance is
often neglected, serving as the source of reeds, one of the few
locally available building materials outside the soil itself,          and
also of fish. Fish constituted perhaps the major source of pro-
tein in the southern    Mesopotamian diet; its importance as an
economic activity is suggested by the fact that more than 100
of the 1,200 or so     members of the Bau community in Early
Dynastic Lagash are listed in contemporary texts as fishermen,
and 125 more as oarsmen, pilots, longshoremen, and sailors.
    The important point about these subsistence alternatives is
that they  were pursued by specialists in whose activities and
interrelations the formal organizations of the community played

a substantial intervening role. In the case of cultivators, for
example, we learn from the tablets of ancient Shuruppak that
both seed and plow animals were often centrally maintained,
supplied, and accounted for. As many as 9,660 donkeys are ac-
               SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                               49

counted for on one Early Dynastic administrative text alone,
and the responsibility for plowing, even on private land, seems
to   have rested with corvees under the direction of appointive
officials.   Significantly,   signs   apparently referring to plowing
officials    can be recognized on Protoliterate texts representing
temple accounts, so this centralization is as old as our earliest
written evidence.
     With respect to herding, the involvement of the central in-
stitutions of the city was as decisive as in the case of farming.

It is   suggested by the preoccupation of so much of the early
glyptic art with sacred herds and by the substantial temple and
palace holdings of domesticated animals recorded on Early Dy-
nastic texts.    Or, to refer again to the           Bau texts from Early
Dynastic Lagash, almost 100 members of that community were
listed as specialized    herdsmen. Perhaps the problem of sparse
summer forage was a particularly critical one, necessitating cen-
tralized     management, particularly         in    the case of the larger
bovids and equids, but in addition part of the explanation surely
lies inthe importance of wool for the manufacture of textiles
upon which the long-distance trade for needed raw materials
like copper must have depended.

    Another part of the domain of the herdsmen lay outside the
perimeters of cultivation and settlement, depending on open,
semiarid steppes for the sustenance of migratory herds rather
than on young barley shoots or stubble in cultivated                fields.

But, although the nomads occupying the region may have been
able to resist political ties with the scattered enclaves of urban
settlement and irrigation agriculture in their midst, in a           more
important sense they remained a vital part of an interacting
cultural     and economic whole. Recently it has been noted, for
example, that the great early centers of the cult of the shepherd
god, Dumuzi, lay in cities bordering the Sumerian edin or
pasturing ground.
     Similarly in the case of the fishermen, the central institutions
of the emergent       Sumerian        city-states   played an active role
50                      The Evolution of Urban Society

with respect to both their production and their consumption
patterns.    The so-called "mashdaria" texts from Lagash, for ex-
ample, have been interpreted for many years as reflecting very
large "offerings" of fish by the fishermen to the temple— offerings
so large that their further employment for food by a large part
of the    working force of the temple community has generally
been taken for granted. Insofar as these texts deal with "offer-
ings" at all, there are indications that they refer to contributions
made to the exchequer of the ruler and his family, from which
in turn we may assume they were redistributed. But probably

it   would be more accurate to conclude that they deal with a
form of ritualized interchange, carefully accounted for by the
officials of   the Bau community, in which herdsmen and fisher-
men exchanged milk products and fish with each other and for
cloth. And it should be remembered that the large quantities

of fishbones reported to have been found in late         Ubaid temple
levels at    Eridu point to a very early beginning of ritualized
patterns of either offering or exchange in which at least the
products of the specialized group of fishermen were made avail-
able to a considerably wider segment of the population.
     A still more direct and basic form of interchange of subsist-
ence products      is   attested   by numerous Early Dynastic and
Akkadian texts. It consisted of large-scale distributions of ra-
tions to    dependents of the great state institutions. The com-
plexity of this system, with regard both to the commodities
involved and to the gradations of support that were extended
to different age, occupational,      and social groups, recently have
been adumbrated by I. J. Gelb (1965). Presumably in exchange
                                         by productive adult
for corresponding periods of labor service
workers, the system made allowance for the aged and even for
nursing infants. At least       among the parishioners of the large
landed demesnes, the allotment of subsistence plots thus was
importantly supplemented by the issuance of monthly rations
of barley— for varying periods of the year,     depending upon po-
litical   conditions as well as     upon degrees of dependency. In
                 SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                            51

addition, there        were annua! rations of Oil and wool, as well as
distributions     at    festivals   and, on other special   occasions, of
mutton, beef and          fish,   dairy products, vegetables, dates and
other fruits, and beer and wine.
    In short, the subsistence patterns of late fourth and early
                    Mesopotamia involve specialized groups
third millennium b.c.
of producerswhose relations were characteristically mediated
by the dominant urban institutions, including the palace and
the temple. Although a quantitative summary has not yet been
attempted ( and indeed may be meaningless until a wider selec-
tion of contemporary Early Dynastic archives is available), the
general outline of the system conforms strikingly well to the
"redistributive"       model that Polanyi and his collaborators have
sketched; moreover, there are at least hints in the available
data that the actual flow of goods and services was large in
relation to the total available supply of such goods and services.
Surely   we see here, as was adumbrated earlier, not merely a
complex pattern of subsistence but one in which the interde-
pendence of its component features played a material part in
shaping the institutions by which we identify the Urban Revo-
lution itself.
    The Mesoamerican pattern was different in important ways
and yet generically similar. There were densely settled enclaves
where conditions were favorable for continuous or intensive
agriculture with the indigenous crops and technology, separated
from one another by extremely rugged areas, permitting, at
best,   marginal settlement. Differences in rainfall, in soils, and,
above all, in elevation, profoundly affected the complex of cul-
tivable crops     upon which depended not only trade in luxuries
but also some commodities closely linked with subsistence.
Regionally adapted varieties of maize, to be sure, grew in vir-
tually every habitable zone, but chiles          and maguey, the latter
an important source of amino acids in diets generally low in
protein, were specialized highland products. Cotton and cacao
beans, on the other hand, were cultivated only at lesser eleva-
52                  The Evolution of Urban Society

tions,   the former having already been imported into the great
central valley of   Mexico long before the Christian Era, while
the latter had    become the accepted medium of interregional
exchange by the Postclassic period, if not earlier. Salt, obtained
particularly along the seacoasts,    was another important com-
modity of trade. Perhaps most significant as a specialized sub-
sistence zone     was the Valley   of Mexico, occupying only an
insignificant proportion of the    Mesoamerican gross land area
but supporting highly productive chinampa horticulture and
providing a rich lacustrine fauna as well.
     This regional contrast, and the prevailing symbiosis that     it

encouraged, constituted an "ecological mosaic," as it has been
called, of strikingly different   and yet interdependent zones of
specialization.   The pattern as   a whole was similar to Meso-
potamia in its high degree of internal differentiation, and, as in
Mesopotamia, it is not unreasonable to suppose that some of
the most advanced and characteristic institutions of Mesoamer-
ican society were centrally involved, and may even have           had
their origins, in mediating the relationships        and interchanges
between the specialized components.
   Further, one of the profound differences between the early
state societies of Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica may lie in the
particular local features that this complexity assumed. In Meso-
potamia distances were small, geographical barriers were un-
important, and interaction between those engaged in different
subsistence pursuits  was close, many-faceted, and continuous.
Most communities, accordingly, were composite with regard to
subsistence specializations, and the responsibility of religious
and political authorities in relation to subsistence was to main-
tain and improve a system of relationships already existing
within their boundaries. At least down through the Akkadian
period and perhaps somewhat        later,   the careful   management
and recording of a system for the redistribution of subsistence
products in the form of rations was the central economic ac-
tivity   and concern of the state institutions. The institution of
              SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                           53

the marketplace, with ancillary jural and ceremonial features,
was largely or entirely absent.
     In Mesoamerica, on the other hand, only the relatively less
deep-rooted "imperial" polities like that of the Aztecs might be
said to have transcended the limitations of a single geographical
(mainly altitudinal) zone, and a dominant orientation of the
urban elites lay in the promotion of "external" trade. Hence it
is   not surprising that upon their arrival in central Mexico the
Spaniards found the institution of the marketplace in hyper-
developed form; 60,000 persons, for example, were daily in
attendance at the market in Tlatelolco, and 30,000 even in a
much smaller principality like Tlaxcala. Large-scale trade by
barter is reported not only in luxuries but in virtually all sub-
sistence products, clothing,    and even rudimentary agricultural
implements, and there were elaborate juridical institutions for
maintaining market norms. By as early as the middle of the first
millennium a.d. at Teotihuacan, there are suggestions that great
marketplaces had emerged as architectual establishments with
well-defined internal arrangements. All these are features that
are missing in Mesopotamia.
     A further general similarity between Mesopotamian and
Mesoamerican subsistence patterns, again accompanied by re-
gionally variable forms     whose differences are also significant
for our purposes,   is   an increasing intensity of land use. Best
known among the patterns of ecological modification to which
this refers is the introduction of irrigation, and there seems little

reason to doubt that it was generally accompanied by at least
a relative increase in the productivity of lands under cultivation.
But in one sense the term "intensity" is perhaps a misleading
one. It implies a special emphasis     upon labor-intensive tech-
niques of agriculture in which the productivity of a fixed,
limited amount of agricultural land rises in direct proportion to
a spiraling labor input. Something of the kind can indeed be
discerned on an extremely limited scale in the chinampa horti-
culture practiced in the Valley of Mexico, but there is no evi-
54                     The Evolution of Urban Society

dence that it ever was a widespread, general feature of either
central       Mexican or Mesopotamian agriculture.
      A better way of characterizing these modified patterns of
land use, at least in terms of the changes in social organization
they may have brought about, involves not their productivity
in relation to land area or labor input         but their unstabilizing
effect   upon communal systems of land tenure and the conse-
quent inducement they provide to the growth of social stratifi-
cation. Irrigation systems, for example, are capital investments
that enhance the productivity of the tracts              and groups they
serve    but not others.      Given inadequacies         in    water supply
(whether arising from a limited average supply in relation to
land, from year-to-year fluctuations, or from lack of congruence
between maximum stream flow and the growing season), the
usual condition in both Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica, such
systems represent relatively permanent improvements, which
restrict or distort uniformity of access to the primary productive

resources of the community and which tend to concentrate the
potentialities for the      production of a surplus of deployable
wealth in the hands of a limited social segment. Depending on
local    circumstances, such potentialities      may be reckoned           in
terms of rights to land or to water, but the effect is the same in
either case.      They stimulate the concentration            of hereditable,
alienable wealth in productive resources,          and hence         also the
emergence of a class society
      Such, at least, is the pattern that can be followed in some
ethnographic examples, for example, Ralph Linton's account
of    the introduction of wet rice         cultivation    in    Madagascar
(   1939 ) In Sinhalese villages, on the other hand, Edmund Leach
          .




reports that such effects can be held in check for long periods
within the community by internal leveling mechanisms based
upon periodic        fractionation   and   redistribution       of   holdings
(1961).       Given such diametrically opposed           alternatives,   our
question becomes:       Under the particular conditions present in
early Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica were the disequilibrating
               SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                         55

effects   of patterns of differential land use             somehow held in
check or were they instead an important inducement to the
growth of a stratified society? In both cases there is good evi-
dence for a decisive increase in social stratification; before deal-
ing with it, however, we should examine the possible roots of
the process in the prevailing subsistence patterns.
   In Mesopotamia the problem of ecological inducements to
social                both complex and obscure. There are
          stratification   is

abundant records, from Protoliterate times on, of great differ-
ences in ownership of land or rights to its usufruct. But it has
not yet been possible to position these early holdings with
respect to one another, to establish the relationship between
purchase price and yield for the same fields, or to show how
closely the very large holdings coincided with superior soils,
access to irrigation water, and productivity. Seemingly, all that
we can fall back on at present are some indirect and rather
doubtful hints.
   First,   the rate of seeding in late Early Dynastic times was
exceedingly      low— only      a   sixth   or   seventh   of    contemporary
Western      practice,     although not greatly different from con-
temporary practice         in the   same area. This low seeding rate,
together with reliance on a simple system of fallow rotation
throughout antiquity (and, for the most part, up until the
present), suggests prevailingly extensive rather than intensive
cultivation.However, it does not rule out the possibility that
there  were substantial relative differences in the value of
arable lands, since under the traditional agricultural regime a
low seeding rate is ecologically advantageous                   (it   provides a
measure of protection against water shortages,                        as   well   as
higher proportionate yields in relation to a given volume of
applied water )    .   Such differences are confirmed by the fact that
in a number of cases the purchase price is differentiated into a
component       directly    based on land area and a supplemental
charge for capital improvements or extras like a standing crop
or adjacent canals. Indeed, pre-Sargonic purchase prices for
56                   The Evolution of Urban Society

land range rather widely— between factors of one and six times
per given unit of surface area, clearly suggesting important
differences in productivity, ease of access, assurance of adequate
irrigation water, devotion to intensive orchard cultivation, or

the like.
      In spite of this considerable variability, the price of land in
the Early Dynastic sale texts is prevailingly low, generally cor-
responding to no more than might be harvested from it over a
two- or three-year period and on occasion             less   than even a
single year's harvest. This low land price     seems to confirm the
existence of a relatively non-intensive system of cultivation,
with greatly excessive areas of potentially cultivable land in re-
lation to the available supplies of irrigation water, but, of course,
may mean little, since it is not known what proportion of which
fields are referred to in     the existing sale texts— whether mar-
ginally irrigated or well supplied with water. It is entirely pos-
sible that the   more favorably situated lands constituted large,
growing holdings in the hands of elites; if so, they would seldom
be formally transferred and hence recorded.
      Somewhat surprisingly, in view of the critical scarcity of
water rather than land, rights of ownership apparently were
calculated exclusively in land and not in water, which must
reflect the   wide variations in flow of the major streams, their
tendency to shift their courses, and the difficulties of measuring
water consumption. There is also a noteworthy absence among
the literary sources— proverbs, disputations, etc.— of references
to controversies over     water rights, such as might be expected
if   there were gross, permanent inequalities in access rights to
this critical resource.   And, similarly, the early references to the
construction of canal systems generally specify their importance
as arteries of communication and do not mention at all the water
they provided for irrigation.
     The large corpus of texts touching on the agricultural econ-
omy also contains little to indicate the development on a sig-
nificant scale of   any more intensive type of land use than the
                SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                             57

traditional system of fallow rotation,which suggests no very
marked trend to increase field productivity even on favorably
situated tracts.     On the other hand, it leaves unexplained the
substantial differences in the unit costs for land. Finally, the
role of the corporate landholding groups that are in evidence in
Early Dynastic times subsequently seems to be a progressively
more restricted one, and no mechanisms for periodic land re-
distribution within such groups, which might have prolonged
their survival by reducing internal differentiation, are directly
attested in the available record. 2
      What emerges from this miscellany of observations is that
agriculture remained overwhelmingly extensive rather than in-
tensive and that there is little or no evidence of intracommunity
competition over scarce land and water resources. Thus, while
all   our evidence points to increasing inequalities in the control
of deployable wealth, the available evidence from ancient texts
neither proves nor disproves that they were significantly en-
hanced by locally emerging patterns of differentiation in sub-
sistence control or productivity.         Of   course, such inequalities
were increasingly reflected in differences in landownership, as
the great acquisitions by single individuals that are recorded
in Early Dynastic texts clearly show. But, while wide variations
in sizes of holdings      may have perpetuated, or even intensified,
the process of social stratification as a whole, it simply cannot
be shown directly how much of that variation was an outcome
of trends inherent in the local subsistence system.
      Even if unambiguous contemporary evidence is still lacking,
however, a consideration of the ecological circumstances char-
acteristic of the     Mesopotamian plain strongly suggests that in-
creasing disproportions in the control of deployable wealth
were at least partly induced by the local subsistence system. It


      2.   On the other hand, Miguel Civil suggests (personal communica-
tion) that the extremely long and narrow shape of fields recorded in some-
what later (Ur III)     texts   may imply impermanent boundaries between
individual allotments within larger corporate holdings.
58                     The Evolution of Urban Society

cannot be overstressed that traditional irrigation agriculture in
that context is maintained within at best an unstable eco-system.
Great variations in rainfall and river flow,          silting,   increasing
salinity with rising groundwater levels, periodic infestations          by
blights and insect pests, the delicately shifting balance between
nomads and settled peoples— all are repeatedly attested through-
out the historical record and are still in evidence today. Con-
sidered in relation to human settlement, in vulnerable, narrow
enclaves along shifting, inadequate watercourses, such factors
leading to marked differences in the control of productive land
and agricultural surpluses have always been overwhelming and
chronic.
      While these processes are perhaps most obvious among cul-
tivators, Frederik Barth's work on the nomadic Basseri of south-

western Iran provides a paradigm that must have obtained
among ancient Mesopotamian herdsmen as well (Barth 1961).
Barth emphasizes that nomadic life is not to be understood as
an isolate but that, instead, there is a continuing dependence
upon neighboring zones of cultivation. One form of this de-
pendence, and perhaps the primary one for our purposes,                  is

that there    is    a continuing feedback of population into the
settlements. In part      it   consists of a relatively large proportion
of the nomadic population whose herds for one reason or an-
other fall below the minimal level necessary to maintain ex-
tended family groups. Such groups have no recourse but to
trickle into the cultivated       zones as a disorganized, depressed,
landless labor force.      A smaller, but for our purposes equally
important, upper stratum of nomads is successful in increasing
its   ratio of animals to      herdsmen past the point at which it is
economical to manage them. This stratum must seek to convert
its herds into     a more stable form of capital, and specifically into
land that can be maintained in production either by the former
herdsman and some of his followers or on an absentee basis.
Even without considering the political effects of large groupings
of nomads, in other words, we can identify potent disequilibrat-
              SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                            59

ing factors arising from the symbiotic interaction of herdsmen
and farmers that must always have been reflected in tendencies
toward increasing inequalities in landholdings.
   As the example of herdsman-cultivator symbiosis           testifies,

ecological relationships that were significant for the growth of
social stratification are not necessarily    understood best from
the standpoint of the nucleated community.         The network of
signficant ecological relationships need not be coterminous with
the self-conscious territorial, social, or religious unit. Granting
the biases and limitations of the contemporary sources,           what
they attest is not so much the onset of processes of social dif-
ferentiation within communities as the existence of prolonged
and bitter intercommunity struggles. In most cases such strug-
gles    may have had their origins in subsistence practices or re-
quirements, for example, the opposing demands of upstream
and downstream irrigators, rival claims to adjacent lands, or
the characteristically divergent local patterns of substantial sur-
plus and impoverishment. But they clearly are to be understood
in a regional rather than an intracommunity framework.           What-
ever their initial roots, rivalries of this kind lead to consolida-
tions    of land, population,    and agricultural surplus  which
                                                            in
political and economic factors were closely intertwined. Thus

externally imposed patterns of political and military domination
are an important facet of the development of social differentia-
tion, complementing its emergence as a result of ecological

pressures within the community.
   There is an additional reason for considering the adaptive
patterns characteristic of Mesopotamia as regional in scope
rather than as centering        upon an individual sedentary com-
munity. Mesopotamian herdsmen and farmers, or rural folk and
city-dwellers, for the   most part have never been fully stable
types but a shifting continuum. Particularly in early times, the
self-conscious,   committed urban elite was extraordinarily thin,
a relative handful of administrators, priests, scribes, and per-
haps craftsmen in a population among most of whom settled
60                    The Evolution of Urban Society

city life was continuously viewed as merely one of several avail-

able alternatives.        Although Leo Oppenheim was concerned
primarily with later periods in a recent discussion of this theme,
there is no reason to doubt that his account is equally applicable
to the city-states of the Early Dynastic and Akkadian periods:

    The palace, of course, the temple, and the hard core of city-
dwellers in the large and old cities had only occasional contacts
with the people in the open country,   who subsisted on the yield
of this environment  and were not to be forced into sedentary con-
ditions. Between these two groups there were important fluctuations
comprising smaller or larger segments of the population of the
cities as   well as the open country. Difficult economic and political
situationswere liable to crowd out of the cities such persons as
delinquent debtors, power groups defeated in intracity striving, de-
fectors from the great organizations, and others. In the open country,
they joined the inhabitants of abandoned villages and settlements
who had been driven into a seminomadic way of life by the deteri-
oration of the    soil,   the breakdown of facilities for irrigation, or
because they had rebelled against taxes and rents. The number of
these was increased by infiltrating groups from the mountains and
the deserts around Mesopotamia. Thus the ranks of this fluctuating
element of the population could swell at times of crisis to a dan-
gerous degree, even engulfing the cities, and— if led by an energetic
and   efficient political or military   leader— it could transfer the rule
over the city, and even that over the entire country, into the hands
of outsiders or  newcomers. Whenever linguistic differences appear
between the city and such power groups in the rebellious hinter-
lands, or more exactly, between the dialect used to write official
documents in the city and that actually spoken by the group in
command, we have the impression of sudden foreign invasions,
bringing kings bearing foreign names to the throne. Such dramatic
changes need not have been the result, necessarily, of foreign
invasion but could have been brought about by a rather slow eco-
nomic and political process of increasing social unrest which would
not be reflected in extant documents. The most effective remedy
against these potentially dangerous elements were projects of internal
and frontier colonization which only a powerful king could set afoot.
The inscriptions of such kings speak triumphantly of the ingathering
... of the scattered, the resettling ... of the shiftless on new land,
where the king forced them to dig or re-dig canals, build or resettle
                  SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                           61

cities,   and till the soil, pay taxes, do corvee work to maintain the
irrigation system,     and— last but not least— perform   military service
[1964:82-83].

    Parallels between the process that Oppenheim describes and
the relationships between city-dwellers in central Mexico and
the so-called Chichimecs along the northern periphery of Meso-
american settlement are immediately apparent. The ecological
frontier of farming in the latter region repeatedly failed to coin-
cide with the cultural frontier, so marginal groups must have
shifted    back and forth from farming to nomadic hunting and
collecting as the political authority and prosperity of the great
urban centers at their rear waxed and waned. The traditional
accounts tend to speak of the Chichimecs as invaders exclu-
sively from beyond the limes of civilization, responsible for the
fall of cities     through their unaided military pressure. Given the
limited numbers and resources of nomads and their necessarily
high degree of dispersal, this explanation seems most unlikely;
Pedro Armillas (1964a) has very recently demolished such an
interpretation in detail. It     is   the characteristic "urban" distor-
tion of a         complex, dynamic relationship and bears a close
analogy     to,                          Arab attributions of
                   for example, the Chinese or
overwhelming strength and destructiveness to their Mongol in-
vaders.     The decisive forces, in fact, were the marginal culti-
vators within the ambit of political           and   religious influences
emanating from the major centers, for to them slight environ-
mental   shifts (for which Armillas argues) and increases in

nomadic pressure could upset a sensitive balance and pre-
cipitate a widespread withdrawal from patterns of peaceful
settlement.
    Under the conditions of territorial expansion and firm po-
litical control that     seemingly obtained at the time of the Toltec
"empire," for example, there is evidence that the zone of settle-
ment not only reached its outermost continuous limits but
jumped beyond them to form a series of isolated enclaves of
local irrigation extending      northward for hundreds of miles in
62                   The Evolution of Urban Society

the narrow ecological niche formed by the junction between the
hot steppe and the mesothermal savannah belt. With the in-
ternal collapse of Toltec political control, with the       weakening
or abandonment of Toltec frontier defenses, and possibly with
environmental deterioration as an additional cause of move-
ment, most of these marginal groups would have had                 little

choice but to drift southward into the heart of the former Toltec
realm, where they would have constituted a formidable threat
to the   remaining urban settlements. However, whether they
were the agents responsible for the         final   destruction of the
major centers, or whether, instead, primarily internecine warfare
among the major centers was involved, remains an open ques-
tion. The Chichimecs of Xolotl (who clearly were not nomadic

food-gatherers but a people long experienced with agriculture),
after all, did not themselves    overwhelm Tula but arrived there
only after the great capital was "fallen and destroyed, its streets
overgrown with grass, and totally abandoned" (Dibble 1951:
18).
     In calling attention to the complexities of the relationships
between the     settled political   systems, their marginally agri-
cultural outliers, and the seminomadic collectors, Angel Palerm
and Eric Wolf rightly stress that the pattern was one involving
active acculturation:


     Obviously, the adoption of Toltec political, military and agri-
cultural patterns by Chichimecs and marginal farmers involved more
than mere imitation. As    we have seen, the Toltecs equipped and
trained such groups with the purpose of using       them as auxiliaries
along the frontier and in their internal struggles, as well as settlers.
Thus some groups learned agricultural skills, achieved a fairly high
level of military organization and efficiency, and came to form tribal
federations. When the Toltec order began to weaken, these groups
stood ready to penetrate Mesoamerica, to enter into symbiotic re-
lationships with   remnant Toltec groups, and in the end to merge
with the mainstream of Civilization. This process is exemplified by
the Chichimecs of Xolotl, founders      of the   dynasty which ruled
                SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                        63

Texcoco when the Spaniards arrived, and thus founders of one of
the most important centers of civilization in Mesoamerica [1957:4].


   Here we catch glimpses of the many-layered character of
even the major urban centers in prehispanic central Mexico. It
closely corresponds to the fluidity of much of the urban popula-
tion in early    Mesopotamia, although differing from the latter
in its apparent emphasis on the retention of self-conscious ethnic

divisions.   How are we to understand the composition of a city
like Tula, said to have included not only a Tolteca-Chichimeca

elite stratum   but also a stratum of Nonoalcas, speaking a differ-
ent tongue or tongues, venerating different gods, and apparently
more skilled in the sedentary arts of construction and crafts-
manship? Or the curious amalgam of supposed geographic de-
rivations and separate customs characterizing the groups of
specialized craftsmen who were said to preserve the Toltec
heritage in the later Aztec capital? Surely even the internal
structuring of such cities, to say nothing of the dynamics of their
development in relation to their rural hinterlands, requires that
we extend beyond the city and its immediately dependent
hinterlands and, instead, adopt a regional frame for ecological
analysis.

    The problem of the relationship between Mesoamerican sub-
sistence patterns    and the growth of social differentiation still
remains to be adumbrated. There are both striking similarities
and important differences between central Mexico and Meso-
potamia with respect to systems of cultivation and tenure. While
the lands of Aztec commoners ( macehuales ) were held by cor-
porate kin groups (calpullis) and were inalienable, with her-
editable usufruct rights depending on continued cultivation,
the conditions of tenure on the lands of the nobility were more
fluid.   Leaving for a later time discussion of the system of social
statuses of which land tenure was only a partial reflection, it is
sufficient to   note that some estates were hereditable and en-
tailed, reverting to the    king in the event of the death of the
64                    The Evolution of Urban Society

noble without issue, while others reportedly eould be sold or
otherwise disposed of. Unfortunately, the sources provide very
few details on who the purchasers of land were or under what
circumstances purchases were made. All that can be said with
certainty is that land was distributed by the king as spoils of
war, both to members of noble lineages and to commoners who
had distinguished themselves in warfare.
     In other words, the available sources from central Mexico
attest only the imposition of large-scale       landownership "from
above," as an act of political largesse       accompanying military
conquest.    The bulk of the population obtained its livelihood
only within the framework of corporate kin groups or else as
dependent retainers bound to a lord's land and to his service.
Under such circumstances the sale of land would appear to be
a correspondingly late development, arising only after unen-
tailed fields had accumulated in the hands of the nobility in an
unprecedented process of territorial expansion. Indeed, Jacques
Soustelle has argued that as late as the time of the arrival of
the Spaniards private property was still "in the act of coming
into existence" (1962:80).      To be sure, we must bear in mind
the bias and disproportionate emphasis in most of the contem-
porary accounts of the powers and activities of royal lineages.
Given this narrowly restricted viewpoint in at least the surviv-
ing documents, the few passing references to privately held land
may assume a greater significance than would otherwise be the
case. But it must still be said that on present evidence the role
of differential access to land in generating class differences re-
mains uncertain.
     Generally, it is impossible to determine where privately held
lands   (i.e.,   lands not associated with the performance of an
office) lay,     how significant a proportion of the arable area in
different regions they constituted,      and whether or not they
tended to be devoted to market-oriented production employing
more intensive regimes of cultivation. Such information would
be particularly important for regions of especially high agricul-
              SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                  65

tural productivity and corresponding economic importance, such
as the chinampa regions around the lakes in           (lie   Valley of Mex-
ico, but apparently it is as unavailable there as       elsewhere. While
the unique but fragmentary "Maguey Map," for example, indi-
cates a rectangular grid of intensively cultivated chinampa-like
houseplots,its position cannot be clearly fixed and it provides

no information on whether the plots represented small-scale
private ownership or merely usufruct rights.    Torquemada and
Clavijero describe indigenous       maps on which different types
of landholdings     were painted    in contrasting colors,        and late
sixteenth century exemplars of this tradition appear in legal
depositions over Indian rights to land. But, while examples
testifying   to   prehispanic conditions apparently survived the
initial   ravages of the Conquest, they were neither copied nor
preserved for present study.
    Although the evidence      is   admittedly inconclusive,          there
are suggestions of a significant,     if   partial,    contrast    between
Mesopotamia and centfal Mexico. In the former, we have seen
that leveling devices involving the redistribution of corporately
held lands apparently were absent, while, on the other hand,
there was vigorous buying and selling not merely                among roy-
ally   appointed officeholders but among small agricultural pro-
ducers,    applying, according to Igor Diakonoff's estimate, to
"at least 40 to 50 per cent of the lands, with          about two thirds
of the population" of the important city-state of                Lagash   at

the end of Early Dynastic times (1954:21). In central Mexico,
on the other hand, the institutions of sale were poorly devel-
oped and largely limited      to the nobility, while the           bulk of
the population enjoyed only a portion of the usufruct (minus
tribute and labor service) of corporately owned, rigorously
entailed land. In the Mesopotamian instance, a contribution
to the growth of social stratification from local differentia in
subsistence seems assured. In Mesoamerica, on the contrary,
the growth of social stratification seems to have been pre-
eminently a politically induced process associated with royal
66                           The Evolution of Urban Society

largesse in the distribution of lands                   and   tribute.   Of    course,
this is           not to deny the linkages between politics and subsist-
ence, but at any rate the linkages seem in fundamental respects
to       have been different ones. Lloyd Fallers provides a succinct
statement of what seems an applicable ethnographic parallel:

         ... in traditional Africa goods and services, both as symbols
and as facilities,          circulate primarily in terms of political relations,
for it is the polity that dominates stratification. Persons
                                                          and groups
                    symbols and facilities that are the expressions
strive to control the
of authority and the means of strengthening and extending it. A
good case could be made that, at least in eastern, central and south-
ern Africa, the most important             facilities   are people. This does not
mean that people are regarded by their rulers as mere                         "things,"
though of course various forms of slavery have sometimes been in-
volved, but rather simply that in the production of goods and serv-
ices in this part of Africa, the most problematic factor is usually
human labor.
     .   .   .   land is on the whole not scarce and agricultural and military
technology               simple. The means of production are
                      are relatively
                   by groups of village cultivators. For the chief
therefore controlled
who wishes to strengthen and extend his rule, the main problem
consists in securing  an adequate supply of labor. The solution of
this problem lies in attracting and holding the maximum number of
subjects who, as cultivators and warriors, can then produce the maxi-
mum amount of tribute and booty in craft and agricultural prod-
ucts. These in turn can be redistributed as largess to the maximum
number of loyal supporters [1964:126].

         There is one further respect in which control over produc-
tive         subsistence resources      may have initiated political proc-
esses connected with the               growth of the state.       I   refer to Karl
Wittfogel's thesis on "Oriental Despotism"                    (1957). Wittfogel
asserts that irrigation-based societies like those commonly asso-
ciated with the great oriental civilizations constitute a separate
class of socialphenomena in which a number of interacting
                     combined to shape a course of develop-
institutional features
ment different from what took place among stratified agricul-
tural societies in western Europe.                 Their special features, he
              SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                            67

maintains, were the imposition of inordinately strong political
controls necessary for hydraulic                 management, a related tend-
ency for their         elites        to   become monopolistic bureaucracies,
close identification of the                dominant religion with the officials
of the government,          and the fractionation and atrophy of pri-
vate property and other non-state-controlled centers of eco-
nomic     initiative    and power. Such              societies,    after   an   initial

creative period during which they were formed, he regards as
stagnating or retrogressing until the impact of                      modern tech-
nical  and social changes associated with the Industrial Revo-
lution. One of the areas with which we deal, Mesopotamia,

appears in his typology as a "compact" hydraulic society; the
central   Mexican highlands fall within his "loose" subtype, in
which centers of hydraulic agriculture were dispersed rather
than concentrated.
   I    am not concerned here with a general discussion of this
grandiose theory, although it may be noted in passing that a
detailed scrutiny of the historical development of a                          number
of regions crucial to           it    tends not to confirm either the specific
role of irrigation      management in the growth of governmental
controls or the existence of structural barriers to further de-
velopment that Wittfogel adduces. A theory that finds it useful
to characterize the temple centers of the Classic lowland Maya
as a "marginal hydraulic society" obviously                   is    overdrawn and
at least requires radical revisionand reduction in scope. But
what is important for the present discussion are two empirical
questions    about the growth of early states in Mesopotamia
and central Mexico, which WittfogeFs thesis                        at least   has the
virtue of bringing forcefully to our attention.                 The first con-
cerns the nature of irrigation systems:                  Were they sufficiently
large in scale or complex in managerial requirements during
the periods with which                    we are dealing to have served as a
stimulus to the growth of specialized political bureaucratic
elites?   The second concerns the nature of irrigation manage-
ment, again during our specific periods. Who assumed respon-
68                         The Evolution of Urban Society

sibility    for    canal      construction         and maintenance, and how
closely    was control over the distribution of water articulated
with other patterns of superordinate authority?
      In Mesopotamia there are sporadic references to the con-
struction      of occasional large canals                  and     irrigation    works             in
late   Early Dynastic royal inscriptions, but the settled zone
in the     main tended to follow bifurcating and rejoining stream
channels running along natural levees. In other words,                                           irri-

gation, on the whole,               was conducted on a               small-scale basis,
which involved little alteration of the natural hydraulic regime
and the construction               of only relatively small-scale field                          and
feeder canals that were wholly artificial. To judge from slightly
later times, the allocation of irrigation                  water was in the hands
of    temple      officials      rather    than royally appointed overseers,
and as early as Early Dynastic times the necessary labor forces
for the    maintenance work were apparently organized and                                         di-

rected by the individual temples. "In short, there                              is       nothing
to    suggest that the rise               of    dynastic    authority      in        southern
Mesopotamia was linked                    to    the administrative requirements
of a major canal system"                   (Adams 1960b:281).
     Our knowledge            of the      detailed physical layout of settle-
ments in relation             to   their       irrigated   agricultural     hinterlands
unfortunately            stems     almost       entirely   from the        central               and
northern parts of the Mesopotamian plain. Here the blanket
of alluvium         is    very     much        thicker than around the ancient
Sumerian       city-states in the              extreme south, and        much denser
and more continuous later occupation has also helped to ob-
scure the early patterns. But, pending more intensive recon-
naissance in the south, the positioning of settlements around
ancient Eshnunna, in a district east of modern Baghdad, pro-
vides the fullest available information:

   The main towns ... do not form the hubs of radiating canal
networks along which the subsidiary villages are strung. The                         .   .   .




subsistence requirements for the existing,                 still   comparatively small,
population could have been met with flood irrigation based on tern-
                  SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                                   69

porary dams and small ditches to direct the water, supplemented
with, or perhaps increasingly replacedin time by, small canal sys-
tems that grew slowly by accretion but that never were extended
more than a few kilometers inland from the streams. In the context
of     Mesopotamian conditions, it has recently been shown             that this
kind of irrigation     well within the capabilities of local groups
                          is

without state intervention. Elaborate control works to regulate the
water supply certainly were not necessary for so rudimentary an
irrigation system.Hence it is difficult to see the emergence of the
towns as a consequence of any monopolistic control of the water
supply of surrounding villages, and still more difficult to imagine
the growth of their political institutions as a consequence of a need
for a bureaucracy concerned with canal management [Adams
1965:40-41].


       As this description implies, a map of Early Dynastic settle-
ments     in    Mesopotamia       (Fig. 2)    tends to convey a false im-
pression about the density and uniformity of ancient land use.
In spite of the relatively slight differences in the topography
of the alluvial plain between the levees of the braided stream
networks that were characteristic of that period and the                      in-

terior depressions separating them, this             system is characterized
by decisive ecological boundaries. Much of the land, such as
the great Sumerian edin, or pasturing ground, in the empty
region between the major southern cities, was permanently
unusable for irrigation agriculture within the terms of the
political      and economic system prevailing until Classical times.
The area        actually cultivated at any one time              was small in
relation both to the gross area of potentially arable land                and
to the    amount cultivated during much of the first millennium
a.d.    and again today. Hence population levels also were rela-
tively low.       There    is   reason to believe that even the largest
          Uruk with 450 hectares, were not continuously built
cities, like

up within their walls but included open areas and even cul-
tivated     gardens.      A maximum          urban   concentration      of   fifty

thousand persons or so seems consistent with excavated remains
and calculations from modern urban                   densities   in   the    same
Figure 2. Early Dynastic settlements in southern Mesopotamia, and
      reconstructed network of contemporary watercourses
         {After Adams 1958, 1965; Jacohsen I960; etc.)
                   SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                             71

area, and only a handful of Sumerian settlements could have
approached even this figure. It follows that a total population
for the entire alluvial plain during the            first   half of the third
millennium          B.C.   of   between a half-million and a million per-
sons     is    perhaps the most reasonable estimate possible with
currently available evidence.
   As         to   Mesoamerica, estimates of the population density
within the central part of the Aztec realm at the time of the
Spanish Conquest vary widely. Systematic and detailed studies
by Sherburne F. Cook, Woodrow Borah, and their co-workers, 3
largely based         on inferences from tribute rolls in the light of
Post-Conquest sources, have been interpreted as suggesting
levels        significantly     higher even than those obtaining under
modern         conditions of industrialization and rapidly improving
public health. According to their estimates, the gross popu-
lation of central Mexico was on the order of 20 million inhabi-
tants;    about 5 million persons would have lived within the
heartland of Aztec control shown in Figure 3. Rural densities
as high as 800 persons per square kilometer are proposed for
the Valley of Mexico, and a correspondingly high estimate of
360,000 persons            is   given for the population of the Tenochtit-
lan-Tlatelolco urban cluster.
  Some          of the     assumptions underlying these estimates are
clearly        debatable,       and a recent review    of   the   Old World
evidence by R. J. Russell (1958) seems to indicate that they
are excessively high in comparison not only with Mesopotamia
but with preindustrial societies generally. Quite possibly Mex-
ico attained population levels substantially higher than those
of early Mesopotamia, in spite of the close similarities in the
Urban Revolutions that transformed both areas. But it is dif-
ficult to believe that the two areas could differ, as the Cook

and Borah figures imply, by a full order of magnitude. And,
in any case, just as in Mesopotamia, it is impossible to support

    3. Most recently, Borah and Cook 1963. A full bibliography of earlier
works is included therein.
72                  The Evolution of Urban Society

an explanation of Aztec militarism and expansionism in terms
of increasing    demographic pressure          as   a major independent
variable.   As Pedro Armillas observes,

This Lebensraum justification     fails   to explain the facts.   Undoubt-
edly, the high density of occupation on the central plateau provided
stimulus and    manpower for aggression.        Nevertheless, the purpose
of resettling populations is never mentioned as a motive for waging
war in the native chronicles, nor did the conquests result in large-
scale movements of people, although in some instances military
colonists were established in newly conquered marches to defend
the frontier [1964b: 323-24].

     In light of the possibility of greater population densities
in   Mesoamerica than in Mesopotamia, the problem of Meso-
american irrigation    is   of particular interest.      At present, how-
ever, a summary evaluation of the role of prehispanic irrigation
is   more difficult, since important new data on the problem is
continuing to be brought forward. An intensive study of docu-
mentary sources by Angel Palerm has disclosed references to
almost 400 widely scattered instances of irrigation in late pre-
hispanic times, their distribution perhaps implying, as he sug-
gests,   "a considerable antiquity." In most cases the systems
were of no more than local importance, but the largest works,
and the greatest concentration of references to them, "coincide,
in   general terms, with the greatest densities of population,
with the distribution of the most important urban centers and
with the nuclei of political power and military expansion"
(1954:71). Clearly, techniques of irrigation agriculture played
a not insignificant part in      Mesoamerican subsistence patterns
of at least the late prehispanic period.
     Our special concern here, however, is not with the impor-
tance of irrigation as one of the          vital,   interacting factors in-
creasing agricultural productivity and hence surpluses, or even
with its possible contribution to the growth of social stratifica-
tion through its encouragement of differential yields. If perhaps
not quite to the same degree, these effects of irrigation almost
20°30'N




          Figure 3. Late prehispanic settlements in central Mexico,
                  largely from Aztec documentary sources.
                            (After Barlow 1949.)
74                         The Evolution of Urban Society

certainlywere present in central Mexico just as they were in
Mesopotamia. But it is Wittfogel's contention that the primary
significance of irrigation arose not                  from its encouragement of
new economic resources and social complexity but rather from
the impetus given to the formation of coercive political institu-
tions   by the managerial requirements of large-scale canal sys-
tems. And in this respect the available evidence, closely paral-
leling that for early         Mesopotamia, fails to support him.
   The scale and organization of irrigation in the Old Acolhua
domain on the eastern flanks of the Valley of Mexico, for ex-
ample, has been described as follows:

     The Texcocan system certainly represents one of the largest ir-
rigation systems known to date in Middle America. Yet its construc-
tion cannot  compare with the massive systems of dykes and dams
characteristic of the hydraulic societies of theOld World and Peru.
Rather modest in scale, it served to integrate a number of com-
munities or settlement areas into what might be called an "irrigation
cluster." .   Such clusters
              .   .              differ from "local irrigation" in that
                                     .   .   .




the individual community lacks direct access to water, and the
problem of allocating water can no longer be met within one com-
munity alone [Wolf and Palerm 1955:276].

In this case, as also in the case of the system of dikes and
aqueducts marveled at by the Spaniards upon their first arrival
in Tenochtitlan,         we may indeed have irrigation on a sufficient
scale for its         management to have had an effect on the growth
of political institutions. But these systems are known to antedate
the arrival of the Spaniards by less than a century and to have
been undertaken as state enterprises by strong, fully constituted
political authorities in response to a critical period of general

famine. While undoubtedly they                       may have served further to
centralize        and    intensify       political    controls,   accordingly they
were hardly responsible for bringing such controls into being
in the first place.
     A perhaps more significant, but also more ambiguous, case
concerns the valley of Teotihuacan to the north of Texcoco and
             SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                               75

the extraordinary urban center that flourished there a full mil-
lennium and more before the Texcocan irrigation system. This
is   not the point at which to discuss Teotihuacan       itself,   except
to indicate that        Rene   Millon's surveys confront us with the
hitherto   unimagined problem of an enormous ceremonial and
population cluster covering close to thirty square kilometers
early in the first millennium a.d., several times the largest esti-
mates (already mystifyingly large) of less than a decade ago.
What is important in the present context, however, is the sub-
sistence pattern that sustained this great urban center, and here
the arguments for its dependence upon irrigation that have been
put forward by William Sanders, although admittedly all based
upon indirect evidence like the placement of contemporary out-
lying sites with relation to springs, channeled watercourses, and
alluvial fans,seem cumulatively conclusive (n.d., pp. 73-74).
     Having admitted the presence of irrigation at Teotihuacan,
however, we must concede that we have "explained" very little.
The springs provide irrigation water only for an area of some
38 square kilometers, an area not substantially larger than the
urban zone alone and in terms of size surely to be classified as
no more than an irrigation "cluster" or "district" in Wolf's and
Palerm's terms. That such an incredible concentration of urban
growth should coincide with a relatively modest irrigation sys-
tem, of a type that elsewhere can both come into being and be
sustained merely as a result of informal, ad hoc arrangements
between villagers, merely underlines the limited role that irriga-
tion management must have played. Its complex system of hier-
archies, after   all,   surely exercised administrative control over a
very large surrounding— largely unirrigated— region.
     Not unreasonably, Sanders believes that, if irrigation helped
to provide the subsistence base on which Teotihuacan was built,
the introduction of irrigation techniques ought to be traced
back to the period of its first explosive transformation into an
urban center, the Proto-Classic at about the beginning of the
Christian Era. Direct corroboration is still lacking, but it may
76                    The Evolution of Urban Society

be significant that objects of the same date recently have been
reported to occur in the silts of the intensively cultivated chin-
ampa district near Xochimilco. It is interesting to note that in
both cases the initial efforts were probably directed in the main
toward the reclamation of swampy land through drainage, a
characteristically simpler undertaking than canal irrigation with
scarce and erratic water supplies and one fully consistent with
small-scale local initiative and an absence of superordinate po-
litical control.   Yet the possibility that canal irrigation may have
been present at an even earlier time is raised by preliminary
reports of reconnaisance findings in the         Tehuacan valley of
southeastern Puebla.      It   would be a foolhardy archeologist who
would insist that no further surprises of this kind are in store
for us.
     As befits the diversity of the Mesoamerican terrain and the
rapid pace of current research there, any        summary statement
on the role of irrigation management in the formation of pre-
hispanic states has apodictic overtones that must be explicitly
denied.     The conclusion does seem warranted, however,        that
irrigation even on the limited scale of early Mesopotamia, bind-
ing together at most a small handful of communities and per-
haps helping to consolidate coersive political controls but not
requiring them, was widely scattered, dwarfed by the scale of
the polities accompanying it, and generally late in making an
appearance.  No more than in Mesopotamia, then, and in all
probability less, can we look to the managerial requirements
of irrigation as the major stimulus to the growth of the institu-
tions     of the state.   In both areas irrigation merely forms a
subsidiary part of a functionally interdependent network of
subsistence techniques, political hierarchies, and economic re-
lationships.    And our task of understanding this network will
not be advanced by isolating irrigation as the primary, inde-
pendent causative agency.
     The physical manifestations of urban settlement in Meso-
potamia and central Mexico are less central to our theme than
             SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT                               77

the ecological setting in which they arose and, in any case, were
too complex       and extensive to receive detailed discussion. The
end products in both areas were true cities, hundreds            (in the
case of Teotihuacan, thousands ) of hectares of densely built-up
agglomeration of architectural components, secular and cere-
monial, public and private, planned and unplanned. For central
Mexico, our near-total ignorance of the archeological aspects
of the more important late prehispanic towns is more than offset
both by depictions of palaces and temples in surviving codices
and by the luminous impressions left by such of the Conquista-
dores as Bernal Diaz, the Anonymous Conqueror, and Hernan
Cortes himself.
   Although less adequate for the Akkadian period than for the
Early Dynastic period, on the whole the archeological record
for Mesopotamia is relatively good.        We can plot the limits of a
half-dozen or more major towns with considerable assurance;
we have detailed knowledge of several palaces, of numerous
temples, and of a large, if perhaps not fully representative, array
of private houses. In at least a few cases, notably in the district
around ancient Eshnunna in the northern part of the alluvial
plain, not only     can the full sequence of construction of these
types of structures be traced individually, but also the extent
of excavations     is   sufficient for a sense of their spatial distribu-

tion in relation to one another to be obtained as well.          But we
have no sources comparable to the Spanish accounts on which
we rely so heavily for Mesoamerica, sources which, for all their
impressionism and imprecision, alone can invest dead floor
plans with people, ceremonies, a widely extended web of social
interrelations,    and the ebb and flow of day-to-day life.
   Given these fundamental differences and the bifurcation in
the nature of our sources, a detailed comparison of urban lay-
outs and their architectural components in Mesopotamia and
Mesoamerica would be a largely futile exercise. It would also
be a misleading and unnecessary one. It is the institutions of
                        and interacted with one another that
city life as they emerged
78                The Evolution of Urban Society

constitute the appropriate units of study for comparative pur-
poses. The towns and cities that came into being in both areas
were no more than the gross outer manifestations of the totality
of this process, the containers, in the apt phrase of Lewis Mum-
ford (1960:7), within which it took place.
          Ill

                              KIN AND CLASS

ALMOST BY DEFINITION, THE GROWTH OF SOCIAL COMPLEXITY HAS
been accompanied by social stratification. If the term "class" is
used to describe objectively differentiated degrees of access to
the means of production of the society without any necessary
implications of sharply reduced mobility, class consciousness,
or overt interclass struggle, the early states characteristically
were class societies. Hence perhaps the central task in a com-
parative essay is to consider parallelisms both in emergent class
structures and in the sequence of changes by which they were
brought about.
     This is a task to which Lewis Henry Morgan first gave con-
crete historical embodiment. Perhaps deriving some of his ideas
from Sir Henry Maine, he formulated the development of the
state in terms of the failure of gentile institutions to      meet the
increasingly complex needs of society. These needs he asso-
ciatd,    first,   with the presence of agriculture and, second, with
the rise of cities:

      ... in the Upper Status [of barbarism], cities surrounded with
ring embankments,    and finally with walls of dressed stone, appear
for the    first   time in human experience. Cities of this grade imply
the existence of a stable and developed field agriculture, the pos-
session of domestic animals in flocks     and herds, of merchandise in
masses and of property in houses and lands. The city brought with
it   new demands in the art of government by creating a changed
condition of society [1963:264].

     Today, with knowledge of a long line of antecedents of both

                                     79
80                      The Evolution of Urban Society

Old and New World civilizations of which Morgan knew noth-
ing, this general           view    still   commands respect. Most students
would shift the emphasis from property as such, socially de-
fined and maintained rights to certain resources or commodities,
to the    system of         stratified social relations of   which rights       to
property were only an expression. Probably most would also
tend to question Morgan's implicit assumption that the substi-
tution of territorially defined communities for ethnically defined
ones was both a necessary and a sufficient cause for the growth
of the institution of private property. But there can                    be little
dissent with the general shift he posited               from ascriptively de-
fined groupings of persons to politically organized units based
on residence. And, substituting class stratification for property,
I, for one, still share his conviction that it was the "mainspring"
and "foundation" of political society (p. 224).
    Hence we must undertake a comparison of the nature of so-
cial stratification in early Mesopotamia and central Mexico,

with reference both to the processes by which it emerged and
to the    forms   it   ultimately assumed. Obviously,          it   is   easier to
describe the latter than to trace the former. There are important
differences between Spanish sources that recount Aztec jural
rules and behavior patterns (usually not differentiating these
two aspects of a social system ) on the one hand, and cuneiform
                                             ,



sources that for the most part fail to indicate either the jural or
institutional setting of the            narrowly focused relationships they
record, on the other. But in both cases the description of the
fully   developed systems can be based on a relative abundance
of material.   For earlier periods, by contrast, we can rely only
on records that are substantially less well understood and re-
liable,   and ultimately on the data of archeology alone.
     Accordingly,      it    is   useful to reverse the historical sequence
for the present and begin with a necessarily brief and somewhat
overgeneralized comparison of the relationship between kin-
based patterns of organization and stratified social groupings
in the    two areas at their latest point. This procedure has the
                                     KIN        AM) CLASS                                          ^]

added         virtue of        adumbrating some of the                   basi<    similarities in
structure between late Early Dynastic                            \kkadian Mesopotamia,
on the one hand, and                     late   prehispanic central              Mexico, on the
other.       On this basis we can then turn more easily to the vital
questions of the similarities                   in   processes     of    growth, whir h       jt   is

my main purpose to elicit.
    As we turn first to Mesopotamia, a cautionary word is nec< s
sary.    Sumerologists only recently have begun to turn their at-
tention to social and economic questions after a period of                                 many
years        in       which the existence            of   a   so-called    Tempelwirtschafi
was taken for granted on the basis of the pioneering but some-
what misconstrued and overgeneralized work of Father Anton
Deimel on archives from ancient Shurppak and Lagash (cf,
Schneider 1920; Deimel L931). Even without consideration                                           of

the massive philological problems confronting students of these
documents, there are important unanswered questions about
their representativeness                 and about the proper methodology for
their interpretation.              The entire body of               material needs inter-
disciplinary,            quantitively oriented restudy, as well as system-
atic comparison with the contemporary archeological data,                                     with
indirect suggestions as to socioeconomic organization provided
by historical and literary texts, and with more fragmentary doc-
umentary sources for the same period from other sites.
   Provisionally,              pending the completion               of    restudies    now un-
der way, we may begin by noting that Sumerian referential kin
terminology (terms of address occur rarely, and only irj formal
literary contexts; follows generational lines.                           Terms for "cousin"
and "aunt" seemingly are absent, but                             'father's   brother"    is   rec-

ognized,          ]
                      possibly indicating a preferential                   marriage pattern
that    is    not.      explicitly attested in the             documentary sources be-
cause        of       their   limited,    largely administrative             subject    matter.
In particular, the wide geographical spread and considerable
known time, depth of patrilateral parallel cousin marriage among

   1.   Ako Sj0bor^. personal communication.
82                            The Evolution of Urban Society

the Bedoilill and                 many groups of settled Aral) peasantry may
Suggest     (l»a(   il   is   a   pattern <>l   immense durability, which already
existed in      Sumerian limes. Robert Murphy and Leonard Kas-
dan (1959:27-28) have argued plausibly that       lends a quality      it



of '^resilience and adaptability in the face of adversity" while
still    permitting the periodic formation of great tribal coalitions
that     are vertically             integrated    through genealogical reckoning
to    common ancestors. But, though these important functional
and ecological advantages lend                       plausibility to a suggestion of

continuity, the presence of a well-developed system of Sumerian
affinal    terminology differentiates between the ancient and the
present systems.              Hence many aspects of                (he character of the
former, including the underlying question of whether or not
the agnatic sections constituting the central components of the
structure     were mainly endogamous or exogamous, still remain
obscure.
        Marriage,        in   any case, was prevailingly— and perhaps ex-
clusively,     except             for the    royal court     monogamous. To judge
from records of land sale and from historical inscriptions (both
perhaps unrepresentative in that they locus primarily on mem-
bers of the elite), descent                  was reckoned in the male line. Cases
arc     known, on the other hand,                    in   which genealogies          also in-
clude individual              women among those through whom descent
is   traced. Moreover,           women occasionally appear in land deeds
and on ration lists as heads of households (perhaps widows)
and as both the donors and recipients of ritualized food offer-
ings.     Furthermore, cases are known                   in which women carried

on long-distance trade                  in   their   own names and filled impor-
tant     administrative posts beside their husbands, for example,
Baranamtarra, the wile of the ruler Lugalanda                                in   late   Early
Dynastic Lagash.                   To judge from          ration   lists,   records of in-
heritance, and the architectural plans of contemporary private
houses, the customary urban residential unit                            was the nuclear
family.
      Traces of larger, more inclusive organizations can be dis-
                               KIN       AND CLASS                                  83

cerned that mediated certain relationships between individuals
or families, on the one hand,               and the institutions of the state,
on the other, although they are only occasionally and ambigu-
ously referred to in the specialized archives upon which we
must rely. It is only reasonable to assume that their importance
in the informal, almost              wholly unrecorded day-to-day            life   of
the  community was much greater than such references alone
would suggest. At least some of these groups seemingly were
localized and corporately held title to agricultural lands. Ad-
ministrative references to others suggest that they                       were    pri-
marily of an occupational or professional character, although
perhaps also localized in places of residence and employment.
The latter bear comparison with guilds, in that their recruit-
ment and internal structure must have followed kin lines;
moreover, they acted as corporate bodies in the fulfillment
of    certain   "external''     civic     responsibilities.

      We are indebted for the primary studies on corporate
landholding groups to Igor Diakonoff (1954),                       who has been
the first to explain satisfactorily a number of enigmatic deeds
of sale   and other records connected with the transfer of land
in Early Dynastic times.              Most of these documents, stemming
from Sippar, Adab, Eshnunna, Shuruppak, Lagash, and other
widely scattered            had long been known, but their
                           localities,

significance did not become apparent until they were studied
as a group. Now it appears that among these documents—
Diakonoff recognizes 35 or so that are of Early Dynastic date-
are a number recording purchases in which there are multiple
sellers in a corporate, although by no means equal, relation

to one another. Commonly, one or a few individuals are listed
as    "owners" of a          field   or    at   least   as   recipients   (literally,

"eaters")   of    its   price in barley, silver, or other commodities.
But    also included are references to "sons of the field"                       (this

category sometimes including women!), "brothers of the own-
ers   of the     field,"    and others who seemingly give assent                    to

the sale by their presence and who generally receive in return
SI                                  The Evolution Of Urban Society

a gift of bread, fish, milk, etc.                          Diakonoll notes that the actual
ritual    of transfer                   is   carried out       in       (he       name ol      the corporate
group as        a     whole, the "house of                          .    .    .
                                                                                  ,"   rather than that       of
the     "owners,"           while             in   one particularly                    revealing      ease   the
"owners" are               Further             characterized                 as   "men       elected    by the
house     of.    .    .
                           ."   Incidentally,             the numbers                   of   individuals in-
volved     in        these          transactions can                be relatively large; in one
example         that       dales             From   the    Akkadian period 600                         men    of
Marad were feasted by Manishtusu for two days in connection
with a purchase of land.    1




      Unfortunately, such restricted and laconic notations of sale
(particularly since                 1
                                         they were recorded from the point of view
of the purchaser) can give us very little insight into the internal
structure and authority systems of the corporate                                              1
                                                                                                  groups     who
were the sellers. The Fact that a eonsiderable number of texts
are known which record the sale of small, privately held sub-
sistence plots strongly                         suggests that even outside the ambit
of the great state              1
                                        institutions the organization of the agricul-
tural    population into kin-oriented groupings was incomplete.
Moreover, the documents Diakonoff has collected betray sub-
stantial differences in at least the                       1
                                                                formal relationships between
the "owners"              e>r   principal           representatives                    and   their followers.
All the foregoing hints at an institution that probably varied
locally in      form and importance, nowhere represented the ex-
clusive    mode   community organization, and was more or
                           of
less rapidly being eroded away by changing social conditions

such as the concentration of landholdings. This theme will be
returned to presently.
      Among the archives of the state institutions and private
estates in Lagash and elsewhere there are references of a differ-
ent sort to units, implicitly based, at least in part,                                            on kin affili-
ations, into         which their male constituents were grouped. For
certain purposes, particularly in connection with personnel lists
specifying the distribution of rations, the affiliation of individ-
uals with these larger units                          on the apparent basis of descent
                          KIN AND CLASS                              85

is   carefully specified. The absence of references to landholdings
in these instances      may, of course, be only    a   reflection of the
special purposes of the documents rather than of the character-
istics   of the groups themselves. On the other hand, while many
of the groups are named after animals (snakes, donkeys, etc.)
                d
or gods (lu- ENKI), a number of others are descriptively en-
titled    with the names of professions (silversmiths, carpenters,
leatherworkers, heralds, etc.) (Gelb 1957:251-52). Perhaps these
groups can be collectively entitled im-ru-a, lineages or clans,
whether composed of craftsmen or agriculturists. As early as the
time of the Shuruppak documents (near the beginning of Early
Dynastic III)       we hear of 539 dumu-dumu grouped in seven
im-ru, with the functions of each servant in the palace being
assigned on the basis of his lineage. In the time of Gudea, about
2200 B.C., we find that energetic ruler of Lagash calling up his
population behind the emblems of their im-ru-a to perform spe-
cialized services in connection with the rebuilding of the temple
of Ningirsu.
     Having recognized the existence of lineage or clan modes of
organization, not only in landholding but also in craft and pro-
fessional groupings,     it is   not unreasonable to suppose that kin
affiliation   played an important role even in many cases where
it is   not attested in what are, after all, mainly highly condensed
compilations for administrative purposes. For example, in the
militias of the     Early Dynastic city-states, craftsmen and other
occupational specialists were mustered in platoons under their
regular foremen, with platoons in turn formed into companies
under the leadership of palace officials. Now, while there is no
evidence that the units were composed of individuals related
by descent or that their leadership was internally sanctioned
rather than superimposed as a stratum of minor officials, it must
be remembered that what was important to the muster-roll
clerks was not the degree of internal kin affiliation characteriz-
ing these units but their specialized functions and their cohesive-
ness for military purposes. Hence the absence of such evidence
86                       The Evolution of Urban Society

means virtually nothing. It would have been only natural for
the palace to treat the heads of these groups as administratively
defined "foremen," with 50 per cent higher rations than their
crews,     rather     than   as   ascriptively   defined   "headmen." But,
again,    it   is   simply not shown that they were so regarded        in-

ternally.

      How far are we justified in reconstructing a system of kin
organization from such ambiguous and fragmentary evidence?
The specialized Sumerologist has the responsibility of remain-
ing close to his sources. The task of the comparatively oriented
anthropologist, on the other hand, is to place them in a more
generalized framework— taking for granted that the framework
will involve interpretive errors but also taking for granted that
the cumulative advance of his field depends upon the genera-
tion of testable hypotheses and their progressive refinement. In
these terms, it is not the lacunae in the data but their consist-
ency that is most impressive. Clearly, there were groupings of
nuclear families into ascriptive units organized at least in part
along lines of descent. Such groups in some (and perhaps in
most) cases corporately held title to agricultural lands. They
also played a role in the organization of the crafts, of corvee
labor called up by the state for certain purposes, and probably
of the army.          Such widely manifested functions suggest that
lineage groupings had not become merely vestigial by late Early
Dynastic and Akkadian times but, instead, were still both power-
ful   and important. The absence of more numerous references
to    them is fully and satisfactorily explained by the particular,
limited purposes for    which the existing texts were recorded.
      Turning to central Mexico, we find ramifying organizations
based on both kinship and residence that were essentially sim-
ilar to what has       been traced in Mesopotamia. Given the nature
of our sources in this case, there is no difficulty in establishing
at least the basic structure         and activities of the more inclusive
units,   the so-called       "calpullis." Although the complexities of

their    changing relationship to the primary institutions of the
                           KIN AND CLASS                              87

state     remain   in dispute   and although there arc fewer      possi-
bilities for quantitative studies    than in Mesopotamia, the Span-
ish accounts       have the inestimable virtue of having quite nat-
urally described calpullis as part of the warp and woof of the
entire institutional setting.
   The bulk of the commoner population, at least in towns
whose lands had not been appropriated by conquest, seem to
have resided in nuclear family units. While polygyny was pres-
ent, the available references to     it   are very largely restricted to
the nobility— for whom Friedrich Katz (1956:122) argues that
it   created the special problem of a disproportionate population
increase in their class. The status of women apparently was in
decline at the time of the Conquest but yet remained relatively
high in that rights to inherit land and to exercise certain pro-
fessions     were still retained. In this respect, as in many others,
close parallels with late Early Dynastic         and Akkadian Meso-
potamia are obvious.
    As in Mesopotamia, our primary interest centers on the
more inclusive units into which such households were grouped.
While debate continues over the precise nature of the calpullis,
the trend of all more recent research supports the conclusion
that they were localized endogamous lineages that under most
circumstances maintained their own lands and temples and
that,     particularly in urbanized, politically organized    commu-
nities,    also exercised a variety of other functions.      Even the
Spaniards were not entirely consistent in their translation of the
word. Usually they spoke of calpullis as "barrios" or quarters,
emphasizing the aspect of these groups as zones of contiguous
residence. But on other occasions they spoke of them as "line-
ages" and defined their leaders as "elder kinsmen." In fact,
Zurita, one of the most penetrating of early Spanish observers,
often translates the term by both words together. In any event,
officers were chosen by election from the group, although gen-
erally from the  same family.
     Lands corporately owned by the calpullis were apportioned
88                    The Evolution of Urban Society

both for the house plots of their members and for cultivation
by the individual families. In the event that cultivation was not
continued or families       moved away, the plots reverted to the
officers of the calpulli,   who either reassigned them to new fam-
ilies   without lands or directed their cultivation in common to
maintain tribute quotas or for similar purposes. Except under
these circumstances, however, there        is   good evidence that re-
distributive mechanisms were not systematically applied for the
purpose of equalizing wealth within the group. Gross variation
is   reported— by a factor of ten or more even within single com-
munities—in the size of calpulli lands allocated to individual
families. Moreover, some calpulli members either had somehow

lost their holdings or had always lacked        land entirely, occasion-
ally    being forced into slavery or emigration as a        result.   The
source of these differences is not clear, since lands could not be
sold by calpulli members holding usufruct rights to them.             Still,

as M. Acosta Saignes (1945:16) has noted, there are occasional
reports of the sale of land with the approval of calpulli officers,
as well as of land being privately owned by merchants,            which
must indicate that land could be alienated by corporate action
under some circumstances.
     Alluding to their fluid combination of features of both class
and     clan, Eric   Wolf has persuasively called attention to the
resemblance between calpullis and what have been called

"conical clans," kinship units   which bind their members with com-
mon familial ties but which distribute wealth, social standing, and
power most unequally among the members of the pseudo-family.
Such kin units trace their descent back to an original ancestor, real
or fictitious; but, at the same time, they regularly favor his lineal
descendants over the junior or 'cadet' lines in regulating access to
social,   economic, or political prerogatives [1959:1361.

If the    paradigm applies to calpullis, it may also apply to the
Sumerian im-ru-a, although in the latter case no evidence is
available on whether or not the group    was endogamous. And
what is even more interesting is that the resemblances between
                           KIN AND CLASS                                       8<)


these two concrete    1
                          instances   do   not    stop with their stratified
internal arrangements but go on to include                   many of their re-
lationships with other institutions in their respective societies
as well.
      Consider some of the other features and                  activities of cal-
pullis.   They served with their own emblems and leadership as
the core of the Aztec armies under the control of officers ap-
pointed by the palace. Such was the case also in the early
Sumerian city-states. As a closely related feature, not attested
in the     Sumerian instance but possibly only absent because of
the particular limitations of the cuneiform sources, the cal-
pullis also assumed responsibility for the training of their

young men for war in a special establishment maintained for
that purpose.      Directly comparable to the situation that has
been described in ancient Sumer, calpullis frequently special-
ized in certain crafts and professions, providing a characteristic
"guild"-like aspect to craft production. Ixtlilxochitl speaks, for
example, of the more than thirty crafts practiced by the inhab-
itants of Tenochtitlan,     each with its own quarter— a view whose
exclusiveness, to be sure, is challenged by the testimony of other
authorities. Unfortunately, there is no direct testimony on what
proportion of these specialized members of calpullis also main-
tained subsistence plots and thus were at least part-time farmers
as well. However, one indication that most of them were essen-
tially full-time specialists   comes from descriptions by the Con-
quistadores of the extraordinary daily markets in great centers
like Tlatelolco.   Moreover, at least in the case of craftsmen em-
ployed on behalf of the royal court, they were supplied with
slaves to    meet their subsistence needs or were directly provi-
sioned from the royal stores of tribute.                If   the inference that
regular participation in the market was the general rule not only
for   merchants but also for craftsmen             is   correct, then in this

respect, as with respect to       market         activities    generally, there

was    at least a formal difference         from the practice          in   early

Mesopotamia.
90                   The Evolution of Urban Society

     The calpullis were, we may assume, a traditional means of
organizing social relationships, with particular reference to sub-
sistence resources, residence,     and profession, a means which
long antedated not only the arrival of the Aztecs in central
Mexico but probably their Chichimec and Toltec predecessors
as well. Possibly they are already implied by the numerous en-
closed "palace"    compounds     that are    known    at   Teotihuacan,
each seemingly composed of several priyate apartments opening
on a central court. Moreover, it is interesting to note that there
are suggestions at Teotihuacan of localized concentrations of
obsidian and pottery wastes within that "Classic" period           city,

suggesting that the congruence of craft production with kin
and residential units may have emerged as the prevailing pat-
tern by that time.
     Since our central concern     is   the growth of the state, the
diversification and stratification within calpullis is perhaps of
less interest than the ways in which they were articulated with

the growing needs of the political institutions characterizing
the Aztec realm. Service in the army, already mentioned,              is

among these articulations. Given the particular pattern of ex-
pansion that the Aztecs maintained— an essentially predatory
process involving the forced exaction of tribute from conquered
towns with few compensating benefits from pacification, im-
proved administration, or even capital improvements designed
to   enhance the tributary base— the strength and cohesiveness
                               As the economy of the capital
of the army obviously was vital.
came to be supported increasingly— some even argue primarily
—by receipts of tribute from subjugated enemies, the military
duties of the calpulli, at least in the eyes of the state, undoubt-
edly began to overshadow their purely productive functions.
But, before the expansion of the realm began to provide ex-
ternal sources of tribute, the institutions of the state depended
very largely on "internal" surpluses made available through the
calpulli system itself.
     The intricacies of this internal tributary system, as well as
                              KIN AND CLASS                               91

differencesbetween the interpretations of various authorities,
need not concern us. The basic features of the system, at a level
of generality suitable for comparison with            Mesopotamia, were
identical whether applied to calpulli or to subject towns; hence
Zurita's succinct description of the system as           it   applied to the
latter     can serve for the former also:

       Tribute commonly was paid in maize, peppers, beans and cotton,
and     fields   were designated
                              for this purpose by each town. The
rulers kept a  number of slaves, who guarded and cultivated these
fields with the aid of the townspeople. People whose towns did not

have tributary lands set aside also came and assisted in this task,
but otherwise they cultivated their own lands and did not travel
elsewhere. Firewood, water, and household service also were given
to the lords as tribute.       Craftsmen gave tribute   in that   which was
their specialty. Tribute was never apportioned by heads, but instead
each town and craft was told what it must give and then assigned
this    amount among its members and brought it at the appointed
time.
       Tribute was not paid according to the value of either fields or
estates,    but in crops and other products. All was produced by
communal labor, save the tribute of the craftsmen, fishermen, hunters,
and those who gave fruit and pottery [1941:146, 152].

       In essence, then, this is a system based on labor service, al-
though in urban groups not directly engaged in agriculture the
labor may have found its major expression in the production of
commodities.        Its   characteristic   form was the setting-aside of
fields     within local communities for the cultivation of which
those      communities were collectively responsible and whose
entire harvest      was to be delivered to the state. Obviously, the
need for central accounting was at a minimum under the sys-
tem, and the apparatus of direct state control did not extend
further into the body politic than the traditional leaders or rep-
resentatives of the local communities. And the latter, as we have
seen, continued to be defined on the basis not only of localized
residence and corporate control of land but also of real or fictive
kinship.
92                         The Evolution of Urban Society

      Assuming that these basic, most widespread elements com-
prised the antecedent form of the tribute system, the great ex-
pansion of the Aztec realm               in the fifteenth       century led to   its

                    As a result of the appearance of new ad-
partial modification.
ministrative problems of unprecedented complexity, a special-
ized group of officials           (if   hardly a bureaucracy         in   the fully
developed sense) were appointed and charged with the                           col-
lection of tribute.         At least in the surviving documentary              evi-

dence, only then do we find the beginnings of a trend toward
supplementing the demand for labor service on lands reserved
for that        purpose with a demand for specified quantities of
foodstuffs,       raw     materials,    or   locally   manufactured products.
But, even with this apparent innovation, insofar as the state
was concerned, the lowest level of responsibility recognized
for furnishing tribute was not the individual citizen but the
local community and its representatives as a corporate body.
    It is important to note that labor service, whether in tribute,

in building, or in personal attendance upon members of the
political and religious elites, did not represent an innovation

but merely an extension of the existing practice within                        cal-

pullis.       The testimony of Zurita again will serve as an                  illus-

tration   :




      The     calpullec   were a numerous group, and comprised almost
all   of those    who paid tribute to the supreme ruler. Each calpulli
also cultivated a field for the sustenance of             its   principal or head,
and gave him service in proportion to the number of people in the
ward. This was in recompense for the care he took of them, and
for his expenditure on the annual meeting held in his house in
support of the general welfare. Tribute to the calpulli head was
not paid upon command of the supreme lord, nor as an obligation,
but because it was regarded as their most ancient custom. This was
independent of the tribute paid to the supreme ruler [p. 142].

      Two further, seemingly contradictory, points remain to be
made about the effects of the Mexican tribute system on the
relationships between the state institutions               and the substratum
                            KIN AND CLASS                               93

of calpullis.    The first is that, at least lor the cities forming the
Triple Alliance, whose population were the beneficiaries of re-
distributed tribute collected from the increasingly large            num-
ber of subjugated towns, the system in time must have tended
to corrode the internal    autonomy and cohesiveness of the cal-
pullis     and to generate new patterns of organization and new
loyalties     directly   linking the population with the state.       For
example, the state itself undertook the distribution to the pop-
ulace of the tribute       it   had received in excess of its other re-
quirements, the state provided          gifts ofcommodities and land
to   its   victorious soldiery, the state   assumed the responsibility
for meeting the needs of the poor from             its   own reserves, and
the state underwrote the costs of many festivals. Moreover, the
availability of redistributed tribute surely must have increased
the stratification within calpullis to some extent, and the in-
creasing emphasis on military activities would have tended to
bring forward patterns of organization in which the traditional
leadership of calpullis could play only a very subordinate role.
Thus the sharp division between political patterns of organiza-
tion at the upper levels and solidary kin communities comprising
the great bulk of the population at the lower levels must have
tended to blur and disappear more or less rapidly during the
final   decades of Aztec rule.
     The opposing, or at any rate qualifying, point is that the
extent and rapidity of this process of "politicization" should not
be overdrawn. It would have taken place mainly in the handful
of major urban centers with substantial tribute to redistribute,
and even there the basic loyalities of the population, like by far
the greater part of their day-to-day activities, must have con-
tinued to be framed in terms of traditional alliances of kinship
and residence. Elsewhere, as the extraordinary durability of
"closed corporate" communities throughout Middle America
after the Conquest suggests, the effects of newly imposed pat-
terns of political control must have been relatively slight and
certainly transient. Bandelier's        and Morgan's view that Aztec
94                     The Evolution of Urban Society

organization remained only "social" and not "political," that at
best it was a military democracy founded upon gentile institu-
tions (Morgan 1963:220), on the whole has been set aside by

more recent students as a distortion of the evidence. But, while
those early writers failed to perceive the dynamism and signifi-
cance of some newly emergent Aztec institutions, their char-
acterization   is   perhaps still very close to the realities of every-
day life for all but a very small elite.
   Thus we find that traditional, localized groupings, composed
of related nuclear families,  were the elementary units upon
which the states of Early Dynastic Mesopotamia and late pre-
hispanic central Mexico were erected. These units in both cases
seem to have taken the form of "conical clans," in which the de-
gree of relationship to a real or fictive common ancestor served
as a basis for internal tendencies toward stratification. Probably
they were of high antiquity, considerably antedating the onset
of civilized life by any definition, and there seems no reason to
question Paul KirchofFs assertion that they represented "the
condition sine qua non" for the formation of complex, flexible
hierarchies of economic and social differentiation that character-
ized the growth of the state itself (1959:268). At the same time,
however, they survived the superimposition of            new political
relationships for a considerable time, retaining loyalties          and
forms of internal organization that were rooted in kin relation-
ships, while    adapting to the needs of the state through the
elaboration of a new series of specialized functions. Among the
specialized functions, three in particular         may be mentioned:
(1) serving as units for military training and service; (2) pro-
viding a corporate framework for the development, employ-
ment, and retention of the        skills   and attitudes of specialized
craftsmanship; and (3) serving as units of labor management
for state projects and services.
     Turning from cohesive bonds based on real or            fictive kin

affiliations within social segments,       we must consider the growth
of differentiated, hierarchical principles of organization affect-
                          KIN AND CLASS                                     95

ing the society at large. What          is   our evidence for the develop-
ment of social stratification? What forms did it take in our
respective areas? Can we identify a common structure of strati-
fication   beneath the welter of divergent local features? Of
course, this    problem   is    complicated by the fact that            we are
dealing with relatively "primitive," undifferentiated systems in
which social stratification did not develop as an autonomous,
distinctive feature but     was "embedded" in multifunctional in-
stitutions   embracing political and religious components as well.
But I believe it remains a valid analytical entity, and without
such   entities essays in      comparison like this one could consist
only of contrasting social systems as descriptively integrated
wholes— and hence would be foredoomed.
   To begin with early Mesopotamia, the available evidence
takes a succession of forms which influence the interpretations
that can be made of it. In the late Ubaid period, apparently the
"take-off" point for the        Urban Revolution,       it   consists   almost
exclusively of reports from excavations in cemeteries, for ex-
ample, more than two hundred graves excavated at Eridu, as
well as others at     Ur and         al-Ubaid. Differentiation in grave
wealth cannot necessarily be linked directly to differences in
status, at least in the   absence of converging lines of inference
from other evidence.      It    is   therefore fortunate that the broad
trend toward increasing differentiation disclosed by later graves
from Khafajah, Kish, Jemdet Nasr, Shuruppak, and, above all,
Ur can be at first supplemented and confirmed, and ultimately
overshadowed, by textual and archeological evidence on aspects
of social differentiation other than those associated with mor-
tuary practices.
   In the late Ubaid period significant differentiation in grave
wealth was almost entirely absent. Normal grave furniture con-
sisted of one or more pottery vessels placed near the feet, with,
in some cases, the substitution of stone vessels for those of clay
and the occasional addition of pottery figurines and of decora-
tive bands of beads on the clothing of the deceased. In the
96                   The Evolution of Urban Society

Warka and Protoliterate periods greater variation begins to be
apparent. Stone maceheads, a copper spear-point, and greater
numbers of stone vessels are attested. About one-third of the
25 graves beneath the floors of late Protoliterate private houses
at   Khafajah were accompanied by stone bowls, and two con-
tained somewhat larger (although still modest) accumulations,
including a few well-made vessels of copper, lead, and stone,
as well as the usual pottery.
     A much larger number of graves of roughly Protoliterate
date have been excavated at Ur, although unfortunately the
chronological placement of many of them         is    somewhat doubt-
ful. Of the 340 or so that have been described, less than 10 per

cent contain only pottery, while 61 contain one or two simple
lead cups or other metal objects. Only two graves of this large
series suggest substantial concentrations of wealth,      and in both
cases the accompanying pottery implies a somewhat later date
than the excavator attributes to them. Both contain beads and
ornaments of carnelian and lapis lazuli, a few copper and lead
bowls and other utensils, considerable numbers of stone vessels,
and, of course, pottery.    On the assumption that they may be
assigned only to the very end of the Protoliterate period at the
earliest,   they suggest the beginnings of a trend toward increas-
ing differentiation but certainly do not indicate that processes
                       had as yet proceeded very far.
of social stratification
    With the advent of writing and representational art in the
Protoliterate period, the picture can be somewhat sharpened
and amplified. Signs already appear for "slave girl" among the
earliest Protoliterate tablets,   while that for "male slave" seem-
ingly occurs slightly later.   The term for "slave" is a derivative
from an expression for "foreign country," perhaps suggesting
that the institution originated either in the taking of war cap-
tives or in the impressment of seminomadic groups who drifted

into the settlements after their herds fell    below an acceptable
minimum for subsistence. Bound "war captives" apparently are
shown on a celebrated seal impression from Uruk, although
                            KIN AND CLASS                                97

it   may be significant that male slaves appear not only later but
also in far smaller numbers than do female ones. Possibly the
means for the retention and effective employment of male cap-
tives had not yet been worked out, so that they were generally

killed.    Unfortunately, the functional basis for the institution of
slavery at the time cannot be determined from the poorly under-
stood texts. Nor are we justified in uncritically inferring that the
complex, fully crystallized patterns of the late Early Dynastic
period were already present merely on the basis of the occur-
rence of the terms.
     Other contemporary gradations of status are even less clear.
There are imposing representations of priests and "king"-like
figures,   but in general they create more questions than they
answer:       What portion of the conceptual continuum between
mythopoeic thought and          "reality"   do they portray?    Do they
illustrate "events" or rituals?     And,    if   mainly rituals, as seems
likely,    do the apparent importance and specialized            roles   of
individuals within that context necessarily reflect their general
status as well?    At any event, since we must postpone the dis-
cussion of specific political and religious functions until the
following chapter,     it   can be noted here only that representa-
tional art possibly does reflect      some of the attributes and ac-
tivities of   new elites that would not be known from the available
reports of cemeteries in spite of the fairly large            number of
graves that have been excavated.
   As a perhaps significant bit of negative evidence, it may be
noted that the terms lu, "full, free citizen," and mash-en-kak,
perhaps "commoner of subordinate status," other major com-
ponents of Mesopotamian society in historic times, do not occur
in   any presently known documents before the Early Dynastic
period. In spite of the presence of terms for "slave," in other
words, there is still no unequivocal evidence for the emergence
of a fully developed system of class distinctions at least until
the onset of the Early Dynastic period.
     By late Early Dynastic times there is much fuller and less
98                   The Evolution of Urban Society

ambiguous evidence to suggest the existence of just such a sys-
tem. It can best be documented, of course, from contemporary
written records, but to rely on them alone would overemphasize
the contrasts with earlier periods for which they were not avail-
able, thus perhaps also overstressing the disjunctive aspects of
change during the Early Dynastic period. So           let   us consider
first the   archeological evidence.
     Architectural exposures sufficiently large to provide a mean-
ingful picture of differentiation in private domestic architecture
occur only in the Diyala area east of modern Baghdad. To judge
from ancient Eshnunna, the larger houses lay along the main
roads through the settlement and often occupied 200 square
meters or more of floor area. The greater number of houses, on
the other hand, were considerably smaller and seem to have
been compressed into the interiors of the "blocks" formed by
the main streets and the establishments adjoining them, having
access to the arterial roads only by means of twisting, narrow
alleys. As a result, many of the smaller houses lack the charac-
teristic enclosed court of Mesopotamia houses in general and

do not exceed 50 square meters of total area. There is inde-
pendent evidence in the associated small finds, in one case
consisting of a valuable hoard, that the large houses were oc-
cupied by persons of greater wealth as well as superior status.
Significantly,   the largest dwelling was apparently that of a
merchant, for opening on the street from the residence behind
was a display room with tiers of bins and receptacles.
   The impression of differentiation is confirmed and amplified
by a study of tomb furniture. One of the clearest indices to
wealth is the presence of copper, as well as more precious
metals. In part, the increasing quantities of copper found in
Early Dynastic graves may reflect only an enlargement in sup-
plies reaching the    lowland cities, but the previously unparal-
leled     concentrations of metal that    appear in a few graves
nonetheless must indicate a correspondingly increased range of
differentiation in wealth.   And while copper becomes "le metal
                             KIN AND CLASS                               99

d'echange par excellence" by the Early Dynastic                 III   period
(Lambert 1953:208), on the whole it remained of so high a
value that ordinary craftsmen and even minor bureaucrats were
limited to at most a few implements of this material for which
they were at pains to keep an accounting. The bulk of the
peasantry may not have benefited from the increasing supplies
at   all,   for none of the utilitarian copper implements connected
with agriculture that have been recovered so far apparently
was made earlier than the Akkadian period. In other words,
copper implements and vessels (to say nothing of gold or
silver) qualitatively increase the implication of wealth for the

burial assemblages in        which they occur, as opposed to those
in   which they are lacking.
     In the Early Dynastic I period, there already was greater
variation in the kind and amount of accompanying grave goods
than had occurred previously. At Kish, for example, burial
equipment for the ordinary grave still consisted of a few large
spouted       jars   and other pottery   vessels,   with no weapons or
ornaments; but an unspecified, presumably small, number of
graves contained copper daggers, lances, axes, sling missiles,
stone and copper vessels, copper mirrors and toilet articles,
and the like. Although not representing great concentrations
of wealth when compared with the royal tombs, the luxury
character of many of the burial offerings is evident. There are
copper stands or trellis supports, for example, which are found
exclusively in association with stone vessels in some of the
wealthier       burials.   At contemporary rates of exchange, the
weight of copper wire in the trellises would have been sufficient
to purchase a field large enough to provide a modest livelihood,
yet each of the stone vessels found in a support could stand
unaided.
     A somewhat later development roughly corresponds with
the late Early Dynastic II and III periods.            It is   known most
spectacularly from the so-called "Royal Cemetery" at Ur, al-
though contemporary finds at Kish and Khafajah confirm the
100                       The Evolution of Urban Society

same general pattern and provide some Imm id reds of additional
graves as examples. At Ur, 588 burials have been described that
were not connected with "royal tombs." Of them, about one-
eighth lacked metal or stone objects of any kind, while an addi-
tional 751        graves, although they yielded no offerings suitable
for dating, must be roughly coeval with them.              Here we see the
remains      of    a    peasantry presumably maintaining        itself   only
slightly above the margins of subsistence, physically associated

with an urban center but having acquired few of the tangible
symbols of its wealth or technological progress.
     On the other hand,             about twenty seemingly non-"royal"
graves contain a substantial wealth of offerings: personal orna-
ments of gold and silver, large numbers of well-made stone and
copper vessels, beads of gold and lapis lazuli, gold bowls, gold-
and silver-mounted daggers, quantities of bronze tools and
weapons, etc. Below this extreme, but intergrading with it to
form a relatively smooth curve of distribution, were consider-
ably more numerous graves that, on the average, contained
several copper and bronze tools and utensils (mirrors, strainers,
razors, bowls, axes) in addition to pottery, an assortment which
Sir Leonard Woolley (1934,2:164)             somewhat offhandedly char-
acterizes as "typical middle class." In         all,   434 of the graves at
Ur have some metal and 167 have objects of gold and silver, a
very high proportion of the 588 clearly datable graves and a
respectable proportion of the total even if all the undated graves
are assumed to be contemporary.
     In sum, insofar as grave goods reflect the general distribu-
tion of wealth, there          is   evidence for a decisive increase in
social     differentiation in       the cities during the course of the
Early Dynastic period. It did not take the form of a numerous
elite that    was sharply cut off from an undifferentiated mass
of artisans and peasantry. Instead, it appears that the resources
of   the    royal      family frequently were     only slightly superior
to those of a          few great private houses and that in the main
                                KIN AND CLASS                                          10]

urban centers the              latter,   in   turn,       graded     off   gradually    to
various degrees of impoverishment.
     It   is   interesting to      contrast        this   concentration of wealth
at Ur with the situation obtaining in the contemporary, nearby
site of al-Ubaid. Of 94 recorded burials there, only 18 contained

any metal        at   all,   only 4 contained more than a single metal
object, only 1 contained objects of precious metal,                        and no grave
contained more than 3 metal objects. Al-Ubaid, it would seem,
was a rural dependency of the capital at Ur, with much of its
wealth drained off to support urban specialists and adminis-
trators.

     Whether this was generally the case with the rural popula-
tion—and, indeed, how much of the population lived in outlying,
dependent villages— is a question that cannot be answered, in
view of the exclusive concern of Mesopotamian archeology here-
tofore with the greater aesthetic appeal, and greater promise of
finding texts, in the cities. Large numbers of villages do occur
in the northern part of the alluvium, but that region,                          Akkad,
differs    both culturally and ecologically from the region of
Sumer in which most of the classical Sumerian city-states were
located.       There are textual references               to   temporary structures
near the       fields   that    were occupied by Sumerian agricultural
workers during the harvest season, and it                       is   at least possible

that    many small settlements like al-Ubaid were consolidated
into larger,      more defensible urban centers                    either just before
or during the Early Dynastic period. On the other hand, several
centuries       later    than    the     Early      Dynastic period,         the   little

Sumerian kingdom of Lagash                    is   reported to have comprised
some 25 towns and 40 or more villages and hamlets within
a 1,600 square kilometer area. If so, something of the same
pattern may have persisted from Protoliterate or earlier times
right through and beyond the initial impulses toward urbaniza-
tion.

     The conclusion from the archeological evidence that late
102                  The Evolution of Urban Society

Early Dynastic society was a stratified, class system is confirmed
and amplified by the contemporary written records. At least
its   quantitative characteristics can be best understood     by a
study of differences in ownership or control of land, but the
Shuruppak and Lagash archives     also provide information on
some of the duties, perquisites, and relative positions of the
various strata.
      At the bottom of the social hierachy were slaves, individuals
who could be bought and sold and who seemingly were owned
in small    numbers even by some ordinary artisans, agricultur-
alists,   and minor administrators. Their economic role was a
much more significant one, however, in connection with great
estates   and temples, of which the Bau archive furnishes so
richly documented an example. In the Bau community of some
1,200 persons, there were from 250 to 300 slaves, of whom the
overwhelming proportion were women. One tablet alone lists
205 slave girls and their children who probably were employed
in a centralized weaving establishment like       one known arche-
ologically at the site of ancient     Eshnunna; other women are
known to have been engaged in milling, brewing, cooking, and
similar interior operations permitting close supervision.     Male
slaves generally are referred to as igi-nu-du, "the blind ones,"
and apparently were employed in gardening operations. Al-
though there are no direct references to the blinding of war
prisoners to prevent their escape, it is a possibility that at least
remains open.
      While it has sometimes been maintained that slavery as an
institution   was   of minor, almost insignificant, importance in
ancient Mesopotamia, there are two respects in which this
view must be contradicted. In the first place, even if the gross
proportion of slaves was relatively small,      we have just noted
that their    distribution   throughout the economy was highly
uneven. In the Bau archive, representing a great estate or
temple, perhaps one-sixth of all resources available above the
subsistence level were devoted to the production of wool and
                                KIN     AND CLASS                                    103

thread.          Moreover,     slaves   working under semi-industrialized
conditions played a preponderant part in this process, and the
sale or exchange of this commodity not only played an import-
ant part in the local redistributive              economy but presumably
also served as the basis for long-distance trade in luxuries           and
vital      raw materials like metal.          In a sense then, there was a
strategic concentration of slaves in precisely those institutions
which characterized Mesopotamian urban society as distin-
guished from preurban society, so to characterize the insti-
tution          as   insignificant,   accordingly      would misrepresent             its

importance as a factor in development.
       A second argument for the strategic importance of slavery
has recently been persuasively elaborated by Moses                                Finley
(    1964 ) His essential point is that the data from the Old World,
            .




both Near Eastern and Classical, does not reflect a polarization
of society into slaves            and   free citizens but, instead, a              wide
spectrum of alternative               possibilities.   Legal,        social,   political,

and economic criteria of dependence or subservience may over-
lap and contradict one another, but there was a cumulative
movement until Classical times toward more and more sharply
defining and isolating a dependent stratum of foreigners at the
bottom of the            social hierarchy. In fact,       it    is    only with this
development that the abstract contrast of "slavery" with "free-
dom" emerged at all. 2
   The implication of Finley 's analysis for our present problem
is    that it is perhaps inapropos to reserve the term "slavery" for
the group I have just discussed, on the implicit assumption that
it    is   sharply contrasted with a         much larger "free" population.
Instead, there were various social impediments                        and conditions
of servitude, of which slavery was merely the most extreme, and
the role of an inferior and in some respects unfree agricultural
class      was surely far more important than the numbers of nar-

    2. A "freed" slave, the term meaning literally that it was "returned to
itsmother," was first mentioned in Urukagina's time, at the end of the
Early Dynastic period (Edzard 1965: 80).
104                  The Evolution of Urban Society

rowly defined "slaves" alone would suggest. Seen in this light,
the controversy between Soviet economic historians characteriz-
ing early state society as "slave" society and Western specialists
insisting   on the relatively small numbers of slaves in some
respects    becomes more a matter of nomenclature than of
substance.
   The      so-called "shub-lugals,"   of   whom there were about
eighty in the Bau community organized in groups under over-
seers or foremen, are     an example of a group with a reduced
status    and degree of freedom. The term has been variously
translated as "subjects of the king" or merely as "subjects of a
master," but in any case their clientage is apparent from their
duties. In various texts they are reported as laboring in         gangs
by the day on demesne lands            of the   Bau temple or     estate,

pulling ships, digging irrigation canals, and serving as a nucleus
of the city militia     (perhaps specialized slingers or archers)
under the direct command of the palace administration.              Two
muster rolls that have been preserved make it clear that upon
the death of a shub-lugal he was succeeded by a near relative,
who assumed his same duties under the same overseer. By the
time of the Bau archive at about the end of the Early Dynastic
period, shub-lugals were     among many groups who received a
subsistence ration during four months of the year in return for
labor service. The shub-lugals also were allotted small plots of
prebendal land from holdings of the temple or           estate.   There
are indications that further control over the group was main-
tained by the periodic reallocation of the plots, even though
their size indicates that many of them would have been inade-
quate for subsistence purposes.
   There are other groups that basically resemble the shub-
lugals,   although differing in their economic position and appar-
ent degree of clientage.    The uku-ush, who perhaps served as
heavily    armed shield- and spear-bearing units in the phalanx
formations of the army, also served as overseers for the shub-
lugals    on labor assignments but were bound by approximately
                              KIN AND CLASS                                   105

the same conditions of service.   More ambiguous are the posi-
tions    of engarsand sag-apins. Engars have been described
variously as "clients" and "free peasants," but in any case both
titles   can at least be assigned somewhat higher positions in the
social        hierarchy;   they conducted or supervised               agricultural
operations on behalf of the estate or temple, supplied cadres
for the militia,       and received both         rations    and allotments of
prebendal land. None of these groups could be bought or
sold,    it   must be stressed, although the clientage of a number
of shub-lugals in          Lagash may have been involuntarily trans-
ferred from the city ruler Lugalanda to his successor, Urukagina.
    Clearly, there         was not    a single status of clientage but a
series of       perhaps overlapping ones based on distinctions that
are not yet apparent. And it is admittedly dangerous to gener-
alize from the limited        and selective archival sources at present
available, particularly in           view of   their disproportionate         em-
phasis on the larger ( especially temple and palace ) estates with
scribes in their employ and special managerial problems for
which permanent accounts were almost a necessity. If Diakon-
off's   estimate (above, p. 65)        is   correct, as    much as two-thirds
of the population in late Early Dynastic times                   still   was not
directly       dependent on manorial units at all but was organized
instead in corporate kin communities. However,                   it   does seem
reasonable to conclude that at least on agricultural estates the
labor force consisted primarily of this semifree gurush class,
whom I. J. Gelb has likened to Greek metoikoi, Roman glebae
adscript!, and English serfs. 3

    Even on lands apparently not falling within the bounds of
great temples  and estates, there are suggestions that small
private plots were not held in alodial tenure but were subject
to certain forms of entailment.             They could be sold and trans-
ferred, as       we know from many examples at Shuruppak, but
nevertheless they stood in some relationship to a superordinate

    3. Gelb 1964. But cf. Gelb 1965: 240-41, where the closeness of the
comparison is reconsidered.
106                     The Evolution of Urban Society

institution— probably the        administrative establishment of the
city ruler.        Plows and even seed corn were provided by       this

central authority, a practice that apparently can be traced back
as far as Protoliterate times on the basis of a tablet of that date
from Tell Uqair. The notarization of a dub-sar-gan               (field
scribe), who must have been a representative of this establish-
ment, was an integral part of every purchase contract. More-
over,   it   may be noted that sales occur in rigid multiples of 2.5
iku (0.88 hectare).     One might suspect on this basis that sales
were not entirely at the discretion of the individual owners
but were subject to a degree of superordinate control that the
documents took for granted and therefore do not mention.
      Large-scale private acquisitions of land have already been
mentioned. Perhaps the earliest example known is the so-called
"Blau Monument," long regarded as a forgery prior to the dis-
covery of pictographic Protoliterate writing in secure archeolog-
ical contexts.       The purchase of 250 or more hectares by one
Du-si and of at least 114 hectares by Lu-pad, a high official of
Umma, are later, better understood examples, while the acqui-
sitions in four districts that are recorded by one       Akkadian king
on the "Obelisk of Manishtusu" total 2,300 hectares and those
by Enhegal of Lagash amounted to about 1,000 hectares. Most
if not all such purchases seem to have been made by members

of ruling families or high officials, and the documents recording
them are appropriately described as "Sammelurkunden"; that
is,   they are records not of the simple transfer of integrated
large holdings but of the assembling of such holdings out of
many separately owned, small parcels.
      Thus the implication of an ongoing process of concentration
of landownership in the hands of state officials during at least
the later Early Dynastic          and Akkadian periods cannot be
doubted. In the case of the lands Manishtusu purchased, to be
sure,   they were redistributed to relatives and political sup-
porters rather than being directly worked by their new owner.
But that      is   unlikely to have been the case even with royal
                              KIN   AND CLASS                          107

acquisitions before the wide conquests of the Akkadian period,
and the king's correspondingly increased responsibilities for the
defense of distant frontiers. And archives of a considerable num-
ber of Akkadian estates, privately owned and yet often employ-
ing on rations up to several hundred dependent agricultural
workers and their families, make            it   clear that the   trend in
general was not toward redistribution but toward the growth
of large, directly       managed holdings.
   Of a still larger order of magnitude than the acquisitions
         were the estates already in the hands of the ruling
just cited

officials of the   palace and temple. The Bau archive is one of
these,   and   in fact   is   the main source and prototype of Anton
Deimel's reconstruction of an all-embracing Tempehvirtschaft.
Now, as we have seen, Deimel's conclusion that units similar
to the Bau temple virtually monopolized the available agricul-
tural land has been shown to be untenable. Moreover, current
studies even cast into some doubt his interpretation of the Bau
community as subordinated in any significant way to the service
of a particular god or a temple hierarchy. 4 But Deimel's calcu-
lations of the total size of the establishment, about 65 square
kilometers of arable land under the direction of an administra-
tive official responsible to the wife of the          Lagash city ruler,
nevertheless seem entirely reasonable. Although much less is
known of them, similar records of large landholdings can be
traced back into the Protoliterate period; a fragmentary tablet
from Jemdet Nasr accounts for 1,828 hectares and may have
originally contained a         much larger total.
   Of course, the management of a manorial estate of this great
size could not be fully centralized irrespective of whether it
was conducted in religious or in secular terms. As we have seen,
some of the estate lands were cultivated directly on its behalf
by shub-lugals; on the basis of known proportions for a very
small part of its area, the demesne lands might amount to about
one-fourth of the total. Another, larger portion consisted of the

    4.   John Hadley, personal communication.
108                  The Evolution of Urban Society

prebendal lands allotted to members of the Bau community,
the harvest from which presumably          was devoted very largely
to their    own subsistence. By far the largest of such allotments
was an area of some 348 hectares that also was cultivated on
behalf of the city ruler and his wife by the shub-lugals, but,
while other high officials also received generous amounts of
land, most allotments were very small. Still a third portion con-
sisted of rent lands, which were farmed on a share-crop basis,
again largely by members of the Bau community, and which
constitute almost half of the lands whose relative proportions
can be accounted for.
     Even the share-crop lands were         centrally   supplied with
seed, draft animals, equipment,      and specialized personnel for
plowing.     Moreover, accounts of receipts and disbursements
suggest that about thirty storehouses were centrally managed—
in   one of which alone the presence of 9,450 tons of barley is
recorded.    Hence the Bau administration should not be con-
strued as a political structure superimposed on a pattern of
atomistically conducted agricultural operations merely to facil-
itate the passive collection of taxes or tribute. It     was, in fact,
an oikos in the classic Weberian sense, an authoritarian super-
household in which a remarkably differentiated labor force
of clients undertook to provide their lords with goods               and
services.   Although little is known in detail of the earlier devel-
opment of this      integrated, consumption-oriented economy,          it

may be noted that the distribution of rations was already ac-
counted for, presumably in exchange for labor services, as early
as late Protoliterate times.
     Drawing together the many diverse         strands   in   this   dis-

cussion of social stratification in early Mesopotamia,        I   believe
we can trace the emergence of a fully developed class society
by no    later than the   end   of the Early Dynastic period.         Its

origins, prior to the   appearance of cuneiform documents, can
be followed only      indirectly, in the   gradual emergence of a
difference between richly furnished tombs, on the one hand,
                         KIN AND CLASS                            109

and the much more numerous graves of a relatively impover-
ished peasantry, on the other. Subsequently, however,         we can
                                                    more and
establish the internal gradations within this society
more clearly from written sources. The system of stratification
was, of course, closely articulated with systems of political and
military powers   and prerogatives, but those relationships must
be reserved for consideration in the following chapter. Here our
major concern is the economic basis of stratification, particularly
as defined in terms of degrees of servitude and access to land.
   Standing at the pinnacle of Mesopotamian society were
small numbers of princely families        who seem to have been
vigorously extending their control of land by purchase during
the later Early Dynastic and Akkadian periods. There has been
a tendency at times to define the role of such families somewhat
too narrowly in terms of their administrative duties. Leo Oppen-
heim, for example (while admittedly addressing his remarks in
the main to a somewhat later period), recently has broadly
characterized Mesopotamian society as notably lacking in the
elements of a military aristocracy and even of "any non-economic
status stratification"   (1964:74-75).   Were this really the case,
the absence of these features would represent an important
contrast with Aztec society in central Mexico. But        I   think   it

can be replied that      we simply lack the kinds of sources in
Mesopotamia— at least until long after the Early Dynastic period
—that might be expected to refer in any way to special behavi-
oral characteristics   and prerogatives setting off the elite from
the mass of the population.    The emphasis on official functions
in existing records is no more than a reflection of the fact that
the overwhelming majority of these records          are   themselves
narrowly administrative in function. We may deplore the ab-
sence of interpretive descriptions by visiting interlopers who,
like the Spaniards, tried to   record all they saw. But a proper
comparison of Mesopotamian with Aztec society requires that
we take their absence fully into account.
   At any rate, ruling families in Mesopotamia seem to have
110                     The Evolution of Urban Society

headed semi-integrated manorial estates that varied greatly in
size.    Their labor force, dependent       in   varying degrees on the
distribution of rations, allotments of land,         and other forms of
clientage, also included a small but significant proportion of
persons employed under repressive, closely controlled condi-
tions of outright slavery. Yet, in spite of the proliferation          and
increasing importance of these class-oriented forms of organiza-
tion, there still existed kin-based communities both outside and

within the manorial establishments, and, while such communi-
ties    were declining in the relative amount of land under their
corporate control, it is likely that they still had very large areas
at their disposal.

       This was, in short, a complex, changing amalgam of older
forms of social organization and new ones. But it is important
to   remember that the older, kin-based            institutions   were not
merely pushed aside by patron-client relationships, to decay
slowly along the neglected margins of the latter. As in the case
of the continuing role of kin ties in the administration of army
and labor service, clientage, and the crafts, the older forms at
least at times were readapted         and retained as important struc-
tural features. As Julian Steward observes, this is only common
and natural; "simple forms, such as those represented by the
family or band, do not wholly disappear when a more complex
stage of development         is   reached, nor do they merely survive
fossil-like,   as the    concepts of folkways and mores formerly
assumed.       They gradually become modified             as   specialized,
dependent parts of new kinds of total configurations" ( 1955:51 ).
       For several reasons, the prehispanic Mexican system of
social stratification can     be much more briefly treated than can
that of the early Sumerians. It is, in the first place, better known,
having been studied and debated since the early days of the
discipline     by   a succession of leading anthropolgists.        Second,
because of the availability of Spanish descriptions of Aztec
society at the height of its        power and prosperity, the lengthy
processes of inference required to reconstruct an integrated
                            KIN   AND CLASS                                       HI
system of Stimerian stratification from unrelated fragments of
archeological data, land deeds, and bookkeeping entries can be
vastly simplified.      And,   third, there   is   simply    less    information
with which to trace the development of the institution through
its   long incipient stages than in the case of Mesopotamia.
      Although we know of burials at Teotihuacan ranging from
simple, unceremonious inclusions in construction                    fill   to    mod-
erately     well-endowed tombs and of a corresponding variation
in    domestic architecture, the accidents of archeological                       dis-

covery have provided us with no later burial and architectural
sequences from which quantitative evidence might be obtained
on the extent of        social differentiation      in    successive periods.
Equally important, there are no Mexican parallels for the
voluminous Mesopotamian economic records, from which                               at
least certain conclusions relevant to social organization                   can be
drawn     as   early as the Protoliterate period            and which shed
increasing light on the        many centuries that followed. Taking
into account these differences in the documentation for the two
areas,   we can only describe the Aztec system as the Spaniards
encountered it, briefly noting short-term developmental trends
toward                  which the traditional accounts of the
            statification to

growth of the Aztec realm    refer. Even on this limited basis,

there are striking and fundamental similarities to Mesopotamia
that are immediately apparent.
      Recent discussions of land tenure by Alfonso Caso (1963)
and Paul Kirchoff (1954) provide essentially similar overviews
that for the sake of brevity may be followed closely. At the
apex of the Aztec social pyramid stood the polygynous royal
household,     its   line of divinely   descended Tlatoanis marrying
daughters of the leading chieftains of the realm to produce in
time a largely endogamous nobility sharply differentiated from
the rest of the population in wealth, education, diet, dress, and
other    prerogatives.     While these    pillis,    or    members          of    the
nobility,    comprised the upper echelons of the                political        and
military administration, they were lords, as Zurita says (1941:
112                      The Evolution of Urban Society

90-91 ), " by virtue not of dominion or command, but of lineage."
Large numbers of them— 600, according to Cortes (1952:96),
as well as their servants and followers— were constantly in
attendance upon the royal court, where they were maintained
with support from the state treasury.
      In addition to an impressive flow of tribute from subjugated
towns, a subject to which we must return subsequently in con-
nection with the emergence of political and military authority,
there were great estates at the king's disposal comparable to
those    in    early    Mesopotamia. Apparently a distinction was
recognized between patrimonial lands, which belonged pri-
vately to the king as a result of inheritance or conquest,                and
entailed lands set aside for the maintenance of administrative
personnel and other specific purposes. Except that this distinc-
tion illustrates nuances of administrative usage that                would be
preserved for us in the interpretive reports of a Spanish chron-
icler   but not in the deed prepared by a Sumerian               clerk,   it   is

not of great importance for understanding the economic basis
for class stratificationand the royal power. Both categories
certainly were very large. Moctezuma I is alleged to have
held some thirty-two towns and twenty-six estates for his
private benefit, and it is reported that the three kings of the
Triple Alliance reserved for their own use at times as much as
one-third of the huge extent of conquered territories. Still other
state lands apparently were given over to temples              and schools
and cultivated by tenants or were set aside for the support of
garrisons and war expenditures.
   Private lands were also held by the nobility. In some cases
they were apparently subject to various forms of entail, and they
reverted to the crown in the event of the death of an owner
without       heirs.   However, they were subject         to sale,    and the
produce from them could be appropriated by their noble owners
without the deduction of a share as royal tribute.
   The source of all such private lands, it should be observed,
was the successful conquest of neighboring territories. In the
                                KIN AND CLASS                                 113

first   recorded instance, after the            fall   of Azcapot/aleo in    1430
before the combined forces of the Triple Alliance, Diego Duran
(1867-80:        1,   79-80)    tells    us that the largest    and best    fields

were     first   taken by the crown, that two plots of land were
then given to each of the nobles                who had pressed the war
against the wishes of the                 common people, and that for the
latter only one plot was set aside for                 each calpulli. Paul Radin
(1920:147) has argued that this award of lands to the nobility
was an innovation, but, even if not, it thenceforward assumed
special significance because of the almost continuously success-
ful expansionistic thrusts               upon which the Aztec subsequently
embarked.        It    served to        strengthen the hand of the military
orders in their struggle for ascendancy over the traditional
calpulli leadership          and to provide an economic basis for the
formation of a noble class that was distinguished from lower
social orders         by more than transient charismatic qualities and
self -proclaimed superiority of lineage.

    In addition to an aristocracy of lineage there was an                    aris-

tocracy of service,          made up in the main of commoners who
had distinguished themselves in warfare. Although beneficiaries
of royal favor during the early, rapid growth of the realm, they
were    later repressed         and excluded       as the nobility of lineage
continued to grow in number during a period when the frontiers
tended to become            stabilized. Also of         an intermediate    status,

although rising in wealth and influence rather than declining
like the nobility of service, were corporate groups of merchants.

Since they were engaged exclusively in long-distance trade,
largely on behalf of the ruler and the nobility, they were closely
involved in the expansion of the Aztec state. Accordingly, we
must postpone           a   discussion of their role and position until
the following chapter.
   Below these groups a large part (in most regions the major
part) of the population   was grouped in calpullis, as we have
seen earlier— localized clans or lineages that were highly strati-
fied internally, that          held corporate     title to   agricultural lands,
114                 The Evolution of Urban Society

and that also served as a basis for the organization of many of
the crafts and professions. There seems to have been a minimum
of twenty calpullis, and probably there were several times that
number, with recognized territories in Tenochtitlan at the time
of the Spanish Conquest,     and there is some evidence that the
calpullis were ranked among themselves from highest to lowest.

    As the persistence of     vertically   oriented   (i.e.,   stratified)

kin-based social groupings across the growing horizontal barrier
between nobles and commoners       implies, this was a society
embarked upon fundamental change and hence not easily sum-
marized in terms of unifying organizational principles. Even
in its ceremonies, M. Acosta Saignes (1946:196-97) has docu-

mented the effects of these essentially contradictory develop-
ments, with kin-based modes of organization and those reflecting
the class superiority of the nobility alternately coexisting amic-
ably and confronting one another in mock battles.
      Some scholars, like Arturo Monzon (1949:29), argue from
the vital part that the calpulli undoubtedly continued to play
that stratification remained so closely intertwined with kinship
that we should not speak of social classes. However, the distinc-
tion between a stratified society and a class society seems to be
an obscure and not particularly significant one— so long,                 at

least, as   there is agreement that the direction of development
in Aztec society was    toward the latter. Classes and clans need
not be polar, mutually exclusive concepts, and            it   is   in   the
general nature of social change that it arises from the competi-
tive coexistence   and ultimate resolution of such seeming con-
tradictions.
   Below the "plebeian" population of macehuales organized
in calpullis   stood the mayeques,    who cultivated the private
lands of the nobility and who (like the client populations on
Mesopotamian agricultural estates) have been likened to serfs
on medieval     fiefs. Probably for the most part having been

earlier settlers on the lands to which they became attached, they

could be sold with those lands but not separated from them.
                           KIN     AND CLASS                             115

Unlike the "free" population of commoners organized in cal-
pullis,    who as we have seen owed tribute to the state, the
mayeques owed tribute and labor services only to the noble
owner of the land they occupied. Their only obligations to the
state,    suggesting the very limited extent of their participation
in it, lay in the wartime performance of military service and in
their subjugation to       its   criminal jurisdiction rather than that
of the local lord.
    The queston      of    the size    of   the   mayeque population      is

obviously an interesting and important one, since              it   bears on
the extent of private landholdings and on the degree to which
the calpulli system       may have begun to decline in at least its
economic importance before the arrival of the Spaniards. Direct,
unequivocal data are unfortunately not available. Calculations
based on the imposition of tribute on previously exempt classes
of the indigenous population after the             Conquest do seem to
suggest, however, that in parts of central Mexico the mayeques
were very numerous and may even have outnumbered the
population of the calpullis (Cook and Borah 1963).
    Presumably mayeques also tended                to   be organized into
localized,   endogamous calpullis, or at least once had been so.
Both the periodic breaking-up of private lands through pur-
chase and the formation of new mayeque groups out of impov-
erished families and refugees would have reduced the relative
importance of kin ties among them and substituted more flex-
ible,    open-ended organizational forms. Their way of life as a
whole, however, received little attention from the early chron-
iclers    and is not well known. According to one source, which
describes the depression of these groups to the lowest margins
of subsistence, tribute     payments to the lord were handled as
individual and not corporate responsibilities, with those               who
failed to meet the requirements being sold into slavery. This
practice also would have hastened the decay of corporate kin
organizations among them.
    Slaves constituted a bottom stratum in the society, and, as
116                        The Evolution of Urban Society

in     early        Mesopotamia,     their      absolute        number was seemingly
not large. Recruitment              is   said to have depended mainly on im-
pressment of criminals, on defaulting debtors, on sell-sale during
times of famine, and, in                  some        eases,    on their requisition as
tribute.       It   differed from the classical Western concept of slavery
as     an unlimited condition              ol   depersonalization and servitude
and constituted instead a soeial category whose status was only
somewhat more impaired than that of the mayeques and sim-
ilar    groups. Slaves are reported to have been engaged, along-
side other workers, in the cultivation of private lands. However,
on public lands and in the construction of public works, cor-
porately recruited corvees of tributaries and the internal calpulli
population provided both a more flexible source of labor and
one that was largely self-sustaining from a subsistence point of
view; hence it is not surprising that the wsc of slaves for these
purposes is unreported. Similarly, there is no reference to their
employment in the crafts.
   There were two areas of strategic concentration of slaves
in the        Aztec economy, recalling their similarly discontinuous
distribution in Mesopotamia. In the absence of draft animals in
the prehispanic           New World, it is not surprising that one of
these     concentrations        was        in    the     transport      of   commodities,
although even in             this    case slaves failed to               supplant "free"
carriers in the delivery of the tribute to                           which subject towns
were obligated. Slaves               also are repeatedly reported to                 have
been very numerous              in       the great households of the nobility,
although here too they merely supplemented                                   and did not
replace the obligated services of tributaries.
       There are suggestions that the number of slaves was increas-
                                                  1




ing during the last decades before                         the   1
                                                                     Conquest. Both the
increasing degree of autocracy and                             stratification   within the
core of Aztec society and the increasing How of tribute, includ-
ing slaves, from conquered towns make this a probable trend
even    we are unable to document it in quantitative terms.
         if

But if so, it may be asked whether increasing numbers of
                         KIN AND CLASS                         117

slaves merely reinforced existing social relationships or whether
instead they began to have qualitative effects on the socio-
political structure.   Unlike mayeques on nobles' estates, whose
surplus product    went only for the support of their lords and
might not be attached as tribute, slaves in the hands of the
commoner population would have served to augment state
revenues. Hence the issuance of slaves to commoners would
have tended to counterbalance the loss of potential sources of
tribute through the award of conquered lands and their attached
agricultural populations to the nobility. At the same time, the
forging of further links of this kind between the state and the
calpullis would enhance the trends toward stratification within
the latter and would help keep in check the independent powers
of the nobility.
   To hazard a larger and more speculative conclusion from a
comparison of slavery in early Mesopotamia with that in pre-
hispanic central Mexico, one is first struck by many formal and
functional similarities: the relatively small   number of slaves,
their discontinuous distribution throughout the economy, their
apparent concentration particularly in the service of the political
and economic elites of the society, the absence of abrupt dis-
continuities between slaves and numerous other groups of
impaired social status. Beyond these similarities, however, are
suggestions of an important underlying difference that may be
traced also in the origins of the nobility and of their control
over land.
   We have described the great Mesopotamian estates as semi-
integrated, implying that their owners or administrators       em-
ployed   at least a    degree of comprehensive management and
planning in order for resources to be made available in sufficient
amounts and with sufficient regularity to justify the retention
of substantial numbers of slaves in economic production rather
than merely in service functions. By contrast, the Aztec nobility
seems to have been almost exclusively military in origin and
predatory in effect. Characteristically, they sacrified both war
118                 The Evolution of Urban Society

captives    and slaves on a scale, and with a degree of ritual
elaboration,   which elsewhere was quite unprecedented. How-
ever elaborate their rationale of social superiority    may have
been (and, parenthetically, our ignorance of a corresponding
rationale in Mesopotamia may be only a result of the different
character of our available sources), the Aztec nobles seem to
have received land exclusively as royal gifts in return for polit-
ical   support or military prowess— that is, for reasons unrelated
to their economic functions. Cortes tells us that all the nobility,
as well as the royal court,   were housed for at least part of the
year in the capital (1952:92-93), and, to judge from all avail-
able evidence, that city was larger and more heavily populated
than any of the city-states of early Mesopotamia. In spite of
the ease of communication by boat within the Valley of Mexico,
in turn    we must assume (particularly in the absence of draft
animals) a substantial diversion of labor merely to the task of
transporting provisions to the nobility and the court.      Mean-
while, the techniques of agriculture remained primitive       and
unspecialized, undoubtedly differing from one zone to another
but at any rate not encouraging the division of the labor on a
single crop into specialized operations for separate work teams
like thoseknown from the Shuruppak and Lagash archives.
   Thus the conditions for the nobility to exercise a role in
economic management were largely absent, while their pre-
occupation with expansionistic warfare along distant frontiers
would have precluded their acquisition of the necessary skills.
Hence it is no surprise to find that, as Charles Gibson
(1964:263-64) reports, the holdings of individuals in central
Mexico were often widely separated; the only role open to the
nobility in respect to land, after       was the imposition of
                                       all,

onerous tribute schedules. In Mesopotamia, by contrast, we
have already noted that Sammelurkunden, deeds recording the
formation of territorially consolidated estates, were the domi-
nant form of transaction in land.
   All of which is, of course, merely another way of asserting
                       KIN AND CLASS                                  119

the contrast already alluded     to   between   stratification   as    a
mechanical, politically superimposed process on the African
model and stratification as an organic process intimately inter-
related with agricultural management. Yet this difference is not
large in relation to the   accompanying     similarities.   From the
viewpoint of stratification, it is not too much to describe early
Mesopotamia and central Mexico as slightly variant patterns
of a single, fundamental course of development in which
corporate kin groups, originally preponderating in the control
of land, were gradually supplemented by the growth of private
estates in the hands of urban elites.   And, while such corporate
kin groups still remained active and viable in many respects at
the termination points in our two sequences, it is only fair to
conclude that they had by then become encapsulated in a
stratified pattern of social organization that was rigidly divided

along class lines.
        IV
                  PARISH AND POLITY

THE RESTRUCTURING OF STRATIFIED CLANS ALONG CLASS LINES HAS
a vital but indirect relation to the growth of the state. Older,
vertically oriented, solidary forms of organization were replaced
by more functionally             specified, authoritarian,        and all-encom-
passing horizontal ones that were better adapted to the admin-
istrative        requirements         of   increasingly   large    and    complex
societies.   In some respects the older forms may have provided
a model that the newer ones needed only to readapt                        and sys-
tematize; such was the case in connection with the extension
of the traditional labor  and tribute system from within the
calpullis tomeet the needs of the emergent Aztec state. But
an analysis of the state, and of the class system on which it
was based, nevertheless are more than complementary ap-
proaches to the same unified reality. Their paths of develop-
ment obviously intertwined and reinforced one another, but
in important respects           each followed laws of its own. To intro-
duce a dramatic             simile,   what we have followed thus far in
discussing the growth of social stratification                is   the action of
the chorus— its conflicts and resolutions somewhat diffuse and
gradual,     broad     in    impact, but always impersonal.              Now we
must deal with the central protagonists.
    The first to appear were the priests— or, at any rate, an elite
whose claims to leadership were primarily validated in religious
terms. Shrines and small temples surely long antedate the
beginnings of our chronological chart. In                  fact,   for the   New
World       at    least,    Gordon         Willey   (Braidwood      and    Willey

                                            120
                     PARISH AND POLITY                                     121

1962:350) has argued that they may be as old as the establish-
ment of settled village life. But, as the precincts of specialists
somehow chosen to lead or represent the community in worship,
there is little basis at present for assuming that they antedate
the Middle Formative period in Mesoamerica and the Ubaid
period in Mesopotamia.
   For those remote time periods it must be pointed out again
that the data of archeology remains unsupplemented from docu-
mentary sources. Religious     rituals,   it   may be argued, are by
nature more stylized, repetitive, and capable of association with
complex, durable symbolism than are channels of political
decision-making and authority. Moreover,            it    is   entirely con-
ceivable that there     were other motivations            for   ritual    than
religious ones,   even in   stylized,   monumental         settings   whose
formal features identify them as related to known temples of
later periods. Clearly, therefore, the dominance of the religious
component— or indeed its differentiation at this time from other
symbolic forms of social representation and activity— ought not
to be merely assumed.
   On the other hand, the intensity and omnipresence of pre-
dominantly religious forms of expression, and their preponder-
ance over all other surviving traces of social activity not directly
concerned with subsistence, are uniformly acknowledged by
investigators   who have dealt with the era beginning with the
Ubaid and Middle Formative periods. Hence the probability
of a primarily religious focus to social life at the outset of the
Urban Revolution, while often somewhat naively exaggerated,
appears to be the decidedly most reasonable reconstruction of
the available evidence.
   Why should this have been so? Part of the answer may lie
with the necessity for providing an intelligible moral framework
of organization for society as it increased cumulatively in scale
and complexity. As Clifford Geertz has recently argued,
A society consisting of a multiplicity of overlapping groups, each
directed to a distinct and fairly specific       end— a    pattern    I   have
122                     The Evolution of Urban Society

elsewhere called "pluralistic collectivism"— would seem to need some
ritual expression      of the elemental    components of      its    structure in
order to maintain a level of conceptual precision sufficient to per-
mit its participants to find their way around in it. The temple
system provides both a simplified model of Balinese social structure
and a schoolroom in which the kinds of attitudes and values neces-
sary to sustain it are inculcated and celebrated [1964:301.

    Although it is hardly possible to elucidate all the specific
factors at  work in Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica, our earlier
discussion of underlying subsistence patterns in the  two areas
at least suggests what some of the most important of the factors
are likely to have been. In the           first   place, there is substantial
evidence from both areas of ecological                instability,   which has
repeatedly been reflected in drouths, famines, floods, and sim-
ilar disasters.     At a magicoreligious level, it is thus no surprise
to find that the earliest conceptions of deity to crystallize were
those associated with the assurance of fertility and the annual
regeneration of crops and livestock.
   Thorkild Jacobsen has argued plausibly that in Mesopo-
tamia thename of the goddess Inanna, whose symbol is
common on even the earliest Uruk seals, may be derived from
her association with the ripening dates.                 The etymology        of
Dumuzi, he suggests, is 'lie who quickens the young ones," and
he interprets representations of Protoliterate ritual as already
reflecting community celebration of a sacred marriage ceremony
between them (1963:474-76). Other authorities, more cautious
about projecting the contents of later myths so far into the
past,      deny the    attribution   of   the     ceremony but uniformly
acknowledge the prevailing identification of the earliest known
deities with the life-giving powers in nature. Eridu, the earliest

city to      emerge out     of the primeval waters in the             Sumerian
creation epic,was the seat of Enki, god of the sweet waters.
The name  of the god Ashnan is a word for grain, of Lahar for
sheep, and of Sumugan for flocks of wild asses and gazelles. 1


      1.   Miguel Civil, personal communications.
                       PARISH AND POLITY                            123

The motif of the rosette-shaped flower, apparently symbolizing
vegetable life in general, prevails alike on Protoliterate temple
facades and as food tendered to divine herds on Protoliterate
seals.

      This   phenomenon corresponds closely with the prevailing
religions emphases throughout the long "Classic" period in
central Mexico. Perhaps the central conception at Teotihuacan,
for example,     was the god usually identified by his later Aztec
name, Tlaloc.     He was variously depicted on murals with at-
tributes of a jaguar, a serpent, a feathered serpent, a butterfly,
an owl, and a shell, and Rene Millon (n.d. ) observes that "he
was apparently conceived not solely as a god of rain but as a
god of life, of living things, a life-giving god." Whatever the
precise attributes of this conception, in each instance there is
reflected a pervasive     and protean preoccupation with fertility,
and particularly with the fertility of the major sources of sub-
sistence.    Although harder to define, other deities whose asso-
ciations are at least suggested at Teotihuacan include an earth
god, a maize god, an old fire god, and others.
      It is interesting to note that in both   Mesopotamia and Mex-
ico   gods were conceived, or at any rate depicted, in anthropo-
morphic form, though it is a gross generalization and conceals
a considerable      underlying divergence.       In    Mesopotamia the
earliest representations of    Inanna apparently were in terms of
her symbol only, while the          human practitioners of her cult
were     realistically portrayed.   Very   shortly,   however, the gods
were also represented as humans, and only a horned crown can
be said unequivocally to distinguish a deity. Special areas of
concern or competence were assigned to various deities, as we
have seen, which in at least one instance— the association of
Inanna with the planet Venus— can be established directly
rather than from presumably retrospective accounts in later
myths. But, in general, all the available evidence forms a con-
sistent picture of a    pantheon whose members, from the latter
part of the Protoliterate period onward, were             endowed with
124                  The Evolution of Urban Society

divine powers but   who otherwise were characterized by the
ordinary    human appetites, failings, and emotions. In central
Mexico, on the other hand, the incredible wealth of mural art at
Teotihuacan suggests that the gods were more remote and awe-
some in their powers, more closely identified with the demonia-
cal and animal attributes with whose masks and features they
were clothed, and surely less human either in their relations
with one another or with man. The beginnings of propitiatory
human sacrifice, even if on a relatively modest scale as yet,
only serve to underline this difference.
      Yet, in spite of this partial contrast, the appearance of gen-
erally anthropomorphic forms may not           be without significance,
for in both instances    we confront under similar circumstances,
and hence must seek to explain, the emergence of representa-
                               where it had been almost en-
tional art in cultural traditions
tirely lacking   during the immediately previous        eras.   Since in
both cases the representational portrayal of          deities   seems to
occur somewhat later or at any rate with           less clearly   anthro-
pomorphic attributes than the portrayal of human figures, per-
haps this trend is associated not so much with the elaboration
of a great religious tradition as with the ongoing process of
social stratification. In short,   perhaps it was the emergence of
an elite— whether secular or sacred makes little difference— that
promoted those aspects of individuality for which portraiture
became necessary as an enduring symbol and monument.
      Powerless as man might be before the major disasters, the
emphasis on the building of temples and the formation of priest-
hoods undoubtedly also       reflects   a   more "rational," economic
aspect. In the absence of widely extended political controls,
offerings   brought to a sanctuary in aggregate would have con-
stituted a larger reserve than otherwise could          be attained, a
reserve transcending the environmental limitations of its parent
community and reflecting the advantages of complementarity
to   be derived from establishing a network of permanently re-
lated communities in adjacent ecological zones.
                         PARISH AND POLITY                          125

    For reasons already suggested, Mesopotamia met this chal-
lenge in one way and central Mexico in another. In the former,
the temple developed not only as a sanctuary but also as a re-
distributive center  and a focus of managerial activity. In the
latter,           was turned outward, overcoming great dis-
          attention
tances, as well as the absence of long navigable waterways and
draft animals, with an astonishing hyperdevelopment of inter-
regional exchange or "trade." In neither case is it necessary to
argue that the socioeconomic importance of the function fully
"explains" the      enormous growth      of temples   as   architectural
complexes and as consumers of a major share of the available
surplus in the form of subsistence goods and luxury products.
Their socioeconomic contribution at one time might be shown
(but only in the complex, reified calculations of an external ob-
server) to have been very nearly equivalent to their consump-
tion, or again it     may not. All that I would insist on is that their
genesis is likely to have involved elements of a direct economic
contribution by the temples to the well-being of their commu-
nities, as   well as a perhaps more clearly perceived and deeply
felt religious one.

    Let us consider the character of temple     activities and or-

ganization   somewhat more fully for our two respective areas,
both as it existed soon after the outset of the Urban Revolution
and as it began to change toward the end of the era of Theo-
cratic Polities, the Urban Revolution's first phase.
    In Mesopotamian temples we can trace a broad trend to-
ward both an increase in size and an increasing differentiation
in function. There are some embarrassing loose ends suggesting
that this process may not be an entirely regular and irreversible
one (e.g., an enigmatic exposure of what may have been an
imposing public building at Tell Uqair as early as the Ubaid
period), but on the whole the evidence from the half-dozen or
so sites where temples are        known— and above all from Uruk—
forms a consistent picture. Well before the end of the Protoliter-
ate period both the resources        and the administrative skills for
126                 The Evolution of Urban Society

building on a truly monumental scale were clearly in hand;
according to one authority, the labor force required for the sub-
structure of the   Anu Ziggurat alone at Uruk was 7,500 man-
years. Perhaps even more important, there was a transition from
the reduplication of separate, traditionally planned structures
that were seemingly oriented exclusively toward ceremonies to
functionally specialized, interdependent complexes that inclu-
ded attached living quarters for their attendant personnel and
tended to be set apart as a separate precinct by an enclosure
wall.   The hypothesis of a progressive detachment of the per-
sonnel of the temple from direct involvement in the life of the
community herein finds considerable support.
   After making due allowance for the far greater emphasis that
Protoliterate temples have received than all other contemporary
structures of a secular character,     it   remains clear that they
were the dominating architectural features of the urban centers
growing up around them. And, in at least partial return for the
agricultural surpluses they absorbed in the gods' service,     it   is

also clear that they were the crucial centers for innovation in
such specialized administrative skills as writing and the keeping
of accounts. The first application of writing was, in fact, to the
keeping of economic records within the temple. Soon afterward
itwas extended to the preparation of lexical lists, including lists
of gods. Writing remained technically primitive and hence
limited in application until the latter part of the Early Dynastic
period, but as early as late Protoliterate times     knowledge of
its   application for purposes of keeping accounts     would have
strengthened the managerial functions of temples. On the part
of the specialized groups to    whom knowledge of writing was
confined, it would also have encouraged a sense of detachment
from and superiority to the day-to-day concerns of secular life.
      Temples also seem to have been the chief innovative centers
for at least the crafts that depended on expensive raw materials
from distant sources. Among them were metallurgy, stone sculp-
ture,   and perhaps the more specialized subdivisions of carpen-
                               PARISH AND POLITY                                       127

try concerned with boats and with wheeled transport.                         While an
economic contribution from the sponsorship of these innova-
tions cannot         be denied, it also must not be overemphasized. It
appears from documentary sources, for example, that extensive
practical use of carts began more than a millennium after their
introduction for cultic and military purposes.
    On the whole, the picture is one of an extremely precocious
development on a relatively limited scale. Glyptic art, for ex-
ample, seemingly leaped into being almost overnight.                                  From
the first,  maintained uniformly high standards of workman-
                it

ship       were never surpassed and displayed what Henri
         that
Frankfort (1939:23) describes as a "creative power       such            .    .   .




that we meet among its astonishingly varied products anticipa-
tions of every school of glyptic art which subsequently flour-
ished in Mesopotamia." Typically,                  its   splendid early products
seem to have been designed exclusively for administrative and
ritual   purposes within the temple establishment;                  it   was only
toward the end of the Protoliterate period that the functionally
interrelated         complex of writing, seal-making, and the use of
seal impressions   was extended to secular economic uses else-
where. Similarly in the case of metallurgy, the finest early work
reflects full control of all major alloys and techniques save a

knowledge of bronze and devotes itself to the limited but highly
exacting production of ritual furniture. Tablets found in temple
contexts from the latter part of the Protoliterate period already
differentiate,       it   is   interesting to note,      between the position of
the smith and that of the master-craftsman who was his super-
visor.

    A study of the organization of the Protoliterate temple en-
counters serious handicaps. The graves of specialists associated
with the temple are unknown, or at least unrecognized, elimi-
nating a valuable potential source of insight into their status in
relation to the community as a whole. While representations of
offering rituals          and other     cult   activities   are fairly numerous,
the fact that        many of the participants were nude deprives us
128                       The Evolution of Urban Society

of information that otherwise           might have been obtained from
differences in their dress. And even the Protoliterate documents,
so helpful with respect to specialization within the crafts, pro-
vide at best a series of administrative             titles   whose authority
and responsibilities are not specified.
    At least in Uruk and probably elsewhere as well, the figure
at the head of the temple community in Protoliterate times, in
both     its    secular   and its religious aspects, seems to have been
the en, or lord. Such a figure is shown taking a central part in
cult    and military activities, distinctively dressed and of heroic
size,    but his superordinate position in relation to a priestly
hierarchy is not apparent. Until the functions associated with
the     title   changed in Akkadian and later times, Dietz Edzard
(1965:74-75) observes that it denoted not a priestly office but
a broadly politicoreligious one.         Even in relation to the temple
economy, Jacobsen defines its concerns (admittedly not on the
basis of contemporary references ) only as "successful economic
management: charismatic power to make things thrive and to
produce abundance" (Jacobsen and Kramer 1953:181).
      Our difficulties are not lessened with respect to other offi-
cialswho occupied a place within the temple administration.
One of those most commonly met on the early Uruk tablets, for
example, is the sanga, sometimes translated as "priest" but by
other authorities only as "accountant." Before the end of the
Protoliterate period several ranks of sanga can be distinguished
at Jemdet Nasr, but in the context of a puzzling, poorly under-

stood architectural complex, which in some respects                  is   more
suggestive of a "palace" than a temple.             It is    perhaps more in-
structive to note that a ration         list   from the Eanna temple pre-
cinct at Uruk accounts for a day's beer and bread allotment for
almost fifty individuals, presumably in its current employ or at
any rate in its parish following, while other fragments record
the consumption of barley and fish. Here, in a clearly religious
setting of Protoliterate date, the centrally administered redis-
                         PARISH AND POLITY                            129

tributive patterns typified by,      and best understood in, the Bau
archive several centuries later thus were already in existence.
Having developed in such a setting, of course, there was noth-
ing to prevent many of the same patterns from being adopted
in     time for the administrative purposes of the palace or of
private estates.
       So   far,   we have considered early Mesopotamian religious
patterns without reference to their geographical distribution.
The fact that all the major gods in the later pantheon were re-
garded as having their principal sanctuaries in particular cities
clearly points back to a time when they were closely identified
with particular places or         districts   and were correspondingly
limted in their assumed radii of efficacy and importance. Yet
this time must have ended early, since the later myths are con-

sistent in conceptualizing the        members of the pantheon as a
hierarchically organized interacting family.      The head of that
family, Enlil, resided at Nippur, a city important subsequently
as a symbol of political control       and a center of religious learn-
ing but apparently never a capital. Presumably, the explanation
lies   not in the forcible extension of local cults by politicomili-
tary means, of which there is no trace in the available evidence,
but in the establishment of interconnections between the ad-
ministrative staffs of different temples as they sought to sys-
tematize a         common    Great Tradition and to solve        common
administrative problems.
       In this sense, it is interesting to note that even the earliest
known forms of writing were not localized; an example has
been found at Kish, in the northern part of the alluvial plain,
as well as in Uruk, near its southern extremity. Toward the end
of the Protoliterate period, word lists, the characteristic means
of instruction of Mesopotamian scribes, were set down in identi-
cal order at Jemdet         Nasr (also in the north) and at Uruk. At
least at the level of the specialized elite,       it   thus appears that
a conscious unity of outlook, a sense of qualitative distinctive-
130                 The Evolution of Urban Society

ness in relation to other, non-eivilized areas,      had been forged
under theocratie auspices well before the advent of the             first

serious attempts at political unification.
      Less can be said with respect to the overall organization of
temples, and of the theocratic elite that presumably was identi-
fied   with them, in central Mexico during the "Classic" period
than in Protoliterate Mesopotamia. Teotihuacan stands out as
an urban center of a qualitatively different order of size than
any    we know or reasonably can anticipate in Mesopotamia,
and, in spite of a generic similarity to the latter in its theocratic
overtones, this difference in size     is   associated with other im-
portant differences as well. Teotihuacan exhibits, for example,
an imposed unity of plan on an enormous scale (nearly 30 sq.
km. at its maximum) that is entirely foreign to Mesopotamia.
Its   undeviating grid of equidistant streets intersecting at right
angles (at least from the Xolalpan period onward),            its   em-
phasis on regularly planned      compounds facing inward upon
enclosed courts, its mastery of dramatic effect in the arrange-
ment of long lines of temples flanking the main approaches as
one moved toward the central shrines, and, finally, the magni-
tude of effort represented by the Pyramid of the Sun and the
Pyramid of the Moon and by many other structures,             all   are
entirely without counterpart in      Mesopotamia.
      We are on more familiar ground when we turn from com-
parisons based mainly on scale to others based on function. For
many, and perhaps most, of the enclosed compounds it seems
reasonable to infer a primarily residential purpose, and the
preoccupation with religious themes in their mural decoration
may signify only the still undifferentiated character of religious,
social,   and political idioms. Like the Eanna precinct in Uruk,
the largest of the great enclosures at Teotihuacan contained
both ceremonial and residential structures (the so-called "Ciu-
dadela," but possibly there are similar enclosures around each
of the two major pyramids )    and may have served as residences
for the principal ruling families.   But what of the many smaller
                         PARISH AND POLITY                                131

compounds, which are still impressively large and lavishly dec-
orated? Are they residences for an inordinately larger priest-
hood than Mesopotamian cities ever knew? Or perhaps the
palaces of an aristocracy drawn from an immensely wider hinter-
land than at least the Protoliterate and Early Dynastic cities
ever had? Or do we exaggerate the status of their occupants,
many of whom conceivably could have been internally strati-
fied,   densely settled corporate kin groups instead of a noble
stratum with quarters for many servants? The answers to these
and     similar questions     depend on      studies     still   under way at
Teotihuacan.
    The picture also remains obscure with regard to the role
of Teotihuacan temples in the crafts.Rene Millon (n.d.) has
recently outlined an attractive but           still   tentative   argument in
favor of viewing a great compound adjoining the Pyramid of
the Moon as one of several centers of specialized workmanship
in obsidian.    More generally, it has often been noted that the
"Classic" period as a whole    is characterized by marked differ-

ences in style and pattern of circulation between ritual objects
and utensils intended only for mundane use, with the former
receiving a far higher degree of specialized care and circulating
much more widely. But these impressions remain to be system-
atized and fully understood. Perhaps, we can argue, the demand
of Teotihuacan temples for obsidian, jade, quetzal feathers, and
similar luxury products       (   not to speak of lime plaster and cotton,
which were also imperative needs of the lay population) was
directly analogous to the          demand of Protoliterate temples for
copper, precious metals, lapis lazuli, stone, and cedar wood. But
there are also suggestions of differences, which recall the less
economically engaged, more strictly acquistive character of the
later   Aztec   elites   (see above, p. 117), Teotihuacan ritual ob-
jects exhibit a high quality of style and craftsmanship, but they

do not advance in technique or experiment with the possibilities
of their material.       Nor is there any evidence of managerial ac-
tivities   directed toward the sustenance and improvement of
132                     The Evolution of Urban Society

the crafts. Characteristically, systems of numeral notation, and
possibly other kinds of glyphs as well, were             known but were
applied only in an apparently rather minor way for ritual rather
than for administrative purposes.
      As in Protoliterate Mesopotamia, the conclusion seems rela-
tively certain that political and religious systems of authority
were largely undifferentiated at Teotihuacan. Throughout the
occupation of the site the major building activity was on struc-
tures of a preponderantly ceremonial character,            and both the
lavish production of ritual goods and the general preoccupation
with religious themes tend to confirm the impression that po-
litical    leadership   was predominantly theocratic in      orientation.
Nevertheless, the sheer size of Teotihuacan, and of the still un-
known but presumably            large supporting territory under      its

influence or control, strongly suggests that the prestige of the
city as a focus of voluntary pilgrimage and offerings must have

been increasingly supplemented by superordinate controls of
a more strongly politicomilitary nature.
    Armed figures from Teotihuacan, presumably accompany-
ing a trading party rather than bent on conquest, were already
represented on an Early Classic Maya stela from the important
contemporary center of Tikal in the Peten rain forest of Guate-
mala. There      is   also evidence   from the highland Guatemalan
site of Kaminaljuyu of       the importation of such large quantities
of Teotihuacan pottery that the possibility of seizure of politi-
cal control by warriors from central Mexico must be voiced, in
spite of the very great         intervening distances across difficult
terrain.    Somewhat later, weapons began to make their appear-
ance in Teotihuacan murals. Military orders of warriors, includ-
ing those of the Eagle and Jaguar as well as others, now also
find their     way into representations— however long they may
have already been present as a           social force before receiving

artisticand theological recognition. Finally, there is evidence
that the partial abandonment of Teotihuacan before 750 a.d.
                        PARISH AND POLITY                               133

involved elements of destruction and looting, suggesting mili-
tary action, pronounced internal unrest, or both.
    Thus a further axis of comparison between Mesoamerican
sites like Teotihuacan and their homotaxial equivalents in Meso-

potamia involves internal trends leading to systematic change
rather than static characterization. In both cases the key de-
velopment was an apparently gradual rise in the power and
influence of militaristic groups, closely accompanied            by the
transformation of a solidary social organization            composed of
ascriptive segments into a hierarchical, increasingly autocratic
one. The rate of this change, to be sure, was not the same; the
designation of the period within which Teotihuacan              falls    as
"Classic" properly implies a substantial, independent aesthetic
achievement as well as considerable duration, while its Proto-
literate counterpart in    Mesopotamia emphasizes instead a more
transitory stage in a developmental sequence.      But the essentials
of the trend, culminating in the rise to power of politically
fragmented Toltec groups, on the one hand, and in the increas-
ingly sanguinary internecine warfare of Early Dynastic Sumer-
ian city-states, on the other hand, were the same in each case.
    This    assertion   of parallelisms   admittedly   is   not without
difficulties.   Detailed comparisons are obscured by an apparent
break in the continuity of occupation at          many sites in the
Valley of Mexico after the fall of Teotihuacan, with different
patterns of regional authority perhaps centering for a period
on Cholula and Xochicalco before the foundation of Tula.
Moreover, Tula itself reportedly was made up of two or more
ethnically      distinguished population strata, with at least the
politicaland religious reins of authority in the hands not of
previously urban groups but of tribalized peoples moving in-
ward from near the frontiers of cultivation. This kind of ethnic
amalgam occurs later in the relative Mesopotamian sequence
also, but it was not a feature of the first polities in which mili-

taristic elements became dominant.
134                   The Evolution of Urban Society

      In spite of these difficulties, the comparisons between Tula
and    its   Early Dynastic Mesopotamian counterparts are very
close.   We can deal with them, of course, only in the aggregate,
as they represent cumulative changes, while recognizing that
such cumulative trends almost certainly proceeded at different
rates in different centers and everywhere consisted of a complex
interplay of retarding and accelerating forces. In fact, the de-
cisive characteristic of the Toltec period        is   its   contradictory
aspect, entirely consistent with its transitional position between
the relatively stable, theocratically oriented society of the early
Classic period      and the vigorous, dedicated expansionism of
Aztec times.- Perhaps this aspect is clearest, as Armillas (1951:
29) has pointed out, in the spread of the Quetzalcoatl cult to
centers as distant as Chichen Itza in Yucatan and to the high-
land Quiche in Guatemala. The object of the cult was an
archaic, agricultural, at least formerly peaceful, deity.          But its
new social content, unlike its form, was the rationale of a war-
rior aristocracy    who, if they failed to construct a durable, po-
litically    integrated realm, nevertheless were successful as inde-
pendently organized military parties in imposing themselves
over widely scattered Mesoamerican peoples.
    The actual extent of the Toltec domain, not to speak of the
effectiveness     and continuity of whatever political control ac-
tually was exercised by the capital, is left unclear by the vague,
semilegendary references to which the historian of the Toltec
period is limited. The beginning of the Historia Tolteca-Chichi-
meca speaks of twenty towns or ethnic groups constituting the
hands and feet of "Great Tollan," and the known position of
some of these towns or groups in later times suggests that the
realm may have extended to the Gulf Coast in the modern
states of     Veracruz and Tabasco.    On the other hand, there is
always a possibility of a foreshortened time perspective in such
references, so that the identification of some localities as Toltec
may have stemmed from their temporary occupation prior to
the foundation of Tula or from later migrations of epigonal
                         PARISH AND POLITY                                   135

groups after its fall. According to the highly questionable state-
ment of Ixtlilxochitl, the Toltec realm extended "from one sea
to the other" toward the end of that dynasty's hegemony, with
its final dissolution having been caused in part by an uprising

of three principalities along the Gulf Coast.
    As   in    Teotihuacan, temples seem to have dominated the
center of Tula, and the religious motivations of its ruling groups
may well have continued as strong as they were earlier. But
the religious emphasis shifted, as Walter Krickeberg observes,
no longer deriving "its essential traits from the divine priest-
king, nor from the gods of water          and vegetation   .   .   .   but from
celestial warrior-gods"      (1964:229-30). Moreover, the symbols
of the Eagle      and Jaguar warrior societies, associated with the
sustaining of these gods through the securing of prisoners for
sacrifice,    now became a dominant motif in temple reliefs. There
are also representations of the warriors themselves,                   armed no
longer only with spear-throwers but with bows and arrows, the
latter   probably newly acquired from nomadic peoples to the
north.
   The confused and somewhat contradictory accounts of the
dynastic succession at Tula permit a variety of conflicting in-
terpretations,     of   which the   alternatives   propounded by W.
Jimenez-Moreno (1958) and Paul Kirchoff (1955) are perhaps
the most important.        The   latter   seems to be a more closely
argued, and hence generally persuasive, position. Perhaps it is
rendered more plausible still by its attribution of the ascend-
ancy of the followers of the god Tezcatlipoca only to the end
of the occupation of Tula, for the excavator of Tula has noted
the absence of a single representation of that god on structures
excavated there (Acosta 1956:107).
    Following Kirchoff's reconstruction, then, we see the author-
ity at Tula divided between a sacerdotal ruler        who was closely
identified with the god Quetzalcoatl and a temporal ruler, with
hereditary succession applying only to the latter                  office.   The
precise details of the ensuing conflict between these figures are
136                  The Evolution of Urban Society

not relevant for us here, save that they seem to reflect a schism
within the society between followers of the traditional deity
and those of Tezcatlipoca and that the latter, who succeeded
eventually in expelling Quetzalcoatl, were committed to a god
directly   bound up with the practice of war and sacrifice. But
the general situation depicted by these admittedly semilegen-
dary sources— most of which is consistent also with the Jimenez
version— clearly involves the      shift   away from sacerdotal or di-
vided leadership toward the ascendancy of militaristically           in-

clined leaders responsive to deities         more appropriate to their
outlook. It   may be noted, moreover, that at least part of the
confusion of the sources seems to arise from a continuing
tendency for both sacerdotal and temporal rulers to be closely
identified with the gods they represented or even to be regarded
as deities themselves.
   Here is a situation that, obscure though it may be in many
of its details, profitably can be compared with Early Dynastic
Mesopotamia. Perhaps        it   might be described loosely as the
onset of tendencies toward secularization in a polity previously
dominated by theocratic influences, but that description over-
looks the probability that the partisans of the         new militaristic
cults   were as deeply impelled by religious convictions as were
the followers of Quetzalcoatl.      The solution of this impasse lies
not in an impossible post hoc measure of religious intensity but
in an assessment of the social constituencies each deified pro-
tagonist represented— in one case, a theocratic elite with a wide,
passive following; in the other, corporate groups of leading
warriors seeking to consolidate their position as an aristocracy
through control of political and religious authority and through
conquest. As S. N. Eisenstadt might describe it, what was truly
distinctive of the latter    was not       a lesser degree of religious
intensity but the pursuit of autonomous political goals and the
quest for power not embedded in the structure of traditional
ascriptive groups.
   The sequence       of   development      in   Mesopotamia of a po-
                            PARISH AND POLITY                                  137

litically    based institution of kingship is one that also remains
obscure in many details but which nonetheless exhibits a basic
and striking similarity to central Mexico. Throughout most of
the Early Dynastic period the extent and character of the con-
quests of individual Sumerian city-states remain as elusive as
they do in the Toltec legends. Tales like "Enmerkar and the
Lord of Aratta," for example, hint at hostile relations between
a lord of Uruk and his counterpart in a distant mountainous
principality, recalling the        shadowy achievements and allegori-
cal milieu of Toltec conquerors. But, while retrospective, semi-
legendary accounts comparable to those dealing with Tula are
available in the form of myths            and epics, with rare exceptions
they are preserved only in late, highly redacted versions. Hence
it   is   desirable, instead, to trace      Mesopotamian developments
mainly from the evidence of contemporary titulary.
      En, or "lord," already dealt with, appears in the earliest
Protoliterate writing and, at least in Uruk, continues until the
Early Dynastic         II   period to denote both political leadership
and a religious        responsibility for control over the generative
forces in nature        and for management of the temple estate as
a god's demesne.            Subsequent    to that time, only the priestly

aspects of the office           were   retained.   The term       for king   was
lugal,     literally   "great   man" and      thus    essentially    secular    in

etymology, although the occupant of the                    office also   assumed
cult responsibilities and administrative control over the temple.
The word lugal occurs once on a text at the end of the Proto-
literate period, but whether in its more generic meaning of

"master" (as Diakonoff suggests) or as a specific indication of
kingship (as Falkenstein suggests)            is   uncertain. At any rate, it
gradually      became the general expression               for   paramount po-
litical    leadership during the Early Dynastic period and                   was
retained as the single royal title thenceforward.                  A third title,
ensi,     alternates with lugal during the Early Dynastic period,
connoting essentially the same responsibilities but perhaps ac-
knowledging some external suzerainty.                 It    is   not necessarily
138                        The Evolution of Urban Society

linked etymologically with the earlier             title, en, and may also

reflect distinctive local traditions in         some city-states. The term
continues as an assertion of at least local independence until
the time of Gudea, just prior to the Third Dynasty of Ur, whose
inscriptions suggest that          it   may have implied even then some
of the qualities as a charismatic provider of               abundance that
previously had been associated with the en. Later it declined
in   importance and came to mean an appointive city-governor.
   There are obvious parallels between this succession of titles
and the apparent division of powers between sacerdotal and
secular rulers at Tula, as well as in the ultimate hegemony of
the latter in both cases.          And there are further parallels with
respect to tendencies toward deification and toward the estab-
lishment of a principle of hereditary succession. During the
Early Dynastic period no kings seem to have been regarded
as gods during their own lifetimes, to be sure, but Lugalbanda
and Gilgamesh were posthumously elevated to this role. More-
over, there     is   no reason to assume that the frequent assertion
by rulers of divine parentage— for example, "the beloved son
of Ninhursag"— was an entirely meaningless epithet. A per-
sonal claim of divinity seems to have been made first by
Naram-Sin during the Dynasty of Agade and continued to be
sporadically reasserted by kings of the Third Dynasty of Ur.
Hereditary succession, a right also assigned to the temporal
ruler    at   Tula,   is    recorded and sanctified by the Sumerian
Kinglist.     Moreover, an epic tale about Etana, the founder of
the First Dynasty of Kish, credits him with having fulfilled
his destiny to find the "plant of birth"            and bring the institu-
tion of kingship to mankind.             Such varying indications as these
surely suggest a           common tendency to       buttress   the position
of an essentially secular authority with divine sanctions              and
powers.
     So far, I have dealt only with the transformation of essen-
tially   theocratic        authority into political rule.   But the frag-
mentary evidence has been convincingly interpreted by Thor-
                         PARISH AND POLITY                                    139

kild Jacobsen (1957)         to suggest that other kinds of political
organs also had been present earlier and underwent similar
processes of displacement as royal powers increased and be-
came institutionalized. Signs for "elder" and "assembly" already
occur on Protoliterate        texts,     and sporadic references suggest
that the poorly understood institution they represent continued
to play       an increasingly circumscribed political role until many
centuries later. Unfortunately, we know of its activities almost
entirely through literary sources— some are myths, sufficiently
remote from their         tellers   to    be projected entirely into the
world of the gods, while others are epic tales that surround a
nucleus of historical fact with semilegendary episodes con-
cerning kings of the Early Dynastic              II   and III periods. Such
sources obviously must be treated warily, but               it   is    significant
that the assembly in the myths occupies a place of predominant
importance. Sometimes said to be composed of                     all    the gods
and sometimes apparently differentiated as to age and author-
ity,    its   actions on occasion included the rendering,              and even
the execution, of judgments.             More characteristically, it met in
response to a situation of crisis and temporarily delegated ex-
traordinary powers as a war leader to one of its number.
       It   seems entirely plausible to infer the existence of assem-
blies functioning along these lines in the Protoliterate period,

at     the same time as temple communities were functioning
under their ens but prior to the establishment of                      fully con-

stituted dynastic rulers. If the assembly             was composed of the
heads of the major corporate descent groups in a particular
center,    would constitute a council of elders almost exactly
              it

like the council of calpullecs, which was the dominant political

authority among the Aztecs at the founding of Tenochtitlan in
the fourteenth century. In areas closely adjacent to the Aztec
capital such councils continued to exercise similar powers until
the time of the Spanish Conquest.
       By contrast, the situation portrayed in the Early Dynastic
epics is one in which the presumed descendants of earlier war
140                  The Evolution of Urban Society

leaders had succeeded in varying degrees in assuming a posi-
tion of permanently elevated status  and authority. The begin-
nings, at least, of the formation of an independent economic
base, in the form of the acquisition of lands by the palace,
have already been referred to. Furthermore, all the available
evidence— the circumvallation of most or all of the major towns,
the increasing emphasis on chariots and weapons in tombs
and graves, the importance of representations of activities as-
sociated with warfare on funerary and other monuments, and,
of course, direct textual references— clearly indicates the in-
creasingly serious, chronic character of the military activities
to   which the appointment of a war leader had been an initial
response.   At   least   in part   because of the greater defensive
strength of large, densely nucleated settlements, and perhaps
partly also because of the greater political control that could
be exercised over them under such circumstances, it also ap-
pears that this was a time of the transformation "des agglo-
merations centrales en veritables            'cites'"    (Falkenstein 1954:
810).
     Such a process      is   exemplified by Enmerkar, described in
the Sumerian Kinglist as "the man who built Uruk," while his
father is listed only as the "king of Eanna" (Jacobsen 1939:86).
Like Kulab, a neighboring town whose name is listed in earlier
texts   from Ur apparently         in    place of Uruk,      Eanna   subse-
quently disappeared as a political             entity,    although literary
echoes of it persisted. Presumably both, perhaps together with
unnamed smaller dependencies, had been induced or compelled
by Enmerkar to come together within a newly constituted
urban framework. Surely           in    such a situation the traditional
powers of the formerly separate assemblies would tend to
weaken collectively, while those of the king would grow more
secure.
     Yet forty years later his successor in the kingship of Uruk
was still constrained to share with an assembly his decision-
making powers concerned with warfare. Gilgamesh, although
                           PARISH AND POLITY                            141

    now holding his office by divine appointment rather than by
    an edict of the assembly, was forced to plead for the approval
    of the Elders for a    war with Kish. Having been turned down
    in this       an early literary account relates that he suc-
               effort,

    ceeded in imposing his will only after convoking an assembly
    of the young men and winning their support. The king's role,
    in other words,  depended upon a combination of charisma and
    maneuver before which the legislative organ gradually re-
    treated into passivity and then disappeared as a significant po-
    litical force.

           Alonso de Zurita provides a report of a strikingly similar
    transitional process   among the Aztecs:
    The killing of a merchant or a royal messenger was regarded as
    a justification for war. The ruler would call together all of the
    elders and the warriors to consider this course of action, informing
    them that it was desired to make war on a particular province
    and what the reason for it was. If it was for one of the indicated
    reasons, all said that this was justified and that the cause was
,   sufficient. If it was for another, lesser reason, they indicated two or

    three times that war should not be declared, and on some occasions
    the rulers ^acceded to their wishes. But if the ruler persisted and
    they ^were called together repeatedly, they said that they would
    follow his wishes, ^hat they had now informed him of their opinions
    and would disclaim further responsibility [1941:107].

         As the pomp and authority of the Aztec Court at the time
    it   was encountered by the Spaniards suggests, the form of
    this    exchange conceals the emerging content of fully consti-
    tuted royal authority. Several steps can be discerned in the
    process of its growth, perhaps beginning with Itzcoatl's        initial

    victory over the Tepanecs of Azcapotzalco         and the following
    distributionof conquered lands to provide an independent
    economic base both for the crown and for the nobility. Im-
    mediately thereafter, the Codex Ramirez reports a revision
    of the customs pertaining to the succession, with the elevation
    of the nearest brothers    and relatives of the reigning king to
    a new princely rank from which alone his successor could be
142                  The Evolution of Urban Society

chosen (by a senate which narrowed to exclude even most of
the nobility).    The decision taken       same time to burn
                                        at the

the picture histories recording the past practices and humble
origins of the Aztec elite, because "it is not suitable that every-
one should know the pictures" (Leon           Portilla     1959:11)    can
best be understood as an aspect of this same process.
     With the spreading conquests        of Aztec     armies and the
consequent further accretion of strength to the king and the
nobility at the expense of the traditional calpullec council, in-
creasing social barriers in movement, dress, and behavior were
erected not only between the nobility and the commoners but
between the king and the nobility. Duran tells of elaborate
regulations to this effect promulgated by Moctezuma I (a.d.
1440-69), and the trend culminated under Moctezuma II ( 1502-
20 ) with the widespread substitution of members of the nobility
of lineage for officials whose rank was based on service alone.
Many of the latter, including the heads of the Tenochtitlan
calpullis, reportedly were put to death in a purge that formally

completed the transition, as Paul Radin puts it, "from an elected
chief to what seems, to all intents and purposes, a king" (1920:
150).
     Given the    strikingly parallel overall pattern of the emer-
gence of kingship in these two instances,             in   spite   of the
hemisphere and 4,000 years in time that separate them,                it   is

useful to compare the characteristics of the emergent dynastic
institutions in   more detail. Let us consider first the scale and
elaboration of court life.
     Palaces belonging to the Early Dynastic II and III periods
in Mesopotamia have been partially excavated at Eridu and
Kish, each apparently covering substantially more than 100
meters in each direction of massively walled, highly compart-
mented private apartments for the ruling family and possibly
the families of other high administrators or personal servants.
Accompanying these monumental, functionally specialized resi-
dential structures were other buildings, for the most part not
                        PARISH AND POLITY                                 143

yet identified archeologically.    An account from late Early Dy-
nastic Lagash, for example, notes that "the houses of the ensi
(and) the    fields    of ensi, the houses of the        (palace) harem,
the houses of the       (palace) nursery (and)          the fields of the
(palace) nursery crowded each other side by side" (Kramer
1963:318). Thus the "palace'' in the broader sense constituted
an economic and administrative as well as residential establish-
ment of considerable size and complexity.
    In the Early Dynastic I texts from Ur, a substantial number
of specialized palace entertainers        and servants can already be
identified, including gatekeepers, cooks, stewards, cup-bearers,

servants, messengers, male and female slaves, and, since a
harem official is mentioned, presumably concubines as well. At
Shuruppak, never a large or important             political     center,   the
Early Dynastic III archive      lists    additional positions for musi-
cians, chamberlains, and butlers and numbered several hundred

people. On personnel lists kept by the Shuruppak palace, per-
haps as records of corvee service, we also learn that there were
considerable numbers of craftsmen in at least its periodic em-
ploy. Separately      grouped under their respective foremen were
masons,   potters,    reed-weavers,      clothworkers,    leatherworkers,
carpenters, smiths, stonecutters, millers, brewers,            and perhaps
others.The contemporary palace staff at Susa, even without
counting slaves, included 471 men and 482 women. With the
political unification of the   country under the Akkadians, there
was a further qualitative increase in palace staffs. We are told
of Sargon, the founder of the dynasty, that 5,400 men ate bread
before him daily.
   In terms of size and magnificence, the Mexican palaces were
perhaps even grander. That of Nezaualcoyotl               at    Texcoco    is

said to have covered eighty hectares, although             much of this
greatcompound was given over to pleasure gardens, adminis-
                      and even a private zoo. The palace of
trative offices, armories,
Moctezuma II in Tenochtitlan was much smaller, probably as
a result of urban congestion        in    that island    capital,   but   its
144                 The Evolution of Urban Society

usable area was increased by a second story, which housed the
royal apartments,    and 3,000 persons were said to be in con-
tinuous attendance upon the king. Also within this establish-
ment were administrative and judicial offices, granaries, prisons,
                             1




artisans'   workshops, quarters for the harem, and, again, a zoo,
whose denizens are said to have consumed five hundred turkeys
a day. "I will say no more than that there is nothing like it in
Spain," wrote Cortes to his emperor. As Jacques Soustelle
observes, "these are very strong words from a Spanish hidalgo
addressing himself to Charles V" (1962:25).
   What differentiates these two instances is a characteristic
feature of the economy that has already been touched upon.
In Mesopotamia, the ration lists make clear that we are dealing
with a permanent      staff of   palace retainers, presumably sup-
ported by its own corps of agricultural clients         (e.g.,   the shub-
lugals ) , by offerings from temples   (   the mashdaria texts referred
to earlier), estates, and perhaps corporate kin groups and even
individuals   whose lands lay within the general suzerainty of
the palace, and occasionally by booty. By contrast, the Mexican
palaces depended in the main on labor service recruited on a
rotation basis. Nezaualcoyotl, for example, "had divided the
country surrounding his capital into eight           districts,    each of
which was obliged to perform these duties for a given period
each year, under the supervision of a calpixqui" (p. 84).
      On the other hand, the decision by Moctezuma to limit
his   personal service to    members       of the nobility suggests      at

least the   beginnings of an erosion of this old calpulli-based
system. Moreover, suggestions of a large relative increase in
the class of "unfree" mayeques, with individual responsibilities
to their lords for tribute and service (see above, p. 115) point
in the   same direction.    Finally, the    mounting demands of the
royal court for luxuries led to the provisioning of quarters and
subsistence for craftsmen within the palace          itself as    the con-
quests of the     Triple Alliance continued;       in   some      instances
craftsmen were called from all parts of the realm to take up
                      PARISH AND POLITY                               145

what must be assumed        to   have been regular services        there.
Different in detail as these two systems          may have been, there
is   thus reason to believe that they were becoming            more and
more    closely aligned in their major institutional patterns until
the Spanish Conquest terminated the development of one of
them.
     Burial practices constitute another tangible aspect of royal
wealth and authority and provide a further interesting paral-
lelism.   The "royal tombs" of Ur are sufficiently well known not
to need extensive description. Human sacrifice was a conspicuous
feature of most of them, with up to seventy or eighty members
of the royal retinue    accompanying the chief occupant of the
tomb. Men-at-arms, ladies of the harem, musicians, chariot-
drivers and grooms with their war vehicles drawn by oxen,
servants crouched in attitudes of personal attendance— all were
present, together with large stocks of costly, beautifully worked
objects, which   today number among the principal treasures of
three of the world's great museums.
   As a result of the accidents of discovery, or the effectiveness
of post-Conquest looting,  no such tombs have yet been found
enclosing the remains of Aztec kings. But what there were
once, and what may yet be in store for future archeologists, is
suggested by a report of Moctezuma I's funeral:

Upon the death of this king he was accorded the appropriate ob-
sequies for rulers of his station, and   all   the kings and lords of the
region attended them with offerings and presents.           According to
their use  and custom they killed many slaves and retainers in the
belief that they might serve him in the after life, and they buried
him with a great part of his treasures [Duran 1867-80:1,253-54].

Behind such displays as this, and ultimately more meaningful
than the suggestions of royal wealth they supply, surely there
were basic understandings about the nature of kingship itself
that were closely similar, although their details now may be
irretrievably lost.
     The special responsibility of the royal court for military
146                     The Evolution of Urban Society

affairs— or, perhaps better, the artieulate leadership provided
by the king and his immediate entourage for the social forces
committed to military expansion as a policy— is strikingly evident
in both Mesopotamia and central Mexico. In the former, a wide

variety of supporting data might be cited. Archeologically,                 it

includes representations of the heroic figure of the king at the
head of his troops, as well as the emphasis on weaponry ( includ-
ing costly ceremonial weapons) in the "royal tombs." In histor-
ical   inscriptions     we find the king emphasizing his personal
rivalry with rulers of neighboring city-states              and personifying
his whole force in boasting of sanguinary victories that left the

bones of his enemies to the mercies of vultures and hyenas.
His special concern with the organization of the army is perhaps
less   metaphorically shown by the fact that many units of the
Bau militia are directly stated to have been mustered under his
command, while the responsibility for army personnel assign-
ments seems to have rested with his administrative assistant,
the nubanda. Further, of course, the shub-lugals and similar
units who seem to have composed the semiprofessional core of
the army were personally bound to him in a patron-client rela-
tionship. Gilgamesh, perhaps epitomizing the martial attitudes
ideally associated with kingship, seems              at    one point to   call

derisively for those who are timid or who have domestic respon-
sibilities to   return to their homes, while he will venture forth
with no more than fifty single adventurers at his side. Rejecting
conciliation,   he characteristically calls for defiance in the face
of Agga's armies         sailing   down on Uruk in their longboats:

                "Let us not submit to the house of Kish,
                  let   us smite   it   with weapons." 2


     2. Pritchard 1950: 45. For an up-to-date critical overview by a num-
ber of specialists of what has been called the "Babylonian national epic"
see Garelli 1960. This discussion implies a rather discouraging estimate of
the potentialities of the literary genre as a whole for any but the most
cautious and sophisticated attempts at historical reconstruction.
                 :




                            PARISH AND POLITY                                147

    Identical attitudes are repeatedly expressed in the Aztec
chronicles.    The frequent insistence of the king on a declaration
of war,    even over the reluctance of                his   council because of
formally inadequate pretexts, has already been referred to in
the testimony of Zurita. Although sacrificial practices may have
had a very ancient origin, the enormous extension and elabora-
tion of sacrificial cults in the later days of Aztec conquests
seems to have followed closely upon royal command. Such was
the case, for example, with the hecatombs of war prisoners—
reputedly 20,000 or  more— sacrificed by Ahuizotl over a four-
day period in 1487 at the consecration of the new Great Temple
in his capital. A particularly illuminating expression of militaris-
tic attitudes    was provided by Tlacaelel, later the highly influ-
ential   founder of a line of Aztec "prime ministers" but then a
young general prior to his accession to office,                 at the critical

moment of popular indecision within Tenochtitlan leading to
the successful uprising against Azcapotzalco and the opening of
the way to empire. In the face of moderating council not only
from the commoners but from some of the nobility                        as well,
Tlacaelel came forward to exhort the crowd in terms reminiscent
of Gilgamesh


"What is this, Mexicans? What has happened to you? Have you
been deprived of all reason? Wait, stop, and let us come to some
better understanding about this matter. Who would be such a
coward as to have us go and surrender ourselves to the people of
Azcapotzalco?" [Radin 1920:94].


   It must be stressed again, however, that the close relation-
ship of kings with military activities and with relatively auton-
omous, essentially          political,   centers of    power    in   the society
continued to be conceived in religious terms in many vital ways,
rather than falling easily under the rubric of secularization.
With the       initiative    passing to the political sector, religious
institutions    and conceptions provide          a further illustration of
148                   The Evolution of Urban Society

Steward's dictum about earlier integrative forms not merely
fossilizing    or disappearing    but,        instead,   tending to become
specialized,    dependent parts of new kinds of total configura-
tions (see above, p. 110).
    Many, perhaps most, of the ceremonies and beliefs of an
earlier era surely were retained, but they were cast into a
different context and assumed a different significance. Tlaloc,
for example, the seemingly omnipresent god of rain and vegeta-
tion who dominated Teotihuacan, at best shared the leadership
of the Aztec pantheon. Perhaps           it    is   also significant that   now
he was thought to be located on the peaks of distant mountains
and that his role was increasingly confined to that of a patron
deity only for the peasantry. Huitzilopochtli, so recently risen
that    he does not appear among the gods of the calendar,
increasingly had come to dominate the pantheon and to provide
the principal focus for the sacrificial cult.
     In Mesopotamia, Akkadian influences resulted in the addi-
tion of several    new deities and in certain syncretistic trends,
but the principal deities remained the same. Instead,
                              :                                        it   was
the attitudes attributed to them that seem to have shifted,                  al-

though, admittedly, the evidence for this change has to be
derived from later sources, so the time of its onset is uncertain.
Enlil, the "farmer," "the lord of the               plow," was increasingly
identified in epithets instead of as "the lord of all lands" or
"he who breaks the enemy land as a single reed," and most
other   members    of the   pantheon as well increasingly tended
to   be viewed not as agriculturally oriented, functionally speci-
fied, local figures   but in the aspect of celestial warriors. In the
process of being transformed into the Semitic goddess Ishtar,
even Inanna did not escape this change [Falkenstein and von
Soden 1953:32-33].
     In both areas, again, the principal temple of a town be-
came identified as the key redoubt of its political autonomy and
military resistance. In the literal transcriptions of hieroglyphs
prepared for the Spaniards, the representation of a destroyed
                        PARISH AND POLITY                                     149

or burning temple       is   taken to be equivalent to the conquest
of the      community, and      in    numerous        attestations    from the
chronicles the burning of a temple signified the                     end of   all

resistance and the victory of the Aztec god. Similarly, the loot-
ing and burning of Mesopotamian temples                    was   at least     an
important concomitant of military victory.           An inscription of
Urukagina of Lagash, for example,             complains that the men
of nearby      Umma under Lugalzagesi, culminating a long ri-
valry, had destroyed the statues of his principality's temples
and stripped them of silver and lapis lazuli.
   If destroyed temples commonly were the symbol of defeat,

they also were among the principal beneficiaries of victory.
Offerings of sacrificial victims to Aztec deities have already
been mentioned. In a Mesopotamian literary tale of the earlier
rivalry     between Uruk and the Aratta, the submission of the
latter is   symbolized by the bringing of stone and the building
of a shrine in Uruk by the people of Aratta. Records of ex voto
offerings of slaves to temples by a victorious king, as well as the
explicitly stated right of the        god to a share of the booty, are
first   attested only in the Ur III period       on the basis of present
evidence but may well have occurred much earlier.
    Lest it be thought that the emphasis on the acquisition of
precious substances for the enhancement of the cult                    was the
major strategic objective of warfare,            it    may be noted that
Entemena       of   Lagash   also    boasted of having exacted some
10,800 metric tons of grain from         Umma as an indemnification
for unsuccessful rebellion.      While this claim may be somewhat
           same ruler's subsequent admission that the men
inflated, the

of Umma had seized a storehouse containing 270 tons of grain
surely is not. Elsewhere we read of the imposition of a tribute
in grain     on Enakalli of Umma after his defeat by Eannatum
and of the unsuccessful efforts of the former's son and suc-
cessor to escape from this burden and to reclaim territory that
had been lost. In fact, the whole long history of rivalry be-
tween Lagash and Umma, extending over more than 150 years,
    150                          The Evolution of Urban Society

seems to have been based on opposing claims to fields along
the border between the two city-states. In addition, there are
references, unfortunately only in literary tales                  whose mean-
ings remain ambiguous, to the possible imposition of corvee
duties            and even military service on the populations of van-
quished towns. Whatever part the defense or gratification of
the deity may have played as a conscious motivation for war-
fare,        it    is   clear that his    human protagonists had their own
interests in             mind as well.
         Behind the             essentially identical general orientation of re-
ligious change, in the                 two cases, there were also differences
that help to illuminate the degree of overall comparison be-
tween them. Perhaps as a consequence of the distances between
major Mesoamerican centers and the difficulties of communica-
tion with exclusively                 human transport, the Aztec world view
was an apocalyptic one that recognized no universal order or
stability.          In each act of conquest Huitzilopochtli faced another
city's god in single encounter, and if the result was foreor-
dained it was at least unknowable to his human protagonists.
In Mesopotamia, by contrast, we have seen that the divine
hierarchy had already begun to be codified in Protoliterate
times and had been endlessly recopied by temple scribes even
before the major city-states had appeared on the scene as
political rivals. The cosmology, then, was self-enclosing and

stable rather than open-ended and in doubt, and the problem
of shifting political fortunes had to be reconciled with the
collective decision of the society of the accepted gods rather
than projected into an essentially unknowable realm of remote
and terrible forces. Urukagina, lamenting the fall of Lagash,
met the attendant problem of divine injustice in one fashion:

.    .   .   the   men of Umma, after Lagash had been destroyed, com-
mitted sin against Ningirsu.               The hand which was laid upon him
he       shall     cut   off.   Offense there was none in Urukagina, king of
Girsu, but as for Lugalzagesi, governor of Umma,
                                               may his goddess
Nisaba make him carry his sin upon his neck [Gadd 1962:52].
                              PARISH AND POLITY                             151

But for kings           in    the hour of victory,     particularly   as   those
victories   spread to encompass          all the world as it was com-

prehended        in the       Sumero-Akkadian pantheon, the refusal to
criticize the acts of the            gods and the pious separation between
the powers of the divine assembly and their                 own powers be-
came more difficult. So we find Gilgamesh, in an act of hubris
to which there is no parallel in pre-Classical literature, tearing
the haunch from the Bull of Heaven and throwing it in the
face of his city's goddess with the ringing taunt:

            "Could I but get thee, like unto him
             I would do unto thee" [Pritchard 1950:85].


Or again, there is a later tale that describes the anger of Naram-
Sin when, in the full flood of that Akkadian king's conquests,
the gods refused him oracles:

"Has a lion ever performed extispicy, has a wolf ever asked [advice]
from a female dream-interpreter? Like a robber I shall proceed
according to my own will" [Oppenheim 1964:226-27].

Yet the contrast with Mexico should not be overdrawn. These
were the        significant       but furthest limits of   human pride and
aspiration,      and with          their   ebb the unattainable, inviolable
status of the       Mesopotamian family of gods was restored. The
epic,   after    all,   tells     of Gilgamesh's failure in his quest.     And
Naram-Sin, having likened his attitude only to that of an ani-
mal or outlaw, also soon repented.
   In relation to            human society, on the other hand, concep-
tualizations      of dynastic         power underwent a cumulative and
irreversible      shift      as   that  power increased. Perhaps the de-
velopment of the state can best be described as fully consum-
mated when it no longer represented solely the partisan inter-
ests of militaristic social strata but began at least to claim a

position "above" contending parties. Urukagina of Lagash, for
example, phrased his responsibilities to adjudicate the con-
flicting claims of his            constituency for his indulgence and pro-
tection in terms of a covenant with the god of his city:
152                   The Evolution of Urban Society

That he deliver not up the orphan and the widow to the powerful
man, this covenant Urukagina made with Ningirsu [Jacobsen
1963:480].

This formulation obviously reflects the emergence of at least
partially   autonomous, impersonal standards of public              service,

as well as the    first    steps   toward a conception of abstract, im-
partial justice to which the entire body of citizenry was equally
subservient.
      Similarly, Zurita observes of the tecuhtli, appointed by the
king from the ranks of the nobility as the highest dignitaries of
the Aztec state, that "they were responsible for caring for and
defending the people in their charge, of defending and pro-
tecting them.     Thus these lords were appointed to serve the
general welfare as well as that of the individual to whom the
officewas assigned" (1941:86). Zurita also describes the high
standards of rectitude and incorruptibility that were expected
of Aztec judges, citing a celebrated case in which a Texcocan
judge was ordered hanged by the king for having falsified a
case in favor of a noble over a commoner (p. 103).
     As the foregoing account has hinted at several points, the
emergence of the political and economic organs of the state
cannot be understood exclusively as a series of internal proc-
esses within     even the largest urban communities. Both the
perils   and the rewards of militarism lay beyond the immedi-
ately    adjoining, more or less permanently attached and de-
pendent,    territories.    The increasing concentration of political
authority in dynastic institutions at the expense of older com-
munal and religious bodies obviously took place in a setting
in which both the perils and the rewards of militaristic con-
tention were fully and deeply understood. Successful conquest
brought political prestige in its wake, not uniformly enriching
the community but, instead, increasing the stratification within
it   and permitting the consolidation of an independent power
base by forces whose initial role had merely been that of lead-
ing elements in a          common      enterprise.   In these and    many
                     PARISH AND POLITY                                          153

other ways, the consolidation of the institutional structures of
the newly developed urban polities must be seen as an internal
adjustment to a steadily widening and sharpening context of
intercommunity, and even interregional, hostilities.
    Hence, having dealt with internal              political      developments,
we must turn to their complementary external manifestations.
Unprecedented patterns of extended                     were
                                                   territorial    control
to be found in Mesopotamia as a product of the Akkadian
conquests and in the Aztec realm on the eve of its rapid de-
struction by the Spaniards. The term "empire" is not an entirely
suitable one for these patterns in either area;              it   implies a de-
gree and durability of economic consolidation, as well as of
administrative control, for which there              is   no convincing         evi-

dence.    Many   features   we        tend to      associate      with   empires
apparently were missing or at best very poorly developed,
such as royal encouragement of a free peasantry with loyalties
directed toward   its   authority; a mobile, achievement-oriented
bureaucracy; policies directed toward the breaking-up of as-
criptive landholding units;    and the establishment of profes-
sional military units   whose fortunes were directly linked with
those of the state itself. Yet the fact of great territorial exten-
sion,   and of the taking    at       least   of   some preliminary         steps
toward empire formation,         is    undeniable.        A consideration of
the nature and extent of these steps in the two areas will
provide a broader basis for the comparison between them.
   The evidence on the Akkadian conquests, and particularly
on the organization of their realm, is very limited and often
ambiguous. Agade, the capital Sargon established, never has
been located, preventing a clear understanding from                       its   ar-

chives of the respects in which its administrative framework
differed from that of the Early Dynastic city-states. Only a
relatively modest corpus of contemporary royal inscriptions is
known, supplemented by chronicles whose recorded versions
are generally of much later authorship, and by omen texts.
And although the basic authenticity of the omen texts has been
154                    The Evolution of Urban Society

vigorously defended, they are of doubtful meaning and limited
utility    for   historical            Even the archeological
                               reconstruction.
record can provide little assistance, limited as it is to a few
palaces and private houses in towns of lesser importance and
to a much smaller and less informative group of graves than
are known for the Early Dynastic period. Accordingly, while
we are told that "the political organization of the Akkad Dy-
nasty amounted to something of a real revolution in Meso-
potamian history" (Finkelstein 1963:464), the precise extent
and character of this revolution still elude us.
   What does emerge from the available data are a congeries
of indications of changing sociopolitical patterns.          There was,
first,   a clear extension of the bounds of territorial control to
encompass not only the alluvial plain of lower Mesopotamia
but the adjacent regions of Elam, the Zagros piedmont, and
Upper Mesopotamia. During the later Early Dynastic period the
                        had consisted merely of individual
basis of political strength
city-states,     held together in fragile alliances only during brief
periods of charismatic leadership;         now a pattern was imposed
that maintained control of a much larger region in one dynastic
line for four generations. It         was presumably on the basis of
firmly established          (or repeatedly re-established)   domination
of the    Sumerian cities in the heartland of the realm that the
chain of conquests could now be extended outward. As early
as Sargon's time     was claimed to have extended "up to the
                       it

cedar forest and the silver mountains," the Amanus and Taurus
ranges, although this expedition perhaps was more a reconnais-
sance in force than an attempt at permanent incorporation of
the huge intervening territory. More doubtful, although not
entirely to be excluded, are late, somewhat allegorical claims
that there was a still further foray into the central Anatolian
plateau to champion the grievances of merchants against the
ruler of Purushkhanda.
    Also ascribed to Akkadian control, at least in later tradition,
were Dilmun (usually identified with Bahrein Island and per-
                           PARISH AND POLITY                                      155

haps the adjoining Arabian shoreline), Magan,                         in   the region
of the Gulf of      Oman, and Meluhha, variously identified but
surely farther    still.   Separated as they were from the mainland
of   Akkadian control by a hazardous voyage                     down the Persian
Gulf and possibly beyond, it is difficult to believe that at least
Meluhha was subjected to more than minor armed raids. But
a literary reference to ships from those regions which moored
at the     quays of Agade          is   supported not only by the arrival
in   Mesopotamia      at this      time of seals of Indus Valley origin
but also by the ample documentation of this overseas com-
merce—in which Dilmun may well have served as a specialized
port of trade— in business records of the Third Dynasty of Ur
not long afterward.
     Direct references to merchants are rare in the Akkadian
inscriptions; such sources as                we have naturally tend to view
the growth of the realm as an acquisition of                      power and ter-
ritory exclusively    on the initiative of its central authority. The
references which do occur suggest that long-distance trading
and tributary patterns were similarly inspired, were directed
toward the same geographical regions, and may have been
subject to a degree of             common administration. At least for
the more adequately documented late Early Dynastic period,
it   can be demonstrated that much of the intercity trade and
procurement was either subject                    to    royal   demand     or under
direct royal control.       The    official status       of the dam-gar, or mer-
chant-agents in whose hands                  it   was placed,    is   suggested by
their inclusion     on     lists   of those receiving rations       and allot-
ments of land. Moreover,                as   W.    F.   Leemans (1950:41) ob-
serves, they were organized under a single superior gal-dam-gar
official   who occupied a high place in the order of precedence
of other gal-officials and who seemingly enjoyed an especially
close relationship to the ruling family.                  However, the presence
of as many as 32 dam-gar even in a small town like Shuruppak
seems difficult to explain solely in terms of royal and religious
requirements.    And other texts record payments to a merchant
156                        The Evolution of Urban Society

by a number of persons on the eve of his departure, suggesting
that private trading accounts were beginning to be handled
by the dam-gar as an adjunct to their official position. 3 In spite
of an absence of confirmation for it in the available Akkadian
sources, a further development of this trend during the Ak-
kadian period seems highly likely. In short, while traders were
gradually becoming more differentiated and autonomous as a
group, patterns of trade probably were still closely interdigi-
tated with exactions of booty and tribute within the spreading
realm of Akkadian control.
    Sargon's pattern of conquests was essentially repeated by
his two sons, Rimush and Manishtusu, who followed him con-
secutively, and by his grandson, Naram-Sin. Collectively, their
inscriptions confirm the impression of a central emphasis on
the extension of trade and the acquisition of tribute. Repeatedly
we read of conquests whose objectives are suggested by their
geographical descriptions: the cedar forest, the silver moun-
tains,     the tin (or lead) country, the silver mine. Repeatedly
victories        were commemorated by temple           offerings    of   some
of the captured booty in copper, gold, stone,               and timber, with
suggestions of direct state support of merchants and                     com-
merce. A lament on the downfall of Agade, recalling the hal-
cyon days of the city, quite appropriately speaks of the ships
at its quays, of the flow of           widely varied goods and offerings
in   through      its    gate,   and of how this wealth rose like water
in the palace           magazines (Giiterbock 1934:31). Recalling Sar-
gon's victories over a number of Persian Gulf principalities, a
motive      is   supplied by one of his inscriptions, which claims:
"Henceforth the ships of Meluhha,              Magan and Dilmun freely
can come to anchor in the Agade harbor" (Bottero 1965:107).
     More is implied than the sporadic extortion of tribute and
imposed trade from distant regions by punitive raids. Far out
at Tell Brak, in northern Syria, a great palace built by Naram-



      3.   Igor Diakonoff, personal communication.
                             PARISH AND POLITY                                     157

Sin    is   known, one half of which must have served as the seat
of a local governor            and garrison, while the other provided a
secure collecting depot for the transshipment of commercial
or tributary goods. Moreover,Nineveh and Ashur, the major
towns     what later became Assyria, were sufficiently under
             in
the hegemony of the Akkadians for the latter to have founded
temples there; Rimush is even credited with having founded
a "city" in the region north of Nineveh. Accordingly, while
political         authority in the further reaches of the realm                  may
have tended to be              thinly    and perhaps unevenly             distributed,
it   cannot be assumed to have been asserted only at infrequent
intervals as         an aspect of the capture of booty or the forced
collection of tribute.
      A somewhat different picture emerges when we consider
the Akkadian relationship to the traditional                     Sumerian        city-

states in the heartland of their realm.                 The capital of Agade
apparently was founded in the northern part of the plain, a
region traditionally characterized more by villages than                        cities,

and many of its settlers must have been seminomadic elements
whose military strength and cohesiveness was in direct pro-
portion       to     their   tribal,    non-urban     origins.   If   a    conscious
struggle between Sumerians                 and Akkadians along ethnic lines
apparently can be ruled out by many indications of an absence
of   any recognized boundary between these groups in speech,
dress, religion, and political affiliation, nevertheless Akkadian
domination was based on hitherto neglected groups, centered
in    a     hitherto    marginal       district,   and successfully employed
techniques of domination hitherto unknown.
      We learn from their royal inscriptions, for example, of
the systematic destruction of the walls of Sumerian cities that
resisted      Akkadian onslaught, an innovation that surely                        in-

creased the difficulties of reconstituting rebellious coalitions.
This step may presuppose the effective reduction by the Ak-
kadians of local raiding and banditry, against which city walls
also      were a defense, although the sources make reference                       to
[58                         The Evolution      of   Urban Society

pacification only at the level of general rebellion.                       One of the
omens In which Sargon is mentioned speaks of his having set-
tled the sons of his palace for five Leagues                      on every side, sug-
gesting an attempt on a limited scale to create a                              new kind
of landed royal             following       among     certain     favored groups of
peasantry       to    defend         the    approaches      to   the   capital    (Gadd
1963:10).       An unprecedented emphasis on the taking of pris-
oners possibly hints            at   steps to nnily the country through the
destruction of enclaves of local resistance. This                      same objective
may have been               a   consideration        in   the    acquisition     of royal
estates like those      4
                            notarized on the Obelisk of Manishtusu, for
local   Sumerian supporters of the dynasty were among its ben-
eficiaries,     while others must have been substantially dispos-
sessed.   At least some of the major towns, including Susa and
Lagash, were additionally subject to the imposition of Akkad-
ian    garrisons,     and the higher            officials   of the realm         seem   to
have been exclusively Akkadians. Finally, the occurrence of
Urukagina's          name as a resident of Agade on the Obelisk of
Manishtusu perhaps implies the practice of forcing members
of local elites in the other city-states to reside as hostages in
the capital.
      With all these innovations, it remains to be noted that real
continuity of control was never achieved. Sargon seems to have
faced a serious, general revolt of the subject cities during the
latter part of his reign, and each of his successors in turn— his
two     sons,   Rimush and Manishtusu, apparently having been
murdered        in    palace conspiracies— could resume campaigning
along the distant frontiers only after a protracted struggle
with the cities immediately at hand. After the time of Naram-
Sin, or perhaps        even during the final years of his reign, a pre-
cipitate retreat       from claimed            frontiers virtually      encompassing
the   known world began.                   Sharkalisharri    no longer could take
the title of "King of the Four Quarters" but instead assumed
only the epithet of "King of Agade." After his death, ap-
parently also in the palace conspiracy, the further decline of
                       PARISH AND POLITY                                     159

the dynasty is evident in an obscure interregnum during which
there were four contending claimants for the throne. This was,
in short, a state    whose rulers undertook extensive conquests,
created the military means to achieve them, benefited heavily
for a time     from the resultant flow of tribute and commerce,
and made significant administrative advances in the direction
of maintaining their authority over a widely extended territory.
But their     efforts fell decisively short of full imperial control,

as the gradual decline       and demise of Akkadian suzerainty in
the face of relatively limited and uncoordinated incursions of
Gutian mountaineers indicates.
   In one particularly essential respect the extension of Aztec
conquests proceeded along similar lines to those followed by
the Akkadians almost four thousand years earlier.                    The Aztec
realm also exhibited a loosely knit quality seemingly in con-
tradiction with the immense armies it fielded against the Span-
iards   and with the impressive flow          of booty       its    capitals re-
ceived. Yet, as the inability of the Aztecs to marshall support
from among their allies and vassals during the final siege of
Tenochtitlan     shows,   the   strength     in    certain   culturally    pre-
scribed,   largely   militaristic,   terms   concealed but could not
overcome the underlying weakness              of    territorial     bonds and
the fragility of the political structure as soon as            it   passed be-
yond the bounds of the individual town.
    While Tenochtitlan had moved into the ascendant political
role by 1519, the realm had been originally constituted as a
Triple Alliance at the time of the successful uprising against
the Tepanecs of Azcapotzalco ninety years previously                       and,
at least in   formal terms, remained so until the end. Tribute
was supposed to be equally divided between Tenochtitlan and
Texcoco, with half as large a share going to Tlacopan; by the
time of the Conquest much of it was being redistributed to
the other towns only through Tenochtitlan, suggesting that the
practice had been changed. As an island citadel formerly with-
out agricultural lands at all, clearly the strategic objectives of
160                  The Evolution of Urban Society

Tenochtitlan differed from those of the Texcocan heirs of the
old Alcolhuan domain, with greater need to secure a flow of
tribute in subsistence products and with a more urgent demand
on the part of the newly emergent nobility for the conquest
of lands, their assignment as personal property,        and the reduc-
tion of their agricultural population to the status of clientage.
Not surprisingly, Texcoco was less dominated by the growth
of a military aristocracy and continued to concede a role to
commoners and merchants in governing councils. But the in-
creasing de facto control of the alliance by Tenochtitlan suc-
ceeded in submerging these differences without an open break.
Regrettably, the available evidence seems to leave in obscurity
the overall flow of goods and services within the Valley of
Mexico, including the relationship between the ultimate re-
gional distribution of products received in tribute, on the one
hand, and, on the other, the private exchange of craft for
subsistence    products.   Whatever     this   relationship   may have
been, the Alliance continued, perhaps increasingly fragile or
even empty of content in functional terms but formally intact,
until the   unprecedented    crisis   of the Spanish invasion.
   In operation, the conquests of the Alliance beyond the
limits of its original holdings apparently failed to          apply sys-
tematically even the limited techniques of control that            were
developed by the Akkadians. While the supremacy of Huit-
zilopochtli had to    be acknowledged by conquered towns and
while a cessation in the flow of tribute from them brought an
immediate threat of stern military        reprisals   accompanied by
even heavier demands for tribute in the future, local elites and
institutions generally were left entirely intact.     There are refer-
ences in the chronicles to the establishment of garrisons, but
except for those along the relatively fixed, vigorously disputed
frontier   with the Tarascan kingdom to the west, garrisons in
general seem to have been posted as additional security for
the long-distance trade-and-tribute routes rather than as in-
struments of political control over conquered populations. Ex-
                            PARISH AND POLITY                                            161

cept in the longest-subjugated districts forming the strategic
core of the empire, the appointment of loyal Aztec                               officials

as local governors, displacing native rulers into lesser                          admin-
istrative positions or         entirely    removing them, was an excep-
tional proceeding rather than                  the prevailing one. There are
apparently no references to such techniques of continuous co-
ercive interference as the taking of hostages from among mem-
bers of potentially hostile local nobilities.
      Yet.    in   spite   of this    relative     thinness        in   the density       of
political      controls    over at least the outlying conquered                        terri-

tories      and in   spite of the inordinately               heavy Aztec demands
for    goods and services        as tribute,          they were more successful
than the Akkadians in assuring continuity of control.                             It    was
not necessary, for example, for each new king to conquer the
rebellious cities constituting the heartland of his realm                              upon
his accession— perhaps          reflecting, to a degree, the effectiveness

of the       demand for thousands of sacrificial victims as a device
for    domination through            terror,   although Akkadian claims to
have slaughtered or enslaved considerable numbers of rebel-
lious      enemies apparently failed to have the same effect. A more
crucial      difference     probably lay         in    the    essential       absence     of

factions within the          Mexican      elite,      as reflected in the natural

death and orderly succession of Aztec kings in contrast to the
regicides in the .Akkadian line. Unfortunately, the stereotyped
.Akkadian victory inscriptions and the ambiguous omens and
later chronicles fail to        provide an indication of the basis for
these schisms. Finally, the rapidly developing state initiatives
in the construction of irrigation works in the Valley of                         Mexico
during the         final   pre-Conquest decades tended                   to    furnish     a
material basis for continuing political                   supremacy— at          least    of
that key geographic region as a whole,                       if   not of a particular
city or      group within it.
      It   must be remembered, however, that the Aztec regime
was cut short at the height of its powers, while the internal
weaknesses of the Akkadians are magnified for us by the at-
162                        The EvolutUm           Of    Urban Society

trition   they suffered after the reign of Naram-Sin.                                  On closer
study, one finds suggestions that similar stresses                                were devel-
oping within the Fabric of Aztec                          territorial     control         as    well.
Aztec demands,            at    least      in   the onerous and precisely codified
form found         in   (lie    Matricula dc Tributes as                it   was applied at
the time ol the arrival ol the Spaniards, clearly had                                   begun to
provoke serious unrest among subject peoples                                 unrest of which
the Spaniards were quick to lake advantage. In fact, as Bcrnal
Diaz (1960:1,           1.48)       relates, the luxurious attire,              rapacious de-
mands, and autocratic behavior of the Aztec calpixques, or
tribute-collectors,            in    Cempoala were among                  the     first   impres-
sions the Spaniards received of their future antagonists                                        upon
their arrival on         the mainland.             Moreover,       (lie      relatively rapid

population         increase of the              Aztec nobility as a result of the
extensive practice of polygyny seems certain,                                if   it   had con-
tinued for another generation or two, to have produced                                            still

more excessive demands                      for tribute,     a   centrifugal           movement
of the nobility into newly established administrative posts with
entailed    lands       away from     the capital, and the appearance of
interna] cleavages             comparable to those among the Akkadians.
     The limits of Aztec territorial control can be plotted with
substantially greater precision than those in Mesopotamia, in
the main because the limits defined tributary relationships that
the Spaniards themselves                    were keenly interested in retaining.
As Robert      11.      Barlow's (1949)                studies have       shown in             detail,

they disclose a strikingly asymmetrical process of expansion,
with the major thrusts carrying far to the south and east, while
in   other directions the frontiers remained relatively stable. In
some cases the explanation is easy; the Tarascans, for example,
bloodily repulsed attacks in the direction of Michoacan, while
the absence of settlements in the dry /one to the north ren-
dered     futile   any major expansion there. Hut elsewhere hostile
States like Tlaxcala                were allowed         to survive as enclaves close

to the heart of the realm, ostensibly to provide an opportunity

for military training                and    for the acquisition of            war prisoners
                             PARISH AND POLITY                                      163

as    sacrificial    victims,    easily    accessible      to the captal. Even
Tlatelolco, Tenochtitlan's sister-city,                 was not forcibly brought
into the realm until 1473. It              is    also   noteworthy that the con-
quest of the province of Xoconusco in 1486 led, not to any
apparent subsequent emphasis on occupying the intervening
          between this detached and distant area and the
territories

main body of the realm, but only to the securing with garrisons
of the trade route leading to              it.

      The essentially chivalric and ceremonial overtones to war-
                                             seem to have
fare during the earlier stages of Aztec expansion
been substantially replaced with more implacable and de-
structive hostilities after the time of                 Moctezuma I. However,
there was little corresponding development of a strategic con-
cern, at least in a sense comprehensible today,                          in   the con-
solidation and extension of territory. Whether a departure from
Akkadian thought and practice is thus represented is by no
means certain. We simply lack the kinds of sources in Mesopo-
tamia that might be expected to reflect discontinuities in terri-
torial control,       while the Spanish sources tend,               if   anything, to
overemphasize them in Mexico.
      Perhaps even to a greater degree than in Mesopotamia
(or     is    this   again     only   a   reflection      of    differences    in   our
sources?),       Mexican militarism was closely bound up with in-
terlocking long-distance trade and tribute patterns. Anne Chap-
man (1957:122) has argued that in most recorded instances
trade was followed by tribute, that is, after the incorporation
of a province into the realm the activities there of the power-
ful group of pochteca, or traders, came to                     an end. If really the
case,   would
         it                                            were
                       imply that later requisitions of tribute
heavy enough— even on the peripheries of Aztec military con-
trol—to eliminate        all    potential surpluses that otherwise might
have served as trading objectives. It is worth noting, however,
that there are no indications of the beginnings of a reduction
in the numbers or prosperity of the pochteca as their activities
were replaced by tributary relationships. Moreover, specialized
164                 The Evolution of Urban Society

lowland commodities like cacao sometimes were demanded as
tribute from subjugated communities even in the central high-
lands,    suggesting that there were        unrecorded processes of
tangential  and centrifugal circulation of goods alongside the
centralized, centripetal ones with which most of the Spanish
sources deal. Hence it is perhaps more likely that long-distance
trading and tributary patterns      considerably overlapped one
another. But of their close and complementary relationship to
the goals of military expansion there can be no doubt at           all.

   Recalling the less substantial tales of interventions by Ak-
kadian kings on behalf of merchants venturing beyond the
frontiers of territorial control, it is interesting to note repeated
instances in   which the mistreatment        of merchants,   or   even
simply the refusal to trade, served as the pretext for Aztec
attack.   Indeed, "the documents     make it clear that a refusal
to trade or the breaking-off of    commercial relations was con-
sidered to be tantamount to a declaration of war" (Soustelle
1962:204). Moreover, some of the pochteca entered hostile
regions in disguise, serving as spies in anticipation of subse-
quent Aztec invasion, while in other cases members of             this

group undertook the pacification of a region even without mili-
tary assistance.   Not surprisingly, we learn from Sahagun's ac-
count that a monarch      like Ahuitzotl     (1486-1502) addressed
them as "my beloved uncles" and "made them like his sons"
(1950-: Book 9, 5, 19). If in fact they had not yet acquired
many important perquisites of nobility by the time of the
Spanish Conquest, there is little reason to doubt that in some
respects their rapid rise had begun to reduce the distinction
to a purely formal one.
   For the same reason that territorial patterns of control were
of such keen interest to the Spaniards, they also meticulously
preserved Moctezuma's tribute      lists.   From them we learn, in
a far more complete and accurate fashion than is possible for
Mesopotamia in any period, of the organization of tribute as
an economic system, including the demand for the delivery
                            PARISH AND POLITY                                           165

in   the capital of specified              types    and quantities of goods              at
regulated intervals. The quantities are very impressive; the bulk
foodstuffs alone are calculated to have                         amounted to perhaps
52,800 tons, or enough for more than 360,000 people at the
estimated      mean annual consumption. Moreover, the enormous
flow of cacao beans, cloth mantles, and other goods serving as
media of exchange placed additional instruments of economic
superiority not only in the hands of the palace but in those of
the nobility and even of the capital population at large.
     Centrally redistributed through the palace, this wealth not
only strengthened the autocratic features of the political struc-
ture but also heightened class                   stratification         and urban-rural
differences. Quantitative estimates of the patterns of distribu-
tion unfortunately depend on hotly debated assumptions about
the size of the urban population and on the degree to which
Tenochtitlan retained more than its stipulated share of tribute.
However,       it   is   suggestive of the         power of the palace under
these circumstances that, according to perhaps as reasonable
an estimate as any, some 25 per cent of the cacao, 50 per cent
of the salt,    and 15-20 per cent of the maize was directly con-
sumed within that            institution.     Thus        it   is   only reasonable to
conclude, as Friedrich Katz puts                   it.   that "the      whole economy
of the     city rested      on    tribute"'      (1956:96.          106'.    Whether   this

characterization         also    applies    to     Agade       still   remains entirely
uncertain.
     If   we contrast the Akkadian and Aztec imperial systems at
a   more general level, the essential character of both as trade-
and-tribute systems, with only limited tendencies toward cen-
tralized administration, stands out immediately.                            The differences
that have been noted seem to imply a somewhat greater degree
of direct control on the part of the Akkadians, which in reality
may be no more than an artifact of differently oriented and
inadequate sources. Given the considerably more integrated
character of the great palace, temple and private estates con-
trolling    much more            of   the land in          Mesopotamia than the
166                    The Evolution of Urban Society

equivalent holdings of the nobility in Mexico, it would not be
surprising   if     there somewhat greater involvement of
                            were    a
the Mesopotamian state in an economic managerial role. The
techniques and even the records were                 al   hand, after all; they
only needed to be centrally applied. Yet as the Aztec disburse-
ment of royal stores and construction of aqueducts and irriga-
tion systems in response to famine shows, the Mexican state
upon occasion also did undertake productive economic invest-
ment, rather than merely consume a portion of the tribute its
predatory activities had brought and redistribute the rest to its
followers.   If'   there    is   a difference at   all,   in other words,   it   is

surely not one of kind but only one of degree.
     A more clearly demonstrable difference concerns both mili-
tary and economic patterns. In the Mexican instance, the major
nuclei of settlement were separated by wide expanses of diffi-
cult terrain,      and communications were further impeded by the
absence of navigable waterways and domesticated animals for
transport.   Military activity accordingly                assumed a predomi-
nantly raiding character, with the limited logistical supports
generally precluding positional warfare and prolonged sieges.
Fortification systems,           on the whole, seem to have been poorly
developed, although, as Angel Palerm ( 1956 ) has observed, the
major centers may have been able to rely on defenses in depth
involving multiple-purpose structures not easily recognizable
in their ruins today. In the absence of bronze weaponry, no ap-

parent basis for technological superiority in warfare existed,
                                                          had
so the successful Aztec pursuit of an expansionistic policy
to depend exclusively on higher levels of skill, organization,
morale, and numbers than their neighbors could muster.
   The pattern the rulers of Agade inherited from the Early
Dynastic city-states was a more sophisticated one. Cities were
customarily surrounded by massive walls, and walled temple
and private compounds suggest that reserve lines of defense
may also have been prepared in advance. To judge from the
effectiveness      of the Akkadians in breaching               and destroying
                        PARISH AND POLITY                                   167

walls, the arts of siege warfare were also well advanced.                  Pre-
sumably, these depended on the solution of the relatively
simpler logistical problem of supplying armies by ship, cart,
and pack     train for the        crucial   campaigns against rebellious
Sumerian    cities    easily accessible to the capital.          Furthermore,
the Mesopotamian armies were more differentiated and pro-
fessional in character than        seems to be implied for their Aztec
counterparts by the frequent instances recounted by Spanish
sources of indiscipline, disorganization, and tactical naivete.
Sumerian muster         rolls    and representations of        battle   suggest
that individual units specialized in different weapons and that
the employment of the phalanx was fully understood. If the
leaders of such units           may be likened to the Aztec nobility,
their following included          an   at least semiprofessional nucleus

of soldier-vassals bound to the palace, for which there was no
Aztec equivalent. And, while it may be doubted that the lum-
bering four-wheel, four-equid chariots provided any substantial
military advantage under most circumstances, the availability
of metal in considerable quantity (on                which the development
of the phalanx   may have depended) provided an important
source of superiority in conflict with those who either did not
have it or could cast it into weapons less expertly.
   The possible       significance of this contrast in wider social
and economic terms is readily apparent. The transport of
tribute from conquered towns in Mexico, depending essentially
on human carriers, simultaneously provided a continuing flow
of subject peoples       upon     whom labor services could also be
imposed. Accordingly, there was             little   or   no economic justifi-
cation for large-scale dependence on slavery or permanently
indentured service,       and the consuming preoccupation with
sacrificial cults    was— if hardly "predictable"— at least not "dys-
functional/'
   Further, the impetus to the elite to provide leadership in
agricultural management was largely absent. Their proper
business on behalf of the community was war and the securing
 K)N                                                 The Evolution                             of       Urban Society

of        1   1   i   I   >i 1 1 * * ;    il     they            succeeded                              in        thai        business,                    agriculture
would lake care                                       ol         itself,             Only when the                                     elite           reached pro-
portions threatening to overtax the supplies ol tribute that any
reasonable extension                                             <>l    the realm could produce (in view ol
i   In*       transportation                              problems),                           a        condition perilously close                                     at

hand during the last years before the Conquest, did the prob-
lem           ol             Forging a managerial,                                             investment-oriented rather than
an extractive, consumption-oriented relationship to land and
agriculture                              become an important one. n                                                          is       for that             reason that
the activities and position of Aztec merchants are so interest-
ing and critical. Representatives ol a group that so often lias
been the harbinger of an atomistic, rationalizing view                                                                                                         iliat   in

the end compels social change, the                                                                           4
                                                                                                                 A/tec traders are reported
io    have begun                               to     acquire land. Presumably they purchased                                                                          it,


since                 land               was given                     In            the   4
                                                                                                king only (o                                members            of the
nobility                        or        to     conspicuously successful                                                     warriors.                    Such pur-
chases probably                                      reflect           upward                       mobility, either of individuals
Or of traders as a class                                                         (he acquisition of small holdings in
imitation of the estates of the nobility,                                                                                     But           it     seems certain
that they also reflect a                                               dawning awareness ol agriculture as a
greater and                               more durable                       1
                                                                                     potential source ol wealth than de-
pendence On                                trade      4
                                                          anel tribute.

          In              Mesopotamia, em the other hand, two circumstances in
particular                           combined                    te>    dictate an earlier                                            and more decisive
trend                 in         the'      same" direction:                                the      4
                                                                                                         greater functional specificity
e)l       agricultural                           employment from                                             at    least              Protoliterate                times
onward            more effectively integrated character of the
                              anel         tlu   %




larger estates em which    was practiced. The important units           it
                                                                                                                                        4




e>l       production                           in     this        ease           4
                                                                                     were               ne>t       families                  e)r       communities
e>l       independently effective agriculturalists,                                                                                   te>    be    4
                                                                                                                                                        shifted     anel

recombined or put                                         te>     other duties at                                  the   4
                                                                                                                              behest               ol      every    new
owner e>r conquerer, but relatively large consolidated, and                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                  ,




complex estates. Anel these estates were closely tie d to a par-                                                                                       4




ticular                     se t
                                 4
                                         e)f   landholdingS                            by               their           networks of                         irrigation

canals                    anel           groves            e>l         producing                         elate      4
                                                                                                                         gardens; by centrally
                         PARISH AND POLITY                                          L60

maintained       Facilities    for storage,   agricultural        equipment, and
draft   animals; and          by the intimate symbiosis between their
herds, fields, and surrounding pasture lands.                     Large-Scale dis-
location of the labor force under sneh conditions,                    whether for
tributary labor service          in   the distant   capital       or tor the       pro-
pitiatory   sacrifice,    could only have jeopardized                 the      primary
resources that were the goal ol conquest. And, unlike the prob-
lems of transporting bulk food stuffs to the Aztec capital (from
many parts ol that realm human carriers would have consumed
far more than they delivered, limiting tribute from such regions
to luxuries), (he concentration ol supplies              by boat          in   a (enter
like Agade could be accomplished with a comparatively minor
diversion of labor. Hence in Mesopotamia        was the towns,
                                                            it


each jealously maintaining its own local traditions and its own
peasant hinterlands, that repeatedly resisted, and ultimately
survived, the ebb and flow of the Akkadian conquests. It was
their   entrenched       strength      and    continuity,        rather    than    any
weakness    in   the imperial organization          ol   the Akkadians, that
seems to aeeount for the major differences with the realm of
the Aztecs.
                                                                                 .




          V
                                         CONCLUSION

IN   WHAT MUST ALWAYS BE A PROCESS OF SELECTION AND EM-
phasis from among many details, valid and accurate for some
purposes and not for others, the main purpose of this essay
has been to suggest that two territorially extensive, complex,
long-lived,      innovative,    characteristically      "civilized"    societies

were fundamentally similar, which is not meant to imply that
there    is   a one-for-one correspondence in           all   their parts— even
in broadly conceived function, let alone in formal details.                 But
the similarities are sufficiently close and numerous to suggest
that in this      and   similar cases    it   is   genuinely useful, that    is,

productive of insights at the level of understanding the indi-
vidual historical sequence, to proceed at times from a generaliz-
ing,    comparative stance rather than exclusively from a con-
trastive      and compartmentalizing one.
     As was indicated       earlier,   the course of the Urban Revo-
lution     can be described as an ascending curve taking the
alternative forms of a         "ramp" or a "step"       (   see above, p. 17 )
These forms are graphed in sequence A and C, respectively,
in Figure 4.      As an ideal type, the former perhaps implies a
steady course and pace of development, a smoothly unfolding
series of     complementary trends following a seemingly "ortho-
genetic" pathway without abrupt transformations or temporary
reversals.The latter emphasizes more sudden and disjunctive
changes, an abrupt "step" upward to a new plateau of socio-
cultural complexity, followed          by oscillations above and below

                                       170
                             CONCLUSION                                        171

 THEOCRATIC POLITIES        MILITARISTIC   POLITIES        CONQUEST   STATES




                Figure 4. Paradigms of early urban growth




the newly elevated mean. Rather than seeking to identify long-
term developmental trends and cumulative aspects of growth,
it   visualizes the abrupt attainment of a             new, urban level         as
being followed only by periodic recessions without successive
further advances in level until the next phase of abrupt change.
Both "ramp" and "step" are intended                   as   polar abstractions
rather than empirical descriptions, of course, so paradigmatic
reconstructions combining aspects of both, like that suggested
by curve B, in most cases may be historically more accurate.
   It should be stressed that the same paradigm is not neces-

sarily the      most fitting for all aspects of a particular historical
sequence; different curves of growth                  may be    applicable to
different criteria of study.        With respect to both Mesopotamia
and Mexico, the "step" simile applies best if we focus on such
qualities as monumentality of architecture, artistic achievement,
172                       The Evolution of Urban Society

and style. Classic Teotihuacan and Protoliterate Uruk both rise
in one incredible burst to a plateau that, according to these
criteria,was not demonstrably surpassed during the remainder
of the sequence that has been presented for each area. The
"ramp" simile, or some approximation of it, requires a different
focus: the emergence of increasingly autonomous, differentiated
sectors of social activity— socioeconomic classes; military, po-
litical,   and administrative elites; economic networks of tribute,
trade and redistribution,              etc.    The attractiveness of this focus
of interest    is,   as   was     indicated at the outset, that        it   directs
attention toward aspects of the Urban Revolution for which the
early written evidence is directly pertinent.                 Hence it has been
the main theme of this essay, which has assumed and sought
to      demonstrate       that    in   Mesopotamia and Mexico we can
identify intelligible, cumulative patterns of         change that were
strikingly similar.
      Whichever focus            of study,      and corresponding polar para-
digm,      we choose to follow, it is interesting to note that ap-
proximately the same correlation of homotaxial phases seems
to hold      between the Mesopotamian and Mexican sequences.
The rough equivalence of Teotihuacan and Protoliterate Uruk
with respect to stylistic virtuosity and monumentality of archi-
tecture has      already been referred               to.   Since both reflect an
all-embracing intensity of religious styles and an apparently un-
questioned ascendancy of theocratic leadership, they also serve
as starting points of equivalent sequences of change along the
axis of social differentiation.               Moreover, the appearance of the
first    formally represented traces of militarism in late Proto-
literate    times and toward the end of Teotihuacan, as well as
the bifurcation between religious and political institutions to-
ward the end of the occupation of Tula and during the Early
Dynastic period, corroborates the main lines of the correlation
set     forward in Figure  and followed throughout this essay.
                                   1

Finally, the very close and detailed similarities in the organiza-
tion of the Akkadian and Aztec realms of extended conquest,
                            CONCLUSION                                     173

trade,   and tribute seem to confirm the postulated equivalence
of the terminal points of our sequences.
     There are differences as well        as similarities in the course

of developments in the two areas, and they also can be at least
partially expressed in terms of the alternative paradigms given
in   Figure   4.   For Mesopotamia, the relatively smoothly rising
"ramp" of the A alternative is as close and reasonable an ap-
proximation as any other of the emergence of autonomous
sectors of social activity. In prehispanic Mexico,             on the other
hand, there were more marked periods of political fragmenta-
tion, discontinuity in occupation,        and decline in the crafts be-
tween the successive periods of            intensified      integration   and
interregional      contact under the aegis of centers like Teoti-
huacan, Tula, and Tenochtitlan. Such phases of advance and
decline during the latter part of the Urban Revolution, together
with the exceptional size already attained by Teotihuacan very
early in the sequence, argue against the simile of the "ramp/'
Probably the available evidence provides no basis for deciding
whether B or        C is the more plausible alternative expression
of the   Mexican sequence considered           as   an    isolate.   However,
the impressive overall similarities with Mesopotamia tend to
incline the balance in favor of an intermediate alternative like
B    rather than the     distinctively    different,     "step"-like   process
reconstructed in C.
     There are, in short, differences as well as similarities in the
course of development followed in the two areas, and the ob-
jective of systematic     comparison would not be advanced by
ignoring the former and overstressing the latter.           We have dealt,
to   be sure, with independently recurring examples of a single,
fundamental, cause-and-effect sequence. Each example, how-
ever, involved not the     reenactment of a predetermined pattern
but a continuing interplay of complex, locally distinctive forces
whose    specific   forms and   effects    cannot be fully abstracted
from their immediate geographical and historical contexts. In
that sense, early urban societies in         Mesopotamia and Mexico
174                     The Evolution of Urban Society

were regionally specialized variants               built   around a common
processual "core," and there are aspects of the two specializa-
tions whose essential features may still elude us. In that sense
also,   these are historical sequences whose determinate relation-
ships can only be discovered or                 imposed retrospectively and
surely   were never apparent to their protagonists.
      And what of the specializations themselves? How may we
succinctly     describe the       differences     between two alternative
pathways leading from a common origin among village                         agri-

culturalists to a common end in urban states and primitive im-

perial systems? The foregoing analysis suggests that among the
                                     Mesopotamian civiliza-
crucially distinctive features of early
tion    were   its      more compact area and settlement
                     relatively
pattern and correspondingly more unified culture; its prevail-
ing ability to dissolve the ethnic identifications of immigrants
and to foster urban loyalties instead; the striking continuity of
occupation and tradition in          all   its   major cultural centers;      its

precocious innovativeness in the crafts and hence                  its   rapidly,
cumulatively advancing technology; and                  its   emphasis on the
development of administrative and redistributive                   institutions
concerned with economic management. In central Mexico, on
the other hand, smaller, more widely dispersed valley enclaves
were the characteristic units of settlement; the basic continu-
ities   were found more often              in    self-conscious,   periodically
mobile ethnic groups than in urban centers; technology                        re-

mained essentially static over long periods; and there was more
emphasis on market integration than on vertically organized
redistributive       networks.
    What seems overwhelmingly most important about these
          is how small they bulk, even in aggregate, when
differences
considered against the mass of similarities in form and process.
In short, the parallels in the Mesopotamian and Mexican "ca-
reers to statehood" (Gearing 1962), in the forms that institu-
tions ultimately       assumed    as well as in the processes leading
to them, suggest that both instances are most significantly char-
                            CONCLUSION"                                175

acterized by a       common core of regularly occurring features.
We discover anew that social behavior conforms not merely to
laws but to a limited number of such laws, which perhaps has
always been taken for granted        in the case of cultural subsys-

tems    (e.g.,   kinship)   and among "primitives"       (e.g.,    hunting
bands   >.   Not merely as an abstract article of faith but as a valid
starting point for detailed, empirical analysis,    it   applies equally
well to some of the most          complex and creative        of   human
societies.
               REFERENCES CITED

Acosta, Jorge R.
       1956      Interpretation de algunos de los datos obtenidos
                 relativos a la epoca Tolteca. Re vista Mexicana de
                 Estudios Antropologicos 14: 75-110.
Acosta Saignes, Miguel
       1945       Los Pochteca. Acta Anthropologica, Vol. 1, no. 1.
                  Mexico, D.F.
       1946       Los Teopixque. Revista Mexicana de Estudios
                  Antropologicos 8: 147-205.
Adams, Robert McC.
      1958      Survey of ancient watercourses and settlements
                in central Iraq. Sumer 14: 101-3.
      1960a     Factors influencing the rise of civilization in the
                alluvium: illustrated by Mesopotamia. In City
                  invincible:   an Oriental Institute symposium, ed.
                  Carl H. Kraeling and Robert McC. Adams. Chi-
                  cago, University of Chicago Press.
       1960b      Early civilizations, subsistence and environment.
                  In City Invincible: an Oriental Institute sympo-
                   sium, ed. Carl H. Kraeling and Robert       McC.
                  Adams. Chicago, University      of Chicago Press.
       1963       The origins of agriculture. In Horizons of anthro-
                  pology, ed. Sol Tax. Chicago, Aldine Publishing
                  Co.
       1965       Land behind Baghdad:       a history of settlement
                  on the Diyala plains. Chicago, University of Chi-
                  cago Press.
Armillas, Pedro
      1951      Techologia, formaciones socio-economicas y       re-


                                 176
                    REFERENCES CITED                                        177

                   ligion   en Mesoamerica. In The          civilizations    of
                   ancient America:       XXIX International Congress
                   of Americanists, Selected Papers, Vol.        1,   ed. Sol
                   Tax. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
       1964a       Condiciones ambientales y movimientos de pue-
                   blos en la frontera septentrional de Mesoamerica.
                  In  Homenaje a Fernando Marquez-Miranda.
                  Madrid and Seville, Universidades de Madrid y
                  Se villa.
       1964b      Northern Mesoamerica. In Prehistoric man in the
                  New World, ed. Jesse D. Jennings and Edward
                  Norbeck. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Barlow, Robert H.
      1949      The extent of the empire of the Culhua Mexica.
                  Ibero-Americana, Vol. 28. Berkeley, University
                  of California Press.

Barth, Frederik
      1961      Nomads of south Persia: the Basseri tribe of the
                  Khamseh         confederacy.    Oslo,   Oslo   University
                  Press.

Borah, Woodrow, and Sherburne F. Cook
      1963      The aboriginal population of central Mexico on
                  the eve of the Spanish Conquest. Ibero-Ameri-
                  cana, Vol. 45. Berkeley, University of California
                  Press.

Bottero, Jean
      1965        Das     erste   semitische Grossreich. In Die altori-
                  entalischen      Reiche,   I:   Fischer Weltgeschichte,
                  Bd. 2, ed. Elena Cassin, Jean Bottero, and Jean
                  Vercoutter. Frankfurt am Main, Fischer Biicherei.
Braidwood, Robert J., and Gordon R. Willey (eds.)
      1962      Courses toward urban life: archeological consider-
                ations of some cultural alternates. Viking Fund
                  Publications in Anthropology, no. 32.
Caso, Alfonso
       1963       Land tenure among the ancient Mexicans. Amer-
                  ican Anthropologist 65: 863-78.
Chapman, Anne C.
       1957       Port of trade enclaves in Aztec and Maya civiliza-
                  tion.   In Trade and market in the early empires,
178                The Evolution of Urban Society

                   ed. Karl Polanyi, Conrad M. Arensberg, and
                   Harry W. Pearson. Glencoe, 111., Free Press and
                   Falcon's   Wing Press.
Childe, V. Gordon
       1950        The urban revolution. Town Planning Review 21:
                   3-17.
       1952        New light on the most ancient East. London,
                   Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Cook, Sherburne F., and Woodrow Borah
      1963      Quelle fut la stratification       sociale   au Centre du
                   Mexique durant     la premiere       moitie   du XVI e
                   siecle? Annales 18: 226-58.

Cortes, Hernan
       1952        Cartas de relation de      la Conquista de Mexico.
                   Puebla,    Publicaciones    de la Universidad de
                   Puebla.
Deimel, Anton
       1931        Sumerische Tempelwirtschaft zur Zeit Urukagi-
                   nas und seiner Vorganger. Analecta Orientalia,
                   no. 2. Rome, Pontifical Biblical Institute.

Diakonoff, Igor M.
      1954       Sale of land in pre-Sargonic Sumer. In Papers
                 presented by the Soviet delegation at the XXIII
                   International Congress of Orientalists, Assyriol-
                   ogy Section. Moscow, Publishing House of the
                   U.S.S.R.   Academy of Sciences.
Diaz del Castillo, Bernal
       1960       Historia verdadera de la Conquista de la Nueva
                   Espana. 5th ed., Mexico, D.F., Editorial Porrua.
Dibble, Charles E.
       1951        Codex Xolotl. Mexico, D.F., Editorial Jus.
Duran, Diego
      1867-80      Historia de las Indias de Nueva Esparia y islas
                   de tierra firma. 2 vols. Mexico, D.F., Impr. de
                   J.   M. Andrade y F. Escalante.
Edzard, Dietz O.
      1965       Die friihdynastische Zeit. In Die altorientalischen
                   Reiche, I: Fischer Weltgeschichte, Bd. 2, ed.
                   Elena Cassin, Jean Bottero, and Jean Vercoutter.
                   Frankfurt am Main, Fischer Bucherei.
                       REFERENCES CITED                                        179

ElSENSTADT, S. N.
         1963        The political systems of empires. New York, Free
                     Press of Glencoe.
         1964        Social change,   differentiation and evolution.
                     American Sociological Review 29: 37.5-86.
Fallers, Lloyd A.
       1964       Social       stratification   and economic       processes. In
                     Economic      transition     in   Africa,   ed.    Melville   J.
                     Herskovits     and M. Harwitz. Evanston, North-
                     western University Press.
Falkensteln, Adam
       1954     La cite-temple sumerienne.                  Cahiers      d'Histoire
                Mondiale 1: 784-814.
Falkensteln, Adam, and Wolfram von Soden
       1953      Sumerische und akkadische Hymnen und Gebete.
                     Zurich, Artemis Verlag.
Flnkelsteln, J. J.
         1963        Mesopotamian historiography. American                   Philo-
                     sophical Society, Proceedings 107: 461-72.
Finley, Moses   I.

         1964        Between      slavery       and    freedom.        Comparative
                     Studies in Society and History 6: 233—49.
Flannery, Kent V.
      1965      The ecology of early food production in Meso-
                     potamia. Science 147: 1247-56.
Frankfort, Henri
      1939       Cylinder seals. London, Macmillan.
Fried,   Morton H.
         1960        On the evolution of social stratification and the
                     state.   In Culture in history: essays in honor of
                     Paul Radin, ed. Stanley Diamond.                  New York,
                     Columbia University Press.
Gadd, C. J.
      1962           The cities of Babylonia. Cambridge Ancient His-
                     tory, 2d ed., Vol. 1, chap. 13 (preprint). Cam-
                     bridge, Cambridge University Press.
         1963        The Dynasty of Agade and the Gutian invasion.
                     Cambridge Ancient History, 2d ed., Vol. 1, chap.
                     19 (preprint). Cambridge, Cambridge University
                     Press.
180               The Evolution of Urban Society

Garelli, Paul (ed.)
       1960      Gilgames et sa legende. Cahiers du Groupe Fran-
                 cois Thureau-Dangin, no. 1. Paris, Imp. Nationale
                  Librairie C. Klincksieck.
Gearing, Fred
      1962        Priestsand warriors: social structures for Chero-
                  kee politics in the 18th century. American An-
                  thropological Association, Memoir 93.
Geertz, Clifford
      1964       Tihingan:       a     Balinese      village.        Bijdragen    120:
                  1-33.
Gelb, Ignace J.
       1957       Glossary of Old Akkadian. Materials for the As-
                  syrian Dictionary, no. 3. Chicago, University of
                  Chicago Press.
       1964       Social stratification in the          Old Akkadian period.
                  In Proceedings of the              XXV International Con-
                  gress of Orientalists, Vol.          1.   Moscow.
       1965       The ancient Mesopotamian ration system. Journal
                  of   Near Eastern Studies 24: 230-43.
Gibson, Charles
       1964       The Aztecs under Spanish rule.                     Stanford, Stan-
                  ford University Press.
Guterbock, Hans G.
      1934      Die     historische      Tradition      und      ihre    literarische
                  Gestaltung bei Babyloniern und                      Hethitern bis
                  1200. Zeitschrift fur Assyriologie 42:                  1-91.
Jacobsen. Thorkild
      1939        The Sumerian Kinglist. Oriental Institute Assyrio-
                  logical Studies,       no.   11.    Chicago, University of
                  Chicago Press.
      1957        Early     political   developments            in    Mesopotamia.
                  Zeitschrift   fiir   Assyriologie 52: 91-140.
      1960        The waters of Ur. Iraq 22: 174-85.
      1963        Ancient Mesopotamian religion: the central con-
                  cerns. Proceedings of the American Philosophical
                  Society 107: 473-84.
Jacobsen, Thorkild, and Samuel N. Kramer
       1953       The myth of Inanna and Bilulu. Journal of Near
                  Eastern Studies 12: 160-88.
                    REFERENCES CITED                                 181

Jimenez Moreno, Wigberto
      1958      Historia antigua de Mexico. 3d            ed.   (mimeo-
                  graphed).  Mexico, D.F., Escuela        Nacional    de
                  Antropologia e Historia.

Katz, Friedrich
       1956       Die sozialokonomischen Verhaltnisse bei den Az-
                  teken im 15. und 16. Jahrhundert. Ethnograph-
                  isch-Archaologische Forschungen, Bd. 3, Teil 2.
                  Berlin,    VEB Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaf-
                  ten.

Kirchoff, Paul
       1954       Land tenure in ancient Mexico. Revista Mexicana
                  de Estudios Antropologicos 14: 351-62.
       1955       Quetzalcoatl, Huemac, y el fin de Tula. Cuader-
                  nos Americanos 14: 163-96.
       1959       The principles of clanship in human society. In
                  Readings in Anthropology, Vol. 2, ed. Morton H.
                  Fried. New York, Thomas Y. Crowell Co.

Kramer, Samuel N.
      1963     The Sumerians: their history, culture, and char-
                  acter.    Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Krickeberg,   Walter
       1964       Las antiguas culturas Mexicanas. Mexico, D.F.,
                  Fondo de Cultura Economica.
Kroeber, Alfred L.
      1953       The delimitation of civilizations. Journal      of the
                  History of Ideas 14: 264-75.
Lambert, Maurice
      1953      La periode PreSargonique. Sumer 9: 198-213.
Leach, Edmund R.
      1961      Pul Eliya: a village in Ceylon. Cambridge, Cam-
                  bridge University Press.
Leemans, W. F.
       1950       The Old Babylonian merchant: his business and
                  social position. Leiden, E. J. Brill.

Leon Portilla, Miguel
      1959       The concept of the state among the ancient Az-
                 tecs. Alpha Kappa Deltan 30: 7-13.
182                The Evolution of Urban Society

Linton, Ralph
       1939        The Tanala of Madagascar. In The individual
                   and his society, ed. Abram Kardiner. New York,
                   Columbia University Press.
Millon, Rene
      n.d.         Teotihuacan.
Monzon, Arturo
      1949         El calpulli en la organization social de los Te-
                   nochca. Publicaciones del Instituto de Historia,
                   no. 14. Mexico, D.F.

Morgan, Lewis H.
      1963         Ancient society, ed. Eleanor B. Leacock. Cleve-
                   land and New York, World Publishing Co., Meri-
                   dian Books.
Mumford, Lewis
      1960         University city. In City invincible:  an Oriental
                   Institute    symposium, ed. Carl H. Kraeling and
                   Robert      McC. Adams. Chicago, University of
                   Chicago Press.
Murphy, Robert F., and Leonard Kasdan
      1959      The structure of parallel cousin marriage. Amer-
                   ican Anthropologist 61: 17-29.
Oppenheim, A. Leo
      1960         Assyriology:  why and how? Current Anthropol-
                   ogy 1: 409-22. Reprinted in Oppenheim 1964.
      1964         Ancient Mesopotamia: portrait of a dead civi-
                   lization. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Orans, Martin
      1966         Surplus.    Human Organization (in press).
Palerm, Angel
      1954         La distribucion del regadio en el area central
                   de Mesoamerica. Ciencias Sociales 5: 2-15, 64-
                   74.
      1956         Notas sobre     las   construcciones   militares   y   la

                   guerra en Mesoamerica. Anales del Instituto Na-
                   tional de Antropologia y Historia 8: 123-34.
Palerm, Angel, and Eric R. Wolf
      1957         Ecological potential   and cultural development
                   in    Mesoamerica. In Studies in human ecology.
                     REFERENCES CITED                                   183

                   Panamerican Union, Social Science Monographs,
                   no. 3.

Perrot, Jean
       1964        Civilisations    prehistoriques    et    protohistoriques
                   du moyen       Orient:   coordination des recherches.
                   Paris,    Centre National de la Recherche Scienti-
                   fique.

Polanyi, Karl, Conrad M. Arensberg, and
  Harry W. Pearson (eds.)
       1957        Trade and market in the early empires. Glencoe,
                   111., Free Press and Falcon's Wing Press.


Pritchard, James B. (ed.)
       1950      Ancient Near Eastern texts relating to the Old
                 Testament. Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Radin, Paul
       1920        The   sources and authenticity of the history of
                   the ancient Mexicans.        University of California
                   Publications in American Archaeology and Eth-
                   nology, no. 17.
Redfield, Robert
       1953      The        primitive   world   and   its   transformations.
                   Ithaca, Cornell University Press.

Russell, R.   J.
       1958        Late ancient and medieval populations. Trans-
                   actions    of the    American Philosophical      Society,
                   Vol. 48, no. 3.

Sahagun, Bernardino de
      1950-     Florentine Codex, General history of the things
                of New Spain, ed. Arthur J. O. Anderson and
                Charles E. Dibble. Salt Lake City, University
                of Utah Press.

Sanders,   William T.
       1956       The central Mexican symbiotic region:             a study
                   in prehistoric settlement patterns. In Prehistoric
                   settlement patterns in the     New World, ed. Gor-
                   don R. Willey. Viking Fund Publications in An-
                   thropology, no. 23.
       n.d.        Teotihuacan Valley Project: preliminary report,
                   1960-63 field seasons (mimeographed).
184                 The Evolution of Urban Society

Schneider, Anna
       1920     Die sumerische Tempelstadt. Essen, G. D. Biide-
                    ker.

Soustelle, Jacques
      1962          The daily life of the Aztecs on the eve of the
                    Spanish Conquest       (tr.   from the French by Pa-
                    trick O'Brian).     New York, Macmillan.
Steward, Julian H.
      1955      Theory of culture change. Urbana, University of
                    Illinois Press.

Wittfogel, Karl A.
      1957      Oriental despotism: a comparative study of total
                    power.   New Haven, Yale University Press.
Wolf, Eric R.
      1959          Sons of the shaking earth. Chicago, University
                    of Chicago Press.

Wolf, Eric R., and Angel Palerm
      1955          Irrigation    in   the old Acolhua    domain.    South-
                    western Journal of Anthropology          11:    265-81.
Woolley, C. L.
      1934          The royal cemetery. Ur Excavations, Vol. 2.
                    London and Philadelphia, published for the
                    Trustees of the British Museum and the Museum
                    of the University of Pennsylvania.

ZURITA, ALONSO DE
      1941          Breve y sumaria relation de los senores y ma-
                 neras y diferencias que habia de ellos en Nueva
                    Espafia. In Nueva coleccion de documentos para
                    la historia   de Mexico, ed. J. Garcia Icazbalceta.
                    Mexico, D.F., Editorial Salvador Chavez Hayhoe.
                                                            INDEX

Acolhua domain (see Texcoco)               Archeological data, problems of
Acosta, J. R., 135                              interpretation, 2, 21-24, 26-
Acosta Saignes, M., 88, 114                     31, 76-77, 95, 97, 121
Adab, Mesopotamian town, 83                Armillas, P, 61, 72, 134
Agade, Mesopotamian capital,               Army   organization,        Mesopota-
     153, 155-58, 165, 167                      mian, 85, 104-5, 145-47,
Agga, ruler of Kish, 146                        166-67
Agriculture, basis for sedentism,            Mexican, 72, 89-90, 93, 132,
     38,44                                      135-36,    146, 159-60,       162-
  chinampa, 43, 52, 53, 76                      64, 166
  composite, 47-53, 168-69                 Ashnan, Mesopotamian deity,
  differing intensity, 53-58, 63-               122
     66, 72-74                             Azcapotzalco, Mexican town,
  irrigation, 43, 53-54,   56, 66-              141, 147, 159
     76, 104
                                           Bancroft, H. H., 36
  labor requirements, 41-43
                                           Bandelier, A. F., 36, 93
  productivity, 41-42, 45
                                           Baranamtarra, wife of ruler of
  religious associations with,
                                                Lagash, 82
     122-23
                                           Barbarism,   1, 6,   13,   79
  role of specialists, 48-49, 51,
                                           Barlow, R. H., 162
     52, 168-69
                                           Barth, F., 58
  surpluses, 12, 45-47
                                           Bau temple or estate        (see
  swidden, 43
                                                Lagash)
Ahuitzotl,   Mexican ruler, 147,
                                           Blau monument, 106
     164
                                           Borah, W., 71, 115
Al-Ubaid, Mesopotamian arche-
                                           Bottero, J., 156
     ological site, 95, 101
                                           Braidwood, R. J., 17
Andean civilization, 23-24
Anonymous Conqueror, Spanish               Calpixque, Mexican official, 144,
     chronicler,   77                           162

                                     185
    L86                                          Index


Calpulli,       Mexican kin group, 83,                   I   )omesticated plants and ani-
          86-94,     113-17,      L39,    142,                  mals, 38-40
          144                                            Dub-sar-gan,          Mesopotamian
Caso, A., Ill                                                   scribe,       106
Chapman, A. C, 163                                       Dumuzi, Mesopotamian               deity,
(   iluClicn    li/i'i,   archeological site                 49, 122
     in Yucatan, 134                                 Duran,         1).,      Spanish chronicler,
Chichimecs, Mexican hunter-                                     113, 142, L45
          gatherers, 61-63,         90               Du-si, 106
Childe, V. G., 9, 10, 11, 45
Chinese civilization, 21-23                          Eanna temple precinct (see
( Iholula, Mexican town, 133                             Uruk)
Civil, M., 33, 57                                    Eannatum, ruler of Lagash, 149
Civilization, 1, 9, 12-14, 20                        Early villages, data            lor,   26, 27,
(Mass (see Stratification, social)                        29
Clavijero, F.         J.,   65                       Edin, Mesopotamian pasture-
Climatic change, 61-62                                    land, 49, 70
(   Index Kamirez, 141                               Edzard, 1). O., 103, 128
Conical clan, 88, 94                                 Egyptian civilization, 21-22
"Contextual" approach,               2,   35         lusenstadt, S. N., 16-17, 136
Cook, S. F., 71, 115                                 Flam, principality in south-
Cortes, Hernan, Spanish con-                              western Iran, 154
       queror and chronicler, 34,                    Elites, urban, 13, 32, 53, 56, 59,
       77, 112, 118, 144                                  82, 94, 117, 119, 167-69
(.'raft organization and speciali-                   "Empire," Akkadian, 153-59,
          zation,    10,    16,   29, 83, 85,             165-69
          89-90, 126-27, 131-32, 143-                  Aztec, 159-69
          44                                         En, title of Mesopotamian ruler,
Cultural ecology, 8                                       128, 137-38
Culture core, 14-17, 174-75                          Enakalli, ruler of Umma, 149
                                                     Engar, member of Mesopota-
Dam-gar, Mesopotamian mer-                                mian status or occupational
    chant (see Merchants)                                 group, 105
Deimel, A., 81, 107                                  Enhegal, of Lagash, 106
Diakonoff, I. M., 65, 83-84, 105,                    Enki, Mesopotamian deity, 122
          137, 156                                   Enlil,      Mesopotamian deity, 129,
Diaz del Castillo, Bernal, Span-                         148
     ish chronicler, 34, 77, 162                     Enmerkar, ruler of Uruk, 137,
Dibble, C. E., 62                                        140
Diffusion, 20, 28                                    Ensi,       title   of    Mesopotamian
Dilmun, modern Bahrein Island,                                  ruler,   137-38
     154, 155, 156                                   Entemena, ruler of Lagash, 149
                                      I   NDEX                                 187

Eridu, Mesopotamia!] town, 50,                  127
     95, 122, 142                           Gudea, ruler of Lagash, 85, 138
Eshnunna, Mesopotamian town,                Guilds      (see Craft organization
     68-69, 77, 83, 98, 102                      and specialization)
Estates, Mesopotamian, 102,                 Gurush, member of Mesopota-
     104-8, 109-10, 117-19, 168-                 mian status group, 105
     69                                     Guti, Mesopotamian border
  Mexican, 112, 114-15, 117-19                   principality, 159
Etana, ruler of Kish, 138                   Giiterbock, H. G., 156
Evolutionary change, 7, 8, 16
Evolutionary parallelisms, 8, 24,           Hadley, J. W. B., 107
     26,37,79, 94, 117-19, 133,             Harding, T. G., 4
     142,    144-45, 165-69, 170-           Harlan, J. R., 38
     75                                     Herding and herdsmen, 19, 40,
                                                 49, 58-59, 96, 123, 157
Falkenstein, A., 137, 140, 148              Huitzilopochtli, Mexican deity,
Fallers, L. A., 66
                                                 148, 150, 160
Finkelstein,   J. J.,   154                 "Hydraulic" society, 15, 66-68,
Finley, M. I., 103                                      76
                                                 74,
Fishing, role of, 38, 40, 48, 49-
     52
                                            Im-ru-a,    Mesopotamian kin
Flannery, K. V., 41
                                                 group, 85, 88
Folk-Urban continuum, 14
                                            Inanna, Mesopotamian deity,
Food-Producing Revolution, 39-
                                                 122, 123, 148
     41
                                            Indus civilization, 21-23
Frankfort, H., 127
                                            Itzcoatl,   Mexican ruler, 141
Fried, M. H., 21
                                            Ixtlilxochitl, F. A.. 89,135
Frontiers, 60, 61, 62, 72,       154,
     158, 160, 162
Functionalism, 16                           Jacobsen, T., 122, 128, 138-40,
                                                152
Gadd, C. J., 150                            Jemdet Nasr, Mesopotamian
Garelli, P., 146                                 archeological    site,   95, 107,
Geertz, C., 121-22                               128, 129
Gelb, I. J., 50, 85, 105                    Jericho, ancient town in Jordan,

Gibson, C., 118                                 38, 39
Gilgamesh, ruler of Uruk, 138,              Jimenez-Moreno, W., 135
     140, 146, 151
Girsu,    sub-principality    (see          Kaminaljuyii,     archeological site
    Lagash)                                      in Guatemala,     132
Grave furniture, as index        to         Kasdan, L., 82
     wealth, 95-96, 98-101, 111,            Katz, F., 89, 165
188                                     Index

Khafajah, Mesopotamian arche-               Lu-pad, official of Umma, 106
      ological site, 95, 97,      99
Kin groupings and terminology,              Macehual, Mexican "commoner"
      Mesopotamian, 81-86, 94                     (see Calpulli)
   Mexican, 86-94                           Magan, Persian Gulf principal-
Kinglist, Sumerian, 138, 140                      ity,   155, 156
Kingship, Mesopotamian, 97,                 Maguey map, 65
      138-41, 145-46, 151-52                Maine, H. J. S., 79
   See also Lugal, En, Ensi                 Manishtusu, Mesopotamian
Kirchoff, P., 94, 111, 135                       ruler, 84, 106, 156, 158
Kish, Mesopotamian town, 95,                Marad, Mesopotamian town, 84
     99, 129, 138, 141, 142, 146            Market trade and marketplaces,
Kramer, S. N., 128, 143                          52-53, 89
Krickeberg, W., 135                         Marriage patterns, 81-82
Kroeber, A. L., 12, 13                      Mashdaria texts, 50, 144
                                            Mash-en-kak, Mesopotamian
Lagash, Mesopotamian town,                      "commoner," 97
      48-50, 65, 81-85, 101-2,              Maya civilization, 24
      104-8, 118, 129, 143, 149-            Mayeque, Mexican of subordi-
      151, 158                                  nate status, 114-17, 144
Lahar, Mesopotamian deity, 122              Meluhha, principality or region,
Lambert, M., 99                                  155, 156
Land, redistribution, 57, 65,               Merchants, 88, 89, 98, 113, 141,
    104, 107                                      154-57, 160, 163-64, 168
  tenure, 54, 56-57, 63-65, 83-             Mesopotamian          plain, ecological
      84, 87-88, 104-7                            potential, 24, 48-51, 57-58,
Leach, E. R., 54                                  166-67
Leacock, E. B., 4, 6                            population, 71-72
Leemans, W. F., 155                         Mexican highlands, ecological
Leon Portilla, M., 142                            potential, 24, 26, 51-52,
Levels of sociocultural integra-                  166
      tion, 6, 8,        17                     population, 71-72
Linton, R., 54                              Millon, R., 75, 123, 131
Lu, Mesopotamian status term,               Moctezuma       I,     Mexican   ruler,
      97                                          112, 142, 145, 163
Lugal,     title    of   Mesopotamian       Moctezuma       II,    Mexican   ruler,
      ruler,       137                            142, 143, 144, 164
Lugalanda, ruler of Lagash, 82,             Monumental public works,            10,
     105                                        29
Lugalbanda, ruler of Uruk, 138              Monzon, A., 114
Lugalzagesi, ruler of Uruk, 149,            Morgan, Lewis Henry, 4-7,          11,
     151                                          36, 79-80, 93-94
                                      )




                                           INDEX                                      189

Multilinear evolution (see Evo-                  Political    differentiation   and   in-
      lutionary parallelisms                          stitutionalization, 10, 16-17
Mumford, L., 78                                  Population, pressure, 15, 44-45,
Murphy, R. F., 82                                     71-72, 162
                                                   unit of evolutionary potential,
Naram-Sin, Mesopotamian ruler,                        8
     138, 151, 156-57, 158                       Prescott,    W. H., 36
Nezaualcoyotl, ruler of Texcoco,                 Priesthood,        Mesopotamian, 97,
     143-44                                           127-29, 137
Ningirsu,         Mesopotamian        deity,       Mexican, 130, 132
      85, 150, 152                                 origins, 120-22
Ninhursag, Mesopotamian deity,                   Pritchard, J. B., 146, 151
     138                                         Private property, 7, 49, 57, 64,
Nippur, Mesopotamian town,                           79-81, 84, 88, 105-7, 115
     129                                         Purushkhanda, Anatolian prin-
Nisaba, Mesopotamian deity,                          cipality, 154
      150
Nobility,         111-13,   117-18,       142,
                                                 Quetzalcoatl, Mexican deity,
      144, 160, 162, 164, 167
                                                      134-36
Nomadism and seminomadism
          (see    Herding and herds-
      men)                                       Radin, P., 113, 142, 147
Nonoalcas, Mexican ethnic                        "Ramp" metaphor, 17-18, 170-
      group, 63                                       73
Oikos, 108                                       Ration system, 50, 52, 82, 84,
Oikumene, 21                                          104-5, 108, 128, 144

Opler, M. E., 4                                  Redfield, R., 13-14

Oppenheim, A.                       60-61,       Redistributive economy, 51, 93,
                        L.,   35,
                                                      128-29,       164-65
     109, 151
"Orthogenetic" change, 6                         Religion, Mesopotamian, 107,
                                                      122-25, 129-30, 148-51

Palaces, 128, 142-44                               Mexican, 122-25, 134-36,
Palerm, A., 19, 62, 72, 75, 166                      148-50
Peasantry, 13, 18, 82, 99-101,                     role of,    12
      148                                        Representational art, 10, 30-31,

Perrot,           38                                  124
            J.,
Petrie,     W. M. F., 21                         Rimush, Mesopotamian ruler,
      Mexican status group, 113
Pillis,
                                                       156-58
     See also Nobility                           Royal tombs, 99-100, 145-46
                                                 Russell, R. J., 71
Pochteca, Mexican occupational
     group (see Merchants)
Polanyi, K., 45, 51                              Sag-apin, member of Mesopota-
190                                           Index

      mian status or occupational                        110, 148
      group, 105                                  Stratification,    social,     7,   10,    16,
Sahagun, Fray Bernardino de,                             29, 79, 93, 94, 124
    34, 164                                          Mesopotamian, 93-110
Sammelurkunden, 106, 118                             Mexican, 110-19, 165
Sanders, W. T., 19, 75                            Sumugan, Mesopotamian deity,
Sanga, Mesopotamian priest or                          122
     administrator, 128                           Survivals, 5
Sargon, Mesopotamian ruler,                       Susa, town in Elam, 143, 158
     143, 153, 154, 156, 158                      Symbiotic regions, 19
Savagery,      1, 6,    13
Schneider, A., 81                                 Tarascans, ethnic group and
Serfs, metoikoi,        and glebae ad-                   principality in western
      script!,       105, 114                          Mexico, 162
Sharkalisharri,        Mesopotamian               Technology, role of, 6, 9, 12, 40-
      ruler,     158                                     41
Shub-lugal, member of Mesopo-                     Tecuhtli,    member of Mexican
      tamian status or occupa-                           status group,      152
      tional group, 104, 107-8,                   Tell Brak, archeological site in
     144, 146                                                 156
                                                         Syria,
Shuruppak, Mesopotamian                           Tell   Uqair, Mesopotamian ar-
     town, 48, 81, 83, 85, 95,                         cheological site, 106, 125
     102, 105, 118, 143, 155                      Tempelwirtschaft, 81, 107
Sippar, Mesopotamian town, 83                     Temples, Mesopotamian, 107,
Sj0berg, A., 81                                          120-21, 125-26, 128, 148-
Slavery, Mesopotamian, 96-97,                            49
     102-4                                            Mexican, 120-21, 130-32,
   Mexican, 115-17                                      148-49
Social     organization,        characteri-       Tenochtitlan,       Mexican         capital,
      zation of early data for, 21,                      36,   71,   74,   89,   114,       139,
      23, 26-36                                          142-44, 147,       159-60, 163,
Soustelle,     J.,   64, 164                             165, 173
State, definition of,        14,   151-52         Teotihuacan, Mexican archeo-
State organization, Mesopotami-                          logical site, 35, 53, 74, 75,
      an, 83-86, 137-41, 144-45,                         77, 90, 111, 123, 124, 130-
      154-59                                           33, 135, 148, 172, 173
  Mexican, 90-94, 144-45, 159-                    Tepanecs, Mexican ethnic
      65                                               group, 141, 159
States,          and "second-
           "pristine"                             Texcoco, Mexican capital, 63,
              23
      ary," 21,                                        74, 75, 143, 152, 159-60
"Step" metaphor, 17-18, 170-73                    "Textual" approach, 2, 35, 36
Steward, J. H., 6, 14-15, 20, 37,                 Textual data, problems of inter-
                                     INDEX                                        191

     pretation, 2, 21-24, 31-36,           Ur, Mesopotamian town, 95, 96,
     76-77, 80, 85-87, 105, 109-                99-101, 140, 143, 145
     11                                    Urban      residence, instability of,
Tezcatlipoca, Mexican deity,                    59-63
     136                                   Urban      revolution,   7,    9-12,    15-
Tikal, archeological site in                    19,    26,    28-31, 40, 44-45,
     Guatemala, 132                             46-47, 71, 95,           121,   125,
Tlacaelel,  Mexican official, 147               172-73
Tlacopan, Mexican town, 159                Urban      settlement,   7,    9-10,    16,
Tlaloc, Mexican deity, 123, 148                 75-77, 101, 140
Tlatelolco, Mexican town, 53,              Urban societies, 3, 5, 9
     71, 89                                Uruk, Mesopotamian town, 70,
Tlatoani, term for Mexican                      96,    122,    125-26, 128-30,
     ruler, 111                                 137, 140, 146, 149, 172
Tlaxcala, ethnic group and prin-           Urukagina, ruler of Lagash, 103,
     cipality   east    of   Valley of          105, 149-52, 158
     Mexico, 53, 162-63
Toltecs,   Mexican ethnic group,           Von Soden, W., 148
     61-63, 90, 133-37
Torquemada, J., Spanish chron-             War captives, treatment of, 96-
    icler, 65                                   97, 102, 117-18, 135, 146-
Trade, long-distance, 10, 49, 51-               147, 158, 161-63, 167
     52, 82, 103, 113, 124, 132,           Warfare, 16, 72, 140-41, 148-
     154-56, 163-64                             49, 157-64, 166-67
Traditions, great      and little,   13,     See also Army organization
     129                                   Willey, G. R., 17, 120
Tribute and taxation, 10, 88-93,           Wittfogel, K. A., 66-67, 74
     112, 115, 116, 144, 155-57,           Wolf, E. R., 19, 62, 75, 88
     159-60, 162-65, 167-68                Women, position of, 82, 87
Triple Alliance, Mexican politi-           Woolley, C. L., 100
     cal coalition, 12-13, 144,            Writing, 7, 10, 30, 126, 132
     159-60
Tula, Mexican town, 36, 62, 63,            Xochicalco, Mexican archeologi-
     133-35, 172, 173                          cal site,      133
                                           Xochimilco, Mexican town, 76
                                           Xoconusco, Pacific coastal re-
Uku-ush, member of Mesopota-                   gion in Guatemala, 163
     mian status or occupational
     group, 104                            Zurita, A., Spanish chronicler,
Umma, Mesopotamian town,                        87,    91,    92,   111-12,       141,
     106, 149, 150                              147, 152
Social Life of Early Man
edited by Sherwood L.          Washburn

 The social relationships that characterize man
 cannot have appeared for the first time in the
 modern human species.        In this volume, the

 world's leading scholars summarize          what is
 known    of   such behavior among prehistoric
 men, demonstrating its complex roots in the
 evolutionary process.
    Since man is a primate who developed from

the Old World simian stock, his social behavior
must also have evolved from that of this mam-
malian group. Thus the investigation of the
 evolution of man's behavior is dependent upon
 what we know of the behavior of monkeys and
 apes,   and much of this book is based upon
 what can be learned in studying them. Addi-
 tional evidence is   provided by many kinds of
 archeological data, notably skeletal remains

 and the materials found in association with
 them, and the cave art of the paleolithic age.
    The picture of early man that emerges from
 this volume is that of a being    — at least by the
 time of Neanderthal — who        is   motivated and
 behaves much like ourselves; neither his intel-
 ligence nor the complexity of his social arrange-
 ments may any longer be underestimated. The
 book contains    full   bibliographies,   an index,
 and thirty- two illustrations.              299 pp.

 Sherwood L. Washburn is Professor of
 Physical Anthropology at the
 University of California at Berkeley.
                     —
                   Also from Aldine
The Pivot of the Four Quarters:
a preliminary inquiry into the origins and character
of the ancient chinese city
Paul Wheatley, Professor of Geography, University of London
It   has become clear that no single urban site contains sufficient evidence
for a theory of urban genesis, and that our understanding of urban develop-
ment must depend upon the comparative study of all nuclear urban areas.
In this magisterial work, one of the world's most distinguished scholars
presents a Nummary of the wealth of evidence pointing to the distinctive
nature of the earliest Chinese cities, while isolating and analyzing the cross-
cultural regularities shared by these cities with urban forms in other cultures.
602pp.

Urban Dynamics in Black Africa:
an interdisciplinary approach
William John Hanna, City University of New York, and
Judith Lynne Hanna, Fordham University
"I am impressed with the thoroughness of the survey and the lucid presen-
tation of propositions the Hannas have put together. Since one of the major
problems in the field of African studies is the lack of cumulative knowledge,
the present work makes a most useful contribution by bringing together a
variety of studies from heterogeneous sources into a convenient format."
—  Aristide R. Zolberg, Chairman, Department of Political Science, Univer-
sity of Chicago.   390 pp.

Courses Toward Urban Life:
archeological considerations of cultural alternates
edited by Robert J. Braidwood, University of Chicago, and
Gordon R. Willey, Harvard University
This book traces the history of man from primitive food -collecting societies
to the threshold of urban food-producing civilizations. "A rare and impor-
tant achievement."       American Anthropologist. 371 pp.

The Concept of Community:
readings with interpretations
edited by David W. Minar, University of Washington, and
Scott Greer, Northwestern University
In an innovative and productive approach to this basic concept, the editors
of this book have carefully gathered selected readings that define and ex-
press various dimensions of the idea of     community. The concept is con-
sidered in both Western and non-Western settings and in tribal, developing,
and urban societies. 370 pp.


 ALDINE PUBLISHING CO. 529 S. Wabash Ave., Chicago,                  III.   60605   "*
